Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase I
Project Design Report
Main report and annexes
Mission Dates:
23 April-04 May 2018
Document Date:
31/03/2020
Project No.
2000002229
Report No.
5007-RW
Loan ID
2000002900
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AfDB
AFR
AH
AIDS
AWPB
BDF
BDSP
CESB
African Development Bank
Access to Finance Rwanda
Animal Husbandry
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
Annual Work Plan and Budget
Business Development Fund
Business Development Service Provider
Rwanda Capacity Development and Employment Services Board
COSOP
Country Strategic Opportunities Programme
CSA
DG
Climate Smart Agriculture
Director General
EDPRS
Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy
EFA
EIRR
ESIA
ESMF
ESMP
FaaB
FAO
FE
FFS
FIRR
FS
Economic and Financial Analysis
Economic Internal Rate of Return
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
Environmental and Social Management Framework
Environmental and Social Management Plan
Farming as a Business
Food and Agriculture Organization
Foreign Exchange
Farmer Field School
Financial Internal Rate of Return
Feasibility Study
GALS
Gender Action Learning System
GAP
GDP
GHG
GIS
GoR
Good Agricultural Practices
Gross Domestic Product
Greenhouse Gas
Geographic Information System
Government of Rwanda
KWAMP
Kirehe community-based Watershed Management Project
HH
HIV
Households
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
HoReCO
Horticulture in Reality Cooperative
IFAD
IFMIS
IMF
IMTA
IWMI
IWUO
KM
International Fund for Agricultural Development
Integrated Financial Management Information Systems
International Monetary Fund
Irrigation Management Transfer Agreement
International Water Management Institute
Irrigation Water User Organisation
Knowledge Management
KOICA
LPA
LWH
M&E
Korean International Cooperation Agency
Lead Project Agency
Land husbandry, Water harvesting and Hillside irrigation project
Monitoring and Evaluation
MIDIMAR
Ministry of Disaster Management and Refugees Affairs
MINAGRI
Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources
MINECOFIN
Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning
MINIRENA
Ministry of Lands, Environment, Forestry, Water and Mines
MoU
MPCI
MT
MTR
Memorandum of Understanding
Multi Peril Crop Insurance
Metric Ton
Mid Term Review
NCCLCD
National Strategy on Climate Change and Low-Carbon Development
NAEB
NGO
NRM
OFID
ORMS
O&M
p.a.
PA
PASP
PEFA
PPP
PRICE
PS
PSC
PSTA
4P
RAB
RCA
RDDP
REMA
RNRA
RSSP
RWF
RWFA
RYAF
SCC
SDG
National Agriculture Export development Board
Non Governmental Organisation
Natural Resources Management
OPEC Fund for International Development
Operational Results Management System
Operation and Maintenance
Per Annuum
Priority Area
Climate-resilient Post-harvest and Agribusiness Support Programme
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
Purchasing Power Parity
Project for Rural Income through Exports
Permanent Secretary
Project Steering Committee
Strategic Plan for the Transformation of Agriculture in Rwanda
Public Private Producers Partnership
Rwanda Agriculture and Animal Resources Development Board
Rwanda Cooperative Agency
Rwanda Dairy Development Project
Rwanda Environment Management Authority
Rwanda National Resources Authority
Rural Sector Support Programme
Rwandan Franc
Rwanda Water and Forestry Authority
Rwanda Youth in Agribusiness Forum
Sub-Catchment Committee
Sustainable Development Goal
SECAP
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures
SOE
SPIU
SSIT
Statement of Expenditure
Single Project Implementation Unit
Small-Scale Irrigation Technology
STARS
Strengthening African Rural Smallholders
SUN
SWC
TBD
TOC
ToT
Scaling Up Nutrition
Soil and Water Conservation
To Be Determined
Theory of Change
Training of Trainers
UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme
USD
VC
WoP
WP
WLUO
WUO
United States Dollar
Value Chain
Without Project
With Project
Water for Livestock User Organisation
Water User Organisation
In line with IFAD11 mainstreaming commitments, the project has been validated as:
☐ Gender transformational ☐ Youth sensitive ☐ Nutrition sensitive ☐ Climate finance
1/28
Executive Summary
Political and economic background. Small and landlocked, Rwanda is a low-income country, with a densely packed population of
about 12.5 million people[1] who are mostly under 20-year old, and a total land area of 26,338 km2 of which 68.7 per cent is classified
as arable agriculture land. From a tragically low starting point in 1994, Rwanda has enjoyed political stability in the last two decades
which, combined with good governance and policy consistency, has created an enabling policy environment ensuring successful
delivery of development programs. Since the turn of the century, Rwanda’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita has increased
from US$242 to US$729, and poverty has been reduced from 60.3 per cent to 39.1 per cent of the population.
Rwanda’s growth in 2016 and early 2017, while below historical standards, remained robust relative to the region, with 2017 growth
estimated at 5.2 per cent. Consumer price inflation has continued to decline since February 2017, reflecting improving food supply
conditions and declining transport costs. Performance under the PSI-supported program (Policy Support Instrument) and Standby
Credit Facility arrangement remained strong, with most quantitative targets and structural reform benchmarks being met. In the most
recent debt sustainability analysis by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Rwanda is assessed to be at low risk of debt distress.
Rwanda’s external debt portfolio remains mostly constituted of concessional loans[2], and this is expected to continue being the main
source of funding for public projects going forward.
Poverty and rural development context. While Rwanda has an impressive record in translating its sustained growth into poverty
reduction, poverty remains a key challenge especially in rural areas. The agriculture sector has proven to be an avenue for propelling
the country towards its vision of attaining middle-income status by 2020. The sustainable development of irrigated agriculture as a key
driver to boost agriculture production and productivity is fully acknowledged in most of Rwanda’s flagship policy documents, and is
viewed as fundamental for poverty alleviation and rural development.
Land and agriculture. Rwanda’s land is fragile due to its mountainous topography, thin soil layers and limited vegetative cover.
Population pressure has forced settlement on marginal areas, resulting in overgrazing, severe soil erosion, and soil exhaustion,
combined with high vulnerability of rural communities to climate and weather shocks. Agriculture is characterized by small production
units - the average landholding size is 0.33 hectare, reflecting the high population pressure on the country's natural resource base.
About 80 per cent of the rural population consists of subsistence farmers who use mostly rainfed production systems; less than 6 per
cent of all cultivated land is irrigated.
Food and nutrition security. Rwanda has recently subscribed to the Global Compact to end hunger and malnutrition by 2025 and
has also joined the Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) movement. Official estimates show that 19 per cent of households are food insecure,
often related to the stability of rural incomes, access to land, ownership of animals, and events such as crop failures and seasonal
scarcities, which reduce access to food. Resource-poor households who farm small plots are the most food insecure. While there
have been marked reductions in the prevalence of chronic malnutrition over the last decade, almost 38 per cent of children under five
are still chronically malnourished. Agriculture has an essential role to play in overcoming the remaining barriers in chronic malnutrition
by enabling rural households to improve the quality of their diets and food system.
Impact of climate change induced droughts. Climate change has resulted in Rwanda experiencing frequent and recurrent mid-
season droughts. Recent rainfall trends show that rainy seasons are tending to become shorter but with higher intensity. While the
North and South Provinces suffer from severe landslides and soil erosion due to heavy floods, the Eastern Province is regularly
affected by drought events leading to decreases in agricultural production and livestock deaths. The economy of Kayonza District is
mostly dependent on agriculture and livestock, which occupy the majority of the labour force. The district has fertile soils in almost all
its sectors, permitting the growth of most types of crops. Although a significant proportion of land is unexploited, the majority of
farmers cultivate small plots (0 to 1 hectare).
Project rationale. In 2016, the Eastern Province was affected by a severe drought that brought an additional burden to the systemic
challenges faced by Rwandan farmers in terms of land pressure, loss of soil fertility due to unsustainable environment management
practices and inadequate farmer participation in rural development planning. More than 47,000 households in the districts of Kayonza,
Nyagatare, Gatsibo Ngoma and Kirehe became food insecure and the Government of Rwanda (GoR) had to provide food relief and
water for livestock to support the affected districts.
Along with its strategy to mitigate the drought-induced calamities through improved use of untapped water resources, the Government
has thus requested IFAD to formulate a new integrated irrigation and watershed development project, revolving around the most
seriously affected district of Kayonza, and building on the experience of the recently completed KWAMP, the successful Community-
based Watershed Management Project implemented in the neighbouring Kirehe District.
Lessons learned. KIIWP design builds on the strengths and lessons learned in the implementation of KWAMP but also the ongoing
Project for Rural Income through Exports (PRICE) and Post-harvest and Agribusiness Support Project (PASP), and the just initiated
Rwanda Dairy Development Project (RDDP) which has a significant emphasis on engaging with policy makers and other relevant
stakeholders as well as assisting the government with the design and implementation of specific regulatory policies related to the
dairy value chain (VC).
Goal and development objective. KIIWP’s Development Goal is to ‘Contribute to poverty reduction in the drought prone Eastern
Province of Rwanda’. The Development Objective is to ‘Improve food security and incomes of 50,000 rural households on a
sustainable basis’ and build their climate resilience. KIIWP will improve the resilience of smallholder farmers to droughts and effects of
climate change through increased levels of production and productivity of selected food and cash crops, livestock and improved
market access and business development. Through KIIWP, it is expected that smallholder farmers will see an improvement in
household food and nutrition security, income and asset ownership, particularly amongst vulnerable groups including women-headed
households and youth. KIIWP’s goal will be achieved through the development of sustainable, profitable and intensive small-scale
agricultural activities supported through Public Private Producers Partnerships (4Ps) whenever opportunities exist in the selected
project sites and areas.
2/28
Project outcomes. The main expected outcomes and outputs of the project include (i) improved access to land, forests, water and
water bodies for production purposes; (ii) increased acreage of farmland under water-related infrastructure; (iii) increased acreage of
farmland under climate resilient management and practices; (iv) increased capacity of smallholder farmers and local government to
sustainably manage natural resources and climate-related risks; (v) enhanced use by farmers, including youth, of technologies,
equipment and infrastructure adapted to smallholder agriculture; and (vi) increased farmers’ economic benefits from market
participation and increased sales.
Strategic commodities will be supported by KIIWP that are central to the main livelihoods of the farmers in Kayonza District and for
both provision of staple food and income generation. Paddy, maize, potatoes, soya, as well as horticulture are anticipated to be KIIWP
major crops.
Project area. The project area comprises the eight drought-prone sectors of the District of Kayonza in the Eastern Province of
Rwanda. These sectors, namely Gahini, Kabare, Kabarando, Murama, Murundi, Mwiri, Ndego and Rinkwavu are relatively hot, with
limited rainfalls - averaging 900 mm per year - compared to the rest of the country, but have good potential for irrigation. The project
area has a population of 262,967 people, of which 51.5 per cent are women, who face a serious challenge of water scarcity during
nearly all dry months of the year. The landholding per capita of 0.5 hectare per household is moderately large compared with the rest
of the country. In the eight sectors targeted by the project, in addition to crop production, 58 per cent of all households raise some
type of livestock, 24 per cent have cows.
Target group. Based on the national wealth ranking system (Ubudehe), and consistent with the targeting strategy laid out in the
Country Strategic Opportunities Programme (COSOP), KIIWP’s direct target groups will comprise about 50,000 poor and food
insecure rural households (HH) representing 225,000 persons who belong to the poorest Ubudehe categories 1, 2 and 3[3].
Targeting strategy. KIIWP will reach the target group through various targeting mechanisms – geographic, self, direct, empowering
and procedural. It is expected that women and youth will account for at least 50 per cent and 30 per cent of total beneficiaries
respectively. Particular targeting mechanisms will be employed to ensure effective participation of women, women-headed
households and youth through specific capacity building interventions targeted at these groups. Gender Action Learning System
(GALS) will be used to improve equal access of men and women to economic opportunities, decision-making processes and share of
workload. Youth will be particularly targeted as both beneficiaries and service providers through the young graduate programme
initiated by MINAGRI to provide technical and managerial assistance to farmers’ cooperatives, Water User Organisations (WUOs)
and Water for Livestock User Organisations (WLUOs).
Alignment. KIIWP will be well aligned with IFAD corporate policies esp. on youth, gender, climate/environment, private sector, rural
finance and nutrition. The project will contribute to strategic objectives (SOs) 1 and 2 of the draft new Rwanda COSOP 2019-2024.
Specifically, it will sustainably increase agricultural productivity in food crop value chains (SO1) and strengthen market linkages
between farmers and other value chain actors (SO2). In this regard, KIIWP will also contribute to the SOs in IFAD’s Strategic
Framework (2016-2025) to increase rural people's productive capacities, increase their benefits from market participation and
strengthen the environmental sustainability and climate resilience of their livelihoods.
KIIWP will also directly contribute to the attainment of several Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), notably SDG 1 (No Poverty,
Target 4); SDG 2 (Zero Hunger, Targets 1 to 4); SDG 5 (Gender Equality); SDG 8 (Decent Work and Economic Growth, Targets 2 and
3); SDG 13 (Climate Action, Target 1 and 3) and SDG 15 (Life on Land, Target 1 and 3).
KIIWP will be implemented in two distinct phases. The two phases will be subject to distinct approval and financing processes, with
the submission of KIIWP 2 for Executive Board approval at the end of KIIWP 1. The rationale for the phased approach is for KIIWP 1
to: respond to the urgent demand of the Government of Rwanda to tackle drought-related issues in the Eastern Province within the
shortest possible time and to conduct the Feasibility Studies (FS) and Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) and
validate the irrigation schemes ahead of large irrigation development and farm business development support in KIIWP 2.
KIIWP 1 will comprise two components:
Strengthening resilience to droughts: this component will invest in catchment rehabilitation, livestock and domestic water
infrastructure development, and the establishment of efficient infrastructure management institutions. Specific Environmental
and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) for these activities will be prepared during implementation, as the location of the sites
are identified, prepared and implemented. Feasibility studies and ESIAs will be undertaken for four potential irrigation schemes
in the District. In addition, 5,000 hectares of area will be studied to prepare a pipeline of investment-ready irrigation schemes in
case the pre-identified schemes fall short of the target area for development.
Institutional development and project coordination: this component will provide the institutional, managerial and
administrative support services needed to implement the above technical component. Key interventions include: (i) the
capacity building of KIIWP implementation staff under the SPIU at the local and national level; and (ii) gender and youth
mainstreaming. Opportunities to support the development and implementation of national policies, strategies and/or
regulations related to the project interventions will be prioritized.
KIIWP 1 will revolve around (i) the catchment rehabilitation and protection of areas where rainfed agriculture is practised; (ii) the
provision of water for livestock and domestic purpose in the most drought-prone sectors of Kayonza; (iii) the preparation of the FS and
ESIAs for large irrigation schemes; and (iv) the formation and capacity building of sub-catchment committees, WLUOs, district and
scheme committees. All of these activities can be implemented as soon as the project is approved and will efficiently pave the way for
smooth and fast rolling out of the main investments foreseen in KIIWP 2.
This PDR mainly focuses on the proposed activities and implementation arrangements for KIIWP 1. As explained above, the
two phases will be subject to distinct IFAD Executive Board approval and financing processes, and the activities expected to take
place in KIIWP 2 will be fine-tuned according to the results of the FS and ESIAs to be produced and disclosed in accordance with the
national environmental regulations and SECAP guidelines. Feasibilities studies and ESIAs are expected to be ready by December
2020. This will allow to further shape and finalize the design of KIIWP 2. Out of a total project duration of six years, KIIWP 1 is
expected to last 2.5 years and KIIWP 2 will cover the remaining 3.5 years. Some activities initiated in KIIWP 1, like the capacity
building of district & scheme committees, sub-catchment committees and WLUOs might be continued based on their status and
strength assessed towards the end of KIIWP 1.
3/28
The anticipated components and activities in KIIWP 2 comprise:
Strengthening resilience to droughts: this component will promote climate smart agriculture for irrigated and rain-fed lands
through Farmer Field Schools. It will include investment on water harvesting and storage, irrigation infrastructure development
and marshland development. This component will also include the promotion of good nutritional practices and the GALS.
Support to farm business development: this component will assist farmers to take advantage of the investments made
under the component on strengthening resilience to droughts by strengthening their organizational and entrepreneurial skills
and improving their backward and forward linkages to access input, service and output markets.
Institutional development and project coordination: this component will continue supporting the project as described under
KIIWP 1.
The main expected outcomes at the end of KIIWP 1 and KIIWP 2 combined include: (i) improved access to land, forests, water and
water bodies for production purposes; (ii) increased acreage of farmland under water-related infrastructure; (iii) increased acreage of
farmland under climate resilient management and practices; (iv) increased capacity of smallholder farmers and local government to
sustainably manage natural resources and climate-related risks; (v) enhanced use by farmers, including youth, of technologies,
equipment and infrastructure adapted to smallholder agriculture and (vi) increased economic benefits by farmers from market
participation and increased sales.  
Project costs and financing KIIWP 1. KIIWP 1 total costs, including physical and price contingencies are estimated at US$24.73
million (RWF 22.2 billion), of which US$23.62 million are baseline costs and US$1.11 million are allowances for physical and price
contingencies. The costs broken down by project component are as follows: (i) Strengthening resilience to droughts: US$21.32 million
(86.2 per cent); (ii) Institutional development and project coordination: US$3.41 million (13.8 per cent). KIIWP I will be financed by: (i)
IFAD up to US$17.79 million (71.9 per cent), through a highly concessional loan; (ii) Government of Rwanda for a total of US$5.4
million (21.9 per cent) in the form of tax exemptions and consultancies for the Ndego irrigation scheme; and (iii) beneficiaries for a
total of US$1.53 million (6.2 per cent) in the form of works.
In KIIWP 1, Component A, Strengthening resilience to droughts, is partially counted as climate finance. The total amount of IFAD
climate finance for this project is preliminarily calculated as US$8,263,396[4], which represents 46.4 per cent of the total project
amount.
The estimated costs for KIIWP 2 are approximately US$59 million (RWF 53 billion), including US$3.7 million in contingencies, broadly
broken down by project component as follows: (i) Strengthening resilience to droughts: US$44 million; (ii) Support to farm business
development: US$8 million; (iii) Institutional development and project coordination: US$4 million. KIIWP 2 is expected to be financed
by: (i) IFAD up to US$26 million, through a highly concessional loan; (ii) Private sector for US$322 thousand; (iii) ICCO for US$ 246
thousand, (iv) Government of Rwanda for a total of US$9 million in the form of tax exemptions; (v) Co-financiers for a total of US$22
million; and (vi) Beneficiaries for US$2 million.
Co-financing arrangements. It is anticipated that the total IFAD loan for KIIWP (KIIWP 1 + KIIWP 2) would amount to about US$43.4
million, to be sourced from IFAD 11 financing cycle. Several development partners esp. the Korean International Cooperation Agency
(KOICA), but also the African Development Bank (AfDB), the OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID), the Spanish
Government and the European Union (EU) have expressed interest in co-financing KIIWP 2 once the results of the feasibility studies
and Environmental and Social Impact Assessments will be disclosed. In case the level of co-financing for unexpected reasons will not
be sufficient to fill the potential US$22 million financing gap in KIIWP 2, resources under IFAD 12 financing cycle will be accessed.
Theeconomic and financial analysis (EFA) of KIIWP 1 shows that the project would be profitable with an Economic Internal Rate of
Return (EIRR) of 15.74 per cent and a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$1.7 million at a 12 per cent economic discount rate. Sensitivity
analysis carried out shows that the economic profitability of KIIWP 1 would remain satisfactory even if the project costs increase by 26
per cent, the project benefits decrease by 21 per cent or if the benefits lag behind by two years. Economic benefits derive from
increased value of agricultural production and the value of improved access to water for domestic and livestock uses. Benefits also
include the improvement of living conditions and nutrition, the positive spill-over effects of capacity building on the local community,
and reduced land lost due to soil erosion control.
The overall EFA shows that KIIWP 1 and KIIWP 2 are financially profitable for rural households engaged in agricultural production
with financial internal rate of return for farmers ranging from 20 to 27 per cent depending on the production system. The sensitivity
analysis shows that the economic profitability would remain satisfactory even if the project costs increase by 46 per cent, the project
benefits decrease by 31 per cent or if the benefits lag behind by two years.
The preliminary environmental and social category is A. However, KIIWP 1 activities are classified as category B, given that
interventions focus on preparatory studies for irrigation schemes, integrated watershed management and planning activities. KIIWP 2
will include investments on water harvesting and storage, irrigation infrastructure development (area >100 hectares) and marshland
development, that may be categorised as A.
Project implementation arrangements. KIIWP 1 institutional arrangements are fully aligned with the current implementation
framework of IFAD-funded projects in Rwanda. The already established Single Project Implementation Unit (SPIU) is strategically
positioned to manage KIIWP with benefits such as (i) realization of economies of scale and reduction of transaction costs; (ii)
improved coordination and creation of synergy; (iii) efficiency and effectiveness in project implementation oversight through improved
M&E; (iv) improved staff retention leading to reduction in staff turnover and increase in institutional memory, and (v) increased
knowledge and expertise as well as best practices in project management.
4/28
The Lead Project Agency will be the Rwanda Agriculture and Animal Resources Development Board (RAB) under the auspices of the
Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI). RAB has the general mission of championing the agriculture sector
development into a knowledge based; technology driven and market-oriented industry, using modern methods in crop, animal,
fisheries, forestry and soil and water management in food, fibre and fuel wood production and processing. District implementation will
follow the devolution principle and day to day management of KIIWP 1 will be delegated by RAB to a District-level Project
Coordination Unit (PCU) within the District of Kayonza which will be the main executing agency of KIIWP 1 at the district level.
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Political and economic background. Small and landlocked, Rwanda is a low-income country, with a densely packed population
of about 12.5 million people and a total land area of 26,338 km2 of which 18,095 km2 is classified as arable agriculture land. From
a tragically low starting point in 1994, Rwanda has enjoyed political stability in the last two decades. Since the turn of the century,
Rwanda has seen its economy grow by 7.9 per cent per year, such that it is currently more than 3.5 times larger than it was in
2000. In the same period, GDP per capita has increased from US$242 to US$729, and poverty has been reduced from 60.3 per
cent to 39.1 per cent of the population.
Rwanda’s growth in 2016 and early 2017, while below historical standards, remained robust relative to the region, with 2017
growth estimated at 5.2 per cent. Consumer price inflation has continued to decline since February 2017, reflecting improving
food supply conditions and declining transport costs. In the most recent debt sustainability analysis by the International Monetary
Fund (IMF), Rwanda is assessed to be at low risk of debt distress. Rwanda’s external debt portfolio remains mostly constituted of
concessional loans, and this is expected to continue being the main source of funding for public projects going forward.
Poverty and rural development context. Rwanda is ranked 158th in the 2017 Human Development Index[5]. Significant socio-
economic developments over the past couple of decades include steadily decreasing birth rates per woman (from 7.2 in 1990 to
3.9 in 2016), rising literacy rates among adults and youth (from 64.9 per cent and 77.6 per cent in 2000 to 70.8 per cent and 85.1
per cent in 2014) and widespread improvements in health, leading to markedly improved life expectancy at birth (from 34 years
in 1990 to 67 years old in 2016).
While the country has an impressive record in translating its sustained growth into poverty reduction, poverty remains a key
challenge especially in rural areas[6]. Agriculture is estimated to have a share of 79 per cent in Rwanda’s total employment, and
84 per cent of its workers are estimated to be poor, i.e. having less than Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) of US$2 per day. The
agriculture sector has proven to be an avenue for propelling the country towards its vision of attaining middle-income status by
2020. The sustainable development of irrigated agriculture as a key driver to boost agriculture production and productivity is fully
acknowledged in most of Rwanda’s flagship policy documents and is viewed as fundamental for poverty alleviation and rural
development.
Land and agriculture. The Rwandan economy is still for the foreseeable future dependent on the agricultural sector which
employs around 70 per cent of the population, provides 91 per cent of the food consumed in the country, accounts for 70 per
cent of export revenues, and contributes 32.7 per cent of the GDP.
Rwanda’s land is fragile due to its mountainous topography, thin soil layers and limited vegetative cover. Population pressure has
forced settlement on marginal areas, resulting in overgrazing, severe soil erosion, and soil exhaustion, combined with high
vulnerability of rural communities to climate and weather shocks. Agriculture is characterized by small production units – the
average landholding size is 0.33 hectare, reflecting the high population pressure on the country's natural resource base. About
80 per cent of the rural population consists of subsistence farmers who use mostly rainfed production systems; less than 6 per
cent of all cultivated land is irrigated. Land remains a binding constraint and generally calls for production intensification as the
only environmentally sustainable pathway for continued growth of the agricultural sector.
The economy of Kayonza District is mostly dependent on agriculture and livestock, which occupy most of the labour force. The
district has fertile soils in almost all its sectors, permitting the growth of most types of food. Although a significant proportion of
land is unexploited, the majority of farmers cultivate small plots (0 to 1 hectare). The district has a good network of rural tracks
and roads connecting it to other districts but has only three modern markets. The rural financial sector is also underdeveloped
resulting in only 37 per cent of the district population with access to finance.
Improvements in the agriculture sector in the past decade have principally been driven by interventions in land management,
input provision, and irrigation. The crop-livestock intensification agenda continues to be critical. Significant interventions have
driven productivity gains, including implementation of the Land-Use Consolidation Policy and Crop Intensification Program,
expansion of irrigated areas, and more productive utilization of extensive fertile marshlands areas. Table 1 shows the notable
increases in yields for the main commodities.
Table 1: Food crop production in Rwanda from 2014 to 2018 ('000 tons)
Crops
2014
5/28
2015
2016
2017
2018
Total Crops
2,349
2,408
2,493
2,590
2,889
Cereals
    Sorghum
    Maize
    Wheat
    Rice
Legumes
   Beans
   Soya
353
40
284
3
26
242
233
9
368
31
295
3
39
257
245
12
401
48
300
4
49
261
249
12
425
42
324
4
55
156
145
11
434
37
333
6
58
263
251
12
Roots & tubers
1,218
1,240
1,280
1,405
1,587
   Irish potatoes
   Sweet potatoes
   Cassava
Bananas
339
511
368
368
Vegetables and fruits
168
335
503
402
378
165
370
504
406
379
172
379
575
451
416
188
439
662
486
406
199
Source: National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (2018)
9.
10.
11.
The market for horticultural produce is growing, with the rapid rate of urbanization in Rwanda strongly increasing domestic
demand. The demand for horticulture exports is also on the rise and cross-border trade is another substantial and profitable
market during the dry season when regional horticultural production is low. Indeed, the horticulture sector is viewed as highly
strategic by the GoR in terms of export revenues, and the National Agricultural Export development Board (NAEB) is intensifying
its support to the sector through various interventions: modern packhouse in Kigali, promotion of Rwanda Fresh brand,
establishment of accredited testing laboratories, etc.
Agricultural development is also being driven by the increasing involvement of the private sector. Local governments also play an
important role in agricultural development through the decentralisation process. The Ministry of Agriculture and Animal
Resources (MINAGRI) continues to provide strategic direction and coordination in the sector, while Districts have been given a
leading role in the implementation of agricultural strategies, through the decentralization of functions and budget.
The Land Tenure Regularisation Programme registered all the land in Rwanda (10.3 million parcels) for the first time over a
period of five years (up to 2013). This significantly increased tenure security for both female and male landowners. It is mandatory
to register land property to both spouses married in a community and spousal consent is now required for transfer of the property.
Current land laws provide for equal access to land without discrimination based on sex or origin. In case of State land acquisition,
owners of land are compensated.
12.
13.
Food security. Rwanda has recently subscribed to the Global Compact to end hunger and malnutrition by 2025. Official
estimates show that 19 per cent of households are food insecure, often related to the stability of rural incomes, access to land,
ownership of animals, and events such as crop failures and seasonal scarcities, which reduce access to food. Resource-poor
households who farm small plots are the most food insecure. In the target Kayonza District, 43 per cent of households are
marginally food secure, 10 per cent are moderately food insecure and 1 per cent are severely food insecure.
6/28
Relevant national policies and strategies. Rwanda’s long-term development goals are defined in the Vision 2020 and Vision
2050 documents that aim to transform the country from a low-income agriculture-based economy into a knowledge-based,
service-oriented economy with middle-income status. The GoR has ambitions to move towards being an Upper Middle Income
country by 2035, requiring an average annual growth rate of 10 per cent. To achieve this, the GoR has come up with a medium-
term strategy: the second Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy (EDPRS 2) outlines its overarching goal of
growth acceleration and poverty reduction through four thematic areas: economic transformation, rural development, productivity
and youth employment, and accountable governance. The GoR conducted a mid-term evaluation of its EDPRS 2 in July 2017.
Areas for further attention going forward include among others using PPPs to unlock business potential; modernizing
agriculture and increasing resilience to climate change, all areas that constitute the backbone of KIIWP’s design.
14.
The project also meets the objectives and priority areas of other key policies and strategies such as the Strategic Plan for the
Transformation of Agriculture (PSTA 4) – the Government's flagship investment programme for the sector, the National Strategy
on Climate Change and Low-Carbon Development (NCCLCD) for Green Growth and Climate Resilience and the Nationally
Determined Contributions (NDCs).
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
15.
16.
17.
18.
Climate change. Climate change has resulted in Rwanda experiencing frequent and recurrent mid-season droughts. Recent
rainfall trends show that rainy seasons are tending to become shorter but with higher intensity. While the North and South
Provinces suffer from severe landslides and soil erosion due to heavy floods, the Eastern Province, including Kayonza District, is
regularly affected by drought events leading to decreases in agricultural production and livestock deaths[7].
Gender. Rwanda has made great strides promoting gender equality, with strong Government backing. International indices that
measure progress towards gender parity rank it among high income countries with high levels of human development. However,
many of the benefits of this progress have yet to be felt in rural areas, where traditional patriarchal attitudes continue to prevail.
Women provide the bulk of labour (86 per cent) in the agricultural sector. Yet, with lower levels of schooling and higher rates of
illiteracy (23 per cent) they are constrained to subsistence farming with insufficient skills, access to markets and control over land
and other key assets and agricultural services, compared to men. In male-headed households, women also work double the
hours of men, on productive, domestic and community work. Rates of domestic violence, and tolerance for it by men and women,
are relatively high. All of these result in a cycle of gender inequality and poverty that transcends generations.
Youth. Over 50 per cent of the population is under 20 years old and the median age is 22.7 years old. The 2015 National Youth
Policy officially revised the definition of youth to people aged between 16 and 30 years old. Youth unemployment is relatively low
(4.1 per cent) and more of an urban problem. Youth inactivity (37 per cent) mainly stems from young people still in education (75
per cent) or looking after their families (16 per cent). Two-thirds of employed youth work in agriculture, but the sector is
characterized by low productivity, low earnings and precarious working conditions. Challenges to youth entrepreneurship and
business development include a lack of collateral to access finance, business and management skills, bankable business plans,
innovation and information technology as well as high interest rates. The Youth Policy thus identifies the modernisation of
agriculture as a priority, especially by linking and improving farm value chains.
Nutrition. While there have been marked reductions in the prevalence of chronic malnutrition over the last decade, stunting
continues to be above the World Health Organisation (WHO) high severity threshold and is a major public health concern. Almost
38 per cent of children under five are chronically malnourished.[8] Only three districts have moderate stunting rates (<30 per
cent). The persistent underlying causes of stunting in rural areas include: poor access to improved water and sanitation facilities
by infants and children; inadequate infant feeding to meet minimum meal frequency and diet adequacy needs; food insecurity
from subsistence farming on small plots of land; poor diet diversification leading to micronutrient deficiencies; and seasonal and
chronic obstacles and climate shocks limiting access to mostly market-sourced food items. Rwanda joined the SUN movement in
2011 and several multi-stakeholder platforms have been set up at central and local level to scale up nutrition. Agriculture has an
essential role to play in overcoming the remaining barriers in chronic malnutrition by enabling rural households to improve the
quality of their diets and food system.
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
19.
20.
In 2016, the Eastern Province was affected by a severe drought that brought an additional burden to the systemic challenges
faced by Rwandan farmers in terms of land pressure, loss of soil fertility due to unsustainable environment management practices
and inadequate farmer participation in rural development planning. More than 47,000 households in the districts of Kayonza,
Nyagatare, Gatsibo Ngoma and Kirehe became food insecure and the GoR had to provide food relief and water for livestock to
support the affected districts.
Along with its strategy to mitigate the drought-induced calamities through improved use of untapped water resources, the GoR
has thus requested IFAD to formulate a new integrated irrigation and watershed development project, revolving around the most
seriously affected district of Kayonza, and building on the experience of the recently completed KWAMP, the successful
Community-based Watershed Management Project implemented in the neighbouring Kirehe District.
21.
KWAMP is one of the most highly ranked supported projects in the IFAD East and Southern Africa (ESA) division. The supported
activities of crop and livestock intensification, irrigation development and improvement in feeder road network contributed to
improved agricultural productivity and enhanced food security in Kirehe District. The 2016 Impact Assessment reported that the
number of poor people in the district reduced from 54.4 per cent in 2008 to 37.1 per cent in 2016. Furthermore, land ownership
and security were improved resulting in 94.2 per cent of farmers owning land and 92.2 per cent of households having their land
registered.
7/28
22.
IFAD can also build on the strengths and lesson learned from the ongoing Project for Rural Income through Exports (PRICE),
Post-harvest and Agribusiness Support Project (PASP) and Rwanda Dairy Development Project (RDDP). RDDP has a significant
emphasis on engaging with policy makers and other relevant stakeholders as well as assisting the government with the design
and implementation of specific regulatory policies related to the dairy value chain. In line with government requests, IFAD will
ensure that KIIWP incorporates relevant good practices promoted in the country programme portfolio.
An innovative phasing approach
23.
KIIWP will be implemented along two phases that are meant to facilitate an early project start up and respond to the
urgent demand of the GoR to tackle drought-related issues in the Eastern Province within the shortest possible time.
KIIWP 1 will thus be devoted to the necessary preparatory works, ahead of the large irrigation infrastructure activities and farm
business development support that will take place during KIIWP 2, once the Feasibility Studies (FS) and Environmental and
Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) are completed and the irrigation schemes validated. This phasing approach will facilitate: a)
early project start up; and b) flexibility in project design and agility in implementation. It is anticipated that with completed FS and
disclosed and approved ESIAs, other development partners and the private sector will be more willing to co-finance with
communities, the GoR and IFAD.
24.
KIIWP 1 will comprise two components:
Strengthening resilience to droughts: this component will invest in catchment rehabilitation, livestock and domestic water
infrastructure development, and the establishment of efficient infrastructure management institutions. Specific Environmental
and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) for these activities will be prepared during implementation, as the location of the sites
are identified, prepared and implemented. Feasibility studies and ESIAs will be undertaken for four potential irrigation schemes
in the District. In addition, 5,000 hectares of area will be studied to prepare a pipeline of investment-ready irrigation schemes in
case the pre-identified schemes fall short of the target area for development.
Institutional development and project coordination: this component will provide the institutional, managerial and
administrative support services needed to implement the above technical component. Key interventions include: (i) the
capacity building of KIIWP implementation staff under the SPIU at the local and national level; and (ii) gender and youth
mainstreaming. Opportunities to support development and implementation of relevant national policies, strategies and/or
regulations will be prioritized.
25.
26.
KIIWP 1 will revolve around (i) the catchment rehabilitation and protection of areas where rainfed agriculture is practised; (ii) the
provision of water for livestock and domestic purposes in the most drought-prone sectors of Kayonza; (iii) the preparation of the
FS and ESIAs for large irrigation schemes; and (iv) the formation and capacity building of sub-catchment committees, Water for
Livestock User Organisations (WLUOs), district and scheme committees. All of these activities will efficiently pave the way for
smooth and fast rolling out of the main investments foreseen in KIIWP 2.
The two phases will be subject to distinct IFAD Executive Board approval and financing processes, and the activities expected to
take place in KIIWP 2 will be fine-tuned based on the results of the FS and ESIAs to be produced and disclosed in accordance
with the national environmental regulations and SECAP guidelines. Feasibility studies and ESIAs are expected to be ready by
December 2020. This will allow to further shape and finalize the design of KIIWP 2. Out of a total project duration of six years,
KIIWP 1 is expected to last 2.5 years and KIIWP 2 will cover the remaining 3.5 years. Some activities initiated in KIIWP 1, like the
capacity building of district & scheme committees, sub-catchment committees and WLUOs might be continued based on their
status and strength assessed towards the end of KIIWP 1.
27.
The anticipated components and activities in KIIWP 2 comprise:
Strengthening resilience to droughts: climate smart agriculture for irrigated and rain-fed lands will be promoted through
Farmer Field Schools. It will include investment on water harvesting and storage, irrigation infrastructure development and
marshland development. This component will also include the promotion of good nutritional practices and the Gender Action
Learning System (GALS).
Support to farm business development: farmers will be assisted to take advantage of the investments made under the
component on strengthening resilience to droughts by enhancing their organizational and entrepreneurial skills and improving
their linkages to access input, service and output markets.
Institutional development and project coordination: this component will continue supporting the project as described under
KIIWP 1.
28.
The main expected outcomes at the end of KIIWP 1 and KIIWP 2 combined include: (i) improved access to land, forests, water
and water bodies for production purposes; (ii) increased acreage of farmland under water-related infrastructure; (iii) increased
acreage of farmland under climate resilient management and practices; (iv) increased capacity of smallholder farmers and local
government to sustainably manage natural resources and climate-related risks; (v) enhanced use by farmers, including youth, of
technologies, equipment and infrastructure adapted to smallholder agriculture and (vi) increased economic benefits by farmers
from market participation and increased sales.
B. Lessons learned
29.
The country loan portfolio provides various lessons learned for the design of KIIWP 1:
1.  The focus on a single district enabled the active role of local government staff at different administrative levels (Cell, Sector,
District) who were seconded to all project components and activities. KIIWP will follow this example right from KIIWP 1 by
supporting local government capacity and institutional strengthening to further ensure the sustainability of the interventions
foreseen in Kayonza District.
8/28
2.  KWAMP showed that a critical element to ensure the sustainability of watershed management is the integrated and
participative approach used to prepare, implement and monitor catchment management plans. With the strengthening of
irrigation water user organizations (WUOs) and other decentralised structures, this participative approach ensured community
ownership and the transfer of infrastructure management to irrigation water user organizations (IWUOs).
3.  Early formation, capacity building and empowerment of WUOs paved the way for them to take-over responsibility for Operation
and Maintenance (O&M) of irrigation schemes. This process needs to be a scheme-based coaching approach and start early,
ideally at the time of planning and construction of a scheme. The same principle will apply to KIIWP 1 for the formation and
strengthening of WLUOs.
4.  There is a need to engage technically competent service providers (SPs) in the elaboration of technical designs of the
irrigation infrastructures. KWAMP experienced cost variations for hillside irrigation infrastructure mainly due to underestimated
foundation depth during design, and inadequate water for one dam as a result of poor runoff estimates at design. KIIWP 1 will
thus devote the necessary time and budgets to undertake highly professional FS that will guide the design of quality irrigation
infrastructure.
5.  In order to promote gender equality and youth engagement in agriculture, strategic partnerships and innovative approaches
are key. The Rwanda Youth Agribusiness Forum (RYAF) is a relevant partner to engage youth in agriculture, as service
providers as well as beneficiaries of capacity building, business and financial services. The GALS has been widely used in
IFAD projects in Rwanda to increase equal access to economic opportunities, decision-making processes and share of
workload.
6.  The competitively-staffed Single Project Implementation Unit (SPIU), in charge of the implementation of all IFAD funded
projects, provides a solid foundation for quick implementation start-up and timely disbursements. KIIWP will use the same
implementation arrangements in its two phases.
30.
Additional lessons learned relevant to KIIWP 2 are included in annex 12.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
31.
The overall KIIWP’s Development Goal is to "Contribute to poverty reduction in the drought prone Eastern Province of Rwanda".
The Development Objective is to "Improve food security and incomes of 50,000 rural households on a sustainable basis and
build their climate resilience". KIIWP will improve the resilience of smallholder farmers to droughts and effects of climate change
through increased levels of production and productivity of selected food and cash crops, livestock and improved market access
and business development. Through KIIWP, it is expected that smallholder farmers will see an improvement in household food
and nutrition security, income, and asset ownership, particularly amongst vulnerable groups including women-headed
households and youth. KIIWP’s goal will be achieved through the development of sustainable, profitable and intensive small-
scale agricultural activities supported through Public Private Producers Partnerships (4Ps) whenever opportunities exist in the
selected project sites and areas.
32.
KIIWP will support commodities central to the main livelihoods of the farmers in Kayonza District and for both provision of staple
food and income generation. Paddy, maize, potatoes, soya, as well as horticulture are anticipated to be KIIWP major crops.
33.
The main expected outcomes of the project include: (i) improved access to land, forests, water and water bodies for production
purposes; (ii) increased acreage of farmland under water-related infrastructure; (iii) increased acreage of farmland under climate
resilient management and practices; (iv) increased capacity of smallholder farmers and local government to sustainably manage
natural resources and climate-related risks; (v) enhanced use by farmers, including youth, of technologies, equipment and
infrastructure adapted to smallholder agriculture and (vi) increased farmers’ economic benefits from market participation and
increased sales. Figure 1 below summarises the two phases foreseen for the project.
Figure 1: KIIWP 1 and KIIWP 2 by component
9/28
34.
The project will contribute to strategic objectives (SO) 1 and 2 of the draft new Rwanda COSOP 2019-2024. Specifically, across
its two phases it will sustainably increase agricultural productivity in food crop value chains (SO1) and strengthen market linkages
between farmers and other value chain actors (SO2). In this regard, KIIWP 1 and KIIWP 2 will also contribute to the SOs in
IFAD’s Strategic Framework (2016-2025) to increase rural people's productive capacities, increase their benefits from market
participation and strengthen the environmental sustainability and climate resilience of their livelihoods. Annex 11 shows the
linkages in more detail between the core indicators in KIIWP 1 and KIIWP 2, the IFAD Strategic Framework (2016-2025) and the
SDG targets.
35.
36.
Project area. The targeted project area comprises the eight drought-prone sectors of the District of Kayonza in the Eastern
Province of Rwanda (see table 1 below). These areas are relatively hot, with limited rainfall compared to the rest of the country,
averaging 900 mm per year, but they have good potential for irrigation. Kayonza District in particular has a high potential for
irrigation development estimated at 30,000 hectares. The possible sources of water in the district are lakes (45.3 per cent),
marshlands (26.6 per cent), groundwater (21 per cent) and small rivers (7.1 per cent).
10/28
According to District population data (2016 census), Kayonza District has a population of 392,676 with 26.4 per cent of the
population living below the poverty line, and 9.5 per cent living in extreme poverty. About 80 per cent of the total active
population is engaged in agriculture as their main economic activity and source of income. The landholding per capita of 0.5
hectare per household (HH) is moderately large compared with the rest of the country. In addition to crop production, livestock is
intensified in the district. The main potential economic opportunities of Kayonza District were identified as agri-business
development opportunities, land availability, productivity enhancement, mechanization and use of modern farming
methodologies.
37.
Target sectors. Out of a total of 12 sectors in Kayonza, KIIWP 1 and KIIWP 2 will target the eight drought-prone sectors of
Gahini, Kabare, Kabarondo, Murama, Murundi, Mwiri, Ndego and Rwinkwavu representing a total of 262,967 people, of which
51.5 per cent are women. In these eight sectors, 58 per cent of all households raise some type of livestock, including 24 per cent
with cows. They face a serious challenge of water scarcity during nearly all dry months of the year. 
Table 2: Target sectors in Kayonza District
38.
Target group. Based on the national wealth ranking system (Ubudehe), and consistent with the targeting strategy laid out in the
COSOP, KIIWP’s direct target groups will comprise about 50,000 poor and food insecure rural households[9], equivalent to
225,000 people who are in the following Ubudehe categories: Category 1: Families who do not own a house or cannot pay a rent,
have a poor diet and can hardly afford basic household tools and clothes; Category 2: Those who have a dwelling of their own or
are able to rent one, mostly get food and wages[10] from working for others but rarely get full time jobs; and Category 3: Those
who have a job and farmers who go beyond subsistence farming to produce a surplus which can be sold.[11] Out of the 50,000
households targeted by KIIWP 1 and KIIWP 2, 7,167 households equivalent to about 32,250 persons are expected to benefit from
KIIWP 1.
39.
Profile of target groups. It is worth noting that in the eight KIIWP target sectors, almost all households (58,209 HH = 99.97 per
cent) are categorised as Category 1, 2 or 3. Almost half of them (49 per cent) are actually categorised as Category 1 and 2,
which is higher than in the whole of Kayonza District (47 per cent) and also higher than the national average (43.9 per cent).
Female-headed households are 31 per cent. Most of the target households will be men, women and youth farmers and livestock
keepers, and those in wage labour and off-farm activities along the target value chains.
40.
Targeting strategy. The targeting strategy for KIIWP 1 and KIIWP 2 will be based on the following targeting mechanisms:
1.  Geographical targeting. As mentioned above, the project will focus on the eight drought-prone sectors of Kayonza District. The
selection of specific sites will be based on the level of degradation, topography and water availability and viability of the site for
development.
2.  Self-targeting. The goods and services provided by the project will respond to the priorities, financial/labour capacities and
livelihood strategies of the target groups
3.  Direct targeting. The poorest households, young farm workers and women (from Category 1) will be targeted directly by the
project, involving the Umudugudu committee at village level to ensure transparent and participative methods of household
selection, for example for labour for construction activities. The Social Management Plan in the ESIAS will specifically assess
the need and how to reach out to Category 1 households in irrigation development. The approach used in KWAMP of
redistributing 20 per cent of the land that was owned by the District to the landless will be explored. Category 1 households
are also expected to benefit from the seasonal and permanent job opportunities created through market-orientated irrigation
development. Women and youth will be specifically targeted to account for at least 50 per cent and 30 per cent of
beneficiaries, respectively. Youth will be targeted as both beneficiaries and service providers. Women-headed households are
also expected to represent 30 per cent of households reached. Youth will be targeted as both beneficiaries and service
providers. It is also expected that the management committees will comprise 40 per cent women and 25 per cent youth.
41.
42.
43.
Empowering measures. The training of management committees will increase awareness of gender issues in infrastructure
management, as well as the role of youth. The GALS will be used to improve equal access of men and women to economic
opportunities, decision-making processes and share of workload. Young professional organisations, such as the Rwanda Youth
in Agribusiness Forum (RYAF) and the Horticulture in Reality Cooperative (HoReCo) are mainly composed of young graduates in
Agriculture, Animal Production, Irrigation, Food Dairy technologies and Agricultural Mechanisation. RYAF and HoReCo have
recently signed MoUs with MINAGRI to encourage the involvement of young professionals in implementing programs/projects
that support agricultural transformation. These youth will be particularly targeted as service providers to provide technical and
managerial assistance to management committees.
11/28
Procedural measures. Attention will be given to costs/beneficiary contributions, timing and administrative procedures required for
effective participation of the various target groups. To ensure the participation of women, attention to the location and timing of
various project activities may increase their opportunity to participate.
Operational measures and monitoring. A Gender, Targeting and Community Mobilisation Officer has been appointed in the
MINAGRI SPIU to coordinate the implementation of the gender and targeting strategies. In addition, KIIWP project staff will
include an M&E Officer that is also in charge of gender and youth.
44.
Further details on gender and youth mainstreaming and the targeting and gender strategies are available in the description of
components and in the Project Implementation Manual.
45.
This PDR mainly focuses on the proposed activities and implementation arrangements for KIIWP 1, while also
presenting the overall project rationale and strategy (KIIWP 1 and KIIWP 2).
D. Components/outcomes and activities
Components/outcomes and activities[12]
46.
KIIWP 1will consist of two components: A) strengthening resilience to droughts and B) institutional development and
project coordination. The main expected outcomes and outputs can be summarized as follows: i) 11,250 people reporting
improved access to land and water for production purposes; (ii) 1,690 hectares of land brought under climate resilient
management benefitting 21,000 people; (iii) 35 infrastructure (valley tanks and boreholes) constructed in rain-fed areas; (iv)
Investment-ready schemes for the irrigation of 2,275 hectares combined with an investment-ready pipeline of about 5,000
hectares; (v) 49 groups supported to sustainably manage natural resources and climate-related risks and (vi) Contribution to the
development and/or operationalization of relevant national policies.
Component A: Strengthening resilience to droughts
47.
For KIIWP 1, this component will cover the much needed catchment rehabilitation and protection in rainfed areas; the urgently
required infrastructure for livestock and domestic purposes; and all preparatory activities for the irrigation development to be done
under KIIWP 2.
Sub-component A.1: Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
This sub-component will support investments in catchment rehabilitation through the following investments: a) sub-catchment
planning; b) land husbandry in rainfed areas; and c) construction of boreholes and valley tanks to supply water for livestock and
domestic use. Specific ESIAs and ESMPs will be developed for each interventions under this subcomponent.  
Improving rain water management: Farmland protection and rehabilitation techniques will be selected with a view to reducing
runoff so that rainwater can infiltrate into the soil. This will be combined with land husbandry practices geared towards increasing
vegetative cover in the farms which will increase the soil fertility. The protection activities such as construction of check dams,
side drains, terraces and contour buns will be complimented with agro-forestry activities including planting of selected agro-
forestry trees, shrubs and grasses as well as pastures rehabilitation. A target of 1,400 hectares will be protected and rehabilitated
in Murundi, Murama, Mwiri, Kabarondo and Gahini Sectors.
The farmlands will be selected through participatory assessments in the sub-catchments. An output of the assessments will be
the catchment management plans that will guide the implementation of the activities. The plans will identify the zones in most
need of protection and the action to be taken to rehabilitate and protect them.
When the catchment management plans are developed, the SPIU will engage a service provider(s) to manage the
implementation of the plans at sub-catchment level. The SPIU will have a field officer responsible for supervising the
implementation jointly with the district and the sub-catchment committees (SCCs) and with the active participation of WUOs and
WLUOs. The activities are expected to result in the rehabilitation and protection of 5,950 hectares of farmlands.
Water supply for livestock and domestic use: The supply of water for livestock and domestic purposes will be improved
through the development of valley tanks and boreholes. The selection of where to invest in livestock watering facilities will be
informed by the need to evenly spread the grazing areas across the sectors to minimize overgrazing. The project will develop 20
boreholes and 15 valley tanks to supply water to 2,500 households and 7,200 livestock.
Sub-component A.2: Irrigation Development
53.
Feasibility Studies (FS) and ESIA for Irrigation Schemes will be undertaken for four potential irrigation schemes in Kayonza
District, namely:
Ndego Sector Irrigation Scheme (Kibare (400 hectares), Humure (600 hectares) and Byimana (400 hectares) with a potential
12/28
net area of 1,400 hectares to be irrigated. The scheme will benefit about 4,667 households. The potential water source will be
Lake Nasho, Kibare and Ihema on the Akagera River, near Akagera National Park. Note: The Government of Rwandahas
initiated the FS and ESIA for irrigation schemes in the Ndego Sector.
Kabare Sector Irrigation Scheme, with a potential net area of 600 hectares to be irrigated at Gakoma. The scheme will benefit
about 2,000 households. The water source for the irrigation is the Lake Nasho on the Akagera River.
Kanyeganyenge Dam and Irrigation Scheme with a potential command area of 150 hectares at Kabarondo. The irrigation
scheme will benefit about 500 households. A dam will be built on the Kanyeganyenge river to supply water to the irrigation
scheme.
Gishanda Dam and Irrigation Scheme with a potential command area of 125 hectares at Kabare, to benefit over 400
households. A dam will be built on the Rwinkwavu River. Note: The sizes of the reservoirs will be determined during feasibility
studies, but it is expected to be above one million m3 for each dam.
54.
The results of the FS and ESIAs will determine the exact locations of the interventions which may include areas outside the
above identified sectors and District boundaries.
55.
56.
In addition, another area of 5,000 hectares will be studied to prepare a pipeline of investment-ready irrigation schemes. The
pipeline will also act as a reserve list of irrigation schemes for development under KIIWP 2, in case the pre-identified schemes fall
short of the target area for development. Priority for the sites to be studied will be given to sites in Kayonza District identified in
the Irrigation Master Plan (IMP).
Irrigation schemes that are identified to be environmentally, socially, technically and financially viable will be developed under
KIIWP. The studies will be done by international consulting companies. The SPIU will engage consultancy firms with the different
required expertise to carry out these studies and assessments with active participation of the community institutions. Specific
ESMPs for activities under KIIWP 1 will be prepared during implementation as part of the FS and ESIAs, as the location of the
sites are identified and prepared.
Sub-component A.3: Infrastructure management institutions
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
Formation and strengthening management committees: In order to ensure long-term sustainability, KIIWP 1 will support the
institutional development of management committees that will be responsible for coordinating the planning and implementation of
activities in the catchment plans. In addition, the committees will play an active role in the planning, design, construction and
operation and maintenance of infrastructure developed in the catchment. The committees will also be central in ensuring
inclusive and equitable access to water for all members, including farmers and livestock keepers. The committees will develop
drought contingency plans for the catchment and sub-catchment areas. Committees to manage specific infrastructure will be
capacitated and strengthened to benefit all users of the infrastructure.
An estimated 10 SCCs, 35 WLUOs and four scheme steering committees will be formed and/or strengthened during KIIWP 1,
totalling 49 management committees. KIIWP 1 will support the formation and strengthening of these institutions in the eight
drought-prone sectors of the District, based on one consistent approach. District, Sector and cell level staff, with the support of
WUO Specialist from the SPIU and RAB, will support the formation and strengthening of these institutions. The District could
simultaneously replicate the approach in the remaining four Kayonza sectors, using their own resources.
Capacity building will take place, covering three key areas: (i) governance; (ii) technical water management (O&M); and (iii)
monitoring and exchange of experiences. The capacity building will be based on a participatory Farmer Field School approach.
Some key features of the institutions are presented below.
Scheme and District Steering Committees. As per Ministerial Instructions (2017, Draft[13]), the project will support the
establishment and strengthening of Scheme and District-level Steering Committees to support and oversee the functioning of the
WUOs and ensure optimal use of developed land at irrigation scheme and District level. Overall six irrigation schemes are
expected to be constructed in Kayonza, and four schemes Steering Committees will need to be established. These will be
chaired by the Executive Secretary of the Sector in which the scheme is located.
Sub-Catchment management committees. In line with the national policy, KIIWP 1 will support the setting-up and strengthening of
sub-catchment[14] management committees in each watershed. These committees will put in place regulations on use,
conservation, protection and management of water resources. They are expected to be effective institutional bodies for managing
and improving sub-catchment areas, and to perform a central role in the planning and implementation of activities identified in the
sub-catchment plans, together with the Scheme and District Steering Committees.
KIIWP 1 will start with establishing the exact boundaries of the different catchments and sub-catchments in Kayonza District
through Geographic Information System (GIS) mapping. This will be done by a local service provider. KIIWP 1 will support the
preparation of sub-catchment management plans, involving the sub-catchment committees in order to ensure water resources
protection and conservation by all in an integrated approach. These sub-catchment committees will also be responsible for
safeguarding communal areas with soil and water conservation measures such as terraces and agro-forestry and monitor the
implementation of reforestation and safeguard the newly reforested areas.
Water for Livestock Users Organisations will be established, and existing ones strengthened, to ensure the management and
sustainability of boreholes and valley tanks. Currently there are 15 valley tanks for domestic and livestock use, with each one
serving an average of 89 male and 15 female headed households and 480 livestock. A further 15 new valley tanks will be
constructed. In addition, 20 boreholes will be installed. In total, 15 existing WLUOs will be strengthened and 35 new WLUOs will
be established and strengthened. The WLUOs will prepare guidelines for O&M of the boreholes and valley tanks, including
connected domestic water supply systems. Women's participation in the management of water supply infrastructure will be
mandatory. The participation of youth will also be encouraged, as they can be hired as water point managers, collect water fees
and ensure hygienic conditions at the water points.
Sub-component A.4: Implementation of Environmental and Social Management Plans
64.
Under this subcomponent, environmental and social management plans as identified by the ESIAs will be implemented. Specific
provisional budget has been provided for as indicated in the ESMF.
13/28
Component B: Institutional development and project coordination
65.
This component is designed to strengthen government agencies to deliver project outputs and to support policy dialogue and
institutional development that will sustain project interventions beyond project completion.
Sub-component B.1: Support to policy dialogue and enabling institutional environment
66.
67.
68.
69.
KIIWP 1 will strengthen institutions that can directly or indirectly support the implementation and provide policy supports that are
needed for the effective implementation of the project. Key activities and interventions foreseen under this sub-component
include the below activities.
Capacity building interventions will be identified for KIIWP staff under the SPIU, including RAB and district personnel engaged
in KIIWP 1 implementation. These capacity building activities will be preceded by a needs assessment. The financing of these
activities will be done by the concerned entities and co-financed by the project, provided that these capacity building activities are
benefiting project implementation and build the sustainability prospects of the project. Collaboration with the Rwanda Capacity
Development and Employment Services Board (CESB) will be explored.
Gender and youth mainstreaming. Poverty and gender and youth studies will be conducted at baseline and in the third year.
Initial studies will be used by RAB in connection with the SPIU to strengthen the targeting strategy and prepare a brief gender
and youth action plan for KIIWP 1. This will also pull on work already done by MINAGRI and other IFAD-supported projects.
Specific training will be organised to familiarise government and project staff with gender and youth mainstreaming approaches,
and special provisions will be made to ensure that gender equity concerns are adopted in the implementation of all project
components. The M&E system will disaggregate data by sex and age to support gender and youth analysis.
Support for policy dialogue will be provided through an evaluation of implementation and impact of new or existing policies
related to the project activities with relevant national, and district level stakeholders. Support for water management policies will
be through the implementation of the recently enacted policies and legislation including Ministerial Instructions on Land
Development, Conservation and Exploitation of Developed Land for the formation and registration of WLUOs and district and
steering committees. In addition, via multi-stakeholder platforms and fora of dialogue, KIIWP 1 will strive to raise specific policy
discussion points meant to address identified bottlenecks in Rwanda’s agricultural sector, such as:
a. Support to national policy on contract farming, making use of the tools developed through the implementation of the Legal Guide on
Contract Farming[15] developed by UNIDROIT, FAO and IFAD in 2015;
b. Analyze the factors affecting rice value chain that makes Rwandan rice less competitive with regional products;
c. Current issues of availability and quality of seeds, including multiplication.
Sub-component B.2: Project management and coordination
70.
The objective of this sub-component is to provide the coordination arrangements, including the financial and human resources
that are needed for the implementation of the project. Details on coordination arrangements are provided in Section 4 of this
PDR.
71.
Conditions to start KIIWP 2
In order to proceed from KIIWP 1 to KIIWP 2, specific, transparent and monitorable triggers are set as conditions. See annex 15 for
more details.
1. 
1.  FSs identify irrigation schemes that are financially, economically, environmentally and socially viable and sustainable.
2.  Third party satisfactory review of FSs, ESIAs and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs).
3.  ESIAs and RAPs are disclosed at local community level, national and IFAD website for a minimum 120 days.
4.  Provision of a budget and commitment by the Government of Rwanda to implement the RAP and other ESMP activities
identified by the ESIAs.
5.  Revision of the PDR and PIM to incorporate the findings of KIIWP 1.
72.
Before submitting KIIWP 2 for EB approval, IFAD Senior Management will assess if conditions have been fully met.
Summary of activities under KIIWP 2
73.
Building up on KIIIWP 1, KIIWP 2 will continue to focus on strengthening resilience to droughts as the first component
(Component A). Potential irrigation development will comprise the Ndego Irrigation Scheme (net 1,400 hectares), Kibare
Irrigation Scheme (net 600 hectares), Kanyeganyege Irrigation Scheme (net 150 hectares + dam), and Gishynda Irrigation
Scheme (net 125 hectares + dam). Depending on the findings from KIIWP 1 FS, other irrigation schemes will be developed in
place of the above, if they are found to be unviable. KIIWP 2 will have two additional components: (B) Support to farm business
development and (C) Institutional development and project coordination. Activities in Component B will include assisting farmers
engaged in commercial production, promoting mechanization, post-harvest storage and irrigation technologies, and supporting
backward and forward market linkages. Component C will focus on supporting national policy related to project activities,
mainstreaming gender and youth, and capacity building, in addition to project management and coordination. More information
on the anticipated activities in KIIWP 2 are provided in Annex 12.
E. Theory of Change
Theory of Change[16]
74.
75.
76.
77.
KIIWP 1 Theory of Change (TOC) is based on the situation faced by crop and livestock farmers currently living in the target area.
Given the identified problems of:
14/28
1.  climate change (droughts);
2.  population pressure;
3.  limited water storage and availability;
4.  crop failures in subsistence agriculture;
5.  limited number of investment-ready irrigation projects;
6.  inadequate farmer participation in rural development planning; and
7.  weak technical and organizational capacity of district staff.
These factors inevitably lead to catchment degradation, conflicts between water users, death of livestock, need for emergency
food, reduced investment in irrigation, weak sense of responsibility/ownership of natural resources and no harmonized approach
to support project implementation.
KIIWP 1 TOC entails that smallholder farmers will sustainably increase their food security and income through focused
interventions made at district/sector level. These interventions will revolve around four main pillars: (i) catchment rehabilitation
through land husbandry in rainfed areas; (ii) construction of valley tanks, boreholes and rainwater harvesting ponds; (iii)
preparation of pipeline of investment-ready projects from 7,275 hectares and (iv) formation and strengthening of sub-catchment
committees, WLUOs, scheme and district steering committees.
The ownership of direct and indirect beneficiaries will be sought through their development as strong local organisations able to
sustainably manage the infrastructure supported by the project. This, combined with the integrated watershed management
approach adopted by the project, will ensure appropriate management of natural resources and increased control of climate-
related risks in the target areas. The direct result of KIIWP 1 interventions can be summarized as follows:
a. 1,200 hectares catchment area protected and rehabilitated in four sectors (Kabarondo, Murundi, Gahini and Murama);
b. 200 hectares (667 households) benefitting from rainwater harvesting ponds;
c. 20 boreholes and 15 valley tanks supplying water to 2,500 households and 7,200 livestock;
d. Six schemes ready to be built for the irrigation of 2,275 hectares + investment-ready pipeline;
e. 49 committees formed and capacitated to manage efficiently the catchment areas and water rights for livestock and domestic
purposes
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
Alignment with national priorities
78.
KIIWP’s Development Goal is fully aligned with GoR’s second Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy (EDPRS
2) whose overarching goal is growth acceleration and poverty reduction[17]. More specifically, KIIWP is well aligned with
Rwanda’s Strategic Plan for the Transformation of Agriculture (PSTA 4), the Government's flagship investment programme for
the agriculture sector:
a) The enhanced CSA and LH practices promoted under Component A respond well to the first two Priority Areas (PAs):
PA 1: Innovation and extension provide the knowledge base for PAs 2-3. The focus is on improving agronomic knowledge and
technology in terms of basic research and innovation, development of efficient extension services, as well as promoting
knowledge and skills of value chain actors.
PA 2: Productivity and resilience focus on promoting sustainable and resilient production systems for crops and animal
resources.
b) While the support to farm business development foreseen in Component B is well aligned with the third PA:
PA 3: Inclusive markets and value addition seek to improve markets and linkages between production and processing. This
includes key input markets such as fertilisers, insurance and finance as well as upstream activities such as aggregation,
promotion of value addition, market infrastructure and export readiness.
c) And the support for policy dialogue under Component C aligns with the fourth PA:
PA 4: Enabling environment and responsive institutions provide the regulatory framework and define and coordinate public
sector involvement.
79.
80.
As for KIIWP’s specific interventions on irrigation infrastructure, they are well aligned with the National Strategy on Climate
Change and Low-Carbon Development (NCCLCD) for Green Growth and Climate Resilience that underlines the need to manage
the implications of climate variability for the social, environmental and economic development of the country.
Last but not least, KIIWP meets the objectives of the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) that are built upon the
NCCLCD and advocate for a climate resilient economy. The NDC’s framework states clearly that the development of irrigation
infrastructure and other water efficient technologies will contribute to both sustainable intensification of agriculture and integrated
water resources management and planning, which are the pillar for enhancing food security and biodiversity and ecosystem
conservation and preservation.
Alignment with SDGs and IFAD corporate priorities
81.
Overall, KIIWP will directly contribute to the attainment of several Sustainable Development Goals, notably SDG 1 (No Poverty,
Targets 4 and 5); SDG 2 (Zero Hunger, Targets 3 and 4); SDG 5 (Gender Equality, Target 5); SDG 8 (Decent Work and
Economic Growth, Target 3); SDG 9 (Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure, Targets 1 and 3); SDG 13 (Climate Action, Target 1)
and SDG 15 (Life on Land, Target 3). See Annex 11 for more details.
15/28
82.
KIIWP is also well aligned with IFAD mainstreaming priorities and policies on youth, gender, climate/environment, private sector,
rural finance and nutrition.
Table 3: Alignment with IFAD Policies, Strategies and Action Plans
Policy/Strategy/Action
Plan
Alignment
Country level policy
engagement
The project will strive to create and provide spaces for policy strengthening, formulation and
implementation, led by the government and including multiple actors in the various value chains
involved, particularly paddy, maize and horticulture. Particular emphasis in KIIWP 1 will be put on the
formalization of the participatory approach used to foster irrigation development through integrated
catchment management plans, and setting up a legal framework for contract farming expected to be
encouraged in some of the new irrigation schemes.
Targeting policy
The KIIWP targeting strategy is based on inclusiveness and will include very poor, poor and resourceful
poor households as direct beneficiaries. The project will adopt several targeting mechanisms:
geographic, direct and self-targeting, enabling environment, as well as ensuring procedural and
operational measures. The strategy will be assessed at various stages of the project life to readjust or
reinforce whenever it is needed.
Gender equality and
women’s empowerment
policy
KIIWP will mainstream gender concerns through project activities. KIIWP 2 will integrate the GALS in the
FFSs approach. This will promote equitable: (i) participation and share of benefits for women and men
involved in crop production (ii) decision-making capacities at household and group levels and (iii) share
of workloads between men and women in agricultural and domestic activities. In addition, KIIWP will
foster economic empowerment of women in the off-farm economy.
Mainstreaming nutrition
action plan
KIIWP will promote good nutrition practices in rural households, particularly among the most vulnerable.
Nutrition education, including on local foods and dietary diversification, will be integrated into FFS
training. Efforts to increase horticultural production will also support access to a diversified diet and
nutrient rich food. Operational measures to implement these activities will involve a short-term TA to
develop a training module and liaising with the Nutrition Specialist in RDDP. In addition, the project log
frame will facilitate the monitoring of nutrition related outputs (number of persons provided with targeted
support to improve their nutrition) and impact (number of children 0-5 years suffering from malnutrition).
Rural Youth Action Plan
KIIWP mainstreams youth in operations to enable the social and economic empowerment of young rural
women and men. Youth-sensitive programming includes: the 25 per cent quota on youth outreach; age-
disaggregated data in the M&E system to support youth assessments and analyses; and, the targeting of
youths throughout project activities. Youths will be specifically targeted as service providers through the
young graduate programme initiated by MINAGRI to provide technical and managerial assistance to
farmers’ cooperatives, WUOs and WLUOs. Youths who cannot access much land and are interested in
quick wins are also likely to be attracted to horticultural development activities.
Rural finance policy
KIIWP foresees that bankable business plans developed by cooperatives, off-takers and processors will
receive technical support in order to facilitate access to financial products. Particular emphasis will be
given to strengthening the linkages between smallholder farmers and the cooperatives or companies that
have already received co-financing support from PASP to develop storage, processing or transport
facilities in Kayonza. For new investments that may occur after PASP completion, or for other VCs that
are not supported by PASP in Kayonza District (esp. rice), KIIWP will provide grant support using
modalities similar to PASP project, e.g. (i) Grants for business-driven cooperative development plans, to
establish new drying grounds and/or simple, affordable post-harvest storage facilities using renewable
energy; (ii) Performance-based grants (tied to a loan) under 4Ps joint-venture for the new warehouses
that would be requested as the result of new irrigation schemes (esp. in Ndego sector).
The project will not work directly on policies related to rural finance.
Policy/Strategy/Action
Plan
Alignment
16/28
Access to land and land
security
KIIWP will mainly work on production intensification and access to natural resources (especially water).
As the project will also work on land tenure security, the guiding principles of IFAD's land policy suggest
that IFAD should be aligned to national policy priorities, do no harm, focus on gender dimensions of land
usage and empower rural people and their organizations on land tenure.
IFAD environment and
natural resource
management policy and
climate change
strategy[18]
Aligned with the ENRM policy (2011), particularly with principle 3-promote climate-smart approaches to
rural development and principle 4-greater attention to risk and resilience to manage shocks. The climate
change strategy (2010) suggests that climate change should be factored into the project design, explore
new ways to work on emerging problems and mobilize resources to address these problems. The
Integrated catchment Management Plans and impending results of the ESIAs prepared under KIIWP 1
will help to ensure that irrigation investments are socially and environmentally sustainable.
Knowledge
management
The project will use new guidance on best practice for logical frameworks and results hierarchies, and
will have a dedicated M&E system as well as significant budget for knowledge management related to
policy experience.
Scaling up
The project is consistent with IFAD's vision of scaling up, defined as “expanding, adapting and
supporting successful policies, programmes and knowledge, so that they can leverage resources and
partners to deliver larger results for a greater number of rural poor in a sustainable way”. KIIWP 1
intends to utilize the extensive set of lessons learned from past and ongoing IFAD-funded programmes
to ensure that the project interventions provide continuity while growing in scale.
Harmonization and partnerships
83.
84.
IFAD experience with FAO[19] and the International Water Management Institute (IWMI), in supporting investments in Agricultural
Water Management (AWM) has informed the design of KIIWP and will be instrumental to further shape KIIWP 2.
The implementation of KIIWP will build on existing programs and activities of other implementing partners or agencies working in
the same sector or geographical location. Partners that can collaborate with KIIWP 1 are identified as follows[20]:
a) MINAGRI will maintain an oversight role and lead the policy interventions and dialogue for the sector in general and for KIIWP
implementation in particular. The Permanent Secretary in MINAGRI will maintain the role of Chair within the steering committee of
KIIWP.
b) IFAD-funded “Climate Resilient Post-Harvest and Agribusiness Support Project” (PASP) is implemented in Kayonza for the
maize and beans value chains. KIIWP will ensure that the nine cooperatives currently supported by PASP will be reached for
catchment rehabilitation activities whenever relevant.
c) IFAD-funded Rwanda Dairy Development Program (RDDP) is also operational in Kayonza, focusing on developing the dairy
value chain through improving cattle productivity, milk quality and processing capacity of the dairy industry. RDDP is also
strengthening the policy and institutional framework for the sector. Synergies will be created to supply water for livestock.
d) IFAD-funded Project for Rural Income through Exports (PRICE) is a country-wide project focusing on the establishment of pro-
poor cash crop value chains involving smallholder production and early transformation in partnership with private operators. Under
KIIWP, synergies will be established to support horticulture producers established in rain-fed areas.
e) Rwanda Capacity Development and Employment Services Board (CESB) established under the Law Nº43/2016 of 18/10/2016
is strategically positioned under the Ministry of Public Service and Labour (MIFOTRA). CESB will support the capacity building
interventions foreseen under Component C of KIIWP.
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
85.
86.
87.
KIIWP 1 total project investment and recurrent costs, including physical and price contingencies, are estimated at US$24.73
million (RWF 22.2 billion), of which US$23.62 million are baseline costs and US$1.11 million are allowances for physical and
price contingencies. The costs broken down by project component are as follows: (i) Strengthening resilience to droughts:
US$21.32 million (86.2 per cent); (ii) Institutional development and project coordination: US$3.41 million (13.8 per cent).
In KIIWP 1, Component A, Strengthening resilience to droughts, is partially counted as climate finance. The total amount of IFAD
climate finance for this project is preliminarily calculated as US$8,263,396[21], which represents 46.4 per cent of the total project
amount.
The estimated costs for KIIWP 2, including physical and price contingencies, are estimated at US$59.23 million (RWF 53.16
billion). The foreign exchange component is estimated at US$26.96 million (46 per cent of project cost), while taxes have been
calculated at approximately US$8.7 million or 14.7 per cent of total project costs. Total baseline costs are US$55.47 million, while
price contingencies account for US$1.9 million (or 3 per cent of the base costs) and physical contingencies amount to US$1.8
million (or 3 per cent of the base costs).
17/28
Table 4: KIIWP 1 project costs by component Table 5: KIIWP 1 project component by year (USD’000)
Table 5: KIIWP 1 project component by year (USD’000)
Table 6: Expenditure Accounts by Components (USD’000) - totals including contingencies
18/28
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
88.
KIIWP I will be financed by: (i) IFAD up to US$17.79 million (71.9 per cent), through a highly concessional loan; (ii) Government
of Rwanda for a total of US$5.42 million (21.9 per cent) in the form of tax exemptions and consultancies for Ndego irrigation
system; and (iii) beneficiaries for a total of 1.53 million (6.2 per cent) in the form of works.
Table 7: KIIWP 1 project costs and financing by component (USD’000)
89.
Project financing from IFAD broken down expenditure category is shown in Table 8 below.
Table 8: Expenditure Accounts by Financier for KIIWP 1 (USD’000)
90.
Co-financing arrangements. It is anticipated that the total IFAD loan for KIIWP 1 is US$17.79 million (71.9 per cent). The GoR
will contribute with US$5.42 million (21.9 per cent) in the form of tax exemptions and consultancies for the Ndego irrigation
scheme. Several development partners esp. the Korean International Cooperation Agency (KOICA), but also the African
Development Bank (AfDB), the OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID), the Spanish Government and the European
Union (EU) have expressed interest in co-financing KIIWP 2 once the results of the FS and ESIAs will be disclosed. In case the
level of co-financing for unexpected reasons will not be sufficient to fill the potential US$22 million financing gap in KIIWP 2,
resources under IFAD 12 financing cycle will be accessed.
91.
92.
93.
94.
95.
96.
Organisation and staffing/Embedded SPIU. KWAMP and the other IFAD financed project coordination structures were
designed to be housed within the SPIU within MINAGRI, staff recruited competitively or transferred from other projects under the
same portfolio. This arrangement has facilitated quick start up of projects thanks to the dedication of the SPIUs staff and the
transfer of knowledge from previous projects. The RAB has been designated as the Lead Project Agency (LPA) for KIIWP 1.
RAB will ensure that where filling of staff positions will be through secondment, the assigned staff have the requisite
qualifications and experience and are fully dedicated to the SPIU to facilitate their full attention on project needs. The project
accountant, under the supervision of the SPIU Chief Accountant and the SPIU Head of Finance will be responsible for all
accounting functions of the project including funds flow, preparation of annual financial statements, periodic financial reporting
and overseeing the arrangements for audits, in accordance with GoR procedures and IFAD’s audit requirements for the entire
project.
19/28
At district level, it is proposed that a Project Accountant be recruited. The incumbent will work with the District finance department
in processing documents, verifying recipients/payees, checking and collating documents for submission to SPIU. The district
project accountant shall initiate transactions in the Integrated Financial Management Information Systems (IFMIS) for approval
and authorisation by SPIU Headquarters.
Budgeting. The GoR national budget calendar will be followed. Considering that the budget has to be input into IFMIS in
accordance with the national budgetary rules and timetable the clearance process by IFAD should be well planned and executed
to precede the GoR budgeting calendar.
The project will be implemented based on approved Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPBs). The budgeting process will be
done jointly between SPIU and implementing partners using a bottom–up approach. The exercise will bring together
Accountants, M&E Officers and Procurement Officers to ensure that the activities align to the log frame and the procurement plan
is aligned to the AWPB. The SPIU will consolidate the AWPB, present it for approval by the PSC and submit it to IFAD with a
request for a No Objection in accordance with the financing agreement and the PIM.
Disbursement arrangements and Flow of Funds – Project design has put into consideration financial management requirements
that will ensure that the loan proceeds and other financing sources will be used for their intended purposes. This has been based
on lessons learned under KWAMP and the RDDP that has been rolled into IFMIS.
Designated/Operational Accounts. Under KWAMP, there were three project accounts; the designated account, an operations
account and a district account. The district account will not be necessary since accounting will be on the IFMIS platform. The
funds flow arrangement (See Figure 2) however will require initiation of transactions at district level for district and lower level
transactions since this will be the document processing, collation and verification point. One US dollar denominated account will
be opened in the National Bank of Rwanda specifically to receive loan proceeds from IFAD. This account will be managed by
SPIU under the supervision of RAB in accordance with GoR procedures. One project operating account in RWF will also be
opened in the National Bank of Rwanda. These two accounts will be linked to IFMIS but will not be subjected to the daily zero
balance requirements under the Single Treasury Account. The RWF operating account will be used for all local currency
transactions while for transactions in respect of procurements undertaken/contracts entered in US dollars and foreign
travel/foreign trainings authority will be sought from the Accountant General to draw US dollars from the designated account. No
bank account will be opened at district level but transactions shall be initiated from the district on the IFMIS platform.
97.
Counterpart account. GoR financing to meet expropriation costs, taxes and duties will be transferred into the RWF
denominated Counterpart account held at the National Bank of Rwanda. This account will be managed by SPIU under the
supervision of RAB in accordance with GoR procedures. The signing mandate will be defined when the SPIU structure has been
defined. Payments will be transferred to the operating account from where payments will be made.
98.
Transfers to implementing partners. Transfers to implementing partners will be done through a project operating account.
These partners may be required to open bank accounts specific for KIIWP depending on the nature of activities and amount of
advances to be received.
Figure 2: Funds flow chart
20/28
99.
Line 1: GoR/MINECOFIN releases allocated funds to RAB Counterpart account for purposes of KIIWP in RWF. This will include
funds for GoR expropriation, taxes and duties;
100.
Line 2: Transfers from Counterpart account to the project operating account for payments;
101.
Line 3: Transfers from IFAD to the designated account (DA) in USD following submission of the withdrawal applications;
102.
Line 4: Transfers of funds from the DA to the Project Operating Account (POA) in RWF for payments of transactions
denominated in RWF;
103.
Line 5 and 6: Payments for goods supplied, works executed, services rendered, salaries and other expenses for Project
implementation and management, both in local and foreign currencies. Foreign currency transactions are paid from the DA while
there may be direct payments made from IFAD directly to the service provider/contractor/supplier or implementing partner;
Quarterly financial reporting and Withdrawal Application submission to IFAD; and
104.
Line 6: Necessary transactional documents are compiled/obtained from suppliers/contractors/service providers including
evidence of completion of service/delivery of goods and justification from implementing partners and reported on to MINECOFIN
and IFAD. Withdrawal applications also move along the same line.
c. Disbursement
105.
Disbursement arrangements and Flow of Funds – Project design has put into consideration financial management requirements
that will ensure that the loan proceeds and other financing sources will be used for their intended purposes. This has been based
on lessons learned under KWAMP and the RDDP that has been rolled into IFMIS.
106.
Designated/Operational Accounts. Under KWAMP, there were three project accounts; the designated account, an operations
account and a district account. The district account will not be necessary since accounting will be on the IFMIS platform. The
funds flow arrangement (See Figure 2) however will require initiation of transactions at district level for district and lower level
transactions since this will be the document processing, collation and verification point. One US dollar denominated account will
be opened in the National Bank of Rwanda specifically to receive loan proceeds from IFAD. This account will be managed by
SPIU under the supervision of RAB in accordance with GoR procedures. One project operating account in RWF will also be
opened in the National Bank of Rwanda. These two accounts will be linked to IFMIS but will not be subjected to the daily zero
balance requirements under the Single Treasury Account. The RWF operating account will be used for all local currency
transactions while for transactions in respect of procurements undertaken/contracts entered in US dollars and foreign
travel/foreign trainings authority will be sought from the Accountant General to draw US dollars from the designated account. No
bank account will be opened at district level but transactions shall be initiated from the district on the IFMIS platform.
107.
Counterpart account. GoR financing to meet expropriation costs, taxes and duties will be transferred into the RWF
denominated Counterpart account held at the National Bank of Rwanda. This account will be managed by SPIU under the
supervision of RAB in accordance with GoR procedures. The signing mandate will be defined when the SPIU structure has been
defined. Payments will be transferred to the operating account from where payments will be made.
108.
Transfers to implementing partners. Transfers to implementing partners will be done through a project operating account.
These partners may be required to open bank accounts specific for KIIWP depending on the nature of activities and amount of
advances to be received.
21/28
109.
The implementation arrangements that pose a risk of low disbursements may arise from delays in start-up due to delays in re-
defining the SPIU, delays in carrying out the Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) that are a condition for
approval of major irrigation infrastructure and delays in reconfiguring the project chart of accounts that may cause delays in
submission of withdrawal applications; delays in financial reporting, among others.
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
110.
Project benefits. KIIWP’s development objective is to improve food security and incomes of rural households on a sustainable
basis. Project interventions are expected to result in an extensive range of tangible and intangible benefits. Key quantifiable
benefits include: i) increased value of agricultural production in marshlands; ii) crop diversification and increased value of
production in hillside areas; iii) reduced post-harvest losses and increased sales in output markets; iv) increased value of
livestock production; v) improved access to water for domestic uses. These benefits will be achieved through project
interventions such as: i) water infrastructure development; ii) promotion of climate smart agriculture and animal husbandry
practices; iii) capacity building for farmers to access markets for agricultural inputs, finance and outputs; iv) promotion of
sustainable land and water management practices.
111.
Economic and financial analysis. The EFA shows satisfactory results, with an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of
15.74 per cent and a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$1.7 million at a 12 per cent economic discount rate. Sensitivity analysis
carried out shows that the economic profitability of KIIWP 1 would remain satisfactory even if the project costs increase by 26 per
cent, the project benefits decrease by 21 per cent or if the benefits lag behind by two years. Economic benefits derive from
increased value of agricultural production and the value of improved access to water for domestic and livestock uses. Benefits
also include the improvement of living conditions and nutrition, the positive spill-over effects of capacity building on the local
community, and reduced land lost due to soil erosion control.
112.
The overall EFA shows that KIIWP 1 and KIIWP 2 are financially profitable for rural households engaged in agricultural
production with financial internal rate of return for farmers ranging from 20 to 27 per cent depending on the production system.
The sensitivity analysis shows that the economic profitability would remain satisfactory even if the project costs increase by 46
per cent, the project benefits decrease by 31 per cent or if the benefits lag behind by two year. More details of the Project
economic and financial analysis are included in Annex 4.
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
113.
Exit strategy. The project will be implemented by RAB and through district teams and the private sector will be engaged from the
earliest possible opportunity. The government entities are permanent structures that will be able to absorb support activities after
the end of the project.
114.
Interventions supported by the project will be owned by community organisations that will be trained to operate and manage
them. Users of the infrastructure will be involved from the studies, construction and operation and maintenance. Operation and
maintenance manuals will be prepared in the language best understood by the users and the users trained. At the beginning of
the construction, RAB will sign an implementation agreement with the potential users of the infrastructure that will clarify the roles
and responsibilities of the parties.
115.
Each irrigation scheme, borehole and valley bottom tank will be handed over to the users on partial completion of the works and
a handover certificate will be issued at full handover. The handover certificate will also indicate the responsibilities of the
government and the users during the operational phase. The project will gradually withdraw from each intervention after the
handover is done, but government agencies in extension, water resources management and natural resources among others,
and the private sector will take over.
116.
Institutional sustainability. Infrastructure management institutions like Sector- and District-level Steering Committees and Sub-
Catchment Committees will play an active role in the design, construction and operation and maintenance of infrastructure
supported by KIIWP 1. The sustainability of the water resource and irrigation schemes will be further enhanced by the six WUOs
and 35 WLUOs to be strengthened and/or developed by the project.
117.
Social sustainability (Empowerment). Using Farmer Field Schools as a basis for smallholder farmers to become accustomed
to working together and sharing knowledge and information will build trust over time and become a sustainable basis for them to
establish more formal associations like WUOs and WLUOs, and cooperate in activities related to the production and marketing of
their products. As for cooperatives, using long term coaching and mentoring support instead of one off training will increase their
chances of success and long term sustainability.
118.
Participation of the private sector. KIIWP 2 will involve private-sector entrepreneurs such as large-scale farmers, wholesalers,
processors and exporters, as well as financial institutions operating at both local and national level. The delivery of water
services, provision of agricultural advisory services, backward linkages to input suppliers and financial service providers, forward
linkages to markets, and direct co-investments in post-harvest infrastructure are some of the key tools that will promote the
development of mutually beneficial business relationships between KIIWP target groups and private stakeholders, and thus
enhance the long term sustainability of the project’s investments.
119.
Economic and financial sustainability. The economic and financial analysis (EFA) of KIIWP 1 shows that the project would
be profitable with an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 15.74 per cent and a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$1.7 million
at a 12 per cent economic discount rate. Sensitivity analysis carried out shows that the economic profitability of KIIWP 1 would
remain satisfactory even if the project costs increase by 26 per cent, the project benefits decrease by 21 per cent or if the
benefits lag behind by two years. Economic benefits derive from increased value of agricultural production and the value of
improved access to water for domestic and livestock uses. Benefits also include the improvement of living conditions and
nutrition, the positive spill-over effects of capacity building on the local community, and reduced land lost due to soil erosion
control.
22/28
120.
The overall EFA shows that KIIWP 1 and KIIWP 2 are financially profitable for rural households engaged in agricultural
production with financial internal rate of return for farmers ranging from 20 to 27 per cent depending on the production system.
The sensitivity analysis shows that the economic profitability would remain satisfactory even if the project costs increase by 46
per cent, the project benefits decrease by 31 per cent or if the benefits lag behind by two years.
121.
Environmental sustainability. The integrated watershed management practices will consist of good integration between crop
and livestock production, combined with the promotion of a wide range of cost-effective erosion control and water retention
measures[22]. KIIWP 1 and KIIWP 2 environmental sustainability will be further enhanced by the adoption of adaptation and
mitigation measures through water harvesting[23] and climate-smart storage[24] technologies, that will be determined according to
specific site locations, size of irrigation schemes, and production systems. In small irrigation schemes, solar energy to pump
water will be considered to avoid the use of expensive and GHG emitting fossil fuels.
122.
Enabling policy environment. The project will benefit from a highly enabling policy and institutional environment, with a series
of new laws and policies coming into force that are fully supportive of the development of water infrastructure and cooperative
development. Identified policy gaps[25] will be addressed with project support both in KIIWP 1 and KIIWP 2.
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
123.
The following are the main risks and the proposed mitigation measures for KIIWP 1[26]:
Main risks
Mitigation measures
Technical design of project: FS/ESIAs find that some of
the six proposed irrigation sites are not
viable/feasible/appropriate
Eastern Province’s vulnerability to cyclical and persistent
drought events
The project will be implemented in two phases to initially undertake the
necessary preparatory activities for irrigation development and address
the urgent need for catchment rehabilitation and protection in rainfed
farming areas and improved water supply for livestock. The detailed
design of KIIWP 2 will be informed by extensive analytical work
beforehand.
KIIWP 1 will not only conduct FS/ESIAs for six potential irrigation
schemes, it will also prepare a pipeline of about 5,000 hectares of
investment-ready irrigation schemes, in case the pre-identified areas fall
short of the target area for development.
KIIWP is designed in direct response to the climate-related risks. KIIWP
will adopt an integrated watershed management approach and a wide
range of cost-effective erosion control measures will be promoted.
Resilience will also be strengthened through the promotion of climate
smart agriculture.
Competition between water users in times of scarcity
(especially irrigators and cattle owners).
KIIWP 1 provides for increasing water storage (small valley dams) or
(solar powered) boreholes for livestock. Catchment water management
committees will be strengthened, in order to support joint management of
limited water resources.
Land tenure issues and conflict with landless rural
population who may be livestock owners
With regard to land tenure, the project will promote cadastral surveys to
identify who the right owner is and the land parcel size. Social
Management Plans will be facilitated by the project and prepared in
consultation with project affected people and disclosed locally, to allow all
stakeholders, including livestock keepers, to participate and raise any
concerns. ESIAs will identify existing/potential risks and specific
mitigation measures which will inform the project strategy.
Main risks
Mitigation measures
23/28
Weak technical and institutional capacities can lead to
slow disbursement, lower project benefits as well as
delays in implementation.
Raising awareness and capacity building are key elements, especially of
FOs and District, Sector and Cell level staff. The SPIU is already in place
with core staff. Involvement of experienced technical KWAMP staff will
also speed up project implementation. Supervision and implementation
support missions, especially in the first two years will support focused
project implementation.
124.
Financial Management Risk Assessment. Overall assessment indicates that Rwanda is a medium risk country, characterized
by strong financial management systems and internal controls. The last PEFA assessment of Rwanda was in 2016. Compared to
the previous one carried out in 2010, seven of 11 indicators improved while four indicators remained the same. With regard to
government accountability, transparency and corruption factors, the most recent Transparency International perception index
shows that Rwanda scored 55 on the 1 – 100 scale with a global rank of 48 out of 180 countries assessed and being the third
least corrupt Country assessed in Sub-Saharan Africa. The IFAD overall fiduciary risk based on the ongoing projects and the
recently closed KWAMP has been assessed as low.
I. Environment and Social category
125.
The preliminary environmental and social category of KIIWP is A. However, KIIWP 1 is category B, as it focuses on
preparatory studies for irrigation schemes, integrated watershed management and planning activities. KIIWP 2 will
include investments on water harvesting and storage, irrigation infrastructure development (area >100 hectares) and marshland
development, that may be categorised as A.
126.
The ESIAs will be aligned with the national General Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment (2006) and the
Environmental and Social Management Guidelines for agriculture projects (2016). ESIA certificates are site-specific and valid for
the entire project implementation phase. All FS for irrigation schemes, hydro-geological surveys for boreholes drilling and valley
ponds, water permit requests and ESIA procedures will be financed and initiated during KIIWP 1 of project implementation.
127.
The whole project will be coordinated through an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to examine the
risks and impacts of the proposed activities, including potential environmental and social vulnerabilities. The ESMF specifies the
environmental and social management requirements (including labour and working conditions, grievance redress system, health
and safety) that will be the responsibility of contractors and primary suppliers hired to construct the irrigation infrastructure.
Environmental and climate change management plans will be developed for each site.
J. Climate Risk classification
128.
As a result of recent droughts events and the vulnerability of the Eastern Province to extreme events, the preliminary climate risk
classification is High.
129.
Climate change impacts in Rwanda vary depending on agro-ecological zones; while the North and Western provinces are more
affected by flood events, Eastern and Southern provinces are more vulnerable to drought events. The impact of floods and
droughts associated with El Nino and La Nina events of recent years are thought to have been exacerbated by climate change
and the environmental degradation observed throughout the country (NAPA, 2006; IPCC, 2014). Over the last decade, droughts
tend to be cyclical and can be persistent.
130.
The mean annual temperature is expected to increase up to 3.25°C for the East Africa region by the end of the century resulting
in proliferation of diseases, crop decline and reduced land availability, which in return, affects food security and livestock
production. Rainfall variability is more uncertain, though most of the models predict more extreme events with higher rainfall
intensities leading to landslides, crop and livestock products losses, health risks and damages to infrastructure. The FS to be
undertaken will include climate risk analyses for the irrigation schemes to inform the site specific environmental and climate
change management plans. In addition, PASP activities also include detailed climate vulnerability analyses for the selected value
chains, which will also inform the management plans.
131.
An in-depth climate vulnerability analysis will also be undertaken by the University of Cape Town with ASAP 2 financing. The
results will be ready by September 2019 and will inform the climate change adaptation activities in KIIWP.
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
132.
The institutional arrangements for KIIWP are fully aligned with the current implementation framework of IFAD-funded projects in
Rwanda. This framework rests upon the below principles and operational modalities.
133.
Single Project Implementation Units (SPIU) were created as an effective institutional framework that will guide the process of
designing and implementing projects that are earmarked to fast track the realization of Rwanda development targets. For KIIWP
implementation, IFAD SPIU is strategically positioned to manage the ongoing and future projects. Benefits to be derived from the
established SPIUs include among others (i) realization of economies of scale and reduction of transaction costs; (ii) improved
coordination and creation of synergy; (iii) efficiency and effectiveness in project implementation oversight through improved M&E;
(iv) improved staff retention leading to reduction in staff turnover and increase in institutional memory, and (v) increased
knowledge and expertise as well as best practices in project management.
24/28
134.
The Lead Project Agency will be the RAB, under the auspices of MINAGRI. RAB Director General (DG) will consequently
become the Chief Budget Manager of the project, together with RDDP and PASP that were transferred under it.
135.
The SPIU coordinator in place will also oversee and coordinate KIIWP activities that will be implemented at both the central and
district level. In addition to the existing SPIU staff performing cross-cutting functions of finance/accounting, M&E, procurement
and administration, KIIWP staff will be recruited to support its implementation. The proposed KIIWP staff positions include: a
Programme Manager, an accountant, an M&E officer in charge also of gender and youth, an irrigation specialist, an
electromechanical engineer, a civil engineer, an environmental and climate specialist, a safeguards compliance specialist, and a
procurement officer.
136.
Specific for the accountant and the procurement officer, in order to benefit from their experience in IFAD procedures, KIIWP
should retain staff that have been performing similar tasks in PASP since the project is coming to an end. Involvement of
experienced technical former KWAMP staff too, would be an added advantage since it would enable the full integration of
lessons learned in Kirehe District and would speed-up project implementation as they will be able to “hit the ground running”.
This especially relates to the following experienced former KWAMP staff: Irrigation Engineers, WUO Specialist, Land Husbandry
(SWC) Engineer, Cooperative Development Officer, and Irrigation Technicians.
137.
At the district level, implementation will follow the devolution principle and day to day management of KIIWP 1 will be delegated
by RAB to a District-level Project Coordination Unit (PCU) within the District of Kayonza. The PCU will be the main executing
agency of KIIWP 1 at the district level. While Kayonza District already has some personnel that will support KIIWP
implementation in addition to their normal district duties, the following additional staff are proposed to supplement district capacity
to provide public services. These positions were identified as “missing expertise” during the stakeholders’ workshop held in
Kayonza on 30 April 2018: an accountant for initiating KIIWP transactions at district, a WUO/WLUO specialist, a land husbandry
(SWC) engineer, a cooperative development officer, a horticulture specialist and an irrigation technician. The modalities and
scope of District level activities will be discussed and agreed at Project start-up and will be reflected in the AWPB and the PIM.
138.
The above personnel will be recruited and paid by the SPIU since these positions are not part of the mandated national structure
for all districts. However, in order to promote local government involvement and ownership, the contracting and performance
management of the said staff will be delegated to the district officials. These arrangements are in line with current
implementation arrangements of IFAD-supported projects (namely PASP and RDDP) under the SPIU that pays for district field
staff salaries.
139.
Project oversight. In line with the practice for other IFAD-funded projects in Rwanda, a Project Steering Committee (PSC)
would be established. The roles of the Permanent Secretary (PS) of MINAGRI as the Chair and RAB DG as the Co-chair of the
PSC have been confirmed by MINAGRI. Its membership will be determined by MINAGRI and shared with IFAD.
140.
Other implementation arrangements. The components will mainly be implemented through service providers and
implementing partners, including RAB. For service providers and implementing partners, contracting and partnership will be
based on renewable performance-based contracts or Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs).
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
141.
Implementation arrangements, and governance. RAB will be the LPA - implementing the project on behalf of the Ministry of
Finance, the borrower. The SPIU will be responsible for overall project implementation in consultation with other relevant national
agencies and ministries to ensure consistency with national policies. The SPIU established at national level will be composed of
project staff either seconded or recruited, and will be headed by the SPIU Coordinator. The SPIU will be accountable to the RAB
Director General who will be the executive level head responsible for the strategic direction of the project. The SPIU will be
responsible for project coordination and management of fiduciary issues in conformity with the standards and requirements
agreed upon between GoR and IFAD.
142.
A PSC will be established, chaired by the PS, MINAGRI, or his/her nominee, and co-chaired by RAB DG, RAB Head of
Corporate Services and representatives from ministries and institutions with direct relevancy to the achievement of KIIWP’s goal
and development objective including MINECOFIN. The PSC will provide strategic guidance towards the achievement of project
objectives and contribute to the higher level sector policy and strategic goals. The PSC will also be responsible for review and
approval of AWPBs and annual reports.
143.
Disbursement arrangements and Flow of Funds. One US$ denominated account will be opened in the National Bank of
Rwanda specifically to receive loan proceeds from IFAD. This account will be managed by SPIU under the supervision of RAB in
accordance with GoR procedures. One project operating account in RWF will also be opened in the National Bank of Rwanda.
These two accounts will be linked to IFMIS but will not be subjected to the daily zero balance requirements under the Single
Treasury Account. The RWF operating account will be used for all local currency transactions while for transactions in respect of
procurements undertaken/contracts entered in US$ and foreign travel/foreign trainings authority will be sought from the
Accountant General to draw US$ from the designated account. No bank account will be opened at district level but transactions
shall be initiated from the district on the IFMIS platform.
144.
Accounting Systems. The accounting systems, policies, and procedures to be used by the SPIU will follow GoR systems. To
ease application, these will be documented in the Financial Procedures Manual. The manual will describe the accounting
system, internal control procedures, basis of accounting, standards to be followed, and authorization procedures, segregation of
duties, financial reporting process, budgeting procedures, financial forecasting procedures, and contract management. In
addition, the manual should document processes to be undertaken for the disbursement of expenditure and auditing
arrangements.
25/28
145.
External Audit. The recently closed KWAMP and the ongoing projects are audited by the Auditor-General as part of its mandate.
Previous audits done by the Auditor General have been rated highly satisfactory by IFAD noting the level of detail and the use of
INTOSAI, acceptable standards to IFAD. It is proposed that in line with IFAD's commitment to support continued development of
government systems, KIIWP external audits will be carried out by the Auditor General. KIIWP financial statements will be
prepared in accordance with the International Public Sector Accounting Standards. IFAD audit guidelines will be used in
preparation of audit terms of reference and key disclosures as required by IFAD will be included in the audited financial
statements. In addition to the opinion of financial statements, opinions on the Statements of Expenditure and the operation of the
Designated Account shall be provided. Any other requirement will have to be adhered to as shall be provided for in the IFAD
audit guidelines. A Separate Management Letter highlighting observations on the internal controls, recommendations and
management responses will also be a requirement.
Procurement
146.
Procurement risk assessment. Based on the most recent 2017 PEFA report that covered the period 2013-2014, there is
overall compliance with the procurement law and its regulations and an increasing degree of transparency in Rwanda, indicating
that the procurement system is strong and demonstrating increasing value for money in the purchases of goods and services.
The only challenge that was noted in procurement was the failure by procuring entities to comply with the act requiring entities to
do the publication of the competition results as soon as the contract is signed by both parties.
147.
The procurement of goods, works and services will be carried out in accordance with government regulations, with the addition
that it should comply with IFAD requirements to be specified in the Letter to the Borrower and the Financing Agreement. The
IFAD SPIU already in place under RAB will be responsible for the procurement of goods, services and works at the national level.
The recruitment of a Procurement specialist will be budgeted to ensure that KIIWP-related procurements are well executed and
monitored.
148.
Districts will be actively involved in contract tendering and management wherever possible. Procurement at the district-level will
be delegated to the District’s Corporate Division that includes the two procurement officers currently available at the district. Their
unit will be responsible for all procurement actions at the district, within the limits specified and to be agreed below. IFAD
considers the procurement capacity of the district to be satisfactory, and this arrangement builds on the experience of KWAMP
whereby the Kirehe district was also responsible for certain procurement actions at the district level. Procurement personnel at
the district will be paid by KIIWP. The District Tender Committee will be responsible for the advertisement of tenders and the
approval of the evaluation recommendations.
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
149.
Planning will be guided by the project’s strategy, logframe and broader results framework which will inform the development of
annual work. A draft annual work plan and budget (AWPB) will be drawn up in consultation with implementing partners, including
beneficiaries (e.g. cooperatives) where relevant. The SPIU will be responsible for the process and for the inclusion of and
collaboration with key stakeholders in the planning process. AWPBs will be cleared by the project steering committee and sent to
IFAD for no objection 60 days prior to the end of each programme year.
150.
Monitoring and evaluation will be embedded in project management, coordinated by the SPIU and supported by additional
professional staff who will work closely with subject-matter specialists to strengthen learning and knowledge management. The
M&E system will be aligned with MINAGRI’s new management information system and IFAD’s new Operational Results
Management System (ORMS).
151.
The M&E system will be participatory, gender sensitive and results-oriented while enabling the integration of physical and
financial progress reporting. In addition, the system will enable the analysis of climate change vulnerability among the
beneficiaries. The system will incorporate in-depth baseline and completion surveys, a mid-term review and other thematic
studies as relevant, including qualitative studies. The baseline surveys will include context-specific needs assessments of the
concrete barriers to smallholder-driven agricultural sector development in the eight drought-prone sectors and address pressing
information needs for implementation planning.
152.
Relevant indicators have been specified in KIIWP logframe and, to the extent possible, quantified. The indicators relate to the
different levels (output, outcome and impact), and include IFAD Core Indicators (CIs) as well as project specific indicators. This is
based on the theory of change, and demonstrates the logical links between the results at their different levels and thereby
enables the meaningful analysis of whether the project is on-track towards its planned results even in the first few years of
implementation when higher-level results are not yet expected.
153.
The following will be the key elements of the M&E system for KIIWP 1: (i) an M&E manual detailing scope, organisation and
contents of the M&E system; roles and responsibilities; how data (sex- and age-disaggregated where appropriate) will be
collected, analysed, reported, used and otherwise managed; timeline for M&E-related activities; staffing and capacity building
plan; budget; etc.; (ii) annual M&E plans; (iii) project results chain, results framework and log frame; (iv) Management information
system; (v) baseline and completion surveys; (vi) mid-term review; (vii) annual outcome surveys; (viii) continuous progress
monitoring of activities and outputs; (ix) risk assessment; (x) thematic studies, e.g. on targeting, gender, youth, formation of
WLUOs, etc.; (xi) IFAD ORMS reporting; and (xii) field visits and joint implementation reviews.
26/28
154.
Learning and knowledge management (KM). The core relevance of the M&E system is in the use of the information it elicits for
planning and decision-making as well as accountability. The FS and ESIAs in KIIWP 1 will provide critical elements to further
shape interventions in KIIWP 2. The FS will provide specific indications on adequate cost-effective irrigation technologies,
availability of water, key crops, capacity level of farming organizations, available/potential markets, inputs on correct mitigations
strategies, appropriate institutional arrangements and thorough risk assessment of the proposed investments. All these will
inform the shaping and detailed design of KIIWP 2.
155.
A KM strategy for the drought-prone agricultural sectors (in alignment with the broad KM and communication strategy of
MINAGRI) will be developed built on three core pillars of KM: people, processes and technology. Quarterly review meetings with
implementing partners will be organised by project management to discuss progress towards results in relation to each quarterly
progress report, the format of which will explicitly include a focus on lessons learnt in terms of challenges, good practices, etc.
Study tours, exchange visits and learning routes will be organised for lateral knowledge transfer.
156.
Concurrently, a downward and upward flow of information about project progress to beneficiaries and implementing partners in
the field is of utmost relevance in fostering ownership and participation. Systems for these information exchanges will be
developed and used on a regular basis, including stakeholder review meetings, planning workshops, and a newsletter to be
shared with all WLUOs, FOs and cooperatives involved in project implementation. The project will collaborate with the
Agricultural Information and Communication Centre within MINAGRI to produce relevant knowledge products and communication
materials, such as press releases, extension materials, and radio spots.
b. Innovation and scaling up
157.
KIIWP will innovate in the management models for irrigation systems by arranging for private sector participation as service
providers. The project will facilitate management agreements between the farmers, government and private sector partners for
the management of irrigation infrastructure and water service provision to farmers. The farmers will be responsible to pay for a
water service fee. This arrangement will be implemented at each of the large pumped irrigation schemes to be developed. This
approach is an innovation in Rwanda, but has been successfully tried in Zambia.
158.
Another innovation that the project will introduce is the use of standalone solar powered pumping stations. The current model that
has been tried in Rwanda is solar feed-into-grid systems. The FS will investigate the potential for standalone solar power stations
for irrigation in the project area. If the potential of this technology is viable, this can be scaled up to other areas in Rwanda. For
such scaling up to take place, innovative models for the ownership, management and financing of the solar power stations and
electricity tariffs (if any) for the irrigation farmers will be analyzed. In addition, small-scale solar pumps will be used for valley
bottom tanks for the watering of livestock. The project will scale up the successful models that are already in place in Rwanda.
M. Implementation plans
a. Implementation readiness and start-up plans.
159.
The actions needed to mitigate financial management risks are summarised below.
Table 9: FM Actions Summary
Action
Responsible Party /
Person
Target Date / Covenants
1
2
3
4
Finalisation of the project's AWPB and PP, approved by relevant
authorities and IFAD
SPIU/RAB
Prior to disbursement
Constitute an SPIU headed by a Coordinator with dedicated staff
recruited on fixed term performance-based contracts
Director General/RAB
Within first six months of entry
into force
Update the PIM that should include a comprehensive financial
management manual with a comprehensive project chart of
accounts
SPIU/RAB
Within first six months of entry
into force
Establish a PSC headed by the Permanent Secretary –
MINAGRI
PS/MINAGRI
Within six months of entry into
force
5
160.
Map the accounts codes and configure the chart field to meet the
27/28
accounting and reporting requirements of project.
SPIU/RAB/IFMIS
Team-MINECOFIN
Part of start-up activities and
continuous
Supervision and Implementation Support Plan for Financial Management. One supervision mission and one follow up
mission are proposed per year in accordance with the current IFAD supervision and implementation support arrangements.
Once FS and ESIAs will be finalized during implementation, a thorough review of project results will be conducted to assess
whether conditions have been met to move to the next phase and update the design of KIIWP 2. During the early set up of IFMIS,
additional financial management implementation support should be provided to ensure that the key challenge of IFMIS chart field
coding is correctly done and addressed at start up to satisfy all reporting requirements. Financial management supervision will
among others review existence and adequacy of financial management and accounting systems including internal controls, funds
flow and liquidity management. It will also comprehensively review the Statements of Expenditure (SOEs) to establish eligibility of
expenditure claimed, timeliness of the claims and adequacy and completeness of supporting documentation.
b. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
161.
Project supervision. KIIWP 1 activities will be directly supervised by IFAD. IFAD will undertake twice yearly supervision and
implementation support missions to assess project implementation status, in collaboration with Government and partners. In
addition, IFAD will be responsible for (i) Reviewing withdrawal applications for IFAD proceeds; (ii) Reviewing and approving on a
no-objection basis all procurement under the project financed by IFAD funds; (iii) Monitoring compliance with the Financing
Agreement, recommending remedies for any substantial non-compliance; and (iv) Carrying out all other functions needed to
administer the financing and supervise the project.
162.
Reporting arrangements. The SPIU will submit bi-annual progress reports according to a format acceptable to IFAD. These
reports will include physical and financial progress updates. Physical reporting will be done against a set of indicators based on
the logframe. Financial reporting will be done against the approved budget.
163.
KIIWP’s impact evaluation will follow the same methodology as the baseline study to allow meaningful comparison, although
the scope of the impact evaluation may be broadened to cover other aspects of project relevance, effectiveness, efficiency,
impact and sustainability to adequately inform the project’s completion report.
Footnotes
[1] 2018 Estimate, http://worldpopulationreview.com/countries/rwanda-population/.
[2] 72% as end June 2017.
[3] Cat. 1: Families who do not own a house or cannot pay a rent, have a poor diet and can hardly afford basic household tools and
clothes; Cat. 2: Those who have a dwelling of their own or are able to rent one, mostly get food and wages from working for others but
rarely get full time jobs; and Cat. 3: Those who have a job and farmers who go beyond subsistence farming to produce a surplus
which can be sold. The fourth category (not targeted by KIIWP) includes people who earn high incomes; people who own houses;
people who can afford a luxurious lifestyle.
[4] As per the MDB Methodologies for Tracking Climate Adaptation and Mitigation Finance, and subject to the costing tables included
in this report.
[5] Out of 188 countries and based on composite statistic on life expectancy, adult literacy rate, annual GDP, etc.
[6] Poverty in Rwanda has incidence of 43% in rural areas compared to 22% in urban areas.
[7] The water requirement satisfaction index using maize as a proxy indicator for drought prone areas shows that Eastern Province of
Rwanda is the most vulnerable to drought events. The Eastern belt of Rwanda covers the districts of Bugesera, Gatsibo, Kayonza,
Kirehe, Ngoma, Nyagatare and Rwamagana.
[8] Malnutrition is costing Rwanda a lot. The Cost of Hunger Study conducted by key ministries in 2013 concluded that undernutrition
in children costs the country around USD 90 million every year in related illnesses and health care needs. It also estimates that 13.5%
of all students who repeated grades at school in 2012 did it because of stunting.
[9] Comprising 28,000 households that benefit directly and 22,000 households that benefit indirectly.
[10] Rwanda’s average daily wages range from RWF 750-1200 (USD 0.87-1.40) in the agricultural sector to RWF 1,500-5,000
(USD1.75-5.85) in the construction sector.
[11] The fourth category (not targeted by KIIWP) includes people who earn high incomes; people who own houses; people who can
afford a luxurious lifestyle.
[12] Additional details on KIIWP 1 activities are provided in Annex 8 (Project Implementation Manual PIM).
[13]Draft Ministerial Instructions on Land Development, Conservation and Exploitation of Developed Land.
[14] A catchment is defined as an area from which rainwater flows into a watercourse or infiltrates into a groundwater body.
28/28
[15] Source: https://www.unidroit.org/english/guides/2015contractfarming/cf-guide-2015-e.pdf.
[16] See diagram in annex 2.
[17] The EDPRS 2 aims to raise GDP per capita to USD 1,000; reduce the percentage of the population living below the poverty line to
less than 30%; and reduce the percentage of the population living in extreme poverty to less than 9%.
[18] IFAD recently revised the environmental and climate change strategy, which KWIIP is also aligned to as it builds on the earlier
NRM policy and Climate change strategy.
[19] IFAD grant implemented by FAO and IWMI: Opportunities to enhance smallholder agriculture in sub-Saharan Africa Through
Sustainable Water, Land and Ecosystem Management
[20] Other partners likely to be involved in the second phase of KIIWP are provided in Annex 13 of this PDR.
[21] As per the MDB Methodologies for Tracking Climate Adaptation and Mitigation Finance, and subject to the costing tables included
in this report.
[22] e.g. tree belts, contour belts, grass strips, contour bunds, planting of fodder grasses on bunds/ridges, use of permanent, perennial
vegetation on contours, etc.
[23] e.g. rainwater and floodwater harvesting, water storage units, etc.
[24] e.g. zero energy cooling chambers, metal silos or hermetic bags for storing grains/cereals, drying grounds and improved
warehouses, etc.
[25] e.g. (i) support to national policy on contract farming; (ii) support to law on financial lease for agricultural equipment; (iii) discussion
on VAT in rice processing that makes Rwandan rice less competitive with regional products; (iv) current issues of availability and
quality of seeds, including multiplication.
[26] See Annex 13 for other risks and mitigation measures foreseen in KIIWP 2
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase I
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Mission Dates:
23 April-04 May 2018
Document Date:
31/03/2020
Project No.
2000002229
Report No.
5007-RW
Loan ID
2000002900
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase I
1/6
Logical Framework
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Outreach 
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households members
Household
members
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
Women-headed
households
Non-women-
headed
households
Households
8 143
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the project
Females
Males
Total number of
persons receiving
services
Young
0
18 322
18 322
36 644
30
Results Hierarchy
Name
Indicators
Baseline Mid-
Term
2/6
End
Target
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Project Goal 
Contribute to poverty reduction in
the drought prone Eastern
province of Rwanda
Number of female- and male-headed households that experience an increase in
household assets
Households
0
6 217
Number of children 0-5 years suffering from malnutrition
Stunting (children
0-5 years) -
Percentage (%)
42.4
Development Objective 
Improve food security and incomes
of 50,000 households on a
sustainable basis
Households with improved food security and income
Households
0
National
statistics,
household
surveys incl.
poverty &
gender studies
National
statistics
SPIU
Baseline
and
completion
SPIU
Baseline,
mid-term,
completion
SPIU
Baseline
and
completion
National
statistics,
household
surveys incl.
poverty &
gender studies
Increased income
will be used on
household
improvements.
Increased income
accompanied by
nutrition education
and behaviour
change will lead to
greater availability
of and access to a
diversified diet and
nutrient-rich crops/
food items.
Food security and
incomes increase
through a combined
effect of increased
crop and livestock
production and
improved market
access. Government
agriculture and SME
policies remain in
place over the
project life (A).
Results Hierarchy
Name
Indicators
Baseline Mid-
Term
3/6
End
Target
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Outcome 
Farmers drought resilience
strengthened
Number of persons reporting increase in production (CI 1.2.4)
Total Number
0
Impact
assessment
report, Project
reports
Number of persons reporting improved access to land, forests, water or water bodies
for production purposes (CI 1.2.1)
Service provider
report
SPIU/RAB
SPIU/RAB
Baseline,
mid-term,
completion
Quarterly
MTR
Completion
Report
Total
Males
Females
Youth
11 250
5 625
5 625
30
0
Output 
Catchment rehabilitation and
protection
3.1.4 Land brought under climate-resilient practices
Hectares of land
0
1 693
Number of valley tanks and boreholes constructed
Infrastructure -
Number
35
Output 
Irrigation development
Gross area of land covered by feasibility studies and ESIAs
Hecaters (ha)
0
7 275
1.1.2 Farmland under water-related infrastructure constructed/rehabilitated
Hectares of land
0
0
Service provider
report
Service provider
report
SPIU/RAB
SPIU/RAB
Quarterly
MTR
Completion
Report
MTR &
Completion
Report
Feasibility
studies and
ESIAs
Service provider
report
MTR
SPIU/RAB
SPIU/RAB
Quarterly
MTR
Completion
Report
The combined
investments in
infrastructure
construction,
organizational
strengthening and
support on
agricultural
practices lead to
higher yields for
crops and livestock
(A). The planned
project activities
lead to improved
access to water or
water bodies.(A)
Climate-resilient
management,
including terracing
and agro/forestry
will be
complemented by
reforestation
programmes under
RWFA (A).
Assessment studies
will find adequate
sites suitable for
borehole drilling.
Assessment studies
are implemented on
time. Assessment
studies will find
adequate sites
suitable for
rainwater
harvesting.
Results Hierarchy
Output 
Infrastructure management
institutions
Name
Indicators
Baseline Mid-
Term
4/6
End
Target
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
3.1.1 Groups supported to sustainably manage natural resources and climate-related
risks
SPIU
Quarterly
SPIU/RAB
Groups supported
0
49
Males
Females
Young
Output 
Enhanced CSA and AH practices
and technologies
Number of rural producers trained in production practices and/or technologies (CI
1.1.4)
Service provider
report
Quarterly
SPIU/RAB
Total Number
0
Number of persons provided with targeted support to improve their nutrition (CI 1.1.8)
Total Number
0
Service provider
report
Quarterly
SPIU/RAB
Local leadership is
supportive, and all
needs from different
water users can be
reconciled (A).
FFS training is
provided to 800
groups under close
supervision by RAB
and District/Sector
Agronomists (A).
Increased
production
combined with
targeted capacity
building will lead to
improved domestic
diets and
consequently
nutrition.
Results Hierarchy
Name
Indicators
Baseline Mid-
Term
5/6
End
Target
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Outcome 
Farm business development;
Increased, sales and linkage of
producers to services and markets
2.2.5 Rural producers’ organizations reporting an increase in sales
Number of Rural
POs
Service provider
report
Quarterly
SPIU/RAB
2.2.3 Rural producers’ organizations engaged in formal partnerships/agreements or
contracts with public or private entities
Service provider
report
Quarterly
SPIU/RAB
Number of POs
Output 
Development Farming as a
Business Skills
Number of persons trained in Farming as a Business skills
Total Number
0
Service provider
report
Quarterly
SPIU/RAB
Output 
Promotion of mechanization, PH
storage and irrigation technologies
adapted to smallholder agriculture
3.1.2 Persons provided with climate information services
Persons provided
with climate
information
services
0
Service provider
report
Quarterly
SPIU/RAB
Cooperatives
remain the focus for
GoR support to
development of
SMEs and
agricultural value
addition (A).
Favourable
economic
environment with
attractive
domestic//export
prices (A).
Cooperatives will
want to engage in
formal agreements
(A). Public or private
entities are willing to
engage with project
(A).
Farmers are
interested in
developing their
operational and
business
development skills
(A)
Detailed local
climate information
is accurate and
available.
Results Hierarchy
Name
Indicators
Baseline Mid-
Term
6/6
End
Target
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Outcome 
Supporting backward and forward
market linkages
Number of target households reporting using rural financial services
Total Number
0
Service provider
report
Quarterly
SPIU/RAB
Number of financial service providers supported in delivering outreach strategies,
financial products and services to rural areas (CI 1.1.6)
Service provider
report
Quarterly
SPIU/RAB
Total Number
Number of formal supply contracts signed between cooperatives and
traders/processors
Service provider
report
Quarterly
SPIU/RAB
Total Number
0
Outcome 
Policy dialogue and institutional
environment
Number of national policies operationalized at local level
Total Number
0
2
Rwanda
Standards
Board records
Bi-annually SPIU
System of subsidies
does not distort the
financial services
market (R).
Financial institutions
are ready to invest
in irrigated
agriculture and
livestock keeping
(A). Cooperatives
and
traders/processors
are interested in
developing mutually
beneficial business
relationships (A).
Budget for policy
implementation is
availed by GoR and
capacity exists for
operationalization at
local level (A).
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase I
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Mission Dates:
23 April-04 May 2018
Document Date:
31/03/2020
Project No.
2000002229
Report No.
5007-RW
Loan ID
2000002900
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 2: Theory of Change  
The Theory of Change of KIIWP 1 will need to be reviewed periodically. The ToC presented 
during project design (see below) is based on the situation as faced by crop and livestock 
farmers currently living in the area.  
1
1 
2
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase I
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Mission Dates:
23 April-04 May 2018
Document Date:
31/03/2020
Project No.
2000002229
Report No.
5007-RW
Loan ID
2000002900
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables 
I.  Introduction 
The Annex describes the assumptions underlying the derivation of the project costs and 
presents summary and detailed cost tables and financing plan. The costing exercise has 
been carried out using Costab software and is based on costs as of May 2018, during the 
1st design mission, and updated after the 2nd design mission in November 2018. Project 
costs are presented in both Rwandan franc (RWF) and US dollars (US$). The Project input 
cost are set in US dollars.  
II.  Main Assumptions for cost estimation 
Summary divisions. The project costs taken into account include investment costs and 
incremental  recurrent  costs  within  the  three  components:  i) Strengthening  resilience  to 
droughts;  ii)  Support  to  farm  business  development;  and  iii) Institutional  development 
and project coordination.  
Project Period. The Project is expected to have a duration of six years, starting in the 3rd 
quarter of 2019 and finishing in the 3rd quarter of 2025. 
Unit  costs.  Unit  costs  are  broadly  derived  from  the  experience  of  the  on-going  IFAD 
projects in Rwanda, namely the Kirehe Community-based Watershed Management Project 
(KWAMP),  the  Project  for  Rural  Income  through  Exports  (PRICE),  the  Climate  Resilient 
Post-Harvest  and  Agribusiness  Support  Project  (PASP),  and  the  Rwanda  Dairy 
Development  Project  (RDDP).  The  project  is  to  some  extent  flexible,  as  based  on  the 
participatory approach and the principle of intervention at request, in particular as regards 
the  producer  public  private  partnerships  (4Ps).  The  estimated  costs  should  thus  be 
considered  as  indicative  and  mostly  presented  in  terms  of  financial  allocations  by 
component, subcomponent or activity. Even when quantities and unit costs are indicated 
in the detailed tables, it is above all the overall allocation that should be considered. The 
detailed  planning  of  activities  and  their  implementation  will  be  in  response  to  requests 
from target groups and/or after needs assessment  
Prices.  Prices  are  inclusive  of  all  taxes,  i.e.  including  custom  duties,  Value  Added  Tax 
(VAT) and other sales taxes. The tax rates retained are similar to those used for the on-
going projects mentioned above, as shown in the table 1 below. Base costs for goods and 
services purchased locally are derived from local sales prices (market prices), including all 
taxes  as  they  are  real  costs  for  the  project.  Prices  of  goods  and  services  are  mostly 
expressed in foreign currency, albeit payable in RWF. Base costs for imported goods include 
CIF prices, duties, sales taxes and domestic value added, i.e. the costs of local handling, 
transportation, financial intermediation, margins of various actors in the supply chain, up 
to the delivery location. 
Inflation. In line with estimates from the International Monetary Fund (IMF)1, the annual 
local inflation rate has been set at about 5%per year for the whole project period. Foreign 
inflation was set at 2% per year. The international inflation applied to foreign exchange 
costs (FE) is based on the forecasted evolution of the Manufactures Unit Value Index during 
the project implementation period (2% during 2017-2022).  
Exchange Rate. The initial exchange rate for the cost estimate has been set at US$1.00: 
RWF855, the rate prevailing in May 2018. In light of the past exchange rate movement in 
Rwanda, it is likely that this rate varies during the life of the project to reflect the significant 
difference  between  national  and  international  inflation  rates.  Therefore,  the  option  of 
Constant  purchasing  parity  has  been  used  in  the  absence  of  reliable  exchange  rate 
forecast. 
Taxes  and  Duties.  Taxes  apply  to  all  expenditure  categories  except  for  Salaries  and 
Allowances,  Consultancies,  Operating  costs,  Grants,  and  Training  and  Workshops,  as 
1 World Economic Outlook 2018, inflation projections until 2022. 
1 
specified  in  table  1  below.  All  taxes  and  duties  will  be  waived  by  the  government  and 
accounted for as Government of Rwanda counterpart contribution in COSTAB.  
Physical and Price Contingencies. Physical contingencies are intended for facing up to 
changes  in  quantities  and/or  methods  of  implementation  of  the  project.  They  are 
expressed as a percentage of base costs and are applied on civil works. Based on PRICE 
experience,  the  physical  contingencies  are  set  to  five  percent  for  civil  works.  Price 
contingencies are intended for facing up to the effects of inflation and devaluation of the 
exchange  rate  between  the  Rwanda  Franc  (RWF)  and  the  US  dollar  (US$).  They  are 
computed  by  Costab  based  on  the  rates  set  forth  for  the  inflation  at  national  and 
international levels  
Expenditure and Disbursement Accounts. The expenditure categories considered are 
in  accordance  with  IFAD  standardization  of  expenditures  categories  based  on  circular 
IC/FOD/02/2013.  The  same  categories  have  been  generated  for  the  disbursement 
accounts.  
Foreign exchange. Foreign exchange represents the direct and indirect imported inputs 
embodied  in  the  cost.  Table  1  below  lays  out  the  expenditure’s  categories  and  the 
percentages of physical contingencies, taxes and foreign exchange used, which are mainly 
derived from on-going IFAD projects in Rwanda.  
Table 1:  Expenditure Accounts 
Description 
Foreign Exchange 
Taxes & Duties 
(percent) 
(percent)  
Physical 
Contingencies 
(percent)  
I. INVESTMENT COSTS 
A. Civil works 
B. Consultancies 
C. Equipment and 
Materials 
D. Vehicles 
E. Training and Workshop 
II.  RECURRENT COSTS 
A.  Salaries & Allowances 
B.  Operating Cost 
III.  Project Costs 
50 
50 
70 
70 
20 
30 
30 
18 
18 
20 
20 
18 
0 
18 
5 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Total Project Costs for KIIWP 1. Total project investment and recurrent costs, including 
physical and price contingencies, are estimated at US$24.73 million (RWF22.2 billion). The 
foreign exchange component is estimated at US$12.26 million (50% of project cost), while 
taxes have been calculated at approximately US$4.2 million or 17% of total project costs. 
Total baseline costs are US$23.62 million, while price contingencies account for US$0.77 
million (or 3 % of the base costs) and physical contingencies amount to US$0.34 (or 1 % 
of the base costs).  
2 
Costs by components for KIIWP 1. The costs broken down by project component is as 
follows:  (i)  Strengthening  resilience  to  droughts:  US$21.32  million  (86.2%);  (ii) 
Institutional development and project coordination: US$3.41 million (13.8%). Table 2 to 
4 below present a breakdown of the costs by component and sub-component, year and 
expenditure type. Detailed cost tables and additional summary tables are presented in the 
excel file. 
Anticipated total Project Costs for KIIWP 2. Total project investment and recurrent 
costs,  including  physical  and  price  contingencies,  are  estimated  at  US$59.23  million 
(RWF53.16  billion).  The  foreign  exchange  component  is  estimated  at  US$26.96  million 
(46% of project cost), while taxes have been calculated at approximately US$8.7 million 
or  14.7%  of  total  project  costs.  Total  baseline  costs  are  US$55.47  million,  while  price 
contingencies  account  for  US$1.9  million  (or  3%of  the  base  costs)  and  physical 
contingencies amount to US$1.8 million (or 3% of the base costs).  
Costs by components for KIIWP 2. The costs broken down by project component are 
as follows: (i) Strengthening resilience to droughts: US$43.9 million (79%); (ii) Support 
to farm business development: US$7.9 million (14%); (iii) Institutional development and 
project coordination: US$3.6 million (6%). Table 5 to 7 below present a breakdown of the 
costs by component and sub-component, year and expenditure type. Detailed cost tables 
and additional summary tables are presented in the excel file. 
3 
Table 2: Project Cost by Component for KIIWP 1 
%% Total(RWF Million)(US$ '000)ForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsA. Strengthening resilience to droughts 1. Catchment rehabilitation and protection structures 3 720.44 746.48 466.74 351.35 551.39 902.656422. Irrigation Development 4 077.94 077.98 155.84 769.54 769.59 538.950403. Infrastructure Management Institutions 183.789.8273.5214.9105.1319.93314. Enviromental and Social Management Plan 315.3158.5473.8368.8185.3554.1332Subtotal Strengthening resilience to droughts 8 297.29 072.517 369.89 704.410 611.220 315.55286B. Institutional Development and Project Coordination 1. Institutional Support 181.645.4227.0212.453.1265.42012. Programme Management and Coordination 1 611.3983.22 594.51 884.51 150.03 034.53813Subtotal Institutional Development and Project Coordination 1 792.81 028.62 821.42 096.91 203.03 299.93614Total BASELINE COSTS 10 090.110 101.120 191.211 801.311 814.223 615.550100Physical Contingencies 147.0147.0294.1172.0172.0344.0501Price Contingencies 869.8814.31 684.1399.8374.9774.7483Total PROJECT COSTS 11 106.911 062.422 169.412 373.112 361.024 734.150105 
Table 3 Project Component by year for KIIWP 1 (US$ 000) 
Base Cost2019202020212022TotalA. Strengthening resilience to droughts 1. Catchment rehabilitation and protection structures 3 140.05 043.61 719.0-9 902.62. Irrigation Development 1 120.04 210.94 208.0-9 538.93. Infrastructure Management Institutions 144.194.677.34.0319.94. Enviromental and Social Management Plan -350.7203.4-554.1Subtotal Strengthening resilience to droughts 4 404.19 699.86 207.74.020 315.5B. Institutional Development and Project Coordination 1. Institutional Support 48.764.781.071.0265.42. Programme Management and Coordination 1 166.0641.1893.7333.63 034.5Subtotal Institutional Development and Project Coordination 1 214.8705.9974.7404.63 299.9Total BASELINE COSTS 5 618.810 405.67 182.4408.623 615.5Physical Contingencies 107.0151.086.0-344.0Price Contingencies Inflation Local 56.8334.1449.354.9895.0Foreign 30.4164.5172.17.8374.9Subtotal Inflation 87.2498.6621.462.71 269.9Devaluation -29.9-179.8-252.1-33.4-495.2Subtotal Price Contingencies 57.3318.8369.329.3774.7Total PROJECT COSTS 5 783.110 875.47 637.6437.924 734.1  Taxes 1 044.31 906.11 250.334.24 234.9Foreign Exchange 3 072.95 611.73 559.5117.012 361.0 
Table 4: Expenditure Accounts by Components for KIIWP 1 (US$) - totals including contingencies 
Institutional DevelopmentStrengthening resilience to droughtsand Project CoordinationCatchmentEnviromentalProgrammerehabilitationInfrastructureand SocialManagementPhysicaland protectionIrrigationManagementManagementInstitutionalandContingenciesstructuresDevelopmentInstitutionsPlanSupportCoordinationTotal%Amount I. Investment Costs EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS 3 000.0----56.03 056.0--WORKS 6 879.0-----6 879.05.0344.0VEHICLES -----236.4236.4--CONSULTANCIES AND NON-CONSULTING SERVICES 23.69 538.9136.9248.4-737.510 685.3--TRAINING & WORKSHOPS --183.0305.7265.4248.51 002.7--GRANTS & SUBSIDIES ---------Total Investment Costs 9 902.69 538.9319.9554.1265.41 278.421 859.41.6344.0II. Recurrent Costs SALARIES & ALLOWANCES -----1 514.21 514.2--OPERATING COSTS -----241.9241.9--Total Recurrent Costs -----1 756.11 756.1--Total BASELINE COSTS 9 902.69 538.9319.9554.1265.43 034.523 615.51.5344.0Physical Contingencies 344.0-----344.0--Price Contingencies Inflation Local 266.2388.514.833.123.1169.3895.0--Foreign 154.6176.12.47.02.332.5374.9--Subtotal Inflation 420.8564.517.240.125.5201.81 269.9--Devaluation -139.8-212.4-8.6-19.1-13.8-101.4-495.2--Subtotal Price Contingencies 281.0352.28.520.911.7100.4774.71.310.0Total PROJECT COSTS 10 527.69 891.1328.5575.0277.13 134.924 734.11.4353.9  Taxes 1 956.41 780.459.1103.549.9285.74 234.91.563.7Foreign Exchange 5 877.94 945.5107.4192.355.41 182.412 361.01.4177.0 
Table 5: Project Cost by Component for KIIWP 2 
(RWF 
Million) 
% 
% 
Total 
(US$ '000) 
  A. Strengthening resilience to droughts 
1. Catchment rehabilitation and protection structures 
5,835.4 
5,835.4 
11,670.8 
Local 
Foreign 
Total 
2. Irrigation Development 
3. Infrastructure Management Institutions 
4. Enhancing climate smart agriculture practices and technologies 
5. Environmental and Social Management Plan 
  Subtotal Strengthening resilience to droughts 
  B. Support to farm business development 
1. Developing Farming as a Business skills 
2. Promotion of mechanization, post-harvest storage and irrigation 
technologies 
3. Supporting backward and forward linkages 
  Subtotal Support to farm business development 
  C. Institutional Development and Project Coordination 
1. Institutional Support 
2. Program Management and Coordination 
  Subtotal Institutional Development and Project Coordination 
Total BASELINE COSTS 
  Physical Contingencies 
  Price Contingencies 
Total PROJECT COSTS 
10,100.2 
47.3 
2,830.7 
1,122.8 
10,020.5 
24.9 
1,278.7 
466.6 
20,120.7 
72.2 
4,109.3 
1,589.4 
19,936.4 
17,626.0 
37,562.4 
519.9 
163.3 
683.2 
1,249.1 
2,050.8 
3,819.7 
50.6 
2,091.1 
2,141.7 
2,428.4 
376.7 
2,968.4 
12.6 
926.3 
938.9 
3,677.4 
2,427.5 
6,788.1 
63.2 
3,017.4 
3,080.6 
25,897.8 
789.8 
2,298.4 
21,533.3 
789.8 
1,854.2 
47,431.1 
1,579.6 
4,152.6 
28,986.0 
24,177.4 
53,163.3 
  Foreign  Base 
Exchan
ge 
Costs 
Local 
Foreign 
Total 
50 
50 
34 
31 
29 
47 
24 
66 
16 
44 
20 
31 
30 
45 
50 
45 
45 
25 
42 
- 
9 
3 
79 
6,825.0 
11,813.
1 
55.3 
3,310.7 
1,313.3 
23,317.
4 
6,825.0 
13,650.0 
11,719.9 
29.1 
1,495.5 
545.8 
23,533.0 
84.4 
4,806.2 
1,859.0 
20,615.2 
43,932.6 
1 
608.0 
191.0 
799.0 
8 
5 
14 
- 
6 
6 
100 
3 
9 
112 
1,460.9 
2,398.6 
4,467.5 
59.2 
2,445.7 
2,504.9 
30,289.
8 
923.8 
1,055.1 
32,268.
6 
2,840.2 
440.6 
3,471.8 
14.8 
1,083.3 
1,098.1 
4,301.1 
2,839.2 
7,939.3 
74.0 
3,529.1 
3,603.0 
25,185.2 
923.8 
852.5 
55,475.0 
1,847.5 
1,907.5 
26,961.4 
59,230.0 
% 
Foreig
n 
Excha
nge 
% 
Total 
Base 
Cost
s 
50 
50 
34 
31 
29 
47 
24 
66 
16 
44 
20 
31 
30 
45 
50 
45 
46 
25 
42 
- 
9 
3 
79 
1 
8 
5 
14 
- 
6 
6 
100 
3 
3 
107 
Table 6: Project Component by year for KIIWP 2 (US$ 000)  
  A. Strengthening resilience to droughts 
  1. Catchment rehabilitation and protection structures 
  2. Irrigation Development 
  3. Infrastructure Management Institutions 
  4. Enhancing climate smart agriculture practices and technologies 
  5. Enviromental and Social Management Plan 
  Subtotal Strengthening resilience to droughts 
  B. Support to farm business development 
  1. Developing Farming as a Business skills 
  2. Promotion of mechanisation, post-harvest storage and irrigation technologies 
  3. Supporting backward and forward linkages 
  Subtotal Support to farm business development 
  C. Institutional Development and Project Coordination 
  1. Institutional Support 
  2. Program Management and Coordination 
  Subtotal Institutional Development and Project Coordination 
Total BASELINE COSTS 
  Physical Contingencies 
  Price Contingencies 
Total PROJECT COSTS 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
Total 
4,050.0 
4,660.0 
31.8 
978.1 
609.0 
10,328.9 
213.8 
783.1 
724.6 
1,721.4 
58.2 
853.3 
911.4 
12,961.7 
435.5 
134.0 
13,531.2 
4,650.0 
13,980.0 
34.8 
1,294.6 
864.0 
20,823.4 
215.8 
1,563.5 
892.6 
2,671.8 
15.8 
1,029.0 
1,044.8 
24,540.0 
931.5 
769.2 
26,240.7 
4,950.0 
4,660.0 
12.4 
1,478.6 
371.0 
11,472.0 
208.8 
1,547.1 
636.0 
2,391.9 
- 
931.3 
931.3 
14,795.1 
480.5 
776.1 
16,051.7 
- 
233.0 
5.4 
1,055.1 
15.0 
1,308.5 
160.8 
407.5 
586.0 
1,154.3 
- 
715.5 
715.5 
3,178.2 
- 
228.3 
3,406.5 
13,650.0 
23,533.0 
84.4 
4,806.2 
1,859.0 
43,932.6 
799.0 
4,301.1 
2,839.2 
7,939.3 
74.0 
3,529.1 
3,603.0 
55,475.0 
1,847.5 
1,907.5 
59,230.0 
Table 7: Expenditure Accounts by Components for KIIWP 2 (US$) - totals including contingencies 
Strengthening resilience to droughts 
Support to farm business 
development 
Institutional Development and 
Project Coordiation 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 
1.5 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
3.1 
3.2 
Total 
 I. Investment Costs 
  EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS 
GOODS & SERVICES & 
INPUTS 
  WORKS 
  VEHICLES 
  CONSULTANCIES 
  TRAINING & WORKSHOPS 
  GRANTS & SUBSIDIES 
Total Investment Costs 
II. Recurrent Costs 
  SALARIES & ALLOWANCES 
  OPERATING COSTS 
Total Recurrent Costs 
  Physical Contingencies 
  Price Contingencies 
TOTAL PROJECT 
COSTS 
- 
- 
- 
360.0 
- 
- 
3,940.0 
- 
- 
13,650.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
13,650.0 
- 
- 
- 
13,650.0 
682.5 
454.0 
- 
23,300.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
23,300.0 
- 
233.0 
233.0 
23,533.0 
1,165.0 
757.6 
12.7 
- 
- 
38.5 
33.2 
- 
84.4 
- 
- 
- 
84.4 
- 
2.4 
1,741.0 
- 
- 
850.0 
1,733.0 
- 
4,684.0 
95.0 
27.2 
122.2 
4,806.2 
- 
199.8 
911.0 
- 
- 
428.0 
520.0 
- 
1,859.0 
- 
- 
- 
1,859.0 
- 
52.1 
386.0 
- 
- 
- 
294.0 
- 
680.0 
103.7 
15.4 
119.0 
799.0 
- 
30.8 
120.0 
- 
- 
10.0 
49.0 
57.5 
4,176.5 
- 
124.6 
124.6 
4,301.1 
- 
162.9 
1,058.0 
- 
- 
- 
582.2 
1,000.0 
2,640.2 
199.0 
- 
199.0 
2,839.2 
- 
108.6 
14,786.5 
25,455.6 
86.8 
5,006.0 
1,911.1 
829.8 
4,464.0 
2,947.8 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
74.0 
- 
74.0 
- 
- 
- 
74.0 
- 
1.1 
75.0 
- 
4,300.0 
- 
- 
- 
175.0 
103.8 
- 
278.8 
3,020.0 
230.3 
3,250.3 
3,529.1 
- 
138.3 
4,228.7 
36,950.0 
- 
1,501.5 
3,389.2 
1,057.5 
51,426.9 
3,417.7 
630.5 
4,048.1 
55,475.0 
1,847.5 
1,907.5 
3,667.4 
59,230.0 
Financing Plan 
Financing Plan for KIIWP I. KIIWP I will be financed by: (i) IFAD up to US$17.79 million 
(71.9%),  through  a  highly  concessional  loan;  (ii)  Government  of  Rwanda  for  a  total  of 
US$5.42  million  (21.9%)  in  the  form  of  tax  exemptions  and  consultancies  for  Ndego 
irrigation  system;  and  (iii)  beneficiaries  for  a  total  of  1.53  million  (6.2  per  cent)  in  the 
form of works. Details of financing arrangements by components are shown in table 8 and 
by expenditure category in table 9. 
Anticipated Financing Plan for KIIWP 2. The project will be financed by: (i) IFAD up 
to  US$25.7  million  (43.4%),  through  a  highly  concessional  loan;  (ii) Private  sector  for 
US$322  thousand  (0.5%);  (iii)  ICCO  for  US$246  thousand  (0.3%),  (iv)  Government  of 
Rwanda  for  a  total  of  US$8.8  million  (15%)  in  the  form  of  tax  exemptions;  (v)  Co-
financiers  for  a  total  of  US$22  million  (37.3%);  and  (vi)  Beneficiaries  for  US$2  million 
(3.4%). Please see annex 12 for more details. 
10 
Table 8: Financing Plan by Components for KIIWP 1 (US$ 000) 
Table 9: Expenditure Accounts by Financier for KIIWP 1 (US$ 000) 
1
1
LocalBeneficiariesIFADThe GovernmentTotal(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%For. Exch.Taxes)TaxesA. Strengthening resilience to droughts 1. Catchment rehabilitation and protection structures 1 527.114.57 044.266.91 956.418.610 527.642.65 877.92 693.31 956.42. Irrigation Development --6 929.670.12 961.429.99 891.140.04 945.53 165.11 780.43. Infrastructure Management Institutions --269.382.059.118.0328.51.3107.4161.959.14. Enviromental and Social Management Plan --471.582.0103.518.0575.02.3192.3279.2103.5Subtotal Strengthening resilience to droughts 1 527.17.214 714.769.05 080.423.821 322.186.211 123.26 299.63 899.4B. Institutional Development and Project Coordination 1. Institutional Support --227.282.049.918.0277.11.155.4171.849.92. Programme Management and Coordination --2 849.290.9285.79.13 134.912.71 182.41 666.8285.7Subtotal Institutional Development and Project Coordination --3 076.490.2335.59.83 412.013.81 237.91 838.6335.5Total PROJECT COSTS 1 527.16.217 791.171.95 416.021.924 734.1100.012 361.08 138.14 234.9LocalBeneficiariesIFADThe GovernmentTotal(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%For. Exch.Taxes)TaxesI. Investment Costs EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS --2 501.680.0625.420.03 127.012.62 188.9312.7625.4WORKS 1 527.120.54 567.961.51 337.918.07 432.930.13 716.42 378.51 337.9VEHICLES --191.080.047.820.0238.81.0167.123.947.8CONSULTANCIES AND NON-CONSULTING SERVICES --7 888.871.33 172.028.711 060.844.75 530.43 539.41 990.9TRAINING & WORKSHOPS --854.682.0187.618.01 042.24.2208.4646.1187.6GRANTS & SUBSIDIES -----------Total Investment Costs 1 527.16.716 003.969.95 370.623.522 901.592.611 811.36 900.74 189.6II. Recurrent Costs SALARIES & ALLOWANCES --1 580.6100.00.0-1 580.66.4474.21 106.4-OPERATING COSTS --206.682.045.318.0251.91.075.6131.045.3Total Recurrent Costs --1 787.297.545.32.51 832.57.4549.81 237.445.3Total PROJECT COSTS 1 527.16.217 791.171.95 416.021.924 734.1100.012 361.08 138.14 234.9 
1
2
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase I
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Mission Dates:
23 April-04 May 2018
Document Date:
31/03/2020
Project No.
2000002229
Report No.
5007-RW
Loan ID
2000002900
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 4:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
Introduction 
This Annex lays out the methodology, assumptions and results of the economic and 
financial analysis carried out to assess the impact and viability of the Kayonza 
Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project Phase I (KIIWP 1). The 
aim is to identify, calculate and compare project costs and benefits and thereby 
assess its viability, first from the point of view of individual participants in the 
project (financial analysis) and then from the standpoint of the national economy as 
a whole (economic analysis). 
Project benefits and beneficiaries 
Benefits. KIIWP 1’s development objective is to improve food security and incomes 
of rural households on a sustainable basis. Project interventions are expected to 
result in an extensive range of tangible and intangible benefits. Key quantifiable 
benefits include: i) crop diversification and increased value of production in hillside 
areas; ii) increased value of livestock production; iii) improved access to water for 
domestic uses. These benefits will be achieved through project interventions such 
as: i) water infrastructure development; ii) promotion of climate smart agriculture 
and land husbandry practices; iii) promotion of sustainable land and water 
management practices.   
Beneficiaries. The project will be implemented in eight drought prone sectors of 
the Kayonza district. It is anticipated that the total number of households benefiting 
directly from KIIWP 1 during will be 8,143 of which 50% of beneficiaries will be 
women. Farmers and rural households in the project area will also benefit indirectly 
from project activities through increased demand for farm labour, clustering and 
value chain linkages and nutrition-related outcomes. Table 1 below provides an 
overview of direct project beneficiaries form different interventions in the project 
lifespan.  
Adoption  rates.  This  analysis  uses  the  total  number  of  direct  beneficiaries  and 
estimates that 76% of farm-enterprises and 77% of non-farm enterprises will adopt 
the project interventions and activities. These adoption rates are reflected in Table 1. 
1 
Table 1: Number of households benefiting directly from KIIWP 1 activities  
Number of direct beneficiaries 
Target groups 
Farm- enterprises 
target 
adoption rate 
no. of HH 
Hillside farms 
cumulative no. of HH 
100% 
100% 
Non-Farm- enterprises 
target 
adoption rate 
no. of HH 
Livestock and 
domestic 
cumulative no. of HH 
Total Project Target 
HHs 
Total beneficiaries in 
project supported HH 
persons per HH 
100% 
100% 
target 
4.5 
Phasing per Calendar Year 
target HH 
Y 1 
Y 2 
Y 3 
Y4 
 Total 
5643 
76% 
4289 
4289 
4289 
2500 
77% 
1928 
1928 
1928 
8143 
0% 
30% 
40% 
30% 
0 
0 
1287 
1287 
1715 
3002 
1287 
4289 
4289 
4289 
0% 
43% 
57% 
0% 
-  
-  
-  
829  
1,099  
-  
829  
1,928  
1,928  
1928 
1928 
2,115  
4,930  
4,930  
36,644 
-    
9,519  
22,183  
2 
Financial Analysis 
Methodology 
The methodology follows recent IFAD guidelines on Economic and Financial Analysis 
(EFA)1 that recommend the use of cost-benefit analysis which is based in the 
valuation in monetary terms of project cost and benefits. The financial analysis is 
only applied to the project activities that lend themselves to it and where sufficient 
data are available. The analysis builds on primary and secondary data collected by 
the design team during the first design mission in April/May 2018. Information was 
obtained through field visits, interviews with government officials, farmers groups 
and stakeholders as well as from other on-going IFAD projects (e.g. KWAMP, PASP, 
PRICE, RDDP) and World Bank Projects (LWH, RSSP) in the country. Conservative 
assumptions were made both for inputs and outputs. The financial analysis has 
been undertaken from the point of view of a rural household engaged in agricultural 
production and livestock (dairy) management activities. The analysis aims first at 
assessing the financial profitability of representative production models. It should 
be noted that the financial models have been developed solely for the purpose of 
the EFA analysis, as in practice farm’s characteristics usually change from one place 
to another.  
Financial models 
A total of eight crop budgets have been prepared to assess farm productivity, gross 
margins and returns to labour for rice, maize, beans, eggplant, green pepper, onion 
and  tomato.  Furthermore,  livestock  models  for  cows  were  also  prepared.  The 
incremental  benefits  have  been  estimated  as  the  difference  between  a  “without 
project (WoP)” and a “with project (WP)” scenario. 
Crop budgets. The “WoP” is characterized by traditional subsistence farming with 
low  yields,  low  technology  adoption  and  high  post-harvest  loss  rates.  Besides, 
farmers  face  particular  difficulties  in  marketing  like  production  planning,  bulking, 
transport,  steady  flow  of  marketable  produce  and  buyer  identification  and 
negotiations. 
In the “WP”, farmers are expected to increase productivity (including more production 
cycles) and decrease post-harvest losses, due to trainings in GAP, producer coaching, 
introduction  of  irrigation,  connection  to  markets.  Furthermore,  the  farmers  are 
assisted in gradually transforming their crops from traditional staple crops to higher 
value  cash  crops.  The  adoption  of  good  agricultural  practices  involves  also  the 
sustainable management of land and water. 
Revenues are formed of agro-products sales and operational costs are mainly seeds, 
fertilizers,  chemicals  and  labour.  Investments  are  mainly  in  small  scale  irrigation 
technologies2. Several aspects have been included in the crop budget analysis: 
1 IFAD’s Internal Guidelines for Economic and Financial Analysis of Rural Investment Projects 
2 The investment cost in SSIT is subsidized at 50%. 
3 
a.  Labour is a combination between family and hired. The hired labor has 
been valued at RwF 1000 per day. For unpaid family labor a daily rate 
of RwF 750 is used as the financial cost3.  
b.  Home consumption for maize, beans and rice is estimated in the models 
to  assess  the  impact  on  food  security  and  marketable  surplus  to  the 
beneficiaries.  Agriculture  production  used  for  self-consumption  is  not 
valued in monetary terms. 
c.  Prices  reflect  those  actually  paid  at  farmgate.  It  is  also  assumed  that 
market demand is healthy for all analysed crops and that all marketable 
surplus  from  local  producers  can  be  readily  absorbed  in  the  main 
markets without adverse effects on the market price. 
d.  It is assumed that productivity increases related to yield improvement 
and reduced post-harvest losses will happen gradually, reaching its full 
value at the end of the project.  
Maize,  beans,  and  rice  budgets  have  been  developed  to  represent  the  current 
situation  in  the  field.  Table  2  shows  post-harvest  yields,  self-consumption,  total 
revenues,  total  operating  costs,  net  income  and  the  return  to  labour  for  the  crops 
considered. The data presented are for 1-hectare representative cultivation area. The 
with-project  information  presents  data  for  the  project  once  it  has  reached  its  full 
development in year 5. The negative values of net income under the WOP scenarios 
for maize and beans stem from the valuation of the financial costs of family labor4. 
Existing average yields are also quite low given the rainfed and poor management 
conditions under which these two crops are grown.  
Table 3 presents similar  information for the remaining crops budgets (vegetables), 
which are part of the focus commodities short-listed for this project. Most of these 
crops are grown in very limited amounts due to the existing farmer’s orientation to 
staple crops. 
3 The calculation of family labor wage rate is based on World Bank (2014) Transformation of Agriculture Sector Program 
Phase 3. 
4 Furthermore, self-consumption has not been valued in monetary terms. 
4 
Table 2 Main indicators from crop budgets: maize and beans.  
Crops budgets- 
per ha 
Post-harvest yield 
Self-consumption 
Total Revenues 
Total Operating 
Costs 
Net Income 
Return to Labour 
* Values at full development 
Maize 
Beans 
Unit 
WoP 
Wp* 
Incremental 
WoP 
Wp* 
Incremental 
kg 
kg 
‘000 RWF 
‘000 RWF 
‘000 RWF 
RWF/p-d 
1,275  
250  
255  
399  
(144) 
- 
4,140  
500  
828 
607  
220  
802  n/a 
225% 
100% 
225% 
52% 
253% 
600 
250  
112  
2,250 
400  
592  
402  
(290) 
- 
584  
7,2  
25  n/a 
275% 
60% 
429% 
45% 
102% 
Table 3 Main indicators from crop budgets: vegetables.  
Tomato 
Onion 
Green Pepper 
Eggplant 
Crops budgets- per ha  Unit 
WoP  Wp* 
Increm.  WoP  Wp* 
Increm.  WoP  Wp* 
Increm.  WoP  Wp* 
Increm. 
Post-harvest yield 
ton/ha 
11.25 
13.5 
20%  11.25 
13.5 
20% 
9.0  
10.8  
20%  11.25 
13.5 
20% 
Self-consumption 
kg 
- 
- 
n/a 
- 
- 
n/a 
- 
- 
n/a 
- 
- 
n/a 
Total Revenues 
‘000 RWF  3,375   4,050  
20%  4,500   5,400  
20%  4,500   5,400  
20%  2,813   3,375  
20% 
Total Operating Costs 
‘000 RWF  1,689   1,689  
0%  1,606   1,606  
0%  1,246   1,246  
0%  1,236   1,236  
Net Income 
‘000 RWF  1,686   2,361  
40%  2,894   3,794  
31%  3,254   4,154  
28%  1,576   2,139  
Return to Labour 
* Values at full development 
RWF/p-d 
3088  4325 
40%  4729  6200 
31%  8301  10597 
28%  4021  5456 
0% 
36% 
36% 
5 
Farm Models. On the basis of the above listed crop budgets, the existing growing 
conditions and production arrangements in the country, a farm enterprise model, with 
an average land of 0.3 hectares, has been developed for hillside farms: 
In the WOP situation, farmers grow mainly traditional maize, beans and a very 
small area of vegetables. This farming is highly dependent on rain and subject 
to soil erosion, resulting in low crop yields. Interventions promoted such as the 
terracing, water storage and the promotion of best agricultural practices will 
have an impact both on crop yields and the cropping patterns. The with 
project situation establishes a decreasing allocation of land for maize and 
beans and an increased cultivation of vegetables. It is expected that about 
4,289 households cultivating in hillsides will benefit from the project, based on 
a 76% adoption rate. 
A summary of the crop pattern for each farm model is presented in Table 4, below. 
Table 4 Assumed Representative Farm Cropping Pattern Without- and With 
Program 
Share of farm area 
WOP 
WP 
Hillside- Representative Farm 
   Maize 
   Beans  
   Eggplant 
   Green pepper 
   Onion 
   Tomato 
   Total  
% 
65% 
31% 
1% 
1% 
1% 
1% 
100% 
ha 
0.195 
0.093 
0.003 
0.003 
0.003 
0.003 
0.30 
% 
43% 
10% 
10% 
15% 
12% 
10% 
100% 
ha 
0.129 
0.030 
0.030 
0.045 
0.036 
0.030 
0.30 
Financial model results. A financial discount rate of 17% was used based 
on the actual lending rates of commercial banks5. The model shows negative 
net present value (NPV) and a financial internal rate of return (FIRR) of 9.2%. Table 
5 presents the expected financial benefits. Indicators selected include net income at 
full development after labour, FIRR and NPV. It is understood that such net incomes 
may not be achieved in one year; thus a gradual and conservative achievement of 
the  expected  benefits  has  been  used  in  the  analysis.  Hillside  farms  have  a  small 
negative net income in the WOP situation which stems from the inclusion of family 
labour costs of producing low return crops such as maize and beans. Results suggest 
a move to producing less traditional crops, especially maize and beans with a low net 
income  to  more  profitable  and  higher  value  vegetable  crops,  which  can  have  a 
significant positive impact on Farm HHs. 
Table 5: Farm Models financial results.   
5 National Bank of Rwanda (2018). Commercial Bank lending rates in 2017. 
6 
Farm enterprise 
type 
Net income (RWF) after 
labour 
WOP 
WP1 
Hillside Farm 
(19,429.8) 
378,21
6 
Increm
. 
2047% 
NPV 
(RwF) 
@17% 
($480,003
) 
NPV 
(USD)6 
@17% 
($561) 
FIRR 
9.22
% 
Livestock  model.  The  project  does  not  invest  directly  in  livestock  production 
activities.  The  major  constrains  hampering  the  development  of  this  activity  in  the 
Kayonza  district  is  the  lack  of  water,  which  affects  also  the  availability  of  enough 
quantity and quality of pastures. However, the project does involve the construction 
of  boreholes,  which  will  improve  access  to  water  for  livestock.  Greater  water 
availability is expected to increase the existing low productivity of cows. The financial 
analysis considers the benefits associated with milk productivity increases for cows. 
In the WOP situation, cows exhibit low milk production. Households are also assumed 
to make limited use of inputs given the existing low returns. The with project situation 
represents  a  gradual  increase  in  milk  productivity  accompanied  with  greater  input 
uses. It is expected that about 1,928 households will benefit from the project, based 
on a 77% adoption rate. Table 6 shows milk production yields, self-consumption, total 
revenues,  total  operating  costs,  net  income  and  the  return  to  labour  for  the  crops 
considered.  The  data  presented  are  for  1-hectare  representative  area.  The  with-
project  information  presents  data  for  the  project  once  it  has  reached  its  full 
development  in  year  5.  From  the  estimation  of  the  livestock  model,  the  additional 
value  of  milk  production  associated  with  the  project  amounts  to  230,550  RwF  per 
year and a net present value of US$898, assuming a 10 year period of benefit stream 
and a 17 percent discount rate7.  
Table 6: Financial results for livestock enterprise models 
Livestock budgets- 
per ha 
Milk production 
Self-consumption 
Total Revenues 
Total Operating and 
Labor Costs 
Net Income 
Return to Labour 
NPV @ 17% 
NPV @ 17% 
Unit 
WoP 
Wp* 
Incremental 
Livestock 
liters 
liters 
RWF 
RWF 
RWF 
RWF/p-d 
RWF 
USD 
1,450  
435  
230,550  
2,900  
870  
461,100  
133,500  
97,050  
1078.3 
231,500  
229,600  
2551.1 
- 
- 
767,384  
898 
100% 
100% 
100% 
73% 
137% 
137% 
6 Exchange rate used is 1USD-855RwF, based on National Bank or Rwanda, May 2018. 
7 No FIRR has been calculated since households will not bear the costs of borehole construction. 
7 
Improved access to water. The construction of boreholes by the project will save 
rural households from fetching water at a distance, even during the dry season. This 
time  saved  can  now  be  used  for  other  activities.  On  average,  households  use  8 
jerricans of water (20 liter-jerricans) each day for domestic purposes. They normally 
fetch from streams or other distant boreholes. The time spent while going to fetch 
the water was estimated at 60 minutes. One person would only carry one jerrican at 
a time. Thus, each household on average requires 480 minutes to fetch water daily, 
i.e., 8 hours. This can be value according to the wage rate of RWF 1,000. An additional 
RWF80 must be added to incorporate the price of borehole water (sold at RWF10 per 
jerrican). Overall, this translates to RWF 394,200 of benefits per year per household 
and a net present value of US$2,148, assuming a 10-year period of benefit stream 
and  a  17  percent  discount  rate8.  It  is  expected  that  about  1,928  households  will 
benefit from the project, based on a 77% adoption rate. 
Economic Analysis 
The economic analysis aims to assess the viability of the proposed project from the 
standpoint  of  the  society  as  a  whole.  It  is  based  on  the  aggregation  of  individual 
incremental  net  benefits  calculated  through  the  models  developed  in  the  financial 
analysis,  subject  to  adjustments  highlighted  hereafter  and  in  accordance  with  the 
targets set in the logical framework.  
Methodology and assumptions 
The economic analysis is predicated on the comparison of the with-project situation 
to the without-project situation to measure the incremental benefits arising from the 
project.  The  methodology  used  is  the  cost-benefit  analysis  at  shadow  prices  that 
better reflect the economic value to society of goods and services, often referred to 
as “economic opportunity costs” or “social opportunity costs”. The analysis has been 
carried out for a 30-year period, corresponding to the likely life period of the benefits 
expected  from  the  major  infrastructure  investments  of  the  project.  The  scenario 
presented in the economic analysis is conservative, the analysis presented below is 
indicative and demonstrates the scope of profitability originated from the conditions 
prevailing at the time of the preparation.  
Discount rate. In keeping with IFAD guidelines, a 12% discount rate has been used 
to reflect the social opportunity cost of capital in Rwanda. This rate corresponds to 
the yield on the five-year government bonds in 2017 (National Bank of Rwanda)9.  
Standard conversion factor. The analysis has been done in domestic currency at 
domestic price level. A shadow exchange rate of 788 RwF for 1 USD has been used 
to  reflect  the  opportunity  cost  of  foreign  exchange  to  the  country.  It  has  been 
calculated  on  the  basis  of  data  from  the  World  Bank  (WITS)10  according  to  the 
following formula:   
𝑆𝐸𝑅=𝑂𝐸𝑅 × {[(𝑀+𝑇𝑀)+( 𝑋−𝑇𝑋)]𝑀+𝑋}=𝑂𝐸𝑅 𝑥 𝑆𝐶𝐹 
8 No FIRR has been calculated since households will not bear the costs of borehole construction. 
9 National Bank of Rwanda (2018) Interest rate structure year 2017. Kigali. 
10 https://wits.worldbank.org/CountryProfile/en/Country/RWA/Year/LTST/Summary  
8 
SCF= SER/OER 
where SER: Shadow Exchange rate  
OER: Official Exchange rate  
M: Total imports (an average of five years would be advisable)  
X: Total Exports (an average of five years would be advisable)  
TM: Duties on Imports  
TX: Export Taxes 
SCF: Standard Conversion Factor 
The financial prices and the streams of costs and benefits have been converted into 
economic  values,  by  removing  taxes,  subsidies  and  other  transfers.  A  standard 
conversion factor of 0.92 has been calculated according to the formula above, to all 
traded goods and services; for the non-tradable goods the conversion factor applied 
is  equal  to  1.  The  economic  prices  of  hired  labour  costs  were  adjusted  based  on 
conversion factor of 0.8 to account for the unemployment rate in rural areas11. For 
equipment,  a  conversion  factor  of  0.8  has  also  been  retained  to  take  into  account 
taxes  embodied  in  the  financial  prices.  All  models  are  expressed  in  2018  constant 
prices. The analysis builds on primary data collected by the design team during the 
first design mission in April/May 2018, provided by the Government of Rwanda and 
derived  from  other  on-going  IFAD  projects  (e.g.  KWAMP,  PASP,  PRICE,  RDDP)  and 
World  Bank  Projects  (LWH,  RSSP)  in  the  country.  Conservative  assumptions  and 
parameters  have  been  applied,  in  order  to  avoid  over-estimation  of  benefits  and 
provide realistic results. 
Economic costs and benefits 
The project economic costs have been generated with Costab software which deducts 
the  amounts  pertaining  to  taxes  and  provisions  for  price  contingencies  from  the 
financial costs and applies the shadow exchange rate to convert the cost portion in 
foreign exchange into local currency. Project costs related to the benefits identified 
were  accounted  for12.  However,  in  order  to  avoid  double  counting,  the  amounts 
regarding the  investments already taken  into account  in the financial models have 
been deducted from the total project cost. The deduction was made directly in the 
Costab before computing the economic costs  
The  economic  benefits  accounted  for  in  the  calculation  of  economic  profitability 
indicators  are  those  that  are  readily  quantifiable,  deriving  from  increased  value  of 
agricultural  production,  increased  production  of  milk,  and  the  value  of  improved 
access to water for domestic uses.   
The models developed in the financial analysis have been transformed into economic 
values  using  economic  prices  instead  of  financial  prices  as  stated  above.  The  total 
incremental  economic  benefits  for  each  model  have  then  been  computed  by 
              11 Source: Labour Force Survey 2016 Report, National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda. 
12 Costs related to the financing of feasibility studies and environmental and social management plans for future irrigation 
investments were not considered in the analysis.  
9 
multiplying  the  individual  incremental  economic  benefits  to  the  number  of 
beneficiaries  that  are  expected  to  adopt  the  improved  practices  proposed  by  the 
project. To take into account the fact that adoption of new practices and infrastructure 
construction is likely to be gradual the following cumulative adoption rates have been 
assumed.  
Table 7 Expected cumulative adoption rates. 
Farm- enterprises 
Livestock and domestic 
Phasing per Calendar Year 
Y 1 
Y 2 
Y 3 
0% 
0% 
30% 
43% 
70% 
100% 
Y 4 
100% 
100% 
The total project incremental benefits have then been calculated by summing up the 
aggregate incremental economic benefit pertaining to each model. Finally, the stream 
of economic costs (computed using Costab) have been deducted from the stream of 
total incremental economic benefits to get the stream of net incremental benefits, so 
as to compute the economic IRR and NPV.  
Economic results and sensitivity analysis 
Net Present Value (NPV) and Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR). The 
net present value of the project over a thirty-year period is calculated to be 1,708 
(US$ 000) at an economic discount rate of 12% and the economic internal rate of 
return  is  estimated  to  be  15.74%.  The  summary  of  the  economic  analysis  is 
presented  in  table  9  in  this  appendix.  The  Project  is  therefore  profitable  from  an 
economic  standpoint.  This  result  is  quite  satisfactory,  especially  as  some  benefits 
have  not  even  been  taken  into  account  in  the  calculations  due  to  data  shortages. 
These include the improvement of living conditions and nutrition, the positive spill-
over effects of capacity building on the local economy (suppliers of inputs, equipment, 
services), especially for women and youth. 
Sensitivity analysis: A sensitivity analysis was conducted to assess the changes in 
NPV and EIRR due to variations in the future stream of benefits and costs, and delay 
in project implementation. The Project remains profitable under a range of project 
scenarios. Switch values for the reduction in benefits and increase in costs are 21% 
and 26% respectively. Table 8 presents the sensitivity analysis results.  
Table 8:  Sensitivity analysis results 
Base scenario 
Project benefits 
Project benefits 
Project benefits 
-10% 
-20% 
-50% 
ERR 
15.7% 
13.9% 
12.1% 
6.2% 
NPV 
2,998 
1,545 
93 
-4,264 
10 
Switch value 
Project costs 
Project costs 
Project costs 
Switch value 
1 year lag in ben. 
2 years lag in ben. 
-21% 
10% 
20% 
50% 
26% 
14.1% 
12.7% 
9.6% 
13.5% 
11.9% 
1,845 
693 
-2,765 
1,374 
-76 
11 
Table 9: Economic analysis (USD) 
Project Economic Analysis - Full Project Cost 
(constant 2018 values) 
(US$ 000) 
PY1 
PY2 
PY3 
PY4 
PY5 
PY6 
PY7 
PY8 
PY9 
PY10  … 
PY30 
Total Program Net Benefits 
-    
833  
1,941  
1,969  
2,058  
2,188  
2,269  
2,269  
2,269  
2,269   … 
          2,269  
Program Costs 
… 
… 
Investment Costs 
             3,536  
5,480  
2,489  
365  
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
-     … 
                 -    
Recurrent Costs  
160  
520  
670  
977  
68  
68  
68  
68  
68  
68  
… 
                68  
Total Program Costs 
             3,695  
5,999  
3,159  
1,343  
68  
68  
68  
68  
68  
68  
… 
                68  
Total Project Incremental Net Benefits 
(3,695) 
(5,166) 
(1,218) 
626  
1,990  
2,120  
2,201  
2,201  
2,201  
2,201   … 
          2,201  
EIRR 
15.74% 
NPV @12% (USD 000) 
             1,708    
Further details are provided in the excel file KIIWP_1_EFA_040419.  
12 
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase I
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Mission Dates:
23 April-04 May 2018
Document Date:
31/03/2020
Project No.
2000002229
Report No.
5007-RW
Loan ID
2000002900
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 5:  Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note 
Major landscape characteristics and Issues (Social, natural resources, and 
climate) 
Socio-cultural context  
Post conflict recovery efforts included infrastructure repairs, community level reconciliation 
initiatives as well as resettlement of Rwandan refugees and displaced populations. Due to 
land shortages and population density, most returnees from Tanzania and Uganda settled 
in the Eastern province and were relocated in an area covering the entire Mutura Game 
Reserve and their resettlement eventually led to the de-gazettement of two thirds of the 
Akagera National Park located in Nyagatare and Kayonza districts (UNEP, 2011)1. Hence, 
the land was segmented into ranches and converted into pastureland, ranging from 0.45 
ha to 80 ha (UNEP, 2011).  
About  55%  of  the  population  of  Kayonza  District  are  aged  19  years  or  younger.  People 
aged 65 years and above make up 3%. About 52% of the population is female and the 
majority of this population group is young, with about 83% still under 40 years of age.  
Youth  face  several  challenges  which  preclude  them  from  being  involved  in  agriculture 
including: they do not own land, and therefore do not have access to finance/investment, 
nor  can  they  lease  land;  agriculture  is  practised  by  youth  who  did  not  go  to  school  - 
educated  youth  do  not  want  to  work  in  the  fields,  and  wait  for  other  jobs;  intellectual 
property is not valued as a contribution in agricultural projects, so youth do not feel there 
are opportunities in the sector in which they can excel. 
The percentage distribution of employment by gender in Kayonza District, shows that the 
majority of females in Kayonza District are small-scale farmer workers (78%), followed by 
wage farmer and independent non-farmer workers (both at 6%). Five per cent of females 
are wage non-farmer workers. Males are also involved in small-scale farm work at a lower 
percentage than females (61%). Males are wage non-farm workers and independent non-
farmers in greater proportions than females, however (18% and 13% respectively). 
Though not particular to Kayonza District, key gender gaps that require to be addressed 
include: (i) granting women equal access to productive resources and income generating 
activities;  (ii)  including  the  interests  of  women  in  capacity  building  opportunities  and 
knowledge management under the project; and (iii) giving women equal representation in 
decision making and institutions.  
With  an  average  of  179  inhabitants  per  kilometre  square,  the  population  density  in 
Kayonza District is lower than the national average of 483 inhabitants/km2 (WB, 2017). 
However,  the  district  presents  disparities  across  sectors  with  highest  density  found  in 
Kabarondo  (559  inhabitants/km2)  and  Kabare  (311  inhabitants/km2)  while  the  least 
populated  areas  are  Mwiri  (45 inhabitants/km2)  and  Murundi  (73  inhabitants/km2).  The 
last two sectors are located in the cattle corridor typified by livestock keeping as the main 
livelihood.  After  Nyagatare,  Kayonza  is  the  second  district  with  the  largest  rangeland 
amounting to 46,806.1 ha out of 114,290.4 ha of arable land in the district (NISR, SAS 
2017).  
The  Kayonza  District  Potentialities  Report  highlights  (2013)  that  land  uses  comprise 
agricultural activities, livestock production, fishing and forestry. It also stated that 46.4% 
of  households  are  cultivating  areas  under  0.3  ha  land.  Yet,  the  Food  and  Agriculture 
Organisation  (FAO)  estimates  that,  a  Rwandan  household,  with  an  average  of  4.3 
members, ideally requires at least 0.9 ha to conduct sustainable agriculture and without 
having to take a job off-farm (NISR2, 2012; WB, 2016).  
1 UNEP, 2011, Rwanda from post-conflict to environmentally sustainable development, Kenya.  
2 National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (2012c)  EICV3 Thematic Report: Environment and Natural Resources. Kigali: 
Repubic of Rwanda.  
According to the World Food Programme (WFP) 2015 Comprehensive Food Security and 
Vulnerability  Analysis,  in  Kayonza  District  only  46%  of  the  households  are  food  secure, 
43% are marginally food secure, 10% are moderately food insecure and 1% are severely 
food  insecure.  In  addition,  households  which  are  most  commonly  affected  by  droughts 
(with  more  than  80%  of  livelihoods  likely  to  be  affected)  are  found  in  Kayonza  and 
Nyagatare districts in the Eastern province.  
In terms of poverty, the overall distribution of the KIIWP potential beneficiaries in  eight 
drought prone sectors by wealth category shows a higher percentage of people in Category 
1 and 2 (49%) than the four other sectors (44%), Kayonza District as a whole (47%) and 
the national distribution (43.9%). Three sectors show lower percentages for Category 1 
and 2, these are Ndego, Rwinkwavu and Kabare. The poorest sectors are Murama, Gahini 
and  Mwiri.  In  the  eight  sectors  of  Kayonza  District  there  are  31%  female  -headed 
households,  which  is  higher  than  the  national  average.  Some  sectors  have  a  very  high 
percentage of FHH, such as Murama (48%) and Kabarondo (32%). 
In the Table below, several indicators show that malnutrition is evident in Kayonza District. 
The Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis (CFSVA3) report in Rwanda 
found that levels of stunting among children aged under five dropped to 36.7% in 2015, 
down from 43% at the time of the last analysis in 2012. Stunting at 42.4% is slightly more 
than 5% higher than the national average. 
Table 1: Nutrition indicators 
NO 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
INDICATOR 
Stunting 
Prevalence of underweight among children under 5 
years (0-59 months) 
Prevalence of wasting among children under 5 years (0-
59 months) 
Prevalence of anemia among children aged 6-59 months 
Prevalence of anemia among women of reproductive age 
(15-49 years) 
% 
42.4 
9.1 
2 
Moderate: 19.9, 
Severe: 2 
Moderate: 2.6, Severe: 
0.5 
Natural resources and Natural Resource Management  
Kayonza  District  hosts  a  considerable  part  of  the  biodiversity  of  the  Eastern  Province, 
including half of Akagera National Park, vast swamps and a dense hydrographical network 
composed of a multitude of small interior lakes and Lake Muhazi that Kayonza shares with 
neighbouring districts. All the lakes are interconnected with the Kagera River by means of 
creeks and barely accessible marshlands (RNRA, 2015)4.  
The wildlife in the Akagera National Park comprises more than 90 species of mammals, 
530 bird species and 35 fish species (REMA, 20095). It is reported that the most threatened 
species are rhinoceros, large carnivores, particularly lions. 
Rwanda is located in two major basins, Nile and Congo basins, and its hydrological network 
is  composed  of  nine  catchments.  Kayonza  District  is  embedded  in  three  catchments:  a 
surface area of 3,269 km2 in the lower Nyabarongo (NNYL in the figure 1 below), a surface 
area  of  2,939  km2  the  upper  Akagera  catchment  (NAKU  in  the  figure  1  below),  and  a 
surface area of 3,223 km2 the lower Akagera catchment (NAKL in the figure 1 below).  
3 MINAGRI and WFP, 2015 
4 Ministry of Natural Resources (MINIRENA/RNRA), 2015, Rwanda National Water Resources Master Plan, Appendix 7: Upper 
Akagera Catchment.  
5 REMA (2009): Rwanda State of Environment and Outlook Report”.  
Figure 1: Localisation of Kayonza District in the lower Nyabarongo (NNYL), 
lower Akagera (NAKL) and the upper Akagera (NAKU) catchments in Rwanda 
(RNRA, 2015)6 
Kayonza 
The  Nyabarongo  catchment  has  good  and  deeply  weathered  soils  with  high  infiltration 
rates in narrow valleys with steep gradients. However, there is significant erosion which is 
related to land use in particular agriculture and mining. In the Akagera catchments, the 
eastern  lowlands  have  relatively  fertile  soils.  The  land  covers  of  the  catchments  are 
dominated by rainfed agriculture and with significant areas of natural open land and forest 
plantations  in  the  eastern  parts.  The  western  part  of  the  Akagera  floodplain is  used  for 
irrigated / agricultural wetland and the central and eastern parts are preserved as natural 
wetland (RNRA, 2015). 
Considering the high water-demand for irrigation in the drought-prone sectors of Kayonza 
District, increasing irrigation schemes may compromise the availability and quality of water 
resources and sustainability of vital ecosystems. According to the Rwanda National Water 
Resources Master Plan, the current level of water use in lower Nyabarongo catchment is 
very low.  The upper Akagera catchment (Naku in  the figure 1) has a  negative seasonal 
water balance and it is estimated that the catchment will begin to suffer from limited water 
stress  from  2020.  The  water  balance  for  the  lower  Akagera  catchment  shows  sufficient 
resources up till 2030, but will then undergo some limited stress during drier years from 
2030 onwards (RNRA, 2015).  
In addition, it is important to emphasize that the Kagera River also comprises significant 
territory in Burundi and Tanzania. These shared catchments require special consideration 
as  part  of  the  design  of  the  KIIWP.  Hence,  the  National  Water  Resources  Master  Plan 
recommends to closely monitor all irrigation developments, select the best suitable land 
6 https://esri-rw.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/a0d68c954ec142cda3554681489b3bc2. 
and  promote  rational  water  use  in  respect  of  environmental  flow,  transboundary  and 
international water resources management and downstream commitments.  
Climate  
Rwanda is ecologically diverse for its size ranging from highland mountain forests in the 
west to savannah grasslands and low altitude marshes in the east. The climate of Rwanda 
is dominated by the Inter Tropical Convergence Zone which passes over the country twice 
a year  and is further modified by a widely varying altitude across the country (900 m in 
south-west, 1,500-2,000 m in the south and the centre of the country, 1,800-3,000 m in 
the highlands of the north and the west and 3,000-4,507 m in the regions of Congo-Nile 
Crest and the chain of volcanoes) and by the presence of large adjacent water bodies of 
the great lakes. Most of the country benefits from two agriculture rainy seasons (February 
-  May;  September  –  December)  (see  below  figure  2  on  typical  seasonal  calendar).  The 
duration  of  the  two  rainy  seasons  is  increasingly  variable,  ranging  from  seven  to  nine 
months, with an annual rainfall amount up to 1,500 mm. Rainfall in the eastern part of the 
country is below the national average of 1,250 mm per annum. For instance, Kayonza and 
Kirehe districts receive  the lowest annual precipitation in the country,  typically between 
1,000 mmm to 1,200mm (MIDIMAR, 2015).  
Figure 2: Rwandan seasonal calendar for a typical year7 
Environmental  and  ecosystem  degradation  in Rwanda  is  triggered  by  two  main  factors: 
climate disturbances and anthropogenic activities.  The former is caused by several factors 
including the El- Niño and La Niña phenomena associated with surface temperatures in the 
Indian  and  Atlantic  Oceans.  A  study  by  the  University  of  Reading8  shows  that  climate 
variability  in  Eastern  Africa  is  due  to  the  influence  of  ocean  –atmosphere  climate 
phenomena, namely El Niño Oscillations (ENSO) and the Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD). Warm 
ENSO  events  are  thought  to  be  responsible  for  a  build-up  of  warm  sea  surface 
temperatures (SSTs) in the Eastern Pacific Ocean which lead to increasing rainfall. These 
events  are  specifically  observed  in  the  short  rains  seasons.  Furthermore,  the  recently 
discovered Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD), in addition to ENSO effects, most probably causes 
anomalously high rainfall in East Africa (see Marchal et al., 2006; REMA, 2011).  For some 
years (1963, 1972, 1982, 1997), El Niño events are thought to have coincided with positive 
IOD events leading to high rainfall in East Africa, whereas high rainfall anomalies in East 
Africa have been documented when positive IOD events occurred independently of ENSO 
events. However, as East Africa has varied topography (e.g. mountains and rift valleys) its 
features  are  not  yet  adequately  represented  in  climate  model  projections  and  deserve 
further investigation, especially with the modifying influence of the Congo basin.  
Because  of  the  growing  population  and  associated  pressure  on  agricultural  lands,  the 
grazing  areas  in  Eastern  Province  are  shrinking  due  to  the  encroachment  for  crop 
7 Source: FEWSNET, May 2018. 
8 Black, 2005, “The relationship between Indian Ocean sea surface temperature and East African rainfall”, Phil. Trans. Roy. 
Soc., A.,N 363, 43-47. 
cultivation9. Therefore, the livestock sector suffers from lack of feeds due to shortage in 
pasture land, insufficient and/or non-controlled commercial feeds.  
In 2015, the Ministry of Disaster Management and Refugees Affairs (MIDIMAR) published 
the National Risk Atlas. This report encompasses a comprehensive assessment of existing 
risks  at  national  and  local  levels  (see  figure  3  below).  It  highlights  that  over  the  last 
decade, the frequency and severity of natural disasters, such as floods and droughts, have 
significantly increased. The extreme weather events have recently destroyed crops, caused 
serious environmental degradation and led to food insecurity, malnutrition and famine in 
affected areas, with water shortages affecting livestock and pasture productions.  
Figure 3: Map of hazards risks in Rwanda (REMA, 2015) 
The  2015  State  of  Environment  and  Outlook  reports  that  the  districts  of  Bugesera, 
Nyagatare,  Gatsibo,  Kayonza,  Ngoma  and  Kirehe  in  the  Eastern  Province  are  the  most 
prone  to  drought.  These  districts  are  affected  by  high  frequency  of  rainfall  deficit,  late 
rainfall onsets, early rainfall cessations, and a significant number of dry spells (MIDIMAR, 
2015). In addition, given the flat topography with little or no wind breaks, these districts 
are the most exposed to heavy windstorms.  
In 2016, the Eastern Province was affected by a severe drought which led to the death of 
2,417 heads of cattle as well as poor crop yields during Season A10. As a result, more than 
47,000  households  in  the  districts  of  Kayonza,  Nyagatare,  Gatsibo  Ngoma  and  Kirehe 
became food insecure. The Government of Rwanda had to provide household food relief 
and  water  for  livestock  to  support  the  affected  districts.  Rwanda  suffered  from  two 
consecutive years of droughts. In 2017, erratic and below-average rainfalls were recorded 
for the rainy season spreading from September to December (SOND). 
Potential project’s social, environmental, and climate change impacts and risks 
Key potential impacts 
Kayonza  District  has  a  total  of  agricultural  land  area  of  114,290  ha,  of  which  56.4%  is 
used  for  intensive  croplands  on  the  hillsides,  2.8%  in  the  marshlands  and  41%  as 
9 Eugene M, 2017, Characterization of cattle production systems in Nyagatare district of Eastern Province, Rwanda, Rheol: 
open access 1:107. 
10 According to MINAGRI, 23,488 ha of crops were lost during Season A that stretches from October to December. 
rangelands  (NISR,  2017).  In  addition,  the  main  sources  of  water  for  irrigation  are 
groundwater (85%), stream water (10%), lake water (2.5%).   
In  view  of  the  current  district  agricultural  land  uses;  there  is  a  potential  for  increasing 
irrigated land areas as well as productivity. Hence, the project intends to build communities 
resilience through: (i) better management of water resources; (ii) promotion of climate-
smart  agriculture  (CSA)  and  animal  husbandry  (AH)  practices  and  technologies;  (iii) 
efficient  use  of  fertilizer  through  appropriate  fertilizer  selection,  timing  and  split 
application;  (iv)  promotion  of  sound  land  husbandry  and  soil  and  water  conservation 
practices  (including  use  of  nitrogen  fixing  trees  such  as  agroforestry,  erosion  control 
measures,  etc.); (v)  enhancing access to improved seeds  varieties; (vi) improving crop 
rotations; and (vii) reforestation of hillsides. 
KIIWP's main expected positive impacts are: 
  Enhanced food security and incomes and reduced rural poverty in project areas 
  Enhanced access to water for human consumption 
  Farmers’ drought resilience strengthened 
  Increased acreage of farmland under water-related infrastructure  
  Increased acreage of farmland under climate resilient management and 
practices 
KIIWP's potential negative impacts are:  
  Increasing irrigation schemes may compromise the availability and quality of 
water resources and sustainability of vital ecosystems; 
  Increasing irrigation schemes may increase environmental pollution due to 
release of agro-chemicals into soil, ground water, rivers  
  Competition between water users in times of scarcity ( especially irrigators and  
cattle owners);  
  Growing competition for land between crop farmers and livestock keepers 
Climate change and adaptation 
The smallholder agricultural sector of Rwandan is dominated by rainfed production systems 
that are vulnerable to the vagaries of annual weather patterns and climate change Hence 
farming systems are affected by natural disasters loss of harvest or livestock, increased 
susceptibility  to  disease,  and  destruction  of  irrigation  systems  and  other  agricultural 
infrastructure.  Climate  variability  will  influence  water  availability  during  plant  growth, 
water for livestock and increase incidence of diseases related to warm weather. In general, 
livestock is more resistant to climate change than crops because of its mobility and access 
to feed.  
To  ensure  food  security  and  conservation  of  the  environment,  the  project  will  include 
improved farming methods such as climate-smart agriculture practices and technologies 
and  selection  of  suitable  crop  and  fodder  species  that  are  appropriate  to  the  two  agro-
ecological zones that typifies Kayonza District, namely the Eastern Plateau and the Eastern 
Savanna.  Project  activities  will  consist  of  building  local  adaptive  capacities  to  cope  with 
prolonged dry spells and droughts, promotion of improved agricultural technologies from 
farm  plot  to  market,  crop  diversification,  soil  conservation  techniques,  efficient  use  of 
fertilizers and improvements in soil quality through the promotion of integrated soil fertility 
management  practices.  These  practices  and  technologies  will  be  confirmed  through 
participatory  and  interactive  approach  for  the  identification  of  needs  and  challenges.  In 
addition,  the  project  will  contribute  to  carbon  sequestration  through  adoption  of 
agroforestry  and  afforestation  initiatives  (e.g.  village  nurseries);  improved  pasture 
management  practices  through  the  adoption  of  drought  resistant  forage  and  fodder 
varieties  within  the  FFS,  storage  and  proper  use  of  manure;  improving  nutrient 
management so as to increase productivity and thus volume of crop residues available for 
soil carbon sequestration, soil fertility and animal feeds.  
Environmental and social category (A)  
The preliminary environmental and social category is A because KIIWP investments focus 
on  irrigation  and  integrated  watershed  management  and  planning,  including  closely 
integrated  activities  and  investments  on  water  harvesting  and  storage,  irrigation 
infrastructure  development  (area  >100  ha)  and  marshland  development.  According  to 
IFAD guidelines, all watershed management schemes (both hillsides and marshlands) with 
a  command  area  exceeding  100  ha  will  be  subjected  to  an  Environmental  and  Social 
Impact  Assessment  (ESIA)  before  funds  are  released  for  the  specific  investments.  The 
ESIAs  will  be  aligned  with  the  national  General  Guidelines  for  Environmental  Impact 
Assessment  (2006)  and  the  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Guidelines  for 
agriculture  projects  (2016).  ESIA  certificates  are  site-specific  and  valid  for  the  entire 
project  implementation  phase.  All  feasibility  studies  for  irrigation  schemes,  hydro-
geological surveys for boreholes drilling and valley ponds, water permit requests and ESIA 
procedures will be financed and initiated during KIIWP 1 of project implementation, which 
does not include any category A activities.  
The whole project will be coordinated through an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) to examine the risks and impacts of the proposed activities, including 
potential environmental and social vulnerabilities. In addition, the watershed management 
schemes with a command area below 100 ha will be further addressed through the ESMF. 
The ESMF will specify the environmental and social management requirements (including 
labour and working conditions, grievance redress system, health and safety) that will be 
the  responsibility  of  contractors  and  primary  suppliers  hired  to  construct  the  irrigation 
infrastructure. Environmental and Climate change Plans will be developed for each site.  
Climate risk category (High)  
As  a  result  of  recent  droughts  events  and  the  vulnerability  of  the  Eastern  Province  to 
extreme events, the preliminary climate risk classification is High.  
Climate  change  impacts  in  Rwanda  vary  depending  on  agro-ecological  zones;  while  the 
North  and  Western  provinces  are  more  affected  by  flood  events,  Eastern  and  Southern 
provinces  are  more  vulnerable  to  drought  events.  The  impact  of  floods  and  droughts 
associated  with  El  Nino  and  La  Nina  events  of  recent  years  are  thought  to  have  been 
exacerbated by climate change and the environmental degradation observed throughout 
the country (NAPA, 2006; IPCC, 2014). Over the last decade, droughts tend to be cyclical 
and are becoming seasonal events of varying duration and intensity.  
The  mean  annual  temperature  is  expected  to  increase  up  to  3.25°C  for  the  East  Africa 
region  by  the  end  of  the  century  resulting  in  proliferation  of  diseases  (e.g.  Banana 
Xanthomonas,  cassava  brown  streak  disease,  fungal  and  bacterial  diseases  in  Irish 
potato), crop decline (especially for maize and beans) and reduced land availability, which 
in  return,  affects  food  security  and  livestock  production.  Rainfall  variability  is  more 
uncertain,  though  most  of  the  models  predict  more  extreme  events  with  higher  rainfall 
intensities  leading  to  landslides,  crop  and  livestock  products  losses,  health  risks  and 
damages to infrastructure. 
Recommended features of project design and implementation 
Environment and social mitigation measures 
The  KIIWP  project  will  adopt  an  integrated  watershed  management  approach  that  will 
integrate appropriate  crop and livestock production practices such as improved crop and 
fodder varieties;  the promotion of a wide range of cost-effective erosion control measures 
(tree  belts,  contour  belts,  grass  strips,  contour  bunds,  planting  of  fodder  grasses  on 
bunds/ridges,  use  of  permanent,  perennial  vegetation  on  contours,  etc.);  and  agro-
forestry (intercropping, integration of trees on  farm plots, tree belts, protective forests, 
nitrogen fixing, erosion control measures, etc.). 
Particular  targeting  mechanisms  will  be  employed  to  ensure  effective  participation  of 
women,  women-headed  households  and  youth  through  specific  capacity  building 
interventions targeted  at these groups.  In all capacity building activities, Gender Action 
Learning  System  (GALS)  will  be  used  to  improve  equal  access  of  men  and  women  to 
economic opportunities, decision-making processes and share of workload. Women will be 
specifically targeted to account for at least 50% of the project beneficiaries, and women-
headed  households  and  women  in  male-headed  households  will  be  empowered  to  build 
small businesses or effectively engage in the economic activities stimulated by the project. 
Youth  will  be  particularly  targeted  as  service  providers  through  the  young  graduate 
programme  initiated  by  MINAGRI  to  provide  technical  and  managerial  assistance  to 
farmers’ cooperatives, Irrigation Water Users Organisations and Water for Livestock User 
Organisations. 
The  project  design  includes  the  promotion  of  good  nutrition  practices  that  will  raise 
awareness among communities of how to improve access to local foods and diversify family 
diets. Emphasis will be put on children, pregnant and breastfeeding mothers and people 
with HIV and AIDS who are the most vulnerable to malnutrition. 
Climate change mitigation measures  
Mitigation measures in agriculture can be categorized in three types of interventions11: 
(i) reducing the emissions intensity along the agriculture value chains, including avoided 
land  use  changes  driven  by  agriculture  and  extensive  use  of  agro-chemicals;  (ii) 
sequestering  additional  carbon  in  agriculture  systems;  (iii) reducing  overall  agricultural 
production  (e.g.  by  reducing  food  loss  and  waste)  or  shifting  away  from  high-carbon 
intensity agricultural products.  
The exact nature and extent of adaptation and mitigation measures to be adopted during 
design and implementation phases will be determined according to specific site locations 
and proposed size of irrigation scheme (i.e. below or above a command area of 100 ha), 
water  harvesting  and  small  storage  technologies  (e.g. rainwater  and  floodwater 
harvesting,  water  storage  units,  etc.).  The  Ministerial  order  no  006/03  of  30/01/2017 
drawing  up  a  list  of  swamp  lands,  their  characteristics  and  boundaries  and  determining 
modalities of their use, development and management shall be used  to  confirm project 
sites and the scope of KIIWP irrigation scheme development. In this way, the project will 
also  contribute  to  the  national  efforts  for  enhancing  environmental  protection  and 
conservation.  
The  project  will  support  mitigation  measures  in  terms  of  enhancement  of  agricultural 
productivity through climate-smart agriculture practices; restoration and management of 
pasture  land;  afforestation,  reforestation  and  forest  conservation  through  collaboration 
with  the  Ministry  of  Environment;  and  promotion  of  appropriate  innovative  and  climate 
smart  technologies  and  production  systems  (e.g.  zero  energy  cooling  chambers,  metal 
silos  or  hermetic  bags  for  storing  grains/cereals,  drying  grounds  and  improved 
warehouses, etc.). In small irrigation schemes, solar energy could be used to pump water 
to avoid the use of expensive and GHG emitting fossil fuels.   
Climate information  services are proven to be effective  options to cope with climate 
variability and climate change effects. KIIWP will thus encourage the communication and 
dissemination  of  meteorological  bulletins  tailored  to  climate  risks  and  vulnerabilities 
specific  to  selected  cash  and  food  crops  suitable  to  Kayonza  District.  The  SPIU  agro-
meteorologist will continue the work initiated within PASP and collect data on quantity of 
rainfall; length of rainy season as well as dry season; sunrise and sunset times so as to 
better organize planting, harvest and drying stages of each value chain. The bulletins will 
11 Dickie, A., Streck, C., Roe, S., Zurek, M., Haupt, F., Dolginow, A., 2014, “Strategies for Mitigating Climate change in 
Agriculture: Abridged Report.” Climate Focus and California Environmental Associates, prepared with the support of the 
Climate and land uses Alliances. 
be  distributed  to  all  relevant  project  stakeholders  at  sector,  district,  cooperative  and 
community levels.  
Incentives for good practices 
Water use efficiency and management. Water development is hence a challenge for 
livestock  production.  Inadequate  access  to  clean  water  affects  livestock  productivity, 
especially  during  the  dry  season.  Given  it  dependency  on  water,  the  agricultural  sector 
needs to manage its water demand by using more resource efficient techniques such as 
water  storage  tanks/ponds  at  household  level,  drip  irrigation  and  treadle  pumps  and 
cultivating more drought-tolerant and less water demanding crop varieties.  
Institutional analysis 
Institutional framework 
The  National  Strategy  on  Climate  Change  and  Low-Carbon  Development 
(NCCLCD) for Green Growth and Climate Resilience underlines the need to manage the 
implications of climate variability for the social, environmental and economic development 
of  the  country.  Given  that  Rwanda  seasonal  agriculture  is  vulnerable  to  climate  change 
and population pressure, the strategy recognizes that slight changes in rainfall patterns 
would  have  significant  impacts  on  crop  and  livestock  production.  Therefore,  the  Green 
Growth Plan fosters the development  of irrigation infrastructure that give farmers more 
control of the water resource, facilitate diversification of crops, contribute to efficient land 
and water usage and ensure water availability in dry areas.  
The Intended Nationally Determined Contributions are built upon the NCCLCD and 
advocate  for  a  climate  resilient  economy.  The  framework  aims  at  achieving  Category  2 
energy  security  and  low  carbon  energy  supply  that  supports  the  development  of  green 
industry and services, sustainable land-use and water resource management, appropriate 
urban development as well as biodiversity and ecosystem services. The development of 
irrigation  infrastructure  and  other  water  efficient  technologies  will  contribute  to  both 
sustainable intensification of agriculture and integrated water resources management and 
planning, which are the pillar for enhancing food security and biodiversity and ecosystem 
conservation and preservation.  
The National Forest Policy intends to make the forestry sector one of the bedrocks of 
economy and national ecological balance for  sustainable benefits to all segments of the 
society. The policy  purposes  at (i) contributing to sustainable land use through soil, water 
and biodiversity conservation, and tree planting through the sustainable management of 
forests  and  trees;  (ii)  strengthening    the  participation  of  communities  and  other 
stakeholders in forest management to conserve water catchment areas, forest biodiversity 
and  ensure  sustainability  of  the  forest  sector;  (iii)  promoting  farm  forestry  to  produce 
timber, wood fuel and to supply wood and non-wood forest products; (iv) promoting forest 
extension  to  enable  farmers  and  other  forest  stakeholders  to  benefit  from  forest 
management approaches and technologies. These objectives will be reflected in the project 
activities. 
Given  its  mandate  that  focuses  solely  on  agricultural  development,  the  Ministry  of 
Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) recommended to liaise with the Ministry of 
Environment and discuss further on the potential collaboration with regard to the planned 
reforestation/afforestation activities. Indeed, for the Ministry of Environment has launched 
a special planting programme in the Eastern province. The region was selected because it 
is  the  least  afforested  in  the  country  and  presents  high  rate  of  population  growth, 
deforestation  and  associated  land  degradation.  The  programme  aims  at  (i)  increasing 
forest  cover  in  the  eastern  province,  (ii)  increasing  wood  production  to  meet  farmers 
demand, (iii) sustainable forest and land management and increasing trees  on farm for 
improved soil productivity environment protection.   
The programme will be implemented by the district authorities with the support of Rwanda 
Water and Forest Authority (RWAFA) and local communities. It is envisaged that the special 
planting  programme  will  include  KIIWP  project  areas  and  the  implementation 
arrangements will be further confirmed during the project design phase.  
In  2015,  the  Ministry  of  Disaster  management  and  refugees  affairs  elaborated  the 
National Contingency Plan for Drought that aims at minimizing drought impacts by 
improving  agency  coordination;  enhancing  monitoring  and  early  warning  capabilities, 
water shortage impact assessments and preparations, response, and recovery programs. 
The crucial objective of the drought response system is to promote early mitigation efforts 
that reduce the time that elapses between the drought early warning message and the 
active response at the country level.  
The phase 4 of the Strategic Plan for Agricultural Transformation (PSTA 4) outlines 
the priority public investments in agriculture and estimates required public resources for 
the  agricultural  sector  for  the  period  2018/2024.  As  changes  in  weather  and  climate 
patterns  are  becoming  more  acute,  PSTA  4  seeks  to  build  resilience  through  on-farm 
measures  and  enabling  actions  to  increase  productivity.  Maintaining  and  promoting 
farmers’ practice of mixing crop varieties mitigates certain risks, including the spread of 
pest and diseases as well as ensuring dietary diversity. PSTA 4 emphasises alternative land 
management  to  complement  terracing  with  comprehensive  climate  smart  soil  and 
integrated watershed management. PSTA 4 also encourages better weather and climate 
information and early warning and seeks to ensure all investments are climate smart.  
Capacity building 
The KIIWP project will focus on building the capacity of the local population in the following 
realms: 
i. 
Land  husbandry  and  water  conservation  practices  which  consist  of  a 
holistic  and  comprehensive  approach  tailored  to  local  conditions  in  order  to 
protect natural base resources and enhance the productive capacity of land and 
soil.    The  benefits  are  higher  yields  and  improved  vegetative  cover,  reduced 
raindrop  impact  and  runoff,  improved  soil  composition  and  fertility,  and 
enhanced farm livelihoods.  
ii.  Animal husbandry and climate smart livestock practices will encourage 
the potential of the livestock sector to mitigate its environmental impacts while 
increasing  energy  efficiency  and  enhancing  rural  livelihoods.  This  approach 
aims  at  conserving  natural  resources,  raising  productivity,  increasing  animal 
productivity and optimizing the use of resources.  
iii.  Climate 
information  service  package  will 
include  multi-disciplinary 
workshops  on  seasonal  forecasts  in  order  to  assist  small  scale  farmers  in 
understanding  weather  information,  climate  risk  management  along  their 
respective value chains and related agro-advisory services.  Consequently, the 
workshop  participants  will  receive  daily  weather  information  considered  as 
generally  valuable  in  helping  plan  farming  operations,  particularly  when  to 
plant, when to harvest and good drying days.  
Additional funding 
Given  the  project  focus  on  building  resilience  in  the  drought  prone  sectors  of  Kayonza 
District, MINAGRI has suggested to leverage additional climate financing to further support 
adaptation and mitigation measures, especially in terms of green growth of the agricultural 
sector,  expansion  of  multi-purposes  water  infrastructures,  the  promotion  of  low  carbon 
and  energy  saving  solutions  and  climate-smart  technologies  (solar  panels,  climate 
resilience building, mechanized equipment, etc.).  
Monitoring and Evaluation 
A participatory M&E system will be developed and poverty and gender studies will monitor 
effectiveness  and  relevance  of  KIIWP  targeting  mechanism.  Logframe  and  results 
framework  include  indicators  that  reflect  the  target  groups.  Data  will  be  sex-  and  age-
disaggregated where appropriate. 
The monitoring and evaluation of environmental indicators will be further refined on the 
basis of the finding of the ESMF to be conducted during project design phase.  The ESMF 
shall include feasible and cost-effective measures to maximise opportunities and prevent 
or  reduce  significant  negative  impacts  in  accordance  with  the  mitigation  hierarchy.  The 
study  will  estimate  the  impacts  and  costs  of  those  measures,  and  the  institutional  and 
training requirements to implement them. The below table provides preliminary guidance 
on  key  parameters  to  assess  and  monitor  during  project  inception  and  implementation 
phases. 
Table 2: Preliminary Environmental Management Plan 
Parameter 
Activity 
Performance 
indicator  
Baseline data 
Agro-chemicals 
released into soil, 
ground water, 
rivers and lakes 
Herd 
mismanagement 
causes damages to 
vegetation cover 
and soil structure 
Soil erosion  
Monitor water quality 
at given sample sites 
along drainage 
network, at collection 
pond, and point of 
discharge to river 
Integrated 
crop/livestock 
systems; 
management and 
recycling of livestock 
manure as organic 
nutrients for restoring 
soil fertility; and (vii) 
range restoration and 
enhancement. 
Monitor erosion 
Monitor efficiency of 
erosion control 
measures 
pH, salinity, EC, 
suspended solids, 
nitrates, phosphates, 
POPs, heavy metals 
concentrations in 
river 
water 
artificial barriers; 
livestock ownership 
patterns, 
land/population 
ratios; animal 
performances, 
feeding systems, 
forage production, 
quality of carcasses 
soil erosion control 
measures such as 
reforestation, 
reseeding of 
grasses, land 
preparation, 
terracing, etc. 
Monitor quality of 
soil 
for nutrient depletion 
and loss in structure 
Baseline sampling  
Hydro-geological 
survey done 
during ESMF 
Responsibility 
during project 
implementation  
Project 
Implementation 
Unit 
Monitoring means 
d) = design 
(o) = operation 
(d) baseline 
Sampling 
(d) hydro-geological 
survey at project inception  
 (o) test results 
baseline sampling   Project 
Implementation 
Unit 
(d) baseline 
sampling 
 (o)  
Recommended 
frequency of 
monitoring  
d) once to set 
benchmark 
(o) 2 samples 
per year 
(dry/rainy 
season) 
(d) once to set 
benchmark  
(o) MTR and 
completion  
Baseline sampling   Project 
Implementation 
Unit 
baseline sampling 
Project 
Implementation 
Unit 
(o) baseline sampling 
(o) hydro-geological 
survey at project inception  
(o) site visits by project 
staff 
 (o) for 
vulnerable sites, 
monthly 
in dry season, 
weekly during 
rainy season 
(o) baseline sampling 
(o) hydro-geological 
survey at project inception 
and completion  
(o) site visits by project 
staff 
 (o) for 
vulnerable sites,  
monthly 
in dry season, 
weekly during 
rainy season 
Further information required to complete screening, if any 
As  part  of  the  KIIWP  design  process,  IFAD  and  MINAGRI  will  hire  an  independent 
consultant  to  develop  an  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Framework  (ESMF)  to 
examine the risks and impacts of water abstraction from the lakes,  rivers and  streams, 
development of livestock valley dams and irrigation schemes (with a command area below 
or  above  100  ha).  The  study  will  analyse  any  potential  environmental  and  social 
vulnerabilities  of  the  identified  project  area.  The  ESMF  report  will  provide  mitigation 
measures  to  reduce  and/or  offset  adverse  risks  and  impacts,  and  estimate  the  costs  of 
such  measures.  In  addition,  in  consideration  of  future  potential  water  imbalance  in  the 
Akagera  catchment  area,  it  is  recommended  to  carry  out  hydrogeological  survey  of  the 
hydrological network in Kayonza District.  
Stakeholder consultations 
A stakeholder meeting was organised during the first design mission. The audience was 
composed of representatives of the civil society, farmer’s organisations, local authorities, 
private sector and Rwanda Agricultural Board. Through group discussions, the participants 
reviewed project objectives, approach and activities. The participants emphasize the need 
to  enhance  soil  erosion  control  measures,  to  increase  water  access  at  household  level, 
promote reforestation initiatives, feeder road construction and rehabilitation.  
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase I
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Mission Dates:
23 April-04 May 2018
Document Date:
31/03/2020
Project No.
2000002229
Report No.
5007-RW
Loan ID
2000002900
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 6:  First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
Kayonza  Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project (KIIMP)18 Month (6-Quarters) Work Plan and BudgetComponent 1: Strengthening resilience to droughts with CSASub-Component 1.1:Catchment ProtectionQ1Q2Q3Q4Q5Q61Staff recruitmentSPIUProcureServiceprovidertotaketheleadinimplementation of the land husbandry activities. SPIUSno1500 000500 000           Procure /provide lime & organic manure SPIUGno150 00050 000            2Procureserviceprovider,forfarmlevelrainwaterharvesting technologies.SPIUSno13 0003 000              3Implementation of Land husbandry activities SPIUHa4203 0001 260 000        4constructionoffarmlevelrainwaterharvestingstructuresSPIUWNo905 000450 000           56Sub-total for 1..1.1 Phase12 263 000   TotalUnit Price USD  Total USD Activity No.Activity per component &  sub-componentImplementing AgencyIFAD CatUnit18 Months Plan Period: Oct 2019-March 2021 
Impl. 
Agency 
SPIU 
SPIU 
SPIU 
SPIU 
Activity 
No. 
Activity per component &  sub-
component 
Staff recruitment 
Recruitment of service provider for 
sub catchment mapping 
Formation and capacity building of 
District & Scheme Steering committee 
Formation&strengthening of 
subcatchment committees (10)* 
Mapping waterseds, production of 
sub-catchement management plans  
Formation&strengthening of  livestock 
water users organisations (35) 
Sub-total for 1.3 KIIWP1 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
IFAD 
Cat 
Unit 
18 Months Plan Period: Oct 2019-March 2021 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Q5 
Q6 
Tot 
Unit 
Price 
USD  
Total USD  
S 
no 
no 
no 
no 
60000 
4 
15 000 
60000 
10 
3 000 
30000 
10 
6 000 
60000 
35 
3 000 
105000 
255 000  
Kayonza  Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project (KIIMP)18 Month (6-Quarters) Work Plan and BudgetComponent 1: Strengthening resilience to droughts with CSAQ1Q2Q3Q4Q5Q61Recruitment of Staff ( Irrigation Specialist ,Irrigation Engineer, Irrigation Technician, )SPIU2Prepare terms of reference and contract SP for hydro-geological studies and supervision of drilling and eqquiping boreholes3Prepare terms of reference and contract SP for design and supervision of constraction of valley tanks4Preparing of Tender documents & tender for drilling and eqquiping 20 Bore Holes SPIU5Preparing of Tender documents & tend for Valley 15 tanks  Works6Drilling and eqquiping of  20 Bore holes SPIUWno1020 000200 0007Supervision  of  20 Bore holes  worksSPIUSno110 00010 0008Implementation of 10Valley TanksSPIUWno10200 0002 000 0009Supervsion of 1Valley Tanks worksSPIUSno150 00050 000Total Expenditure for the plan period2 260 000UnitUnit Price USD Total USD18 Months Plan Period: Oct 2019-March 2021Activity No.Activity per component &  sub-componentImplementing AgencyIFAD CatTotal 
Kayonza  Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project (KIIMP)18 Month (6-Quarters) Work Plan and BudgetComponent 1: Strengthening resilience to droughts with CSA1.2 Irrigation Development1.2.1: Feasiblity Studies&ESIAsQ1Q2Q3Q4Q5Q61Staff Recruitment SPIU2Prepare TORs for Feasibility Studies & ESIAs3Procure Service Providers for the feasibility Studies and ESIAs4Undertake feasibility study of Kabare Irrigation Scheme (600ha)SPIUS800                    600480 000                  5Undertake Feasibility Study & Design Kanyeganyege Irrigation Scheme (150ha)SPIUS800                    150120 000                  6Undertake Feasibility Study & DesignGishyanda Irrigation Scheme (125haSPIUS800                    125100 000                  7Feasibility studies & Design: Pipeline projects for 5,000haSPIUS800                    5 0004 000 000               8Full ESIA for Kabare Irrigation SchemeSPIUS150 000            1150 000                  9Full ESIA for Kanyeganyege Irrigation SchemeSPIUS150 000            1150 000                  Full ESIA for Gishyanda Irrigation SchemeSPIUS150 000            1150 000                  Full ESIAs: Pipeline projectsSPIUS1 500 000         11 500 000               sub-total 1.2.1 Phase 16 650 000       Activity No.Activity per component &  sub-componentSub-ActivityImplementing AgencyIFAD CatTotal USDUnit18 Months Plan Period: Oct 2019-March 2021TotalUnit Price USD 
Kayonza  Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project (KIIMP)18 Month (6-Quarters) Work Plan and BudgetComponent 1: Strengthening resilience to droughts with CSASub-Component 1.3: Infrastructure Management InstitutionsQ1Q2Q3Q4Q5Q61Staff recruitmentSPIURecruitment of service provider for sub catchment mappingSno60000Formation and capacity building of District & Scheme Steering committee415 000600002Formation&strengthening of subcatchment committees (10)*SPIUno103 000300003Mapping waterseds, production of sub-catchement management plans SPIUno106 000600004Formation&strengthening of  livestock water users organisations (35)SPIUno353 00010500056Sub-total for 1.3 Phase1255 000  Total USD 18 Months Plan Period: Oct 2019-March 2021TotalUnit Price USD Activity No.Activity per component &  sub-componentImplementing AgencyIFAD CatUnit 
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase I
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Mission Dates:
23 April-04 May 2018
Document Date:
31/03/2020
Project No.
2000002229
Report No.
5007-RW
Loan ID
2000002900
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 7:  Procurement Plan for first 18 months 
DescriptionComponent RefPlanned & Actual datesTotal Cost in US$Procurement MethodReceive approved SpecsWrite RFB/RFQApprovalLaunch/Invite BiddersReceive BidsEvaluate BidsApprovalSign Contract1constructionoffarmlevelrainwaterharvestingstructuresPlanned                  450 000 National Competitice Bidding15/01/202020/01/202020/01/202030/01/202028/02/202003/07/202003/10/202017/03/2020Actual 2Drilling and eqquiping of  20 Bore holes Planned                  200 000 National Competitice Bidding20/01/202025/01/202025/01/202002/10/202003/11/202018/3/202021/3/202025/03/2020Actual3Implementation of 10Valley TanksPlanned               2 000 000  International competitive bidding 15/01/202020/01/202020/01/202030/01/202028/02/202003/07/202003/10/202017/03/2020ActualTOTAL WORKS               2 650 000 KIIWP 18-MONTH (OCTOBER 2019-MARCH 2021) PROCUREMENT PLAN DescriptionComponent RefPlanned & Actual datesTotal Cost in US$Procurement MethodReceive approved SpecsBidding Document Preparation ApprovalBid Invitation date/PublicationReceive Bids/Bids OpeningEvaluate BidsApprovalSign Contract1Procure /provide lime & organic manure Planned50 000National Competitice Bidding25/10/201911/04/201911/04/201911/06/201912/06/201912/10/201915/12/201915/01/2020Actual TOTAL  GOODS                    50 000 KIIMP ANNUAL PROCUREMENT PLAN  
DescriptionComponent RefPlan vs ActualTotal Cost in US$Procurement MethodReceive approved TORREOI IssueReceive EOIsEvaluate EOIsApprovalRFP PrepApprovalRFP IssueReceive ProposalsEval startEval EndSubmit TechEval ReportApprovalOpen FinProsEvaluate FinProsSubmit Combined ReportApprovalNegotiationsContract Signature1ProcureServiceprovidertotaketheleadinimplementationofthelandhusbandry activities. Planned          500 000 National Competitice Bidding/QCBS02/10/202003/08/202004/09/202016/04/202019/4/202030/04/202030/04/202005/02/202030/5/202006/02/202006/11/202006/11/202006/11/202025/6/202028/6/202028/6/202029/6/202015/7/202029/7/2020Actual date2Procureserviceprovider,forfarmlevelrainwater harvesting technologies.Planned                3 000 National Competitice Bidding/QCBS02/10/202003/08/202004/09/202016/04/202019/4/202030/04/202030/04/202005/02/202030/5/202006/12/202021/6/202021/6/202021/6/202007/05/202007/08/202007/08/202007/09/202025/7/202008/08/2020Actual date02/10/202003/08/202004/09/202016/04/202019/4/202030/04/202030/04/202005/02/202030/5/202006/02/202006/11/202006/11/202006/11/202025/6/202028/6/202028/6/202029/6/202015/7/202029/7/20203Undertake Feasibility Study & Design Kanyeganyege Irrigation Scheme (150ha)Planned            120 000 National Competitice Bidding/QCBS20/6/201907/08/201908/09/201916/8/201919/8/201930/8/201930/8/201909/02/201930/9/201910/02/201910/11/201910/11/201910/11/201925/10/201928/10/201928/10/201929/10/201913/11/201922/11/2019Actual date02/10/202003/08/202004/09/202016/04/202019/4/202030/04/202030/04/202005/02/202030/5/202006/02/202006/11/202006/11/202006/11/202025/6/202028/6/202028/6/202029/6/202015/7/202029/7/20204Undertake Feasibility Study & DesignGishyanda Irrigation Scheme (125haPlanned            100 000 National Competitice Bidding/QCBS01/07/202020/01/202021/02/202028/02/202028/02/202003/10/202003/10/202003/10/202004/10/202013/04/202017/04/202017/04/202020/04/202005/01/202005/08/202005/08/202005/08/202018/05/202022/05/2020Actual date5Supervision  of  20 Bore holes  worksPlanned              10 000 National Competitice Bidding/QCBS01/07/202020/01/202021/02/202028/02/202028/02/202003/10/202003/10/202003/10/202004/10/202013/04/202017/04/202017/04/202020/04/202005/01/202005/08/202005/08/202005/08/202018/05/202022/05/2020Actual date6Supervsion of 1Valley Tanks worksPlanned              50 000 National Competitice Bidding/QCBS17/1/202030/01/202030/02/202003/08/202003/08/202020/3/202020/3/202020/3/202020/4/202023/04/202027/04/202030/04/202030/04/202005/11/202018/5/202018/5/202018/5/202028/05/202006/02/2020Actual date7Undertake feasibility study of Kabare Irrigation Scheme (600ha)Planned            480 000 International Competitice Bidding/QCBS20/1/202003/05/202030/02/202020/3/202023/3/202004/03/202004/03/202004/06/202004/08/202004/12/202022/04/202022/04/202029/04/202020/5/202027/5/202027/5/202006/01/202006/08/202028/6/2020Actual date20/1/202003/05/202030/02/202020/3/202023/3/202004/03/202004/03/202004/06/202004/08/202004/12/202022/04/202022/04/202029/04/202020/5/202027/5/202027/5/202006/01/202006/08/202028/6/20208Full ESIA for Kabare Irrigation SchemePlanned            150 000 National Competitice Bidding/QCBS20/1/202002/05/202030/02/202020/3/202023/3/202004/03/202004/03/202004/06/202004/08/202004/12/202022/04/202022/04/202029/04/202020/5/202027/5/202027/5/202006/01/202006/08/202028/6/2020Actual date9 Feasiblity Studies and Detailed  design for pipeline project 5,000haPlanned          4 000 000 International Competitice Bidding/QCBS20/1/202003/05/202030/02/202020/3/202023/3/202004/03/202004/03/202004/06/202004/08/202004/12/202022/04/202022/04/202029/04/202020/5/202027/5/202027/5/202006/01/202006/08/202028/6/2020Actual date10Environemental Social  Impact Assessment (ESIA) for pipeline projects 5,000haPlanned          1 500 000 International Competitice Bidding/QCBS20/1/202003/05/202030/02/202020/3/202023/3/202004/03/202004/03/202004/06/202004/08/202004/12/202022/04/202022/04/202029/04/202020/5/202027/5/202027/5/202006/01/202006/08/202028/6/2020Actual dateFull ESIA for Kanyeganyege Irrigation SchemePlanned            150 000 National Competitice Bidding/QCBS20/1/202002/05/202030/02/202020/3/202023/3/202004/03/202004/03/202004/06/202004/08/202004/12/202022/04/202022/04/202029/04/202020/5/202027/5/202027/5/202006/01/202006/08/202028/6/2020Actual dateFull ESIA for Gishyanda Irrigation SchemePlanned            150 000 National Competitice Bidding/QCBS01/07/202020/01/202021/02/202028/02/202028/02/202003/10/202003/10/202003/10/202004/10/202013/04/202017/04/202017/04/202020/04/202005/01/202005/08/202005/08/202005/08/202018/05/202022/05/2020Actual dateFull ESIAs: Pipeline projectsPlanned          1 500 000 International Competitice Bidding/QCBS20/1/202003/05/202030/02/202020/3/202023/3/202004/03/202004/03/202004/06/202004/08/202004/12/202022/04/202022/04/202029/04/202020/5/202027/5/202027/5/202006/01/202006/08/202028/6/2020Actual dateRecruitment of service provider for sub catchment mappingPlanned              50 000 National Competitice Bidding/QCBS01/07/202020/01/202021/02/202028/02/202028/02/202003/10/202003/10/202003/10/202004/10/202013/04/202017/04/202017/04/202020/04/202005/01/202005/08/202005/08/202005/08/202018/05/202022/05/2020Actual dateTOTAL SERVICES          8 763 000 Legend: N.A.:      Not ApplicableQCBS:   Quality Cost Based KIIWP 18 MONTH (OCT 2019-MARCH 2021) PROCUREMENT PLAN   
Procurement Plan Version:Column1PlannedActualGoods50 000                      Works2 650 000                 Services8 763 000                 Totals11 463 000               Project: Kayonza  Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project (KIIMP) 
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase I
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Mission Dates:
23 April-04 May 2018
Document Date:
31/03/2020
Project No.
2000002229
Report No.
5007-RW
Loan ID
2000002900
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 1 (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project – Phase 1 
(KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 1 (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Table of Contents 
1 
Introduction 
1.1  Overview 
1.2  The Components of the KIIWP (Phases 1 and 2) 
1.3  KIIWP Phasing 
1.4  Targeting strategy 
2  Component 1: Strengthening resilience to droughts 
2.1  Sub-component 1.1: Catchment Rehabilitation & Protection 
2.2  Water for Livestock and Domestic Purposes 
2.3  Sub-component 1.2: Irrigation Development 
2.4  Sub-Component 1.3: Infrastructure Management Institutions 
3  Component 3: Institutional Development and Project Coordination 
3.1  Sub-component 3.1: Support to policy dialogue & enabling 
institutional environment 
3.2  Sub-component 3.2: Project coordination 
4 
5 
Financial management Arrangements 
Procurement Arrangements for KIIWP 1 
5.1  Procurement thresholds and prior-review mechanism 
6  Draft Job Descriptions 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
4 
4 
7 
10 
13 
16 
16 
16 
18 
22 
22 
24 
i 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
1 
Introduction 
1.1  Overview  
1. 
2. 
This  draft  Project  Implementation  Manual  (PIM)  provides  guidelines  for  the 
implementation of the  KIIWP 1. The PIM elaborates the procedures and processes 
that are to be followed in the implementation of activities in KIIWP 1. The PIM is an 
annex  of  the  Project  Design  Report  (PDR)  and  thus  processes  and  procedures 
presented in this document are to be read in conjunction with the relevant sections 
of the main PDR. 
The  process  presented  here  are  a  framework  that  is  meant  to  assist  the  KIIWP 
implementation staff including those from RAB and the District in thinking through 
the processes for the different sub-components. It is proposed that at startup, the 
recruited staff be facilitated to review the activities and processes presented herein. 
The  review  would  update,  refine  and  firm  up  the  as  activities  and  processes 
necessary.  The  value  in  undertaking  such  a  review  would  be  that  through  the 
process, the implementing staff would “own” the PIM. Such ownership would ensure 
that the staff would follow the PIM during the implementation of activities.  
1.2  The Components of the KIIWP (Phases 1) 
3. 
The Project  comprises of the following components and Sub-components:  
  Component A: Strengthening Resilience to Drought 
o  Sub-component A.1: Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection. 
o  Sub-component A.2: Irrigation Development. 
o  Sub-component A.3: Infrastructure management institutions. 
o  Sub-componentA1.4:  Enhancing  climate  smart  agriculture  practices  and 
technologies.  
o  Sub-component A.5: Environmental Management Plans. 
  Component B: Institutional development and project coordination 
o  Sub-component B.1: Policy and institutional development. 
o  Sub-component B.2: Project coordination. 
1.3  KIIWP Phasing 
4.  While entire project is as indicated above, it will be implemented in two phases: a 
2.5-year  preparatory  phase  (KIIWP  1);  and,  the  main  3.5-year  investment  phase 
(KIIWP  2).  KIIWP  1  will  cover  the  much  needed  catchment  rehabilitation  and 
protection in rainfed areas. It will put in place key and urgent environmental, physical 
and institutional measures and conduct feasibility studies and impact assessments 
in readiness for irrigation and farm business development foreseen in KIIWP 2. 
5. 
Since the actual interventions that will be implemented in KIIWP2 will be established 
after  the  feasibility  studies  and  impact  assessments,  this  PIM  presents  the 
procedures and processes to be followed in KIIWP 1 only. After the establishment of 
the actual investments for KIIWP 2, the PIM will be updated to include the procedures 
and processes for these investments.  
6. 
The interventions to be implemented in KIIWP 1 will be in components  A and B as 
follows:  
  Under component A, full implementation will be in sub-component A.1: Catchment 
Infrastructure 
sub-component  1.3: 
Rehabilitation  and  Protection  and 
management institutions and implementation of ESMPs. 
1 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
  Only a few preparatory activities are to be implemented in sub-component A.2: 
Irrigation  Development.  These  include  the  feasibility  studies  and  impact 
assessments studies that will inform the selection of the final irrigation schemes 
that will be implemented in KIIWP 2. 
1.4  Targeting strategy 
7. 
Target  group.  Based  on  the  national  wealth  ranking  system  (Ubudehe),  and 
consistent  with  the  targeting  strategy  laid  out  in  the  RB-COSOP,  the  direct  target 
group  of  KIIWP  1  is  7,167  poor  and  food  insecure  rural  households,  equivalent  to 
about 32,250 people who are in the Ubudehe categories 1, 2 and 3. 
8. 
Targeting mechanisms:  
a) Geographical targeting. The project will focus on the 8 drought-prone sectors of 
Kayonza  district.  The  selection  of  specific  sites  will  be  based  on  the  level  of 
degradation,  topography  and  water  availability  and  viability  of  the  site  for 
development.  
b) Self-targeting. The goods and services provided by the project will respond to the 
priorities, financial/labour capacities and livelihood strategies of the target groups. 
c)  Direct targeting. The poorest households, young farm workers and women (from 
category  1)  will  be  targeted  directly  by  the  project,  involving  the  Umudugudu 
committee  at  village  level  to  ensure  transparent  and  participative  methods  of 
household selection, for example for labour for construction activities. Women and 
youth  will  be  specifically  targeted  to  account  for  at  least  50%  and  30%  of 
beneficiaries,  respectively.  Women-headed  households  are  also  expected  to 
represent 30% of households reached. Youth will be targeted as both beneficiaries 
and service providers. It is also expected that the management committees will 
comprise 40% women and 25% youth. 
d) Empowering  measures.  The  training  of  management  committees  will  increase 
awareness of gender issues in infrastructure management, as well as the role of 
youth.  Young  professional  organisations,  such  as  the  Rwanda  Youth  in 
Agribusiness Forum (RYAF), and the Horticulture in Reality Cooperative (HoReCo) 
have  emerged  in  Rwanda,  mainly  composed  of  young  graduates  in  Agriculture, 
Animal  Production,  Irrigation,  Food  Dairy  technologies  and  Agricultural 
Mechanisation.  Most  of  them  have  been  trained  in  Israel  for  1  year  after 
completing their university courses in Rwanda. RYAF and HoReCo have recently 
signed MoUs with MINAGRI to encourage the involvement of young professionals 
in  implementing  projects  that  support  agricultural  transformation.  These  youth 
will  be  particularly  targeted  as  service  providers  to  provide  technical  and 
managerial assistance to management committees. 
e)  Procedural  measures.  Attention  will  be  given  to  costs/beneficiary  contributions, 
timing  and  administrative  procedures  required  for  effective  participation  of  the 
various  target  groups.  To  ensure  the  participation  of  women,  attention  to  the 
location and timing of various project activities may increase their opportunity to 
participate. 
f)  Operational  measures  and  monitoring.  A  Gender,  Targeting  and  Community 
Mobilisation  Officer  has  been  appointed  in  the  MINAGRI  Single  Project 
Implementation Unit (SPIU) to coordinate and oversee the implementation of the 
targeting and gender strategies. In addition, KIIWP 1 project staff will include an 
M&E  Officer  that  is  also  in  charge  of  gender  and  youth.  Additional  operational 
measures are explained under component 3. 
Gender strategy 
9. 
The Agriculture Gender Strategy prepared by MINAGRI in 2010 sets clear steps to 
ensure  that  the  programmes  and  activities  targeting  the  agricultural  sector  set  a 
2 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
strong foundation for equal rights and equal opportunities for both women and men 
in rural development.  The Kayonza District gender  strategy also aims to “enhance 
equity and equality (men and women participation) in all value chains of agricultural 
activities:  including  farming,  harvesting  and  processing,  marketing  and  income 
utilisation".  In  response,  the  KIIWP  1  gender  strategy  aims  to  promote  gender 
equality  and  women's  empowerment  through  various  mainstreaming  measures 
(mentioned above, under targeting) and by pursuing the following objectives: 
  Expand  women's  economic  empowerment  through  access  to  and  control  over 
water for livestock purposes and rehabilitated rainfed farmland.  
  Strengthen  women's  decision-making  role 
in  the  community  and  their 
representation  in  membership  and  leadership  of  sub-catchment  management 
committees,  water  for  livestock  user  organizations  and  scheme  and  district 
steering committees. 
  Achieve a reduced workload and an improved equitable workload balance between 
women and men, girls and boys by improving women's access to domestic water 
supply. 
3 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
2  Component A: Strengthening resilience to droughts  
10.  This  component  comprises  of  the  first  interventions  to  be  implemented  aimed  at 
improving  the  resilience  of  smallholder  farmers  to  droughts  and  effects  of  climate 
change  through  increased  levels  of  production  and  productivity.  The  interventions 
include catchment rehabilitation and development of infrastructure that will improve 
water  supply  for  livestock  and  domestic  consumption.  Because  of  the  nature  of 
activities to be implemented, the activities under this component will be implemented 
in a participatory manner. 
2.1  Sub-component A.1: Catchment Rehabilitation & Protection  
11.  This  sub-component  will  support  the  implementation  of  participatory  and 
comprehensive land husbandry practices in a sub-catchment setting. It will support 
investments in infrastructure to rehabilitate and protect the degraded farmlands as 
well as considerably reduce the runoff from the catchments. The sub-component will 
also support water for livestock and domestic water purposes. The interventions in 
catchment protection and rehabilitation will be selected with a view to reducing the 
volume and velocity of runoff and allow for rainwater to infiltrate in the soil.  This will 
be  combined  with  land  husbandry  practices  geared  towards  increasing  vegetative 
cover in the farms which will increase the soil fertility and further reduce the erosive 
force of rainfall.   
12.  The  sub-component  is  designed  to  improve  hillside  agricultural  management  to 
protect  against  soil  erosion  and  to  enhance  sustained  crop  productivity  and 
ecosystem  conservation.  Activities  to  be  implemented  include  soil  conservation 
measures and development of infrastructure appropriate to differing slope categories 
(e.g. bunding, progressive and radical terracing, depending on the slope category). 
Further, given the acidity and exhaustion of Rwandan soils, additional activities such 
as liming, green manuring and composting may be necessary. Other activities in this 
sub-component  include  the  construction  of  farm  level  rainwater  harvesting 
technologies.  The  activities  described  will  benefit  both  female  and  male-headed 
farming  households  in  the  target  area.  Beneficiaries,  led  by  the  sub-catchment 
committees, will participate in the selection of appropriate practices and technologies 
as well as the actual implementation of activities. 
13. 
Implementation of activities in this subcomponent will be driven by the following key 
staff who the SPIU will hire at the start of implementation: Land Husbandry Specialist 
(LHS);  District  Watershed  management  field  officers  (DWMO);  Land  husbandry 
supervising engineers when required and the Irrigation Engineer (IE) for rainwater 
harvesting.  The  SPIU  will  contract  the  following  service  providers  (SP)  to  support 
implementation of activities under this subcomponent: 
(a)  A  service  provider  to  take  the  lead  in implementation  of  the  land  husbandry 
activities. 
(b)  A service provider, with proven experience in farm level rainwater  harvesting 
technologies. 
14.  The  SPs  under  the  supervision  of  the    SPIU  staff  will  lead  the  process  of 
implementation of the activities as follows:  
No. 
1 
2 
Activity 
Responsibility 
(a)  Land Husbandry 
Preparation  of land husbandry guidelines that will be 
applicable for each of the agro climatic zones 
Mobilization  of  the  local  authorities,  opinion  leaders, 
farmers, through contacts and awareness meetings 
LHS 
SP/LHS/ DWMO 
4 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Activity 
Responsibility 
No. 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
and 
for  the 
grass/legume 
land  husbandry 
Refresher  course 
field 
technicians  and  local  leaders  of  on  land  husbandry 
technologies and their implementation 
Carry out an assessment and prioritize the areas that 
will require to be rehabilitated  
Production  a  detailed  and  farmer-friendly  manual  on 
trees 
trees/shrub, 
management  as  well  as  a  selection  of  crops  suitable 
for the zone including the crop husbandry.  
Training  the  communities 
technologies 
maintenance 
Provision of lime and organic manure 
Establishing 
seed 
multiplication  and  fruits  nurseries  with  seed  and 
equipment  stores  as  recommended  at  least  one  per 
project site  
Establishing nurseries for other agro forestry trees 
land  husbandry 
implementation,  management  and 
grass/legume 
tree/shrub, 
  on 
fruit 
9 
10  Operation  and  maintenance  of 
land  husbandry 
11 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
infrastructure  
Continuous monitoring of operation, maintenance and 
sustainability of land husbandry infrastructures 
(b)  Farm Level Rainwater Harvesting 
Mobilization  of  the  local  authorities,  opinion  leaders, 
farmers, through contacts and awareness meetings 
Develop criteria of farmers to be supported with farm 
ponds 
Identification of the farmers that will be supported to 
implement the farm ponds in target sectors and local 
artisans to be trained in the technology 
Design of rainwater harvesting systems 
Training  artisans  on 
technology including: 
  construction of the ponds 
  the  rainwater  harvesting  system  (from  the  farm 
runoff  as  well  as  from  roofs  in  the  homestead 
including gutter installation); 
rainwater  harvesting 
the 
SP 
SP/LHS/Farmers 
DWMO 
SP/DWMO 
SP 
SP  
Community Approach 
community 
Sub-catchment 
Committees 
SP/LHS/ DWMO 
LHS/IE/District 
agriculture 
officer,(DAO) 
LHS/IE/DAO/Farmers, 
SP 
SP 
  connection to farm ponds;  
  the system for pumping water from the pond to the 
elevated storage tank;  
  Gravity-fed system to the drip system on the farm; 
and, 
  protection  of  the  pond  (fencing  and  shade  net 
roofing) 
6 
Providing the materials for pond construction (dam 
liner, roofing metallic structure, roofing net, shading, 
drip kit, pump and tanks 
SP 
6a 
Preparation of ESMPs 
7 
8 
9 
Construction of farm ponds in the various farms 
Supervision of the construction works 
Operations and maintenance 
SP/Artisans/Farmers 
Irrigation Engineer 
Farmers 
5 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
No. 
10 
Continuous monitoring of operation, maintenance and 
sustainability of ponds and irrigation systems 
Sub-catchment 
Committees 
Activity 
Responsibility 
15.  As  observed  in  paragraph  9  above,  the  different  slope  categories  require  different 
land husbandry measures for effective catchment protection.  The different measures 
are as follows: 
Land-husbandry Measures For The Different Slopes 
No 
1 
Slope Category 
Land-husbandry Measures 
Nearly level to strongly 
undulating (Slope 0-6%) 
Grass strips/trash lines (~1km /ha) 
Agro-forestry interventions 
2 
Gently rolling to strongly 
rolling (slope 6- 16%) 
3 
Hilly  to  steep  (slope  16  –
40%) 
intercropping with plant cover and green manuring 
Applying manure/compose at the rate of 10tons/ha 
Mulching 
Grass strips/trash lines (~1km /ha) 
Construction of soil bunds (1km/ha) (level or graded 
as per agro climatic zone 
Planting trees/shrubs along the lower side supporting 
the bunds 
intercropping and green manuring 
Applying  manure  /compost  at  10  tons/ha  and 
mulching 
Constructing Bench (radical) terraces (1.86km/ha) 
Planting trees/shrubs along the lower side supporting 
the radical terraces 
intercropping and green manuring 
liming with agricultural lime at 3 tons/ha 
Applying  manure  /compost  at  10  tons/ha  and 
mulching 
4 
5 
Very  steep  (slope  40  –
60%) 
Constructing progressive terraces (~5 km/ha) 
Intercropping and green manuring 
Extremely 
>60%) 
step 
(slope 
Constructing  micro-basins  with  tree  planting  at 
1000/ha 
Planting tree seedlings at 1000/ha 
Implementation arrangements 
16. 
Implementation  of  arrangements  for  catchment  protection  activities  would  be  as 
follows: 
  At  SPIU  level:  a  land  husbandry  expert  to  be  recruited  for  the  overall 
coordination of land husbandry activities. He /She will also be in charge of ToRs, 
land  husbandry  contracts 
preparation  of  Land  husbandry  guidelines, 
6 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
management, preparation of annual work plans and  budget as well as different 
documents as required in land husbandry. 
  At  district  level:  land  husbandry  field  officers  per  site  to  be  recruited  by 
SPIU/RAB  for  supervision  of  land  husbandry  technologies  implementation 
activities to ensure better quality of the works. 
  A catchment level (hill sides): Sub catchment committees to be established to 
participate  in  development  of  sub-catchment  plans,  including  where  land 
husbandry activities will be carried out as well as oversee the implementation of 
the activities.  
  At  command  area  level:  WUOs  who  actively  participate  in  operation  and 
maintenance of infrastructures for livestock and domestic water supply purposes. 
Land husbandry indicators 
Indicator 1 
Indicator 2 
Indicator 3 
Indicator 4 
Indicator 5 
Indicator 6 
Indicator 7 
Area protected against soil erosion in hectares 
Increase in number of water harvesting farm ponds in use 
Area developed for Irrigation in hectares 
Increase in the area covered by fruits trees 
Increased productivity in irrigated area and rain fed area 
Increase in number of water harvesting farm ponds in use 
Area developed for Irrigation in ha 
Indicator 8 
Increased productivity in irrigated area and rain fed area  
2.2  Water for Livestock and Domestic Purposes 
17.  The supply of water for livestock and domestic purposes will be improved through 
the development of valley tanks and drilling and equipping boreholes. The selection 
of  where  to  invest  in  livestock  watering  facilities  will  be  informed  by  the  need  to 
evenly  spread  the  grazing  areas  across  the  sectors  to  minimize  overgrazing. 
Selection of where the watering facilities will be constructed it to be done through 
participatory assessments in the sub-catchments. The selection of these sites will be 
part  of the development of sub-catchment plans that will be produced under sub-
component A.3.   
18.  Drilling of boreholes and construction of valley tanks are technical activities for which 
the SPIU will hire services providers as follows: 
(a)  A drilling contractor with capacity to undertake hydro-geological investigations 
and experience in drilling and equipping of the boreholes; 
(b)  A consultancy firm with experience in design and supervision of construction of 
valley tanks; and 
(c)  A contractor with experience in valley tanks construction. 
7 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Drilling and Equipping of Boreholes 
19.  Development of a borehole based water supply system entails a number of steps and 
processes.  For  each  of  the  sites  that  will  have  been  selected  as  per  paragraph  14 
above,  a  hydro-geological  study  will  first  be  carried  out.  This  study  is  meant  to 
establish  the  possibility  of  striking  ground  water  at  that  particular  site  as  well  as 
establishing an estimate of the water the borehole is likely to produce. This study is 
carried out by a qualified hydro-geological professional. It on the basis of the results 
of this study that an estimate for the costs of drilling can be established.  
20.  The  next  step  is  the  actual  drilling  of  the  borehole  which  is  undertaken  by  the 
contractor with the appropriate drilling equipment, primarily a rotary drilling rig with 
the necessary equipments. When the hole is drilled to the recommended depth and 
water  is  struck,  then  the  casings  will  be  installed  still  with  the  rig,  gravel  pack 
installed,  the  hole  developed/cleaned  and  protected.  The  drilling  equipments  are 
then demobilized and on a later date a test-pumping unit is mobilized to establish 
the yield of the borehole. The borehole yield that will be established with the pump 
testing is what will determine the size of the pump in combination with the height at 
which the storage tanks will be mounted.  
21.  The next step will be the equipping of the borehole. In KIIWP1, the boreholes will be 
equipped with solar pumping units delivering water to elevated plastic storage tanks. 
The  size  of  the  pumping  units  and  the  storage  capacity  will  be  determined  as 
observed above by the yield of each of the boreholes.  The final key activity will be 
the construction of the  cattle troughs and domestic water point and installation of 
the water delivery system. 
22.  The activities will be implemented as follows: 
A)  Consultancy Services for carrying out hydro-geological surveys and 
supervision of drilling works 
Summary of Activities for hydro-geological Investigations and drilling 
supervision 
No 
1 
2 
3 
3a 
4 
5 
Activity 
Prepare  the  Terms  of  Reference  for  the  consultancy  to 
carry  out  hydro-geological  investigations  and  supervise 
drilling works 
Carryout the tender process, up to award of the contract, 
to carry out hydro-geological investigations and supervise 
drilling works 
Carry out the out hydro-geological investigations for the 
20 sites 
Prepare ESMPs 
Prepare  tender  documents  for  the  drilling  and  equipping 
of 20 boreholes 
Supervise the drilling and equipping of the boreholes 
Responsible 
SPIU 
SPIU 
SP 
SP 
SP 
B)  Drilling and Equipping of boreholes 
Summary of Activities for Drilling and Equipping of Boreholes 
No 
1 
2 
Activity 
Carryout  the  tender  process  up  to  award  of  the 
contract to drill and equip  the 20 boreholes 
Undertake  the  drilling  of  services  for  20  boreholes 
development  by  implementing  the  activities  as 
follows: 
Responsible 
SPIU 
Contractor 
8 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
No 
Activity 
Responsible 
Drilling works 
Pumping test all the boreholes to establish the yields 
Install submersible solar powered pumps  
Construct  livestock  watering  troughs  &  domestic 
water points 
Install  Water  tanks  and  associated  plumbing 
systems. 
Train LWUO in the technical aspects of O&M of the 
infrastructure  
Implement ESMPs 
Supervise  on  daily  basis  the  all  works  related  to 
Hydro-geological  survey,  pumping  testing,  drilling 
works & equipping of the boreholes 
Oversight of the drilling and equipping of boreholes 
3 
4 
SP 
SPIU/District 
C)  Consultancy Services for Design and Supervision of Construction of the 
Valley Tanks 
23.  As  in  the  development  of  borehole  based  systems,  the  valley  tank  water  supply 
system also entails a number of steps and processes. For each of the sites that will 
have been selected as per paragraph 14 above, a site survey will first be carried out. 
This study is meant to establish, among others, the suitability of the soils for water 
storage and the possibility of capturing sufficient rainwater runoff at that particular 
site. This study is carried out by qualified soils and hydrological professionals as well 
as a land surveyor. Once the parameters are found suitable, the design of the valley 
tank can proceed. 
24.  The activities for design and supervision of the valley tanks will be as follows: 
Consultancy Services for Design and Supervision of Construction of the 
Valley Tanks 
No 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Activity 
Prepare  the  Terms  of  Reference  for  the  consultancy  to  design 
and supervise construction of 15 valley tanks 
Carryout  the  tender  process,  up  to  award  of  the  contract,  to 
design the valley tanks and prepare the bills of quantities 
Carry out the design including bills of quantity for construction 
of 15 valley tanks  
Carryout  the  tender  process  up  to  award  of  the  contract  to 
construction of  the 15 valley tanks 
Prepare ESIAs/ESMPs for site 
Preparation of the Bills of quantities 
Supervise construction of valley bottom tanks 
Responsible 
SPIU 
SPIU 
Consultant 
SPIU 
D)  Construction and Equipping of Valley Tanks 
25.  The  construction  of  the  valley  tanks  follows  the  design  by  the  consultants.  The 
construction basically entails the excavation of the storage and the construction of 
the  embankment,  and  importantly,  the  spillway.  The  size  of  the  storage  will  vary 
depending of the site conditions but on average the tanks under KIIWP1 are expected 
to  be  about  40,000  cubic  meters  on  average.  When  the  works  are  completed  the 
equipping will entail the water abstraction from the valley tank with solar pumping 
system delivering the water to elevated plastic tanks. For the valley tanks the size 
of the pumping units and the storage capacity  are  expected to be the same.  The 
9 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
final key activity will be the construction of the cattle troughs and domestic water 
point and installation of the water delivery system. 
26.  The activities will be implemented as follows: 
Summary of Activities in the Construction and Equipping of Valley Tanks 
Responsible 
SPIU 
Contractor 
No 
1 
2 
Activity 
Carryout the tender process up to award of the contract to 
construct and equip 15 Valley Tanks 
Undertaking  the  construction  services  for  construct  and 
equip 15 Valley Tanks development by implementing the 
activities as follows: 
Implement ESMPs as necessary 
Preliminary works (site installation and bush clearing) 
a. Excavation and compaction works 
b. Construction of Spillway. 
c.  Supply  and  installation  of  submersible  solar  powered 
pump 
d. Supply and installation of storage tanks 
e. Construction of watering troughs and plumbing system 
f.  Construction of fence 
g. Construction  of  security  guard  house  and  sanitation 
facilities 
h. Buffer zone around the valley tank 
i.  Train  LWUO  in  the  technical  aspects  of  O&M  of  the 
infrastructure  
3 
Onsite supervision of all valley tank works 
Consultant 
2.3  Sub-component 1.2: Irrigation Development 
27.  This sub-component is meant to strengthen the support of small-scale farmers with 
water for irrigation. The proposed irrigation infrastructure is made of two categories: 
(i) irrigation in marshlands and neighbouring hillsides which will require damming to 
harvest  enough  water  for  off-season  supplementary  irrigation;  ii)  large  pumped 
irrigation systems abstracting from either the various lakes in the district or directly 
from the Akagera River.  
28.  The  proposal  is  that  the  KIIWP  will  support  the  implementation  of  the  following 
irrigation schemes, if they are found to be viable after feasibility studies:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ndego - Kibare Irrigation Scheme (400ha). 
Ndego - Humure Irrigation Scheme (600ha). 
Ndego - Byimana Irrigation Scheme (400ha). 
Kabare irrigation infrastructure (600ha). 
Kanyeganyege Dam and irrigation infrastructure (150ha). 
Gishyanda Dam and irrigation infrastructure (125ha). 
29. 
It is only after each of these schemes has to undergone a feasibility study and ESIAs, 
and be found to be acceptable that they will be taken to the next stage which is the 
engineering design. The Government of Rwanda has provided funding to carry out 
the feasibility studies and designs for the first three schemes: Ndego – Kibare, Ndego 
- Humure and Ndego – Byimana. The activities proposed here are for the feasibility 
studies,  ESIAs  and  design  for  the  other  3  schemes  (Kabare,  Kanyeganyege,  and 
Gishyanda)  as  well  as  a  pipeline  of  bankable  projects  to  irrigate  another  5,000 
hectares.  
10 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
30.  The activities for these studies will be as follows:  
Carrying Out the Feasibility Studies 
No 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Activity 
Prepare  the  tender  documents  for  carrying  out 
the feasibility studies for Kabare, Kanyeganyege, 
and  Gishyanda  schemes  and  for  the  pipeline 
projects 
Carryout  the  tender  process  up  to  award  for 
carrying out the feasibility studies 
Carry  out  the  feasibility  Studies  for  the  3 
schemes and the pipeline projects including: 
a.  Land-Husbandry 
b. Topographic Survey 
c.  Hydrological Analysis  
d. Water-harvesting  (Dam),  Diversion  Weir, 
Intake for Pumped Systems. 
e.  Marshland 
and 
Hillside-irrigation 
infrastructures 
f.  Socio-economic analysis 
g. Economic and Financial Analysis 
Review of feasibility studies 
Supervise the consultancy as necessary 
Selection  of  viable  schemes  for  development 
under Phase 2 
Responsible 
SPIU 
SPIU 
Consultant 
Technical 
Panel/Consultants/IFAD 
SPIU/District 
SPIU/RAB 
31.  The  schemes  that  will  be  found  feasible  will  undergo  the  full  ESIA  process.  The 
process will be as follows: 
Carrying out the ESIA Studies 
No 
1 
2 
3 
Activity 
Prepare  the  tender  documents  for  carrying  out  the  ESIA 
studies 
for  Kabare,  Kanyeganyege,  and  Gishyanda 
schemes and for the pipeline projects 
undertake the tender process up to award for carrying out 
the ESIA studies 
Carry  out  the  ESIA  Studies  for  the  3  schemes  and  the 
pipeline projects including: 
1.  Contribute to the environmental and social design for 
Responsible 
SPIU 
SPIU 
Consultant 
the schemes; 
2.  Prepare a Project Brief for submission to the Rwanda 
Development Board (RDB) 
3.  Prepare a Scoping Report for submission to the RDB 
4.  Establish a baseline for biophysical, climatic conditions 
and socio-economic data 
5.  Prepare a Stakeholder Engagement Plan which can be 
used  during  the  ESIA  process  as  well  as  during  the 
construction and operation phases of the schemes 
6.  Establish  the  need  for  physical  and/or  economic 
displacement  resulting  from  scheme  activities  and 
proposed  infrastructure,  and  if  necessary,  develop 
for  a 
Terms  of  Reference  and  cost  estimates 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP); 
11 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
No 
Activity 
7.  Develop  a  comprehensive  Environmental  and  Social 
Management and Monitoring Plan (ESMMP), which will 
include cost estimates for mitigation and monitoring 
8.  Prepare  an  Environmental  and  Social 
Impact 
Assessment Report 
Responsible 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Supervise the consultancy as necessary 
Public disclose of ESIA reports, locally, nationally and on 
IFAD website (min. 120days) 
Receive comments from the public and revise ESIA 
Selection  of  irrigation  schemes  to  be  developed  under 
Phase 2 
SPIU/District 
IFAD 
SPIU 
SPIU/RAB 
32.  For the schemes that meet the viability criteria (technical, environmental, social and 
economic)  the  SPIU  will  engage  a  consultancy  firm  to  carry  out  the  detailed 
engineering design as follows: 
Detailed Engineering Designs and Bills of Quantities 
No 
1 
2 
3 
Activity 
Prepare  the  tender  documents  for  carrying  out  the 
detailed  engineering  designs  for  2275hairrigation 
schemes that are found to be viable. 
Carryout the tender process up to award for carrying 
out the detailed engineering designs  
Carry  out  the  detailed  engineering  designs  for  the 
schemes and the pipeline projects including: 
a) 
Responsible 
SPIU 
SPIU 
Consultant 
For the pumping Kabare scheme and any of the 
pipeline  schemes  that  will  require  pumping, 
carry out the designs and BOQs for the irrigation 
infrastructure including:  
intake structures;  
 
  pumping station(s);  
  main conveyance system;  
  secondary canals; 
  on farm application structures;  
  all necessary appurtenances; and 
  access road works. 
For the Kanyeganyege, and Gishyanda  and any 
of the pipeline schemes that will require daming 
and gravity flow, carry out the designs and BOQs 
for the irrigation infrastructure including:  
i.  Dam works:   
b) 
  Embankment;  
  Spillway;  
 
  Upstream and downstream protection.  
intake chamber; and, 
ii.  Irrigation infrastructure: 
  main conveyance system,  
  secondary canals,  
  on farm application structures,  
  all necessary appurtenances; and, 
  access road works 
4 
5 
6 
SP 
Revise the ESIA and ESMPs as necessary 
Prepare bidding documents for the irrigation schemes  SP 
Supervise the consultancy work as necessary 
SPIU/District 
12 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
No 
7 
External review of detailed engineering designs  
Activity 
Responsible 
Technical 
Panel/Consultants/IFAD 
33.  On completion of the detailed engineering designs, the SPIU will prepare the tender 
documents  and  process  the  engaging  of  the  contractors  to  undertake  the 
construction of the  schemes whose studies and meet the selection criteria.  
2.4  Sub-Component 1.3: Infrastructure Management Institutions 
34.  Support  to  infrastructure  management  institutions  relates  to  all  infrastructures 
constructed or rehabilitated under KIIWP. These are 10 Sub-Catchment Committees 
(SCCs), and 35 Water-for-Livestock User Organizations (WLUOs) (20 boreholes and 
15 valley tanks), thus a total of 45 Farmers Organizations (FOs) will be formed and/or 
strengthened. In addition, 1 District-Level Steering Committee will be strengthened. 
Under  this  sub-component  also  will  be  the  mapping  of  the  sub-catchments  and 
preparation of the sub-catchment management plans. 
35.  The SCCs will be formed and strengthened to be the institutional bodies responsible 
for managing and improving sub-catchment areas. They will be having a central role 
in the planning and implementation of activities under sub-component 1.1.  The SPIU 
will engage a service provider for mapping of the sub-catchments. After the mapping 
and  validating  of  the  sub-catchments,  the  SCCs  will  be  formed  and  their  capacity 
built to enable them produce sub-catchment plans and oversee the implementation 
of the plans including land husbandry activities as well other development activities 
in the sub-catchments.  
36.  The WLUOs will be formed for each scheme and will be capacity built to manage the 
operations and maintenance of the schemes. The members of the committees will 
be elected from among the users of each of the facilities keeping in mind the need 
for  gender  inclusion.  The  The  District  level  Steering  Committee,  which  is  already 
established, is chaired by the Vice-Mayor in charge of Economic Development and is 
responsible for guidance and oversight of all the FOs. 
Sequence in Formation & strengthening of Infrastructure Management 
Institutions 
No. 
1 
2 
Activities 
Responsible 
The Monitoring department in SPIU will perform 
baseline survey of Water Users Organisations in 
Kayonza District 
The SPIU IFAD/RAB will recruit the following staff: 
SPIU  
SPIU 
  1 no. Water Users Organization specialist  
  2 no. Water Management Field Facilitators 
3 
(WMFF) 
Prepare the terms of reference for a SP to 
undertake the mapping of the sub-catchments 
SPIU 
4  Recruit and contract the SP for mapping sub-
SPIU 
catchments 
5  Undertake the mapping of sub-catchments 
6 
Form the sub-catchment committees  
7  Capacity building of the sub-catchment 
8 
9 
committees 
Preparation of sub-catchment plans 
Prepare guidelines and training Manual for O&M 
specific to irrigation schemes (Hillside, 
marshlands, small scale and Livestock waters 
users) 
SP 
SPIU/District 
SPIU/RAB/District 
SPIU/RAB/District/SCCs 
SPIU  
13 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Activities 
No. 
10  The Water Users Organization specialist will jointly 
with the District mobilize the local authorities, 
opinion leaders, farmers and hold awareness 
meetings on establishment of Waters Association 
(both Irrigation water Users and Livestock water 
Users Associations) 
Responsible 
SPIU and District 
11  The above the will hold specific mobilization 
SPIU/District 
meeting to create awareness on WUOs for 
beneficiaries of each Irrigation sites and Livestock 
water facilities 
12  The meetings will result in establishment of 
SPIU /District 
interim WUOs for each of the facilities and elect 
interim Committee /Representative of each of the 
WUOs  
13  The Water Users Organization specialist will lead 
SPIU  
the process of training the elected committee and 
opinion leaders in the community on their roles 
and responsibilities: before, during schemes 
development and after scheme completion 
14  After the initial training the Water Users 
SPIU  
Organization specialist will the lead the process 
formal elections of WUO committee that will be 
responsible for sustainable O&M of the constructed 
infrastructure  
15  The Water Users Organization specialist lead in the 
training of the established WUO committee and 
members on Operation and Maintenance, 
Management and other aspects related to the 
management of their facilities 
SPIU 
16  The Water Users Organization specialist will lead in 
SPIU 
the training of the District Steering Committee on 
their roles and responsibilities. 
17  The formal training of District Steering Committee 
and LWUOs will be complemented study tours and 
exchange visits to other districts where WUOs 
have already sustainably managing O&M. 
18  The WMFF in collaboration with District steering 
Committee be carrying out proximity coaching: 
training focused on the actual needs of each of 
LWUOs in collaboration with District steering 
Committee on a regular basis 
SPIU/District  
SPIU /District 
19  The SPIU in collaboration with the District and RAB 
SPIU/RAB/District 
will support the WUOs in the registration process 
and fulfilling requirements for signing IMTA 
20  Continuously monitor the performance of the 
District/RAB/SCCs 
WUOs in their carriage of the O&M of their 
infrastructure 
Implementation Arrangements 
 
At  SPIU  level:  The  Land  husbandry  specialist  and  Watershed  shed 
management Officer recruited for sub-component 1.1 will take the lead in the 
sub-catchment  mapping,  SCC  formation  capacity  building  as  well  as  the 
production of sub-catchment plans. A Water Users organization Specialist will 
14 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
be recruited for the overall coordination of water users organisations’ activities. 
He /She will also be in charge of ToRs, preparation of water users’ organisation 
guidelines and Training Manual, preparation of annual work plans and budget 
as well as different documents as required in field of Water users organizations. 
 
At district level: Two Water management field Facilitators will be recruited by 
SPIU/RAB  and  these  will  be  responsible  for  organization  of  water  users 
associations and ensure their proximity coaching towards efficient use of water 
and scheme operationalization. 
Indicators 
Indicator 1: sub-catchment maps produced 
Indicator 2: sub-catchment committees formed and strengthened 
Indicator 3: sub-catchment plans produced 
Indicator 4: LWUOs established and strengthened  
Indicator 5: increased Productivity in command area 
Indicator 6: sustainable operation and Maintenance of water facilities. 
15 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
3  Component B: Institutional Development and Project Coordination 
37.  This  component  is  designed  to  strengthen  government  agencies  to  deliver  project 
outputs and to support policy dialogue and institutional development that will sustain 
project interventions beyond project completion. 
3.1  Sub-component B.1: Support to policy dialogue & enabling institutional 
environment 
38.  KIIWP  1  will  strengthen  institutions  that  can  support  directly  or  indirectly  the 
implementation of KIIWP and provide policy support that is needed for the effective 
implementation of the project. Key activities and interventions foreseen under this 
sub-component include the activities briefly described below. 
39.  Capacity building interventions will be identified for KIIWP staff under the SPIU, 
including  RAB  and  district  personnel  engaged  in  KIIWP  implementation.  These 
capacity building activities will be preceded by a needs assessment to be elaborated 
for the SPIU, RAB and district personnel.  
Capacity Building of the KIIWP Implementers 
No 
1 
2 
4 
5 
Activity 
Carry  out  a  capacity  building  needs  assessment  for  all  the 
project implementers  
Develop capacity building plans for the implementers including 
identifying  potential  service  providers  that  would  deliver  the 
needed capacity building 
Implement the capacity building plan  
Continuous monitoring and evaluation  
Responsible 
SPIU/RAB 
SPIU/RAB 
SPIU/RAB/SPs 
SPIU/RAB 
40.  Gender and youth mainstreaming. Poverty and gender studies will be conducted 
at baseline and in year 3. Initial studies will be used by RAB in connection with the 
SPIU to strengthen the targeting strategy and prepare a brief gender action plan for 
KIIWP  1.  This  will  also  pull  on  work  already  done  by  MINAGRI  and  other  IFAD-
supported projects. Specific training will be organised to familiarise government and 
project  staff  with  gender  and  youth  mainstreaming  approaches,  and  special 
provisions will be made to ensure that gender  equity concerns are adopted in the 
implementation of all project components. The M&E system will disaggregate data 
by sex and age to support gender and youth analysis. 
Gender and youth mainstreaming 
No 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Activity 
Poverty and  gender studies conducted in target area 
Prepare  a  gender  action  plan  and  strengthen  the  targeting 
strategy  for  KIIWP  1  including  training  of  government  and 
project staff specific training  
Develop  data  capture 
disaggregated M&E 
Implement the gender action plan 
Continuous monitoring and evaluation  
for  sex  and  age 
instruments 
Responsible 
SPIU/RAB 
SPIU/RAB 
SPIU 
SPIU 
SPIU/RAB 
3.2  Sub-component B.2: Project coordination 
41. 
 The objective of this sub-component is to provide the coordination arrangements, 
including the financial and human resources that are needed for the implementation 
of the project 
42.  Coordination arrangements. The coordination arrangements for the KIIWP 1 are 
fully aligned with the current implementation framework of IFAD-funded projects in 
Rwanda. While the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (MINECOFIN) is the 
16 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
borrower, the Lead Project Agency will be the Rwanda Agriculture Board (RAB). As 
the  Leady  Agency,  RAB  will  be  responsible  for  the  overall  implementation, 
management and monitoring of KIIWP 1.  
43.  KIIWP will be integrated within the SPIU of IFAD projects (PASP and RDDP) that are 
under RAB. The SPIU Coordinator will also oversee and coordinate KIIWP activities 
that  will  be  implemented  at  both  the  central  and  district  level.  A  District  Project 
Steering Committee chaired by the Kayonza Vice-Mayor Economic Affairs and made 
up of members of the District Council, members representing the farmers, FOs and 
local institutions from the public and private sectors’ participating in the project  is 
already in place. The committee will be reviewing the draft Annual Work Plans and 
Budgets (AWPBs) and the implementation progress. It will it will also be responsible 
for  the  technical  oversight  of  the  implementation  of  the  AWPBs  and  the  project’s 
integration into the district structure. 
44.  Staffing:  The  day-to-day  implementation  management  will  be  under  the  SPIU. 
Within  the  SPIU,  a  dedicated  KIIWP  1  unit  will  be  established  to  be  headed  by  a 
KIIWP Project Manager (PM). At the central level, the PM will be working directly with 
a dedicated KIIWP staff comprising of the following: KIIWP accountant; M&E officer 
(also in charge of gender and youth); an Irrigation engineer; Environment, climate 
and social safeguards officer; and, a Procurement officer. At district level, staff will 
include  an  accountant;  a  WUO  Specialist;  a  Land  Husbandry  (SWC)  Engineer;  a 
Cooperative  Development  Officer;  a  horticulture  specialist;  and  an  irrigation 
technician, all integrated in the district organization structure but paid by KIIWP. 
45.  Supervision and implementation support missions, especially in years 1 and 2 
will support focused project implementation. 
46.  Project  oversight.  In  line  with  the  practice  for  other  IFAD-funded  projects  in 
Rwanda, a Project Steering Committee (PSC) would be established. The Chair of the 
Steering Committee is the PS of MINAGRI and the membership will be determined 
by  MINAGRI  and  shared  with  IFAD.    The  PSC  will  provide  oversight  and  strategic 
guidance of the Project and also be responsible for review and approval of AWPBs 
and annual reports. 
47.  Other 
implementation  arrangements.  The  components  will  mainly  be 
implemented through service providers and implementing partners, including RAB. 
For service providers and implementing partners, contracting and partnership will be 
based on renewable performance-based contracts or Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoUs). 
17 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
4  Financial management Arrangements 
48.  The  KIIWP  financial  management  system  is  designed  to  be  in  line  with  Rwanda’s 
financial  management  systems  with  a  few  IFAD  specific  requirements  to  address 
gaps  that  may  exist  in  Country  systems.  The  main  financial  management 
considerations in KIIWP1 include the following: 
a.  KIIWP1  will  implement  an  embedded  SPIU  with  project  staff  who  are  fully 
dedicated to the project; 
b.  KIIWP1 will use IFMIS for accounting and financial management as required by 
GoR. To satisfy IFAD’s reporting requirements, the correct set up of IFMIS will be 
key at start-up of the project;  
c.  Internal audit of the project will be at least once every six months and IFAD will 
request  GoR  to  share  the  audit  reports  as  shall  be  agreed  at  negotiations;  The 
Project  statutory  audit  will  be  carried  out  by  the  Office  of  the  Auditor  General 
(OAG), among other aspects to cover in the audit terms of reference will be the 
audit of Statement of Expenditures (SOEs); 
d.  The KIIWP accountant at SPIU level will be responsible for all accounting functions 
of the project; and, 
e.   At  district  level,  the  recruited  Project  Accountant,  working  with  the  District 
finance  department,  will  be  responsible  for  processing  documents,  verifying 
recipients/payees, checking and colleting documents for submission to SPIU. The 
district  project  accountant  shall  initiate  transactions  in  IFMIS  for  approval  and 
authorisation by SPIU Headquarters. 
49.  Budgeting. The GoR national budget calendar will be followed. Considering that the 
budget has to be input into IFMIS in accordance with the national budgetary rules 
and timetable the clearance process by IFAD should be well planned and executed 
to precede the GoR budgeting calendar.   
50.  The budgeting process will be done jointly between SPIU and implementing partners 
using  a  bottom  –  up  approach  resulting  in  the  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budgets 
(AWPBs). The SPIU will consolidate the AWPB, present it for approval by the PSC and 
submit it to IFAD with a request for a No Objection. 
51.  To  facilitate  proper  budget  monitoring  and  control,  SPIU  will  provide  budget 
templates to implementing partners including districts that mirror its code/chart of 
accounts  reflecting  components,  categories  and  activities  together  with  funding 
sources as part of preparation for implementation readiness. SPIU will also guide the 
implementing partners on eligible activities.  
52.  Accounting Systems. KIIWP1 will use national systems with a combination of IFAD 
financial management requirements in areas where GoR systems may not meet all 
the financial management and reporting systems.  
53.  Under KWAMP, a Financial Procedures Manual was developed and implemented. The 
manual  describes  the  accounting  system,  internal  control  procedures,  basis  of 
accounting, standards to be followed, and authorization procedures, segregation of 
duties,  financial  reporting  process,  budgeting  procedures,  financial  forecasting 
procedures,  and  contract  management.  In  addition,  the  manual  documents  the 
processes  to  be  undertaken  for  the  disbursement  of  expenditure  and  auditing 
arrangements. The SPIU will ensure that under KIIWP the manual is updated to pick 
up the new aspects under the project.  
54.  Financial  reporting,  accounting  policies  adopted  and  explanatory  notes. 
KIIWP1  will  be  required  to  ensure  that  complete,  accurate  and  timely  reports  are 
produced  in  accordance  with  International  Public  Sector  Accounting  Standards 
18 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
(IPSAS). The SPIU will be the financial management and reporting hub, responsible 
for posting, reconciling and reporting on project finances.  
55.  Disbursement  Procedures.  Disbursement  procedures  are  detailed  in  the  IFAD 
disbursement handbook which will be part of this Project  Implementation manual. 
The procedures for withdrawal of loan proceeds have been standardized to facilitate 
disbursements and consist of four major types; 
i.  Procedure I – Designated Account 
ii.  Procedure II –Direct Payment 
iii. Procedure III –Special Commitment under Letter of Credit 
iv. Procedure IV –Reimbursement 
56. 
In practice most disbursements follow procedures I and II above, while procedure 
III  is  not  recommended  due  to  its  complicated  procedure  and  high  cost  and 
procedure  IV  is  not  commonly  used  in  majority  of  projects.  Disbursement  will, 
regardless of the procedure applied, be based on a Withdrawal Application submitted 
by the Project. Each WA is made up of two integral parts. The first part  is the WA 
itself, in letter form, which mentions the total amount to be withdrawn and contains 
requisite statements and agreements by the Project. The second part consists of one 
or more summary sheets with supporting documentation where individual items are 
listed according to the loan/grant category or subcategory to which they relate. 
57.  As start a number of actions/activities will be required to ensure that the financial 
management systems of KIIWP1 are in place. These are presented in the table below. 
Actions/Activities to Ensure Smooth FM Take off 
No. 
Action 
clearly  defined 
Constitute  an  SPIU  headed  by  a 
Coordinator  or  other  title  as  appropriate 
with  fully  dedicated  staff  to  the  project 
recruited on fixed term performance based 
contracts  with 
job 
descriptions and with proper segregation of 
duties 
Compile  the  first  AWPB  and  its  related 
Procurement plan 
Update  the  PIM  that  should  include  a 
comprehensive 
financial  management 
manual with a comprehensive project chart 
of accounts 
Establish a PSC headed by the Permanent 
Secretary – MINAGRI 
Map the accounts codes and configure the 
chart  field  to  meet  the  accounting  and 
reporting requirements of project. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Responsible 
Party / Person 
Target Date / 
Covenants 
Director 
General/RAB 
first 
Within 
six 
months or as shall 
be  agreed  during 
negotiations 
SPIU/RAB 
SPIU/RAB 
PS/MINAGRI 
SPIU/RAB/IFMIS 
Team-MINECOFIN 
Withdrawal 
condition 
Within 
six 
months  of  entry 
into force 
first 
Within  six  months 
of entry into force 
Part  of  start-up 
activities 
58.  On KIIWP1 start-up, the following is a summary of the envisaged FM procedures and 
processes.  
19 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Summary of Financial Management Activities/Procedures 
No 
1 
Prepare the AWPBs 
Activity 
2  Consolidate and submit the AWPB to 
PSC  
Responsible 
SPIU and 
implementing 
partners 
SPIU 
3  Submit the AWPB to IFAD for No 
SPIU 
Objection 
4  Carry out all accounting functions of 
SPIU/District 
Timing/Covenants 
Timed to precede 
GoR calendar year 
Timed to precede GoR 
calendar year 
Timed to precede GoR 
calendar year 
On a continuous basis 
5 
the project including: 
 
  preparation of annual financial 
funds flow,  
statements,  
  periodic financial reporting; and, 
 overseeing the arrangements for 
 
audits 
Prepare and present interim financial 
reports capturing: 
 a statement of source and uses of 
funds,  
 a statement of uses of funds by 
project component by financier and 
expenditure category, and 
 a summary variance report 
explaining financial performance for 
the period 
SPIU 
Quarterly  
6 
Produce annual Project financial 
statements 
SPIU 
Annual 
7  Ensure that adequate disclosures are 
SPIU 
In all FM reports 
included in the financial statements 
8  Develop a data tracking tool to capture 
and quantify community contribution 
9  Maintain an internal auditor at portfolio 
level 
SPIU  (Head  of 
Finance and the 
Head of MIS) 
RAB/SPIU 
At Start-up 
From Start-up 
10  Ensure that IFAD gets systematic 
RAB 
Twice a year 
access to Internal Audit Reports 
11  Submit draft financial statements to 
the Office of the Auditor General 
SPIU 
12  Provide the Terms of Reference for the 
SPIU 
external audit clearly specifying IFAD 
audit requirements 
Not  later  than  30th 
Sept each year 
Not  later  than  30th 
Sept each year 
13  Carry out KIIWP external Audits that 
Auditor General  Once a year 
will provide: 
 opinion of financial statements; 
 opinion on the Statements of 
Expenditure;  
 the operation of the Designated 
Account; and, 
 any other requirements as per the 
IFAD audit guidelines 
14  Provide financial management 
implementation support 
IFAD 
Six months apart  
20 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
No 
Activity 
Responsible 
Timing/Covenants 
(One supervision mission and one 
follow up mission) 
21 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
5  Procurement Arrangements for KIIWP 1 
59.  The procurement of goods, works and services will be carried out in accordance with 
government regulations, with the addition that it should comply with IFAD‟s prior-
review procedure to be specified in the Letter to the Borrower. The IFAD SPIU already 
in place under RAB will be responsible for the procurement of goods, services and 
works  at  the  national  level.  The  recruitment  of  a  Procurement  specialist  will  be 
budgeted  to  ensure  that  KIIWP-related  procurements  are  well  executed  and 
monitored. 
60.  Procurement at the district-level will be delegated to the District’s Corporate Division 
that includes the two procurement officers currently available at the district. Their 
unit will be responsible for all procurement actions at the district, within the limits 
specified  and  to  be  agreed  below.  District  procurement  will  follow  Government 
procedures  and  processes  related  to  procurement.  Procurement  personnel  at  the 
district will be paid by KIIWP1. The District Tender Committee will be responsible for 
the advertisement of tenders and the approval of the evaluation recommendations.  
5.1  Procurement thresholds and prior-review mechanism 
61.  Building on the KWAMP experience, a prior-review mechanism will be put in place for 
the SPIU and for the District, the two entities responsible for the procurement actions 
under KIIWP1. SPIU will be required to request a no-objection from IFAD while the 
district will be requiring a no-objection from the SPIU. 
62.  A  prior-review  mechanism  will  be  the  following,  subject  to  confirmation  and 
agreement by SPIU and RAB: 
Procurement category 
No-objection requirement 
Goods and works 
District 
SPIU 
<40,000 USD 
Not required 
Not required 
40,000-80,000 USD 
Required from SPIU 
Not required 
>80,000 USD 
Services 
<20,000 USD 
Required from SPIU 
Required from IFAD 
Not required 
Not required 
20,000-40,000 USD 
Required from SPIU 
Not required 
>40,000 USD 
Required from IFAD 
*These above are derived from the current thresholds for IFAD prior review, and in order to have control 
over procurements done  at district level, it is important that thresholds are set by the SPIU. Depending 
on the risk assessment of the SPIU, these thresholds will be revised from time to time.  
63.  The  actual  process  for  procurement  of  Works,  Goods  and  Services,  including 
timeframes is described here below. 
Summary of the Procurement Process 
No 
ACTIVITIES/STEPS IN 
PROCUREMENT 
1 
2 
3 
Preparation of procurement plan 
Review of ToRs/Technical 
specifications 
Preparation of Bidding Document 
for goods or works or REOI 
Responsible  
Procurement 
Department  
Procurement 
Department  
Procurement 
Department  
Timeframe 
for 
preparation 
3 weeks  
1 day  
1 day  
22 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
No 
ACTIVITIES/STEPS IN 
PROCUREMENT 
Request for IFAD No Objection on 
Bidding Document/RFP 
IFAD No objection to the tender 
document or ToRs 
Bid Invitation /Publication (30 
days for national tenders/45 
days for international) 
Bids Opening/Technical proposal 
opening  
Bid evaluation /Technical proposal 
evaluation  
Request for IFAD NO to the 
evaluation report 
Responsible  
Procurement 
Department  
IFAD  
Procurement 
Specialist  
Timeframe 
for 
preparation 
1 day  
3 weeks  
1 day  
Tender Committee 
1 day  
Tender Committee 
Procurement 
Department  
IFAD no objection to the evaluation   IFAD  
Provisional notification stage ( 7 
days ) 
Final notification stage or Invitation 
for opening of financial proposals 
for services 
Contract signature for goods and 
works  
Opening of financial proposals/ 
Services tenders  
Evaluation of financial proposals / 
Services tenders 
Final notification for services/ 
Services tenders 
Invitation for negotiations / 
Services tenders  
Request for IFAD no to the 
financial evaluation report/ 
Services tenders 
IFAD no objection to the financial 
evaluation report/ Services 
Tenders  
Procurement 
Department  
Procurement 
Department  
Procurement 
Department  
Tender Committee 
Tender Committee 
Procurement 
Department  
Tender Committee 
Procurement 
Department  
IFAD  
Procurement 
Department  
Two weeks  
1 day  
Latest 1 
month 
1 day  
1 day  
Two weeks 
1 day  
2 day  
1 day  
1 week 
1 day  
Two weeks 
1 week 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20  Contract signature  
23 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
6  Draft Job Descriptions 
1.  Project Operations Manager (Project Coordinator) 
Duties and Responsibilities: 
Under the authority of the SPIU coordinator, the Project's Operations Manager is in 
charge of the management of KIIWP's daily activities according to the financing 
agreement signed between the Government of Rwanda and IFAD. He (She) will respect 
all documented agreements in  relation to the management of the project (aide 
memoire, back to office report, audit report, evaluation reports, midterm review, and 
completion report). He (She) is responsible of the subsidiary agreements between the 
Project and different service providers. S/he will report to the SPIU Coordinator and RAB 
DG especially ensuring timely physical progress report and financial statements in the 
required format. The Project Operations Manager will perform the following duties: 
  Provide orientations for the implementation of the project; 
  Ensure the project performance in accordance with the Rwandan policies on 
performance contracts and IFAD procedures; 
  Coordinate the project team and ensure partnership with key stakeholders; 
  Ensure synergies between project components to maximize the project's impact; 
  Supervise the project planning and implementation according to the financing 
agreement, the recommendations of the steering committee as well as the 
recommendations of the supervision missions; 
  Timely coordinate the preparation of the annual work plan and budget as well as 
progress reports; 
  Supervise the preparation and negotiation of the MoUs, contracts and other 
agreements with partners and service providers; 
  Execute the approved plan and budget; 
Identify areas which require external support and recruit suitable consultants; 
 
  Guide the consultants, experts and contractors toward the realization of planned 
project outputs and evaluate their performance; 
  Monitor the project implementation progress; 
  Support the implementation support missions and the follow up missions. 
Expected outputs: 
  Project general objective, specific objectives and activities timely reached within 
the frame of the financing agreement; 
  Project planning and budgeting processes implemented timely with the full 
participation of key partners in a participation approach; 
  Project physical and financial report timely submitted to the relevant authorities 
in accordance to the provision of the financial agreement; 
  Disbursement procedures done in accordance to the project design report; 
  The Project impact data updated regularly and disseminated to project partners 
for measuring the results across all project components; 
  Excellent relations with line ministries, implementing agencies, project 
beneficiaries and other key partners. 
Qualification: The Operational Manager must have a Master's degree in in the following 
areas: Agriculture or Irrigation with  5 years of working experience or a Bachelor’s 
degree with 10 years of working experience. 
24 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
Key competences: 
  Fluency in Kinyarwanda, English or French; 
  Computer skills; 
  Good communication skills; 
  Ability to work with project's implementing partners.  
  Ability to meet deadlines; 
  Working experience with IFAD funded project is an advantage.  
Duration: 2 years renewable performance based contract with a 6 months' probation 
period. 
2.  Accountant 
Duties and responsibilities:  
Under the direct supervision of the Chief Accountant, the specific duties of the 
Accountant are as follows: 
  Capture in the books and files all supporting documents of expenditures  paid 
from the petty cash;  
  Prepare all documents that are required for the payment of suppliers’ invoices 
duly approved by his/her supervisor;  
  Monthly declaration of withholding taxes deducted from suppliers’ invoices; 
  Verification of supplier’s invoices before payment; 
  Timely posting all project accounting vouchers on the accounting software; 
  Exercise proper custody of all posted vouchers and other accounting documents; 
  Verify and check bank statements and accounting software printouts; 
  Supervise and direct the accounting and logistical functions in order to ensure 
efficiency; 
  Prepare and submit periodical financial reports on deadlines; 
  Prepare Withdrawal Applications; 
  Regular spot check of petty cash fund and other reconciliation reports; 
  Timely replenishment of operation account with project bank account; 
  Authorisation of payments vouchers; 
  Acting on the position of  the Chief Accountant in his/her absence; 
  Facilitate financial audits and implementation support missions; 
  Regular follow up of smooth functioning of the accounting software, and make 
contact with ICT staff and software suppliers; 
  Submit account printouts by components to the heads of components for analysis 
and comments; 
  Advice the project team on accounting and administration matters; 
 
Implement any other relevant duties assigned by the Chief Accountant. 
Expected outputs: 
  Financial reports prepared and submitted on time; 
  Withdrawal applications prepared and submitted for replenishment; 
  Accounting documents maintained properly.    
Qualifications: The Accountant should have at least a bachelor's degree in accounting 
or finances with a practical experience of at least 5 years in financial management. 
Key competences: 
  Fluency in Kinyarwanda, English or French; 
25 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
  Skills in accounting applications such as TOMPRO, PASTEL, SUN; 
  Good communication skills; 
  Fluent in Kinyarwanda, English or French (reading, writing and speaking)  
  Ability to meet crucial deadlines. 
  A previous experience with IFAD-funded projects would be an advantage.  
Duration: 2 years renewable performance based contract with a 6 months' probation 
period. 
3.  M&E Specialist 
Duties and responsibilities: 
Under the direct supervision of the Head of the MIS Department, the specific duties of 
the M&E specialist are the following: 
  Developing and establishing a pragmatic and participatory project learning 
system (PLS) within the project in order to capture input-output data as well as 
impact on project objectives; 
Identify appropriate monitoring indicators for each component and ensure that 
they are used in measuring the Project progress; 
 
  Compilation of quarterly comprehensive progress reports; 
  Analyzing data (linking inputs to outputs, and outputs to impact) and preparing 
analytical reports for project management on implementation progress, 
performance and impact; 
  Establishing and managing the framework for any baseline survey; 
  Measuring achievements against targets and measuring the impact of project 
activities on beneficiaries through agreed indicators; 
  Facilitate the project's planning process in collaboration with other staff, and also 
monitoring performance of all project parties; 
  Ensuring that all participating institutions and project officers maintain updated 
records on their activities and feed this information into the overall MIS; 
  Carrying out regular internal evaluations, so as to give early warning on project 
performance;  
  Developing a simple reporting system in monitoring all project’s activities; 
 
In collaboration with project's staff, support the development of targeting and 
gender strategies; 
  Assess and report on project's activities related to gender, youth and targeting 
 
aspects; 
Identify opportunities for strengthening project's implementation from a gender 
perspective and ensuring target groups’ participation in project's activities. 
Expected outputs: 
  Simple, efficient and cost effective M& E; 
  Planning and budgeting process implemented timely through a participatory 
approach; 
  Project's AWPB submitted timely to MINAGRI and IFAD; 
  Quarterly project progress reports available to all project partners; 
  Project impact information regularly updated and available to all project partners;  
Qualifications: Bachelor's degree in Project Management, Rural Development, 
Agricultural Economics or Business Administration with 5 years of working experience.  
Key competences 
  Fluency in Kinyarwanda, English or French; 
  Good communication skills; 
26 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
  Proven knowledge and practical experience of at least 5 years in project M&E; 
  Computer literacy (Microsoft office and statistical software); 
  Communication and result oriented management skills. 
  Ability to work in an interdisciplinary team and meet crucial deadlines; 
  Working experience with IFAD funded project is an advantage. 
4.  Environment, Climate and Social management officer 
Duties and responsibilities:  
Under the direct supervision of the KIIWP Operations Manager, the  Environment, 
Climate and Social management officer will be responsible for orienting and ensuring the 
climate resilient implementation of project's activities. The specific tasks to be performed 
by the Environment, Climate and Social Management Officer are the following: 
  Supervise  baseline  assessments  of  irrigation  infrastructures  and  develop  a 
strategy/guidelines for necessary modifications to make them climate resilient; 
  Supervise  the  development  of  building  codes/standards  to  ensure  that  irrigation 
investments are climate resilient; 
  Working with appropriate local partners to ensure that engineers and technicians 
can  supervise  the  construction  of  irrigation  structures  according  to  the  agreed 
building codes and standards; 
  Providing guidance to Service Providers on climate risk management in the KIIWP 
intervention's area.  
  Act as focal point for the Rwanda Meteorological Services (RMS), REMA and RDB  
in the receipt and transmission of climate and agro-climate information; 
  Assist  in  the  development  of  agro-meteorological  products  and  decision  support 
systems  designed  for  transmission  to  the  various  departments  of  the  ministry, 
relevant extension services and the private sector/business partners; 
  Ensuring  the  sound  integration  of  climate-resilient  technologies  in  value  chain 
development ; 
  Building KWIIP capacities in climate resilient approaches; 
  Planning and implementing a capacity building program for key stakeholders based 
on identified needs; 
  Assisting in the preparation and implementation of Learning Routes with regard to 
climate resilience; 
  Carry out any other duties as assigned to him/her by his/her superior.  
Expected outputs: 
  Project's partners have access to agro-meteorological data on time; 
  Climate resilient activities are mainstreamed in all project's activities; 
Qualifications: Master's degree in the following areas: Climatology, Hydrology or 
Environmental Sciences with at least 5 years of working experience.  
Key competences: 
  Fluent in Kinyarwanda, English or French; 
  Computer literacy; 
  Good communication and results-oriented skills; 
  Experience in mainstreaming climate adaptation issues within both public and 
private sector organizations;  
  Ability to work in an interdisciplinary team and meet crucial deadlines. 
  Working experience with IFAD funded project is an advantage. 
27 
Rwanda 
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project  (KIIWP 1) 
Project Implementation Manual (DRAFT) 
5.  Irrigation engineer 
Under the direct supervision of the Project Operations Manager, the Irrigation Engineer 
will be responsible of overseeing and coordinating all activities related to Irrigation 
infrastructure. More specifically he/she will be responsive for the following: 
  Oversee all the technical aspects related to irrigation infrastructure; 
  Ensure timely implementation of project's activities in relation to irrigation 
development and observe the quality of works/service being implemented; 
  Assist the Project to identify any technical support required in irrigation 
development; 
  Address the technical support requests from the beneficiaries, public and private 
operators; 
  Develop a program of capacity building for Project stakeholders and contribute to 
its implementation; 
  Assist the preparation of feasibility/design studies of project sites including 
collecting design information, performing design calculations and preparing bill of 
quantities and cost estimates; 
  Assist the project team in the planning of irrigation activities; 
  Monitor the service providers recruited by the project with regard to irrigation 
activities; 
  Perform any other assignment as prescribed by the project operations manager. 
Expected outputs: 
  Project planning and budgeting in relation to irrigation activities timely done with 
the full participation of key partners; 
Irrigation activities  timely implemented according the design/feasibility studies;  
 
  A capacity building program related to irrigation development formulated and 
implemented. 
Qualifications: Bachelor’s degree in Civil engineering or Irrigation with at least five (5) 
years of working experience. 
Key competences: 
  Fluent in Kinyarwanda, English or French; 
  Computer literacy; 
  Good communication and results-oriented skills; 
  Ability to work in an interdisciplinary team and meet crucial deadlines; 
  Working experience with IFAD funded project is an advantage.  
28 
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase I
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Risk Framework (IRF)
Mission Dates:
23 April-04 May 2018
Document Date:
31/03/2020
Project No.
2000002229
Report No.
5007-RW
Loan ID
2000002900
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
1/4
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
1. Political and governance
Low
Low
Over the last 20 years, Rwanda has enjoyed political
stability which, combined with good governance and policy
consistency, has created an enabling policy environment
ensuring successful delivery of development programs.
2. Macroeconomic
Medium
Low
3. Sector strategies and policies
Low
Low
4. Technical aspects of project or
program
Medium
Low
Since 2000, Rwanda has seen its economy grow by 7.9%
per year. It is currently more than 3.5 times larger than in
2000. In the same period, GDP per capita has increased
from USD 242 to USD 729. According to IMF's analysis,
the medium-term macroeconomic outlook remains
favourable and the GDP growth is expected to remain
strong. This is supported by continued diversification of
the export base, public investment spending to crowd-in
private sector investment, and more resilient agriculture
as a result of extensive irrigation programs. Inflation is
expected to remain within the central bank’s target of 5%.
The project will likely benefit from a highly enabling policy
and institutional environment, with a series of new laws
and policies coming into force that are fully supportive of
the development of water infrastructure and cooperative
development. Indeed, the sustainable development of
irrigated agriculture as a key driver to boost agriculture
production and productivity is fully acknowledged in most
of Rwanda’s flagship policy documents. Identified gaps in
terms of operationalisation of new policies, laws,
regulations and institutional framework will be addressed
with KIIWP support. To this end, KIIWP 1 will conduct an
evaluation of implementation and impact of new or
existing policies related to the project activities with
relevant national, and district level stakeholders.
There is a low likelihood that factors related to the
technical design of the program or project may adversely
impact the achievement of the project objective. The
project will be implemented in two phases to initially
undertake the necessary preparatory activities for
irrigation development and address the urgent need for
catchment rehabilitation and protection in rainfed farming
areas and improved water supply for livestock. The
detailed design of KIIWP 2 investments in irrigation
development, climate smart agricultural production and
market access will be informed by extensive analytical
work beforehand. Plus, IFAD and the Government have
good experience implementing similar projects well (e.g.
KWAMP).
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
2/4
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
5. Institutional capacity for
implementation and sustainability
Low
Low
6. Financial management
Low
Medium
Rwanda has an overall solid track record in project
implementation and management, characterized by a
recognized result-based approach and high level of
financial management and procurement compliance,
However, limited technical capacity, governance and
institutional capacities of project stakeholders can lead to
slow disbursement, lower project benefits as well as
delays in implementation. Raising awareness and capacity
building are key elements in KIIWP, especially of FOs and
District, Sector and Cell level staff. As demonstrated by
the Kirehe Community-based Watershed Management
Project (KWAMP), a district-level approach in project
design and implementation contributes to strong district
ownership and capacity-building in planning, implementing
and monitoring agricultural transformation. The
institutional arrangements for KIIWP will be fully aligned
with the current implementation framework of IFAD-
funded projects in Rwanda. In particular, the Single
Project Implementation Unit (SPIU) is already in place
with core staff. The (SPIU) is effective in guiding the
process of designing and implementing projects together
with IFAD (and the World Bank). Involvement of
experienced technical staff from KWAMP will also speed
up project implementation.
The last PEFA assessment of Rwanda was in 2016.
Compared to the previous one carried out in 2010, seven
of eleven indicators improved while four indicators
remained the same. With regard to government
accountability, transparency and corruption factors, the
most recent Transparency Internaitonal perception index
shows that Rwanda scored 55 on the 1 – 100 scale with a
global rank of 48 out of 180 Countries assessed and being
the third least corrupt Country assessed in Sub-Saharan
Africa. The IFAD overall fiduciary risk based on the
ongoing projects and the recently closed KWAMP has
been assessed as low. The implementation arrangements
that pose a risk of low disbursements may arise from
delays in start-up due to delays in re-defining the SPIU,
delays in carrying out the Environmental and Social
Impact Assessments (ESIAs) that are a condition for
approval of major irrigation infrastructure and delays in
reconfiguring the project chart of accounts that may cause
delays in submission of withdrawal applications; delays in
financial reporting, among others. 
Overall assessment indicates that Rwanda is a medium
risk country, characterized by strong financial
management systems and internal controls. Design
arrangements have taken into account this medium
inherent risk, and proposed implementation and financial
management based on GoR systems and minimising
IFAD financial management requirements.
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
3/4
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
7. Procurement
Low
Low
8. Stakeholders
Low
Low
Procurement will be carried out in accordance with
government regulations and should comply with IFAD
requirements to be specified in the Letter to the Borrower
and the Financing Agreement. The IFAD SPIU already in
place under RAB will be responsible for procurement at
the national level. A Procurement specialist is budgeted
for and will be recruited to ensure procurements are well
executed and monitored. Procurement at the district-level
will be delegated to the District’s Corporate Division. IFAD
considers the procurement capacity of the district to be
satisfactory, and this arrangement builds on the
successful experience of KWAMP.
The likelihood and/or impact of stakeholder opposition to
the project is low. Project objectives, approach and
activities were discussed during the first design mission at
a stakeholder meeting composed of representatives from
civil society, farmer’s organisations, local authorities, the
private sector and the Rwanda Agricultural Board. The
whole project will be coordinated through an
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) to examine the risks and impacts of the proposed
activities, including potential environmental and social
vulnerabilities. The ESMF specifies the environmental and
social management requirements (including labour and
working conditions, grievance redress system, health and
safety) that will be the responsibility of contractors and
primary suppliers hired to construct the irrigation
infrastructure. To mitigate competition between water
users (especially irrigators and cattle owners) in times of
scarcity, KIIWP 1 will support the increase in water
storage and water supply. It will also strengthen the
institutional development of various natural resource and
infrastructure management committees to support joint
management of limited resources within catchment areas
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
4/4
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
As a result of the Eastern Province's vulnerability to
cyclical and persistent drought events, there is a high
probability that climate change will challenge the
achievement of project objectives. Land fragmentation and
high population density continue to lead to catchment
degradation. However KIIWP is designed in direct
response to these risks so the potential impact of these
risks on project objectives is moderate. KIIWP will adopt
an integrated watershed management approach that will
integrate appropriate crop and livestock production
practices such as improved crop and fodder varieties; the
promotion of a wide range of cost-effective erosion control
measures (tree belts, contour belts, grass strips, contour
bunds, planting of fodder grasses on bunds/ridges, use of
permanent, perennial vegetation on contours, etc.); and
agro-forestry (intercropping, integration of trees on farm
plots, tree belts, protective forests, nitrogen fixing, erosion
control measures, etc.). Climate information services or
bulletins will be distributed to all relevant project
stakeholders at sector, district, cooperative and community
to help them cope with climate variability and climate
change effects. Resilience will also be strengthened
through the promotion of climate smart agriculture. 
To mitigate any adverse environmental and social impacts
of the project, all watershed management schemes with a
command area exceeding 100 ha will be subjected to an
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)
before funds are released for the specific investments.
The ESIAs will be aligned with the national General
Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment (2006)
and the Environmental and Social Management
Guidelines for agriculture projects (2016). ESIA
certificates are site-specific and valid for the entire project
implementation phase. All feasibility studies for irrigation
schemes, hydro-geological surveys for boreholes drilling
and valley ponds, water permit requests and ESIA
procedures will be financed and initiated during KIIWP 1.
The exact nature and extent of adaptation and mitigation
measures to be adopted during design and
implementation phases will be determined according to
specific site locations and proposed size of irrigation,
water harvesting and small storage technologies.
Furthermore, the whole project will be coordinated through
an Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) to examine the risks and impacts of the proposed
activities.
9. Environment and social
High
Medium
Overall
Medium
Low
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase I
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Mission Dates:
23 April-04 May 2018
Document Date:
31/03/2020
Project No.
2000002229
Report No.
5007-RW
Loan ID
2000002900
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 10: Exit Strategy 
The  exit  strategy  of  the  project  is  in-built  from  design  and  implementation.  The 
implementation of the project will be done by RAB and through district teams and the 
private sector will be engaged from the earliest possible opportunity. The government 
entities are permanent structures that will be able to absorb support activities after 
the end of the project. 
The  interventions  to  be  done  by  the  project  will  be  owned  by  the  community 
organisations that will be supported to have the capacity to operate them. Users of 
the infrastructure will be involved from the studies, construction and operation and 
maintenance. Operation and maintenance manuals in the language best understood 
by  the  users  will  be  prepared  and  the  users  trained.  At  the  beginning  of  the 
construction, RAB will sign an implementation agreement with the potential users of 
the infrastructure that will clarify the roles and responsibilities of the parties. 
Each irrigation scheme, borehole and valley bottom tank will be handed over to the 
users on partial completion of the works and a handover certificate will be issued at 
full  handover.  The  handover  certificate  will  also  indicate  the  responsibilities  of  the 
government and the users during the operational phase. 
The project will gradually withdraw from each intervention after the handover is done, 
but  government  agencies  in  extension,  water  resources  management  and  natural 
resources among others, and the private sector will take over. 
The project design is built on lessons learnt from recent IFAD-financed projects that 
have provided important insights which will be key to the project’s sustainability and 
exit strategy. 
The  above  approach  and  the  sustainability  factors  mentioned  below,  will  ensure  a 
smooth, responsible and sustainable exit of project funded activities. 
Institutional sustainability. The institutional development foreseen by KIIWP aims 
at  gaining  the  user  buy-in  and  satisfaction  on  which  sustainability  depends. 
Infrastructure  management  institutions  like  Sector-  and  District-level  Steering 
Committees and Sub-Catchment Committees  will play an active role in the design, 
construction and operation and maintenance of infrastructure  supported by KIIWP. 
The  sustainability  of  the  water  resource  and  irrigation  schemes  will  be  further 
enhanced  by  the  6  Water  User  Organizations  and  35  Water  for  Livestock  User 
Organizations to be strengthened and/or developed by the project. 
Social  sustainability  (Empowerment).  The  group-based  approach  has  proven 
effective in supporting and involving the rural poor, whether engaged in on-farm or 
off-farm activities. Using Farmer Field Schools as a basis for smallholder farmers to 
become accustomed to working together and sharing knowledge and information will 
build  trust  over  time  and  become  a  sustainable  basis  for  them  to  establish  more 
formal associations like WUOs and WLUOs, and cooperate in activities related to the 
production  and  marketing  of  their  products.  As  for  cooperatives,  using  long  term 
coaching and mentoring support instead of one-off training will increase their chances 
of success and long term sustainability. The engagement of Business Development 
Service Providers who will act as an advocate for cooperative members engaging in 
contracts with other value chain actors will ensure that implementation is sensitive 
to the needs and concerns of the target households. 
Participation  of  the  private  sector.  In  line  with  the  Government  of  Rwanda’s 
recognition that agricultural growth must be driven by investments of private actors, 
KIIWP  will  involve  private-sector  entrepreneurs  such  as  large-scale  farmers, 
wholesalers, processors and exporters, as well as financial institutions operating at 
both local and national level. The delivery of water services, provision of agricultural 
advisory  services,  backward  linkages  to  input  suppliers  and  financial  service 
providers,  forward  linkages  to  markets,  and  direct  co-investments  in  post-harvest 
infrastructure  are  some  of  the  key  tools  that  will  promote  the  development  of 
mutually beneficial business relationships between KIIWP target groups and private 
stakeholders,  and  thus  enhance  the  long  term  sustainability  of  the  project’s 
investments. 
Economic  and  financial  sustainability.  The  project’s  economic  and  financial 
analysis  has  established  that  the  project  will  generate  a  positive  return.  The  EFA 
shows that KIIWP is financially profitable for rural households engaged in agricultural 
production with financial internal rate of return for farmers ranging from 20 to 27% 
depending  on  the  production  system.  The  sensitivity  analysis  shows  that  the 
economic  profitability  of  KIIWP  would  remain  satisfactory  even  if  the  project  costs 
increase by 50%, the project benefits decrease by 40% or if the benefits lag behind 
by two years. 
Environmental sustainability. Good environmental stewardship is at the heart of 
the  project  success.  Within  KIIWP  project,  the  integrated  watershed  management 
practices  will  consist  of  good  integration  between  crop  and  livestock  production, 
combined with the promotion of a wide range of  cost-effective  erosion control and 
water retention measures. In addition, the ecological sensitivity of the project area 
will  require  increased  attention  to  good  agricultural  practices  that  farmers  will  be 
trained  in.  KIIWP  environmental  sustainability  will  be  further  enhanced  by  the 
adoption of adaptation and mitigation measures through good agricultural practices, 
water  harvesting  and  climate-smart  storage  technologies,  that  will  be  determined 
according  to  specific  site  locations,  size  of  irrigation  schemes,  and  production 
systems.  In  irrigation  schemes,  solar  energy  to  pump  water  will  be  considered  to 
avoid the use of expensive and GHG emitting fossil fuels. 
Enabling policy environment. The project will benefit from a highly enabling policy 
and institutional environment, with a series of new laws and policies coming into force 
that are fully supportive of the development of water infrastructure and cooperative 
development.  Identified  gaps  in  terms  of  operationalisation  of  new  policies,  laws, 
regulations  and  institutional  framework  will  be  addressed  with  KIIWP  support.  The 
achievement of policy and legislation frameworks that are conducive to the replication 
and dissemination of new experiences and achievements is an important element for 
sustainability, replicability and scaling up of KIIWP interventions. 
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase I
Project Design Report
Annex 11: Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
Mission Dates:
23 April-04 May 2018
Document Date:
31/03/2020
Project No.
2000002229
Report No.
5007-RW
Loan ID
2000002900
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
1/1
 Gender transformational
 Youth sensitive
 Nutrition sensitive
 Climate finance  
 National gender policies, strategies
 National youth policies, strategies
 National nutrition policies, strategies
Situation
analysis
and actors
 Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
 Key livelihood problems and
youth group
opportunities, by gender
 Use (pro-WEAI) assessment for
M&E baseline
and actors
and actors
 Main youth groups
 Key nutrition problems and
 Challenges and opportunities by
underlying causes, by group
 Nutritionally vulnerable
beneficiaries, by group
Theory of
change
 Gender policy objectives
(empowerment, voice, workload)
 Pathways to youth socioeconomic
 Nutrition pathways
empowerment
 Causal linkage between problems,
 Gender transformative pathways
 Youth employment included in
outcomes and impacts
 Policy engagement on GEWE
project objectives/activities
Logframe
indicators
Human
and
financial
resources
 Outreach disaggregated by gender
 Outreach disaggregated by age
 Outreach disaggregated by gender
 Women are > 40% of outreach
beneficiaries
Pro-WEAI indicator
Further details to be confirmed
 Staff with gender TORs
 Staff with youth TORs
 Staff or partner with nutrition TORs
 Funds for gender activities
 Funds for youth activities
 Funds for nutrition activities
 Funds for Pro-WEAI surveys in M&E
budget
IFAD Adaptation
Finance
IFAD Mitigation
Finance
$8,263,000
$0
Total IFAD Climate-
focused Finance
$8,263,000
ECG
Remarks
Gender
Nutrition
Youth
 No social inclusion themes
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase I
Project Design Report
Annex 12: List of eligible activities to be financed by FIPS
Mission Dates:
23 April-04 May 2018
Document Date:
31/03/2020
Project No.
2000002229
Report No.
5007-RW
Loan ID
2000002900
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 12: Information on KIIWP 2 
This annex provides information on the anticipated components and activities of KIIWP 2. It 
also identifies the pertinent lessons learned for KIIWP 2 from the country loan portfolio and 
presents the theory of change for KIIWP 1 and 2. 
1 
Figure 1: KIIWP 1 and KIIWP 2 by component 
2 
  KIIWP 1 Contribute to poverty reduction in the drought prone Eastern Province of Rwanda  Improve food security and incomes of 50,000 rural households on a sustainable basis A. Strengthening resilience to droughts B.  Institutional development and project coordination KIIWP 2 Catchment rehabilitation and protection Improving rainwater management Water for livestock and domestic use  Irrigation development Feasibility studies and ESIA studies for irrigation schemes  Infrastructure management committees Formation and strengthening of management committees   Project management and coordination Support for policy dialogue Project coordination and management Catchment rehabilitation and protection Irrigation catchment area protection  Irrigation development Civil works  Enhancing climate smart agriculture Farmer Field Schools  Environmental management plan Developing farming as a business skills  Promotion of mechanization, PH storage and irrigation technologies adapted to smallholder agriculture  Supporting backward and forward market linkages  Project management and coordination Support for policy dialogue Project coordination and management  Triggers for KIIWP 2  Completion of feasibility studies   ESIAs and RAPs are disclosed at local community level, national and IFAD website for a minimum 120days, all comments collected and the reports finalised  Commitment, by the Government of Rwanda, to implement the resettlement action plan (RAP) and other ESMP activities  Revision of the PDR and PIM to incorporate the findings of the study A. Strengthening resilience to droughts B. Support to farm business development C. Institutional development and project coordination  
Component A: Strengthening resilience to droughts 
Sub-component A.1: Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection 
The catchment rehabilitation and protection of irrigation schemes will be done following the 
preparatory activities of sub-catchment planning and management committee development 
made under KIIWP 1. 
Sub-component A.2: Irrigation Development 
Irrigation  development  will  depend  on  the  identification  of  feasible  irrigation  sites  by  the 
studies conducted in  KIIWP 1. After completion of the feasibility studies and full disclosure 
and approval of ESIAs, the irrigation schemes to be developed will be selected and submitted 
for financing. The GoR will apply for additional financing from IFAD for the development of 
2,275ha. In addition, if the feasible area is bigger than 2,275ha, the GoR can approach other 
financiers for the development of the irrigation schemes. 
The proposed irrigation infrastructure is made of two categories: i) irrigation in marshlands 
and  neighbouring  hillsides  which  will  require  dams  to  harvest  enough  water  for  off-season 
supplementary irrigation; and, ii) large pumped irrigation systems abstracting from either the 
various lakes in the district or directly from the Akagera River. 
Potential results comprise: the Ndego Irrigation Scheme (net 1,400ha); Kibare Irrigation 
Scheme (net 600ha); Kanyeganyege Irrigation Scheme (net 150ha + Dam); Gishynda 
Irrigation Scheme (net 125ha + Dam). However, other irrigation schemes will be developed 
if these schemes are found to be unviable. 
Sub-component A.3: Infrastructure management institutions 
To  date,  none  of  the  existing  WUOs  in  the  District  have  signed  an  Irrigation  Management 
Transfer  Agreement  with  the  District.  The  aim  will  be  that  after  scheme  completion  and 
fulfilling all conditions all WUOs and WLUOs in the District will ultimately sign an  Irrigation 
Management  Transfer  Agreement  (IMTA)  with  MINAGRI/RAB,  which  will  be  co-signed  by 
Kayonza District authorities. The project will focus on preparing all WUOs and WLUOs, both 
existing and newly formed ones, to sign the IMTA before project completion. 
Sub-component A.4: Enhancing climate smart agriculture practices and 
technologies 
A long list of existing CSA practices and technologies will be compiled By RAB Crop Officers 
and Kayonza District and Sector Agronomists in liaison with expert partners. RAB researchers 
will test proposed CSA technologies with select farmers in the different areas to come up with 
the  technologies  and  practices  that  work  best  under  different  environments/conditions  and 
crops.  Short-term  international  technical  assistance  will  be  sought  to  prepare  training 
materials on best CSA practices and technologies, that will be selected and promoted in each 
KIIWP project area.  
Training and demonstrations of CSA will be delivered through Farmer Field Schools and the 
establishment of demonstration plots on both rain-fed and irrigated land. The FFS curricula 
will be defined through a consultative process in which the farmers, the extension workers as 
well as the private sector have a say. 
Promotion  of  good  nutrition  practices  and  support  to  household  food  security  will  raise 
awareness among communities of how to improve access to local foods and diversify family 
diets. Emphasis will be put on children, pregnant and breastfeeding mothers and people with 
HIV and AIDS who are the most vulnerable to malnutrition. Short-term TA will be sought to 
3 
develop a training module on basic nutrition education, which will be incorporated into the 
FFS training. 
A Gender Action Learning System will be promoted to increase awareness of gender roles in 
the  households  and  communities  by  improving  their  capacity  to  negotiate  their  needs  and 
interests  and  find  innovative,  gender-equitable  solutions  in  livelihoods  planning  and  value 
chain development.  
Sub-component A.5: Environmental Management Plan. 
Environmental and social safeguards will be implemented in this sub-component.  
Component B: Support to farm business development 
Sub-component B.1: Developing Farming as a Business (FaaB) skills 
Business  advisory  services.  KIIWP  will  strive  to  assist  farmers  engaged  in  commercial 
production to acquire a better understanding of the market demands as well as to understand 
the gross margin calculations to assess profitability and plan production accordingly. A specific 
FaaB training module will be developed and incorporated in the FFS curriculum1. KIIWP 2 will 
ensure that RAB and District frontline staff and FFS Facilitators are systematically involved in 
this training to ensure a spill-over effect and sustainability beyond the project’s life.  
Business Development Service Providers (BDSPs) will be hired as coaches or mentors; they 
will  support  the  project  beneficiaries  through  dedicated  ad-hoc  assistance  based  on  the 
specific challenges they meet, and along the different stages of  the cropping seasons. The 
project  will  organize  pre-season  meetings  for  cooperatives2,  which  will  facilitate  exchanges 
with prospective buyers, help farmers identify market demand and opportunities, and thus 
plan  their  production  accordingly.  Market  exposure  will  be  enhanced  by  the  cooperatives’ 
participation in trade fairs or agricultural shows. 
The BDSPs will also facilitate marketing arrangements with traders, processors and/or major 
off-takers through improved communication and negotiation skills, market-based production 
programming and joint marketing.  
Capacity  building  of  cooperatives.  Farmers  supported  through  new  irrigation  or  water  for 
livestock schemes will be encouraged to join existing cooperatives or form new cooperatives 
that will be registered  with the Rwanda Cooperative Agency (RCA). Building on support by 
RCA, the organizational and technical capacity of both new and existing cooperatives will be 
strengthened.  In  addition,  KIIWP  2  will  establish  and  develop  cooperative  linkages  and 
partnerships with WUOs/WLUOs (through seasonal contracts), district and sector staff, RCA 
staff as well as other stakeholders. Where needed formal agreements or MoUs will be prepared 
and signed. 
Sub-component B.2: Promotion of mechanization, post-harvest storage and 
irrigation technologies 
In line with RAB mechanization programme initiated in 2009, KIIWP, through the FFS training, 
will  sensitize  farmers  and  cooperatives  in  using  farm  machinery  in  different  farming 
operations. The project will also facilitate the linkages of cooperatives with farm machinery 
4 
hiring services, by providing incentives for land preparation, hay baling, fertilizer transport, 
etc. To scale-up access to modern irrigation technologies, the project will build on the support 
provided by the GoR to assist farmers’ investments in simple, affordable and demand-driven 
Small-Scale Irrigation Technologies (SSIT). 
Whenever possible, KIIWP will encourage the optimal use of drying grounds and warehouses 
already in place in Kayonza District. Particular emphasis  will be given to strengthening the 
linkages between small-holder farmers and the cooperatives or companies that have already 
received  co-financing  support  from  the  Post-harvest  and  Agribusiness  Support  Project  to 
develop storage, processing or transport facilities in the maize and beans value chains. For 
new investments that may occur after PASP completion, or for other value chains that are not 
supported  by  PASP  in  Kayonza  District  (esp.  rice),  KIIWP  will  provide  grant  support  using 
modalities similar to PASP project.  
Sub-component B.3: Supporting backward and forward market linkages 
KIIWP 2 will strive to improve access to and use of adequate financial services by the target 
population  of  Kayonza.  Activities  will  revolve  around  two  types  of  interventions: 
(i) strengthening  of  Community  Based  Finance  Institutions  and  their  active  linkage  to  the 
cooperatives supported by KIIWP 2; and (ii) facilitating their access to agricultural insurance 
systems that can alleviate farming risks. In this process, KIIWP 2 will build on the existing 
agricultural lending products that have been developed in recent years.  
Promotion  of  Agriculture  Insurance  Schemes.  In  2017,  the  GoR  moved  towards  the 
development of a National Agriculture Insurance Scheme recommends the implementation of 
a first phase supporting comprehensive risk insurance (MPCI – Multi Peril Crop Insurance) to 
cover yield losses due to non-preventable risks such as drought, flood, pests and diseases, 
etc.  The  project  will  seize  this  opportunity  to  support  MINAGRI’s  technical  support  unit  in 
piloting the first phase of the MPCI scheme for maize and beans VCs in Kayonza. 
Public-Private-Producers Partnerships (4Ps). In the specific case of pumped irrigation systems 
that  are  intended  to  develop  a  highly  commercial  smallholder  irrigated  production  system, 
4P-like arrangements with the private sector will be developed whenever feasible. KIIWP will 
support  small-scale  farmers  with  irrigation  water  supply  infrastructure,  sensitization  and 
cooperative  institutional  development,  while  neighbouring  large-scale  farmers  will  manage 
the  production  and  delivery  of  irrigation  water  to  smallholder  farmers  at  a  fee,  ensure  a 
reliable market for smallholder produce, and/or provide technical and farming-as-a-business 
advisory services in lieu of FFS and BDSPs.  
Implementation  arrangements.  This  component  B  will  be  implemented  under  the  overall 
responsibility of the MINAGRI SPIU and the direct coordination and supervision of the Program 
Manager to be recruited. At SPIU level KIIWP will lean on the Nutrition Specialist and Farmer 
Organization  Specialist  recently  hired  by  RDDP  project,  as  well  as  the  Market  Support 
Specialist already assisting other ongoing IFAD-funded projects.   
To complement the business development services provided by experienced coaches/mentors, 
young professional organisations, such as the Rwanda Youth in Agribusiness Forum, and the 
Horticulture  in  Reality  Cooperative  will  be  mobilized  by  the  project  as  service  providers 
whenever  the  need  and  opportunities  arise,  in  both  rain-fed  and  irrigated  areas.  Other 
specialized institutions identified as implementing partners include the Rwanda Cooperative 
Agency, NAEB (especially for horticulture export crops), the Ministry of Environment, and the 
Ministry of Health among others. 
5 
Component C: Institutional development and project coordination  
This component is designed to strengthen government agencies to deliver project outputs and 
to support policy dialogue and institutional development that will sustain project interventions 
beyond project completion. To this effect, KIIWP has been integrated with the SPIU structure 
of RAB that is mandated to implement agricultural projects on behalf of MINAGRI. KIIWP 2 
will continue the coordination activities initiated in the first phase at both SPIU and District 
level  under  sub-component  C.1.  In  addition,  as  described  below,  KIIWP  2  will  strengthen 
institutions that can support directly or indirectly the implementation of KIIWP and provide 
policy supports that are needed for the effective implementation of the project. 
Sub-component C.1: Policy and institutional development 
Support for policy dialogue will be provided by KIIWP through an evaluation of implementation 
and impact of new or existing policies related to the project activities with relevant national, 
and district level stakeholders. Below are concrete examples of policy discussion points that 
can  be  raised  and  addressed  in  multi-stakeholder  platforms  and  fora  of  dialogue  to  be 
supported by KIIWP: Support to national policy on contract farming; Support national policy 
on issues of availability and quality of seeds, including multiplication. 
Gender and  youth mainstreaming. To ensure gender  and youth mainstreaming into project 
activities and outcomes, RAB in connection with the SPIU will prepare a brief gender action 
plan and youth strategy, building on work already done by MINAGRI and other IFAD-supported 
projects. Specific training will be organised to familiarise government and project staff with 
gender and youth mainstreaming approaches, and special provisions will be made to ensure 
that  gender  equity  concerns  are  adopted  in  the  implementation  of  all  project  components. 
The  M&E  system  will  be  gender  and  youth-disaggregated  to  support  gender  and  youth 
assessments and analysis, and a peer learning group on gender will be established. The officer 
in charge of gender  and youth  in the SPIU will be specifically responsible for  ensuring and 
overseeing the implementation of the gender action plan and youth strategy. 
Capacity building interventions will be identified for KIIWP staff under the SPIU, including RAB 
and  district  personnel  engaged  in  KIIWP  implementation.  These  capacity  building  activities 
will  be  preceded  by  a  needs  assessment  to  be  elaborated  for  the  SPIU,  RAB  and  district 
personnel.  The  financing  of  these  activities  will  be  done  by  the  concerned  entities  and  co-
financed by the project, provided that these capacity building activities are benefiting KIIWP 
implementation and build the sustainability prospects of the project. Collaboration with the 
Rwanda Capacity Development and Employment Services Board (CESB) will be thus explored 
and pursued. 
Sub-component C.2: Project coordination  
This component  focuses on providing the coordination arrangements  including the financial 
and human resources for the implementation of the project.  
Lessons learned 
The country loan portfolio provides various lessons learned for the design of KIIWP 2: 
1.  Cooperatives,  farmer  organisations  capacity  building:  whilst  several  cooperatives 
were  either  formed  or  rehabilitated,  and  supported,  they  continued  to  face 
organizational and governance issues. Further comprehensive and tailored capacity 
building is  required  for  these  institutions.  This is  precisely  what  KIIWP  foresees  to 
6 
provide  under  component  B  (Support  to  Farming  Business  Development)  during 
KIIWP 2.  
2.  Development  of  farmer's  organisational  capacity  to  participate  in  markets  through 
public-private-producer  partnerships  is  essential  but  to  be  successful,  formation  of 
4Ps requires proper diagnostic assessment of key public and private actors and their 
capacities to foster partnerships from the outset. PASP experience demonstrates that 
when commercial linkages between farmers and buyers are formalized and trust is 
built, off-takers can become co-investors with farmers and instrumental to help them 
access financial services and other market and product quality information that are 
needed to add value and grow their businesses to scale.   
3.  In Kayonza District, PASP has supported the development of  seven hubs related to 
the  dairy,  maize  and  bean  value  chains.  These  hubs  are  instrumental  in  terms  of 
provision  of  training  and  business  advisory  services,  advancement  of  farmer 
cooperatives, construction/rehabilitation of post-harvest infrastructures, creation of 
market linkages,  engagement  of private sector and access to financial services.  In 
order  to  ensure  sustainability,  capacity  building  and  hub  development  need  to 
systematically involve District and sector level staff and local leaders. A ToT on hub 
development,  business  development  and  4P  arrangements  needs  to  be  organized 
with participation of all these actors. 
4.  The potential of horticulture to contribute actively to Rwanda’s export diversification 
has been demonstrated in the last few years. It is also a labour-intensive industry 
characterized by high incomes per square meter and quick returns on investments, 
two  aspects  that  are  of  vital  importance  in  the  context  of  Rwanda’s  land-scarce 
resources.  Additionally, it is likely to attract youths who typically cannot access much 
land and are particularly interested in quick wins. Besides economic receipts and jobs, 
other  horticulture  related  benefits  include  improving  people’s  nutritional  situation, 
encouraging  public-private-producer  partnerships  in  horticulture-related  industries, 
and promoting Rwanda’s attractive agro-climatic conditions. 
5.  Limited access to financial services remains a key bottleneck for smallholder farmers 
to  graduate  from  subsistence  farming  to  commercial  farming.  PRICE-supported 
performance-based grant scheme has proven that horticulture is a bankable sector 
and it attracted 35 Financial Institutions including Microfinance Institutions, Savings 
and  Credit  Cooperatives,  Microfinance  banks,  Commercial  Banks  and  the  Rwanda 
Development Bank. 
7 
Table 1: Theory of change for KIIWP 1 and KIIWP 2  
Anticipated Financing Plan for KIIWP 2 
The project will be financed by: (i) IFAD up to USD  25.7 million (43.4%), through a highly 
concessional loan; (ii) Private sector for USD 322 thousand (0.5%); (iii) ICCO for USD 246 
thousand (0.3%), (iv) Government of Rwanda for a total of USD 8.8 million (15%) in the form 
of  tax  exemptions;  (v)  Co-financiers  for  a  total  of  USD  22  million  (37.3%);  and  (vi) 
Beneficiaries for USD 2 million (3.4%). See Tables 2 and 3 for details. 
8 
Table 2: Financing Plan by Components for KIIWP 2 (US$ 000) 
Beneficiaries  
% 
Amount 
IFAD  
Amount 
% 
Co-Financiers  
% 
Amount 
The Government  
Total  
Amount 
% 
Amount 
% 
  A. Strengthening resilience to droughts 
1. Catchment rehabilitation and protection structures 
2. Irrigation Development 
3. Infrastructure Management Institutions 
4. Enhancing climate smart agriculture practices and technologies 
5. Enviromental and Social Management Plan 
  Subtotal Strengthening resilience to droughts 
  B. Support to farm business development 
1. Developing Farming as a Business skills 
2. Promotion of mechanisation, post-harvest storage and irrigation 
technologies 
3. Supporting backward and forward linkages 
  Subtotal Support to farm business development 
  C. Institutional Development and Project Coordination 
1. Institutional Support 
2. Program Management and Coordination 
- 
249.7 
- 
- 
- 
249.7 
- 
1.0 
- 
- 
- 
0.5 
4,667.9 
8,249.8 
84.8 
2,465.8 
1,770.3 
17,238.6 
31.6 
32.4 
97.7 
49.3 
92.6 
36.5 
7,457.1 
12,419.0 
- 
2,193.3 
- 
22,069.4 
50.4 
48.8 
- 
43.8 
- 
46.7 
20.7 
2.5 
749.1 
90.3 
1,761.7 
- 
1,782.4 
39.5 
- 
21.6 
1,518.6 
2,451.3 
4,719.1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
75.0 
3,667.4 
34.0 
83.2 
57.3 
100.
0 
100.
0 
100.
0 
43.4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2,661.6 
4,537.0 
2.0 
346.9 
140.8 
7,688.3 
18.0 
17.8 
2.3 
6.9 
7.4 
16.3 
14,786.5 
25,455.6 
86.8 
5,006.0 
1,911.1 
47,246.0 
25.0 
43.0 
0.1 
8.5 
3.2 
79.8 
60.0 
7.2 
829.8 
1.4 
961.1 
164.6 
1,185.7 
21.5 
5.6 
14.4 
4,464.0 
2,947.8 
8,241.7 
- 
0.0 
- 
- 
75.0 
3,667.4 
7.5 
5.0 
13.9 
0.1 
6.2 
- 
22,069.4 
- 
37.3 
0.0 
8,874.1 
- 
15.0 
3,742.4 
59,230.0 
6.3 
100.0 
  Subtotal Institutional Development and Project Coordination 
Total PROJECT COSTS 
- 
2,032.1 
- 
3.4 
3,742.4 
25,700.0 
9 
Table 3: Expenditure Accounts by Financier for KIIWP 2 (US$ 000) 
Private sector 
Amount  % 
Amount 
ICCO 
% 
Beneficiaries 
% 
Amount 
IFAD 
Amount 
% 
Co-Financiers 
Amount 
% 
The 
Government 
Amount 
% 
Total 
Amount 
I. Investment Costs 
EQUIPMENT & 
MATERIALS 
GOODS & SERVICES & 
INPUTS 
WORKS 
VEHICLES 
CONSULTANCIES 
TRAINING & 
WORKSHOPS 
GRANTS & SUBSIDIES 
Total Investment Costs 
II. Recurrent Costs 
SALARIES & 
ALLOWANCES 
OPERATING COSTS 
Total Recurrent Costs 
Total PROJECT 
COSTS 
222.6 
5.0 
92.5 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
315.0 
- 
- 
- 
2.1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0.6 
- 
- 
- 
- 
35.4 
- 
- 
- 
187.3 
- 
222.7 
16.7 
- 
16.7 
- 
0.8 
- 
- 
- 
5.3 
- 
0.4 
0.5 
- 
0.4 
1,630.5 
36.6 
1,292.7 
20.7 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1,651.2 
- 
380.9 
380.9 
0.5 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
3.0 
2,140.7 
12,917.6 
- 
1,506.7 
2,926.3 
1,098.6 
21,882.6 
- 
57.3 
9.0 
3,533.6 
283.9 
3,817.4 
29.0 
48.7 
32.3 
- 
96.8 
83.2 
100.0 
39.8 
99.5 
42.7 
90.6 
295.9 
6.6 
1,016.5 
22.8 
4,458.1 
1,444.7 
19,876.1 
- 
50.6 
402.1 
- 
22,069.4 
- 
- 
- 
32.9 
49.7 
- 
3.2 
11.4 
- 
40.1 
- 
- 
- 
658.9 
7,198.6 
- 
- 
0.0 
- 
8,874.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
15.0 
18.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
16.1 
4,392.9 
39,992.4 
- 
1,557.3 
3,515.8 
1,098.6 
55,015.0 
- 
- 
- 
3,550.2 
664.8 
4,215.0 
315.0 
0.5 
239.4 
0.4 
2,032.1  3.4 
25,700.0 
43.4 
22,069.4 
37.3 
8,874.1 
15.0  59,230.0 
10 
11 
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase I
Project Design Report
Annex 12: SECAP Clearance Sheet
Mission Dates:
23 April-04 May 2018
Document Date:
31/03/2020
Project No.
2000002229
Report No.
5007-RW
Loan ID
2000002900
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
SECAP Clearance Sheet
1/2
TO:
FROM:
Donal Brown 
Associate Vice President, PMD
Lauren Phillips 
Director OPR
DATE:
31 March 2020
SUBJECT:
Adherence to SECAP requirements for Category A projects only.
Project Title: Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase I
Country: Rwanda
Division: ESA
Country Programme Manager: Francesco Rispoli
Project Category: A
Executive Board: 02/05/2019
Implementation Stage
1.The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (or other relevant SECAP studies) has been
completed and reviewed by the relevant national authority and IFAD
Yes
2.The Free Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) has been obtained by the borrower or grant recipient
N/A
3. The FPIC Implementation Plan has been developed at the design stage and reviewed by the relevant
national authorities and IFAD
N/A
4. The ESIA (or other relevant SECAP studies) has been cleared/approved by the relevant National
Authorities for disclosure on IFAD website
Yes
5.The FPIC process has been completed or the FPIC Implementation Plan has been cleared/approved by
the relevant National Authorities for disclosure
N/A
6.The ESIA and /or FPIC/FPIC Implementation Plan has been disclosed on IFAD website?
2/2
N/A
Effective disclosure date on IFAD website: 17/01/2019
Notes
KIIWP1 only include category B interventions, given that it focus on preparatory studies for irrigation
schemes as well as ESIAs which are precondition to proceed to KIIWP2
7.The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has been completed and reviewed by IFAD and the relevant
national authorities
8. The review of the land acquisition and compensation process has been completed and reviewed by
IFAD and the relevant national authorities
9.The RAF has been cleared by National Authorities for disclosure on IFAD website
Effective disclosure date on IFAD website:
Notes
N/A
N/A
N/A
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase I
Project Design Report
Annex: Partnerships foreseen in KIIWP2
Mission Dates:
23 April-04 May 2018
Document Date:
31/03/2020
Project No.
2000002229
Report No.
5007-RW
Loan ID
2000002900
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 13: Partnerships foreseen in KIIWP 2 
MINAGRI will maintain an oversight role and lead the policy interventions and dialogue 
for  the  sector  in  general  and  for  KIIWP  implementation  in  particular.  The  Permanent 
Secretary  in  MINAGRI  will  maintain  the  role  of  Chair  within  the  steering  committee  of 
KIIWP. 
IFAD-funded “Climate Resilient Post-Harvest and Agribusiness Support Project” 
(PASP)  is  implemented  in  Kayonza  too  and  as  of  April  2018,  a  total  of  16 entities  (of 
which  nine  cooperatives)  had  their  business  plans  already  co-financed  by  PASP  in  the 
maize and beans value chains. Ten of these projects led to the construction/rehabilitation 
of  warehouses,  five  related  to  drying/milling  equipment,  and  one  to  maize  and  beans 
transportation KIIWP will ensure beneficiaries are connected to these structures, and build 
on  lessons  learned  on  post-harvest  management,  cooperatives  capacity  building  and 
forage production. 
IFAD-funded  Rwanda  Dairy  Development  Program  (RDDP)  is  operational  in 
12 districts of four Provinces of Rwanda: East (Nyagatare, Rwamagana, and  Kayonza), 
North (Gicumbi, Burera, and Musanze), West (Nyabihu, Rubavu and Rutsiro) and  South 
(Nyanza,  Huye,  and  Ruhango).  It  focuses  on  developing  the  dairy  value  chain  through 
improving cattle productivity, milk quality and processing capacity of the dairy industry, 
and strengthening the policy and institutional framework for the sector. Synergies will be 
created in Kayonza District, especially in dairy development and water for livestock. 
IFAD-funded Project for Rural Income through Exports (PRICE) is a country-wide 
project  focusing  on  the  establishment  of  pro-poor  cash  crop  value  chains  involving 
smallholder  production  and  early  transformation  in  partnership  with  private  operators. 
Under KIIWP, synergies will be established under the development of horticulture value 
chains for both domestic and export markets. 
Access to Finance Rwanda (AFR) has the core objective of stimulating the development 
of the financial sector in Rwanda. AFR’s intention is to remove the systemic barriers that 
hinder access to financial services by putting the low income people particularly the rural 
poor  and  women  at  the  centre  of  its  interventions.  AFR  supports  the  development  and 
provision  of  financial  services  including  savings,  credit,  insurance,  payments  and 
remittances. AFR is funded by the UK Department for International Development (DFID,) 
Sweden, the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), the MasterCard 
Foundation  and  KfW  Development  Bank.  For  KIIWP  implementation,  collaboration  with 
AFR would be explored in policy dialogue in rural finance and for specific instruments that 
are relevant for KIIWP implementation. 
ICCO  Cooperation:  The  newly  launched  ‘Strengthening  African  Rural  Smallholders’ 
(STARS)  programme  is  a  five-year  initiative  of  ICCO  to  support  210,000  farmers 
(50% women) in rural Ethiopia, Burkina Faso, Rwanda and Senegal to access appropriate 
financial products and agricultural services. Strong areas of collaboration with ICCO have 
been identified. For more details, please see Annex 4 under Component B. 
Business Development Fund (BDF): Established in 2011 as a wholly owned subsidiary 
of the Development Bank of Rwanda (BRD), BDF has the objective of assisting SMEs to 
access  finance,  particularly  those  without  sufficient  collateral  to  obtain  credit  from 
traditional  financial  institutions  at  reasonable  rates.  For  KIIWP  implementation, 
collaboration  with  BDF  could  be  explored,  especially  with  the  Guarantee  Fund  and 
matching  grant  schemes  currently  managed  by  BDF  and  financed  by  PASP,  PRICE  and 
RDDP. 
Rwanda Cooperative Agency (RCA) promotes, regulates and supervises the grouping 
of many smallholders into more effective market-oriented cooperative organizations. RCA 
was created through Law n° 16/2008 of 11.06.2008 which is strongly related with Law n° 
50/2007  of  18.09.2007  adopted  by  the  Parliament  to  determine  the  establishment, 
organization and functioning of Cooperative Organizations in Rwanda. RCA is in charge of 
several activities connected with the creation and supervision of cooperatives including: 
registering,  regulating  and  supervising  cooperatives;  setting  standards  and  formulating 
professional  ethics  for  prudent  management;  assisting  with  capacity  building  through 
training  and  seminars;  encouraging  the  cooperative  movement  to  take  advantage  of 
investment  opportunities  at  national,  regional  and  international  levels;  carrying  out 
research  and  studies;  advising  the  Government;  and  developing  good  relations  and 
collaborating with other agencies carrying out similar missions. 
Rwanda  Capacity  Development  and  Employment  Services  Board  (CESB) 
established under the Law Nº43/2016 of 18/10/2016 is strategically positioned under the 
Ministry of Public Service and Labour (MIFOTRA). CESB aspires to be a center of reference 
and support engine for Capacity Development interventions and  Employment Promotion 
advisory  services in  the  Country.  Its  mission  include,  among  others:  (i)  advise 
Government on the implementation of institutional capacity-building and human resource 
development strategies and how to match them with employment promotion; (ii) monitor 
and  coordinate  the  implementation  of  the  national  institutional  capacity-building  and 
human resource development strategies and those related to employment promotion; (iii) 
play a role in the national institutional capacity-building and human resource development 
planning;  (iv)  manage  the  National  Capacity  Development  Fund  and mobilize  resources 
for initiatives under capacity development and employment promotion. 
Partnerships. KIIWP will provide an opportunity to further strengthen the collaboration 
with the other Rome-based UN agencies. The project will leverage FAO expertise in FFSs 
which will be used to enhance smallholders' CSA and AH practices and technologies. The 
use  of  Rural  Invest  to  develop  bankable  business  plans,  and  mobile  apps  developed  by 
FAO (e.g. Agrimarket place, Weather and Crop Calendar, e-Nutrifood, and a Cure and Feed 
livestock  app)  will  also  be  promoted  in  project  implementation  during  KIIWP  2.  IFAD 
experience with FAO and International Water Management Institute (IWMI), in supporting 
investments in Agricultural Water Management (AWM) has informed the design of KIIWP 
1 and will be instrumental to further shape KIIWP 2. 
Potential areas for collaboration with WFP include the Farmer to Market Alliance (FtMA), 
which takes a market led approach promoting access to predictable markets and affordable 
finance,  to  technologies  and  quality  input,  including  handling  and  storage  solutions.  
Partnerships  with  NGOs  and  key  players,  such  as  AGRA,  SNV  and  Technoserve,  will  be 
continued to pilot innovations and mobilise additional resources for the achievements of 
the project development objectives. Opportunities to collaborate with ICCO International 
have  been  particularly  explored  during  the  design  process.  The  newly  launched 
‘Strengthening  African  Rural  Smallholders’  (STARS)  provides  concrete  opportunities  for 
cooperation. KIIWP will leverage on the existing resources of ICCO-STARS to scale-up its 
current  interventions  in  Kayonza,  which  is  based  on  supporting  smallholders  through  a 
combination of interventions meant to enhance backward and forward linkages: develop 
entrepreneurship skills, strengthen cooperative governance, promote business models to 
access inputs and post-harvest equipment through partnerships with processors, build the 
capacity of financial institutions, develop agricultural assessment tools for risk mitigation. 
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase I
Project Design Report
Annex: Project risks and mitigation measures foreseen in KIIWP2
Mission Dates:
23 April-04 May 2018
Document Date:
31/03/2020
Project No.
2000002229
Report No.
5007-RW
Loan ID
2000002900
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 14: Project risks and mitigation measures foreseen in 
KIIWP2 
Main risks 
Mitigation measures 
Climate and environment risk. Rwanda faces 
increasing  effects  of  climate  change  as 
evidenced by prolonged droughts. 
Strengthening resilience  to drought and promotion 
of  CSA  and  AH  practices  and  technologies  form  a 
major part of the project. 
Land  fragmentation  and  high  population 
density lead to catchment degradation. 
Competition between water users in times of 
scarcity  (especially  irrigators  and  cattle 
owners). 
Low farming entrepreneurship skills prevent 
the graduation of the target population from 
subsistence 
commercial 
smallholder farmers. 
farmers 
to 
Weak management capacity of cooperatives 
hampers  their  ability  to  develop  as  a  fully-
fledged  commercial  entity  to  market  crop 
surplus. 
Lack  of  large  and/or  reliable  market  could 
lead to heavy post-harvest losses, especially 
for  the  most  perishable  products  like  fruits 
and vegetables. 
Catchment  rehabilitation  and  protection  structures 
and  systems  will  be  implemented,  new  farming 
systems  are  required  to  increase  productivity  and 
water efficiency. 
KIIWP provides for increasing water storage (small 
valley  dams)  or  (solar  powered)  boreholes  for 
livestock. 
water  management 
committees will be strengthened, in order to support 
joint management of limited water resources. 
Catchment 
Farming as Business skills will be enhanced through 
the  proximity  coaching  approach.  Particular 
emphasis will be put on the basics of FaaB, that are 
a pre-requisite to enable  farmers to  take informed 
decisions  on  what  they  should  produce,  which 
market  they  should  aim  at  and  which  investment 
they can afford. 
KIIWP  is  expected  to  (i)  support  focused  capacity 
development programmes to foster the governance 
and  management  capacity  of  cooperatives,  and 
(ii) facilitate  their  marketing  arrangements  with 
traders, processors and/or major off-takers through 
improved  communication  and  negotiation  skills, 
market-based  production  programming  and  joint 
marketing.  BDSPs  will  actively  accompany  the 
cooperatives  up  to  the  stage  of  signing  supply 
contracts that ensure a fair distribution of the profits 
and enhanced trust between the different parties. 
The rapid rate of urbanization in Rwanda has already 
initiated a strong growth in the domestic demand for 
horticultural  produce.  The  demand  for  horticulture 
exports is also on the raise (+ 75% in export value 
from  2016  to  2017),  and  cross-border  trade  is  a 
substantial  market  that  is  extremely  profitable 
during the dry season, when the regional production 
is low. Irrigated lands will thus enjoy a comparative 
advantage  during  these  months.  In  all  cases,  the 
selection  of  horticultural  produce  grown  under 
KIIWP  will  be  100%  market-driven.  KIIWP  is  also 
expected  to  capitalize  on  experience  of  PRICE  and 
PASP projects: through the BDSPs, the project will 
engage  actively  with  the  key  off-takers  who  have 
already  managed  to  make  a  break  through  on  the 
international markets. 
Common  External  Tariff  barriers  and 
unregulated  importation  of  cheaper  soya 
beans from external markets could affect the 
competitiveness  of  Rwanda  farmers  and 
their  interest  in  producing  such  crops 
despite high demand from the private sector 
(esp. for animal feed). 
Thorough  market  assessment  and  gross  margin 
analysis will be carried out with the support of the 
BDSPs  before  farmers  engage  in  soya  production. 
Should  this  crop  reveal  to  be  less  profitable  than 
other crops farmers would like to engage in, it will 
be  replaced by  an  alternative  crop that  presents a 
better comparative advantage. 
Main risks 
Mitigation measures 
small-scale 
Limited access to financial services restrains 
smallholder farmer's capacity to (i) invest in 
the 
technologies 
(SSIT) and (ii) access the necessary working 
capital  to  implement  the  CSA  practices 
promoted by KIIWP. 
irrigation 
Weak  technical  capacity,  governance  and 
institutional  capacities  can  lead  to  slow 
disbursement, lower project benefits as well 
as delays in implementation. 
falling  under 
The  re/afforestation  activities  foreseen  in 
Kayonza  water  catchment  areas,  that  are 
now 
the  Ministry  of 
Environment  and  Natural  Resources,  may 
not  intervene  along  the  same  timelines  as 
the project ‘s interventions. 
KIIWP will strive to build on the existing agricultural 
lending  products  that  were  developed  in  the  last 
years.  Opportunities  to  collaborate  with  ICCO 
(STARS  program)  and  others  will  be  seized  and  a 
grant fund to assist smallholder farmers in accessing 
finance  to  co-invest  in  irrigation  technologies  and 
post-harvest infrastructure will be set in place. 
Raising  awareness  and  capacity  building  are  key 
elements, especially of FOs and District, Sector and 
Cell level staff. The SPIU is already in place with core 
staff. Involvement of experienced technical KWAMP 
staff  will  also  speed  up  project  implementation. 
Supervision  and  implementation  support  missions, 
especially  in  years  1  and  2  will  support  focused 
project implementation. 
The PSC chaired by the PS MINAGRI will play a key 
role in ensuring that KIIWP’s interventions are well 
coordinated with those of other Ministries, especially 
the  Ministry  of  Environment  that  has  launched  a 
special planting programme in the Eastern Province 
(see Annex 12 SECAP Note). The sector- and district 
level  catchment  committees  are  also  expected  to 
further ensure that this programme responds well to 
the specific needs of KIIWP target groups. 
Rwanda
Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project - Phase I
Project Design Report
Annex: Kiiwp Esmf Report 20181130 Final
Mission Dates:
23 April-04 May 2018
Document Date:
31/03/2020
Project No.
2000002229
Report No.
5007-RW
Loan ID
2000002900
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
GOVERNMENT OF RWANDA 
Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources 
(MINAGRI) 
Rwanda Agriculture and Animal Resources Development Board (RAB) 
Kayonza District Irrigation & Integrated Watershed Management Project 
(KWIIP) 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) 
FINAL REPORT 
November 2018 
Table of Contents 
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................ ix 
1  Introduction ........................................................................................................................................ 1 
Background to the Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project 
1.1 
(KIIWP) ................................................................................................................................................ 1 
Goal and Objectives of KIIWP ................................................................................................. 1 
1.2 
Rationale and Objectives of this ESMF ................................................................................... 2 
1.3 
Approach and Methodology used for the Preparation of the ESMF ...................................... 4 
1.4 
Stakeholder Consultations ...................................................................................................... 5 
1.5 
Disclosure of this ESMF and FPIC Implementation Plan ......................................................... 5 
1.6 
Limitations and Assumptions .................................................................................................. 5 
1.7 
Report Presentation ................................................................................................................ 6 
1.8 
2.4 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
2.3.1 
2.3.2 
2.3.3 
2  KIIWP Project Description ................................................................................................................... 8 
Overview of the Project Area Characteristics ......................................................................... 8 
Target Groups .......................................................................................................................... 8 
Programme Components ...................................................................................................... 10 
Component 1: Strengthening Resilience to Drought .................................................... 10 
Component 2: Support to Farm Business Development ............................................... 11 
Component 3: Institutional Development and Project Coordination ........................... 13 
Institutional Arrangements for KIIWP Implementation ........................................................ 14 
Project Oversight ........................................................................................................... 14 
District Level .................................................................................................................. 14 
Scheme Level ................................................................................................................. 16 
Sub-Catchment Level .................................................................................................... 16 
Selection of Sites for Intervention under KIIWP ................................................................... 16 
Participatory Approach ................................................................................................. 16 
Technical Considerations ............................................................................................... 17 
Economic Considerations .............................................................................................. 17 
Selected Sites ................................................................................................................ 17 
2.5.1 
2.5.2 
2.5.3 
2.5.4 
2.4.1 
2.4.2 
2.4.3 
2.4.4 
2.5 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
3.4 
3.5 
3  Policy, Legal and Institutional Framework for Environmental Management in Rwanda .................. 19 
Constitutional Provisions and Vision 2020 ............................................................................ 19 
Policies and Strategic Provisions ........................................................................................... 19 
National Legislation ............................................................................................................... 24 
Institutional Framework for Environmental Regulation ........................................................ 27 
International Treaties and Conventions ................................................................................ 30 
Environmental Impact Assessment on International Context ...................................... 30 
International Conventions ............................................................................................. 30 
IFAD Safeguard Polices .......................................................................................................... 33 
Differences in GoR and IFAD Policy Requirements................................................................ 39 
3.5.1 
3.5.2 
3.6 
3.7 
4.1 
4.1.1 
4.1.2 
4.1.3 
4.1.4 
4  Lessons Learnt ................................................................................................................................... 44 
IFAD-Supported Projects ....................................................................................................... 44 
Support Project to the Strategic Plan for the Agriculture Transformation (PAPSTA) .... 44 
Kirehe Community-Based Watershed Management Project (KWAMP) ........................ 44 
Post-harvest and Agribusiness Support Programme (PASP) ......................................... 45 
Project for Rural Income through Exports (PRICE) ........................................................ 46 
Other DP-supported Projects ................................................................................................ 46 
Rural Sector Support Program (RSSP) and Land Husbandry, Water Harvesting and 
4.2.1 
Hillside Irrigation Project (LWH) .................................................................................................... 46 
4.2 
5  Environmental and Social Profile of the Project Area ....................................................................... 48 
i 
5.1 
5.2 
5.3 
Administrative Structure ....................................................................................................... 48 
Bio-Physical Environment ...................................................................................................... 49 
Topography .................................................................................................................... 49 
5.2.1 
Climate .......................................................................................................................... 50 
5.2.2 
Geology, Soils and Mineral Resources ........................................................................... 50 
5.2.3 
Hydrology and Water Resources ................................................................................... 52 
5.2.4 
5.2.5  Wetlands ....................................................................................................................... 57 
Vegetation/Flora ........................................................................................................... 58 
5.2.6 
Forests ........................................................................................................................... 59 
5.2.7 
Fauna ............................................................................................................................. 59 
5.2.8 
Protected Areas: the Akagera National Park ................................................................. 60 
5.2.9 
Socio-Economic Environment ............................................................................................... 60 
Demographic Characteristics of the Scheme Areas ...................................................... 60 
5.3.1 
Land Tenure ................................................................................................................... 61 
5.3.2 
Land Use ........................................................................................................................ 61 
5.3.3 
Agriculture in Kayonza District ...................................................................................... 63 
5.3.4 
Livestock ........................................................................................................................ 64 
5.3.5 
Health Status in the Project District .............................................................................. 65 
5.3.6 
Social Protection ........................................................................................................... 66 
5.3.7 
Education Status of Subproject Communities ............................................................... 67 
5.3.8 
Access to Services ......................................................................................................... 68 
5.3.9 
5.3.10  Water Sources ............................................................................................................... 68 
5.3.11  Household Income and Expenditure ............................................................................. 68 
5.3.12 
Tourism .......................................................................................................................... 69 
5.3.13  Gender .......................................................................................................................... 69 
6.1 
6.2 
6.3 
6.4 
6  Stakeholder Consultations ................................................................................................................ 70 
Background and Rationale .................................................................................................... 70 
Consultation Locations .......................................................................................................... 70 
Issues Discussed during Consultations .................................................................................. 72 
Summary of Outcomes of Consultations .............................................................................. 73 
Cooperative Approach for Delivery of KIIWP ................................................................ 73 
Target Beneficiary Crop Priorities for KIIWP ................................................................. 73 
Target Beneficiary Willingness to Invest in KIIWP ......................................................... 73 
Land Use Competition and Conflicts ............................................................................. 73 
Target beneficiary grievance resolution views for KIIWP .............................................. 74 
Priorities for Interventions .................................................................................................... 74 
6.4.1 
6.4.2 
6.4.3 
6.4.4 
6.4.5 
6.5 
7  Potential Environmental, Social and Climate-Related Impacts of KIIWP Interventions and their 
7.4 
7.5 
7.3.1 
7.3.2 
7.3.3 
Mitigation .......................................................................................................................................... 75 
Benefits of KIIWP .................................................................................................................. 75 
7.1 
Potential Environmental, Social and Climate-Related Consequences .................................. 75 
7.2 
Anticipated Adverse Environmental and Social Impacts of KIIWP ........................................ 76 
7.3 
Irrigation ........................................................................................................................ 76 
Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection ..................................................................... 86 
Provision of Water for Livestock and Domestic Use ..................................................... 88 
Cumulative and Synergistic Impacts ..................................................................................... 91 
Site Specific Environmental, Social and Climate Observations ............................................. 92 
Ndego Sector ................................................................................................................. 92 
Kabare Sector ................................................................................................................ 94 
Rwinkwavu Sector ......................................................................................................... 95 
Murama Sector.............................................................................................................. 96 
Kabarondo Sector .......................................................................................................... 96 
Mwiri Sector .................................................................................................................. 96 
Gahini Sector ................................................................................................................. 97 
7.5.1 
7.5.2 
7.5.3 
7.5.4 
7.5.5 
7.5.6 
7.5.7 
ii 
7.5.8 
Murundi Sector ............................................................................................................. 97 
8.1 
8.2 
8  Climate Risk Assessment ................................................................................................................... 98 
Introduction .......................................................................................................................... 98 
Climate Risk Analysis ............................................................................................................. 98 
Key Considerations ........................................................................................................ 98 
Risk Classification .......................................................................................................... 99 
Climate Risk Resilience Measures ....................................................................................... 100 
8.2.1 
8.2.2 
8.3 
9  Summary of the Resettlement Action Framework ......................................................................... 101 
Approach to the Preparation of a Resettlement Action Plan for KWIIP.............................. 101 
9.1 
9.2  Methodology for RAP Preparation ...................................................................................... 102 
10 Environmental, Social and Climate Change Management for KIIWP ............................................. 108 
ESIA Procedures .................................................................................................................. 108 
10.1 
10.2  KIIWP Environmental, Social and Climate Change Management Procedures .................... 114 
Implementation and Coordination.............................................................................. 114 
10.2.1 
Screening ..................................................................................................................... 114 
10.2.2 
Environmental, Social and Climate Safeguards Documentation ................................. 118 
10.2.3 
Review and Approval of ESIA, ESMP, IPMP, RAP, Dam Safety Plan .............................. 123 
10.2.4 
10.2.5 
Disclosure of the ESIAs and ESMPs ............................................................................. 123 
10.2.6  Grievance Redress Mechanisms.................................................................................. 124 
10.2.7  Monitoring .................................................................................................................. 126 
10.2.8  Quarterly and Annual Reviews .................................................................................... 128 
10.2.9 
Environmental and Social and Auditing ...................................................................... 128 
10.2.10  Reporting ..................................................................................................................... 129 
Summary of Processes and Responsibilities ....................................................................... 129 
10.3 
11.1 
11 Capacity Building ............................................................................................................................ 131 
Existing Capacity ................................................................................................................. 131 
KIIWP Lead Agency ...................................................................................................... 131 
KIIWP Project Management Team .............................................................................. 131 
KIIWP Implementation Partners ................................................................................. 131 
Project Beneficiaries ................................................................................................... 132 
11.2  Capacity Building ................................................................................................................. 133 
Technical Assistance ............................................................................................................ 135 
11.3 
11.1.1 
11.1.2 
11.1.3 
11.1.4 
12 ESMF Implementation Budget ....................................................................................................... 136 
13 Summary of Key Issues Arising and Recommendations for KIIWP Design ..................................... 139 
13.1  Hydrology ............................................................................................................................ 139 
13.2 
Environmental Flow ............................................................................................................ 139 
13.3  Wetlands ............................................................................................................................. 139 
13.4  Biodiversity .......................................................................................................................... 140 
13.5  Buffer Zones ........................................................................................................................ 140 
13.6  Dams ................................................................................................................................... 141 
13.7  Climate Risk Analysis ........................................................................................................... 141 
13.8  Community Expectations .................................................................................................... 141 
13.9  Physical and Economic Displacement ................................................................................. 142 
13.10  Access to Water Sources and/or Grazing ............................................................................ 142 
13.11  Health .................................................................................................................................. 142 
13.12  Human/Wildlife Conflict...................................................................................................... 142 
13.13  Community Involvement in Subproject Development ........................................................ 143 
iii 
List of Tables 
Table 2.1  Selected Sites and Respective Interventions ........................................................................ 18 
Table 3.1  International Treaties and Conventions ................................................................................ 31 
Table 3.2  Comparison of Government of Rwanda and IFAD Requirements ........................................ 39 
Table 5.1  Projected Annual Demand Distribution ................................................................................ 56 
Table 5.2 Yields as Percentages of Targets set as KPIs by Sector .......................................................... 63 
Table 5.3 Twigire Association Information by Crop Site and by Sector, Kayonza District ...................... 64 
Table 5.4  Kayonza District Livestock Ownership by Sector .................................................................. 65 
Table 5.5  Valley Dams in Kayonza District ............................................................................................ 65 
Table 5.6  Sources of Lighting ................................................................................................................ 68 
Table 6.1  Sites Visited for Stakeholder Consultations .......................................................................... 72 
Table 7.1  Typical Environmental and Social Impacts of Irrigation and their Mitigation ....................... 78 
Table 7.2  Typical Impacts from Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection Interventions.................... 86 
Table 7.3  Typical Impacts from Interventions to Provide Water for Livestock and Domestic Use ....... 89 
Table 8.1  Climate Risk Screening .......................................................................................................... 99 
Table 10.1  Functions of Various Stakeholders in the ESIA Process .................................................... 111 
Table 10.2  Categorisation of KIIWP Interventions ............................................................................. 116 
Table 10.3 Typical Performance Monitoring Indicators ...................................................................... 126 
Table 10.4  Typical Results Monitoring Parameters ............................................................................ 128 
Table 10.5  ESMF Procedures and Responsibilities ............................................................................. 129 
Table 11.1  Capacity Building Topics.................................................................................................... 133 
Table 12.1  ESMF Implementation Budget .......................................................................................... 136 
List of Figures 
Figure 2.1 KIIWP Theory of Change ........................................................................................................ 9 
Figure 2.2 KIIWP’s Institutions at District Level .................................................................................... 11 
Figure 3.1 Social Environmental and Climate Screening Flow Diagram ................................................ 37 
Figure 10.1 REMA’s ESIA Procedures .................................................................................................. 109 
Figure 10.2 Grievance Redress Mechanism for KIIWP ........................................................................ 125 
List of Maps 
Map 1.1  KIIWP Project Area ................................................................................................................... 2 
Map 2.1 Location of Potential Sites ...................................................................................................... 17 
Map 5.1 Administrative Map of Kayonza District .................................................................................. 48 
Map 5.2 Topography of Rwanda ........................................................................................................... 49 
Map 5.3  Average Annual Precipitation in Rwanda ............................................................................... 50 
Map 5.4 Geological Map of Eastern Province ....................................................................................... 51 
Map 5.5 Mines and Quarries in Kayonza District .................................................................................. 52 
Map 5.6 Rwanda Hydrological Drainage Basins .................................................................................... 53 
Map 5.7 The Lower Akagera Catchment ............................................................................................... 54 
Map 5.8 Surface Water Resources in the Project Area ......................................................................... 55 
Map 5.9 Wetlands in the Project Area and their Categorisation .......................................................... 58 
Map 5.10 Proposed Land Use in Kayonza District ................................................................................. 62 
iv 
Annexes 
Annex 1: 
Annex 2: 
Annex 3: 
Annex 4: 
Annex 5: 
Annex 6: 
Annex 7 
Annex 8: 
Annex 9: 
Annex 10: 
Annex 11: 
Annex 12: 
References 
List of Persons Consulted 
Sample TORs for ESIA Studies 
Resettlement Action Framework 
FPIC Implementation Plan 
Guidelines for an Integrated Pest Management Plan 
Guidelines for Dam Safety 
Sample Contract Clauses for Environmental and Social Management 
Notes on Community Consultations 
List of Potential Beneficiary Consultation Participants 
Proceedings of the ESMF Validation Workshop 
Study Team, Sites Visited and ESMF Timelines 
Lake Ihema, the Bramin Scheme in the foreground and Humure beyond 
v 
Acronyms and Abbreviations 
Agri-TAF 
ANP  
BDSPs 
CBD 
CBFI 
CGIAR 
CITES 
CMS 
CSA 
DDP 
DEO 
ECC 
ECCO 
EDPRS 
EF 
EICV 
ENRM 
ESIA 
ESMP 
FaaB 
FAO 
FAW 
FBF 
FFS 
FIRR 
FO 
FPIC 
GGCRS 
GIS 
GRM 
Ha 
HH 
HIV/AIDS 
ICRISAT 
ICT 
IFAD 
IFC 
IL 
INDC 
IPMP 
IWUO 
KIIWP 
km 
KWAMP 
LDC 
LPA 
LWH 
m2 
m3 
MINAGRI 
MININFRA 
Agriculture Technical Assistance Facility   
Akagera National Park 
Business Development Service Provider   
Convention on Biological Diversity 
Community Based Finance Institution   
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research   
International Convention on the Trade in Endangered Species 
Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals   
Climate Smart Agriculture   
District Development Plan 
District Environment Officer  
Environment and Climate Change 
Environmental and Climate Change Officer  
Economic Development and Poverty reduction Strategy   
Environmental Flow   
Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey 
Environment and Natural Resource Management  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
Environmental and Social Management Plans 
Farming as a Business   
Food and Agriculture Organization,  
Fall Army Worm   
Fortified Blended Food   
Farmer Field School 
Financial Internal Rate of Return   
Farmers’ Organisation 
Free, Prior and Informed Consent  
Green Growth and Climate Resilience Strategy   
Geographical Information Systems 
Grievance Redress Mechanism   
Hectare 
Household   
Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome 
International Crop Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics 
Information Communication Technology 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
International Finance Corporation 
Impact Level   
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution   
Integrated Pest Management Plan 
Irrigation Water Users Organisation   
Kayonza Integrated Irrigation and Watershed Development Project 
Kilometre 
Kirehe Community-based Watershed Management Project   
Less Developed Countries 
Lead Project Agency   
Land Husbandry, Water Harvesting and Hillside Irrigation Project   
Square metre 
Cubic metre 
Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources   
Ministry of Infrastructure 
vi 
MINIRENA 
MPCI 
NGO 
NST 
O&M 
PAP 
PAPSTA 
PASP 
PCBs 
PCR 
PRICE 
PSC 
PSF 
PSTA 
RAB 
RAF 
RAP 
RB-COSOP 
RCA 
RDB 
REMA 
RICA 
RIMP 
RLMUA 
RSB 
RSSP 
RWFA 
SDC  
SDG 
SECAP 
SEDO 
SPIU 
SSO 
SWC 
TA 
TSS 
TVET 
UNCCD  
UNFCCC 
VCT 
VTC 
WHO 
WUO 
Ministry of Environment 
Multi Peril Crop Insurance   
Non-Governmental Organization   
National Strategy for Transformation 
Operation and Maintenance 
Project Affected Persons   
Support Project to the Strategic Plan for the Agriculture Transformation   
Post-harvest and Agribusiness Support Programme   
Polychlorobiphenyls 
Physical Cultural Resources 
Project for Rural Income through Exports   
Project Steering Committee 
Private Sector Federation   
Strategic Plan for Agricultural Transformation 
Rwanda Agriculture and Animal Resources Development Board   
Resettlement Action Framework  
Resettlement Action Plan  
Results-Based Country Strategic Opportunities Programme   
Rwanda Cooperative Agency   
Rwanda Development Board   
Rwanda Environmental Management Authority   
Rwanda Inspection and Competition Authority   
Rwanda Irrigation Master Plan 2010 
Rwanda Land Management and Use Authority  
Rwanda Standards Board   
Rural Sector Support Program    
Rwanda Water and Forestry Authority   
Sector Development Committee  
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals 
Social, Environment and Climate Assessment Procedures 
Socio-economic Development Officers  
Special Projects Implementation Unit 
Social Safeguards Officer 
Soil and Water Conservation   
Technical Assistance   
Technical Secondary School   
Technical and Vocational Education and Training   
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  
Voluntary Counselling and Testing 
Vocational Training Centres   
World Health Organisation   
Water Users Organisation 
vii 
Acknowledgements 
The ESMF Study Team wishes to express their gratitude to the Mayor of Kayonza District and his officers 
for  their  support,  time  and  information/data  provided  to  us.    We  also  appreciate  advice  and 
recommendations given to us by officers we met in MINAGRI, RAB, RWFA and REMA.  We are grateful 
to all those who attended the ESMF Validation Workshop for their constructive comments. 
Special thanks are due to the community members in the Project area who made such an effort to 
come  to  the  stakeholder  consultations  and  gave  us  their  precious  time  and  valuable  inputs  and 
recommendations.   
viii 
Executive Summary 
INTRODUCTION 
Rwanda’s Eastern Province has suffered from recurrent drought in recent decades.  In 2016, a severe 
drought resulted in extremely poor crop yields and the loss of more than 2,400 heads of cattle.  As a 
result, the Government of Rwanda (GoR) had to provide food relief and water for livestock to support 
some 47,000 households in the worst affected districts of Kayonza, Nyagatare, Gatsibo, Ngoma and 
Kirehe.  In  order  to  support  these  districts  to  increase  resilience  against  such  drought-induced 
calamities, the GoR requested the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) to formulate 
a new integrated irrigation and watershed development project focussing on Kayonza District, which 
was most seriously affected.   
The  goal  of  the  Kayonza  Integrated  Irrigation  and  Watershed  Development  Project  (KIIWP)  is  to 
‘Contribute  to  poverty  reduction  in  the  drought  prone  Eastern  Province  of  Rwanda’.  The  Project’s 
Development  Objective  is  to  ‘Improve  food  security  and  incomes  of  50,000  rural  households  on  a 
sustainable basis’. 
KIIWP investments focus on irrigation and integrated watershed management and planning, including 
integrated  activities  and  investments  on  water  harvesting  and  storage,  irrigation  schemes  and  the 
development  of  marshland  development.     The  Project will  impinge  on ecologically  sensitive  areas 
(namely the Akagera National Park and marshlands), irrigate fields that are greater than 100ha in area, 
and  may  necessitate  a  significant  increase  in  the  use  of  agrochemicals.    Thus,  as  per  IFAD’s  Social 
Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) screening guidelines, the Project has been 
accorded an overall Category A classification. 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 
As the exact boundaries and/or locations of the interventions have not yet been determined, nor have 
feasibility  studies  been  carried  out,  it  is  not  possible  to  prepare  environmental  and  social  impact 
assessments  (ESIAs)  and  environmental  and  social  management  plans  (ESMPs)  for  the  various 
subprojects. Hence the preparation of an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
was deemed necessary in order to inform the design, and to guide the preparation of ESIAs or ESMPs 
for the subprojects.  
The  ESMF  study  commenced  in  August  2018.    The  study  methodology  comprised:  collection  and 
review of primary and secondary baseline data; consultations with key stakeholders and project area 
communities, site visits to all the eight project districts, and report writing.   
This ESMF is based on the Project Design Report (PDR) dated August 2018.  It will be noted that the 
PDR is still under development, and although the sub-component descriptions may change, the types 
of interventions will remain the same.  
ix 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
Project Location 
Kayonza District is located in Eastern Province, Rwanda.  It is bordered to the north and north-west by 
Gatsibo District, Rwamagana District to the west, Ngoma District to the south-west and Kirehe District 
to the south.  Its shares its eastern border with Tanzania.  The Project area covers the eight drought-
prone sectors of the District of Kayonza in the Eastern Province of Rwanda, namely Gahini, Kabare, 
Kabarando, Murama, Murundi, Mwiri, Ndego and Rwinkwavu sectors.   
Project Components 
The Project will comprise three components, namely:   
•  Component  1:  Strengthening  resilience  to  droughts.   This  will  invest  in  irrigation  infrastructure 
development in marshlands and hillsides for intensive smallholder agriculture and improved water 
supply  for  livestock  and  domestic  use;  catchment  rehabilitation  including  terracing  and  agro-
forestry;  and  support  for  the  development  and  establishment  of  infrastructure  management 
institutions. These investments combined with the activities implemented under Component 2, 
will  result  in  effective  water  and  land-use  management  and  improved  survival  of  cattle  during 
droughts. 
•  Component 2: Support to farm business development. This component will focus on promotion of 
climate smart agriculture (CSA) practices and technologies for irrigated and rainfed lands improved 
under Component 1, promotion of good nutrition practices, capacity development investments to 
foster Farming as a Business (FaaB) skills, governance and management capacity of cooperatives, 
enhanced access to rural financial services and development of 4Ps. 
•  Component 3: Institutional Development and Project Coordination.  This component will provide 
the institutional, managerial and administrative support services needed to implement the two 
technical components. Opportunities to support the development and implementation of national 
policies, strategies and/or regulations related to the Project interventions will be prioritized. 
KIIWP will directly target approximately 50,000 households which will benefit from terracing and agro-
forestry  and  resultant  improved  water  retention;  irrigated  farming  in  marshlands  and  hillsides; 
organisational  strengthening  activities  supporting  sustainable  water  management  by  water  user 
organisations; smallholder pumped irrigation schemes in Ndego and Kabare Sectors; water harvesting 
infrastructure; and provision of water for livestock and domestic use.  Most of KIIWP’s target group 
will comprise men and women farmers and livestock keepers, as well as men, women, youth and the 
physically challenged in wage labour and off-farm activities along the target value chains.     
Project Implementation Arrangements 
The Lead Project Agency for KIIWP will be the Rwanda Agriculture and Animal Resources Development 
Board (RAB) which will have the overall responsibility for the coordination and execution of the Project.  
KIIWP will be integrated within the Special Projects Implementation Unit (SPIU) for IFAD projects that 
are  under RAB. The  SPIU Coordinator will also oversee and coordinate  KIIWP activities  that will be 
implemented at both the central and district level. The IFAD SPIU Environmental and Climate Change 
Specialist will be responsible for monitoring the environmental, social and climate performance of the 
subprojects. A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be set up, where the PS of MINAGRI will be the 
chair of the PSC.   
At district-level, staff will include an accountant; a WUO Specialist; a Land Husbandry (SWC) Engineer; 
a Cooperative Development Officer; a horticulture specialist; and an irrigation technician all integrated 
x 
in the district organization structure and paid by KIIWP.  It is recommended that the District KIIWP 
Team  include  an  Environmental  and  Climate  Change  Officer  and  a  Social  Safeguards  Officer.  The 
management of infrastructure and optimal use of developed land will be ensured by a Scheme Steering 
Committees for irrigation and soil conservation activities at both District and Scheme level.   
Sub-catchment  Committees  will  be  set  up  for  each  selected  watershed  and  will  work  closely  with 
sector development committees (known as SDCs) and with FOs and various other associations 
Selected Sites for Interventions 
The selection of interventions has been based on the participatory approach, technical considerations 
and economic considerations.  The participatory approach involves establishing the types of crops that 
the  smallholder  farmers  are  already  growing,  what  they  would  like  to  produce,  identification  of 
markets, capacity to contribute to the Project (whether in cash or kind), how they can contribute (for 
example at what point during the year are they able to contribute, whether they prefer to stagger their 
contribution  over  the  Project  period,  etc).    Technical  considerations  include  water  availability; 
availability  of 
irrigation  and  catchment  protection  activities;  climatic  factors;  soil 
characteristics, stability and suitability; topography; proximity to settlements; and accessibility of the 
proposed sites.  The key economic considerations in site selection are investment cost per hectare and 
a favourable Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR). 
land  for 
Four sites have been selected for pumped irrigation in Ndego and Kabare Sectors totaling 2000 ha, 
about 275 ha of land will be developed for marshland irrigation in Rwinkwavu, Kabare and Kabarondo 
Sectors; and in Muruma Sector, farm ponds will be constructed for rainwater irrigation of some 10ha 
of land.  Catchment rehabilitation and protection interventions will include terracing and agroforestry 
and will cover an estimated 1300ha.  It is also proposed that in  Ndego, Gahini, Murundi and Mwiri 
Sectors, 7 new valley tanks will be constructed, 15 valley tanks will be rehabilitated, and 20 boreholes 
will  be  installed  to  provide  water  for  livestock  and  domestic  purposes.      The  selected  sites  and 
respective interventions are tabulated in Table E.1 below. 
Table E.1: Selected Sites and Respective Interventions 
Infrastructure 
Total area  (ha) 
Irrigation  
Pumped irrigation 
Av. Size (ha) 
1400 
No. 
3 
400 
600 
400 
600 
1 
Small marshlands 
600 
275 
Farm-level ponds 
200 
0.05 
10 
Catchment Conservation 
Land Husbandry (Terraces 
+ agroforestry, mulching, 
liming, etc) 
7500  
Provision of Water for Livestock and Domestic Purposes 
Valley tanks new 
7 
Valley tanks rehab 
Boreholes 
15 
20 
xi 
Comments 
Ndego sector: 3 sites (Kibare, Humure, Byimana) 
Source: Lakes Kibare, Ihema, Nasho 
Kabare sector: 1 site (Gakoma) 
Source: Lake Nasho 
To irrigate both marshlands and hillsides  
Sectors: Rwinkwavu, Kabare (River Gishanda) 125 ha 
Kabarondo (River Kanyeganyege):150 ha 
Source: rainwater 
Locations: Murama 
Selection criteria: terraced land, but no water 
Pond size 50-200m3 
Includes 2275 irrigated and rainfed Kabare, Kabarondo, Rwinkwavu: 
dam or irrigation related 
Murama (900ha), Kabarondo (190ha): rainfed  
Criteria for selecting locations: terraced land with water scarcity; 
non-terraced land 
Av. Household land holding: 0.3ha 
Ndego, Gahini, Murundi and Mwiri Sectors 
Locations of new tanks and boreholes and respective capacities not 
known at this stage. 
No. of people and livestock to be supplied not yet established.  
POLICY, LEGAL AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT 
The  Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  Rwanda,  promulgated  in  2003  and  revised  in  December  2015, 
articulates  the  rights  and  responsibilities  of  all  citizens  and  the  role  of  the  state  regarding  the 
environment by providing that every citizen is entitled to a healthy and satisfying environment and 
that very person has the duty to protect, safeguard and promote the environment.  The Constitution 
recognizes ownership of property and every person’s right to private property. Consequently, private 
property, whether individually or collectively owned, is inviolable.  However, the right to property may 
be overruled in the case of public interest, and in such cases procedures are determined by the law 
and subject to fair and prior compensation.  Key national policies and strategies relevant to KIIWP are 
the  National  Environment  Policy,  Land  Policy,  Agriculture  Policy,  Fertilizer  Policy,  Water  Resources 
Management Policy, Health Sector Policy, Green Growth and Climate Resilience Strategy, Biodiversity 
Strategy  and  the  Strategy  for  Transformation.    Pertinent  national  legislation  and  ministerial  orders 
cover Environment, Land, Expropriation in the Public Interest, Structure of Lands, Modalities of Land 
Registration,  Agrochemicals,  Environmental  Impact  Assessment,  and  Protected  Animal  and  Plant 
Species. 
With regard to the institutional framework for environmental management as applicable to KIIWP, the 
Ministry of  Environment  (MINIRENA)  is  the ministry  responsible  for  the  environment.  The  Rwanda 
Environmental Management  Authority  (REMA)  was established under  Law  No. 16/2006 of 2006  as 
amended  in  2013,  as  the  authority  in  charge  of  supervising,  monitoring  and  ensuring  that  issues 
relating to environment are integrated in all national development programs. However, the mandate 
for implementing EIA of development activities is delegated to the One Stop Centre within the Rwanda 
Development Board (RDB).  Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) has a primary 
mandate for the  development,  transformation and modernization of agricultural sector in Rwanda, 
while  the  Rwanda  Agriculture  and  Animal  Resources  Development  Board  (RAB)  has  a  mandate  to 
coordinate all activities in relation with agriculture and animal resources development.  The Rwanda 
Water and  Forestry Authority  (RWFA) is responsible for implementing policies, laws, strategies  and 
Government decisions related to the management of forests and natural water resources.  Finally, the 
Eastern Province and Kayonza District Administration are also involved in supporting the RDB to review 
Project  Briefs,  EIA  reports,  organize  and  host  public  hearings,  and  in  the  implementation  of 
environmental management and monitoring plans.  
Rwanda is party to a number of international treaties and conventions including: the Convention on 
Biological Diversity (CBD), Cartagena Protocal to the CBD,  Convention on the International Trade in 
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC), the Kyoto Protocol to the UNFCCC, the Ramsar Convention, the Stockholm 
Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants, the Rotterdam Convention on Commercial Transactions 
of  Agricultural  Pesticides  and  Other  Poisonous  Products,  the  Basel  Convention  on  the  Control  of 
Transboundary  Movements  of  Hazardous  Wastes,  the  Montreal  Conventional  on  Substances  that 
Deplete  the  Ozone  Layer,  and  the  Bonn  Convention  on  Conservation  of  Migratory  Species  of  Wild 
Animals. 
IFAD’S SAFEGUARD POLICIES 
IFAD has developed safeguard policies to support the sustainable implementation of its activities and 
interventions in achieving its mandate to eradicate rural poverty and food insecurity.  These include 
policies on Improving Access to Land and Tenure Security, Disclosure of Documents, Environment and 
Natural Resources, Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment, and Targeting, as well as a Climate 
Change Strategy and Social, Environment and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP). 
xii 
In  general,  there  are  no  great  deviations  between  the  GoR  and  IFAD  policy  streams.      The  main 
differences are that the GoR policies do not specifically provide for climate risk categorisation, and 
FPIC and livelihood restoration where physical and economic displacement may occur. 
LESSONS LEARNED  
IFAD has supported a number of projects in the agricultural sector in Rwanda, namely Support Project 
to the Strategic Plan for the Agriculture Transformation (PAPSTA), Kirehe Community-based Watershed 
Management  Project  (KWAMP),  Post-harvest  and  Agribusiness  Support  Programme  (PASP),  and  is 
currently supporting the Project for Rural Income through Exports (PRICE).  The World Bank is funding 
the Rural Sector Support Program (RSSP) and Land Husbandry, Water Harvesting and Hillside Irrigation 
Project (LWH).  Some of the key lessons from these projects are: 
•  Capacity  building  is  required  at  various  levels  and  groups:    project  beneficiaries,  irrigation 
water users organisations (IWUOs), cooperatives, MINAGRI personnel, District and sector level 
staff. 
IWUOs must be formed early in the project development process; 
• 
•  The success of commercial linkages between farmers and buyers is based on trust between 
the two parties. 
•  Competent  service  providers  must  be  engaged  to  develop  the  sound  technical  designs  for 
irrigation schemes.  
•  The  formation  of  road  brigades  in  KWAMP  has  ensured  maintained  and  accessible  feeder 
• 
roads to facilitate the transport of produce from irrigation schemes to markets. 
Innovations or models from other countries need to be introduced early in the design stages 
for communities and farmers to understand the processes involved. 
•  More effort needs to be made to involve youth in agriculture. 
•  The  watershed  management  approach  should  incorporate  land,  soil,  water,  vegetation, 
• 
topography, and above all, the human watershed community. 
Integrated projects can serve to develop close cooperation between different ministries and 
government agencies.  For example, in the case of KWAMP, collaboration between the project 
and REMA facilitated the implementation of measures for the protection of buffer zones by 
planting  grasses,  agroforestry  trees,  forestry  and  soil  erosion  control  measures,  and  with 
MINIRENA resulted in capacity building of hydrographic committee members. 
•  Consideration of alternative low-cost technologies in the early stages of the project will allow 
for monitoring and assessing the performance of interventions during the project period.  In 
the case of KWAMP, biogas systems were introduced later on in the project, and therefore it 
was not possible to assess the success of the intervention in terms of watershed and natural 
resource management, which was the prime purpose of the intervention.  
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE KIIWP PROJECT AREA 
Topography:  The  Project  area  is  characterised  by  a  series  of  hills  that  run  roughly  north  to  south 
through the middle of the district (the Eastern Plateau).  The hills give way to valleys where floodplains 
and wetlands are found.   To the east of this line of hills is a large gently  undulating expanse – the 
Eastern Savannah – which slopes towards the Akagera wetlands system.   
Climate:  The  Project  area  receives  an  average  rainfall  below  700mm,  and  higher  temperatures, 
frequently exceeding 30oC in February and July-August.  The area is therefore subject to prolonged 
xiii 
periods  of  drought.    The  Baseline  Climate  Change  Vulnerability  Index1  for  Rwanda  indicates  that 
Eastern Province is most vulnerable in terms of exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity to climate 
change.   
Geology, Soils and Minerals: The  soils in the Project area are derived from metamorphic rocks and 
granitic rocks of the Precambrian Period.   They are mainly oxisols particularly around the lakes and 
water bodies, vertisols where the wetlands are found, inceptisols in the lowland areas between the 
wetlands and the Akagera National Park, and small occurrences of entisols.  Most of the Project sites 
lies  in  relatively  flat  or  gently  undulating  terrain,  and  soil  loss  is  considered  to  be  low.    Mineral 
resources found in Kayonza District are wolfram (tungsten), cassiterite (tin) and coltan in Rwinkwavu, 
Murundi, Ruramira, Mwili, Rukara, Ndego and Kabarondo Sectors.  
Hydrology  and  Surface  Water  Resources:  The  Project  area  falls  entirely  within  the  Lower  Akagera 
Catchment.  The Akagera River forms the eastern border of Kayonza District with Tanzania.  The River 
has several small tributaries, such as the Kadiridimba River and Cyizange River, that originate to the 
south west of the District, and flow north through the Project area to join the Akagera River to the 
north of the Akagera National Park. In addition, there are a number of lakes in the Project area, namely 
Lakes Nasho, Chyambwe, Gishanda and a small section in the southern part of Lake Ihema.  The rest 
of  Lake  Ihema  lies  in  Mwiri  Sector  within  the  Akagera  National  Park,  together  with  Lakes  Hago, 
Kivumba,  Ngerenke,  Kihari  and  the  southern  tip  of  Lake  Kisanju.  The  lakes  in  the  Akagera/Nasho 
complex  shallow  (less  than  10  m  in  depth).  They  have  high  nutrient  values,  species  diversity  and 
productivity.2  The Akagera River shows bidirectional flow patterns which depend on the sequence, 
magnitude and duration of hydrological events in upstream catchments and within the lower Akagera 
catchment itself.  “Reverse flow” occurs when the Akagera River is in flood as a result of rainfall in the 
upstream catchments (Akagera and Ruvubu) filling up the lakes. The Lower Akagera Catchment Master 
Plan states that the width and depth of the channels between Akagera River and lakes are a crucial 
factor  for  maintaining  the  hydrological  functionality,  recommends  that  abstraction  of  water  for 
agricultural use between the Akagera River and its lakes should be avoided3.   Based on catchment 
wide data, the adjusted water balance for the Lower Akagera Catchment indicates that at catchment 
level the renewable resources are sufficient to cater for demand until 2030, after which resources will 
be stressed during the twenty-year dry year; but by 2040, water resources during the dry season will 
be stressed for most years, except when exceptionally wet years are experienced. 
Hydrogeology  and  Groundwater  Resources:  The  Project  area  is  dominated  by  permeable  fractured 
aquifers (quartzites on schist base) and low permeable fractured aquifers (schist and micaschist) which 
are  likely  to  have  low  suitability  for  groundwater.    The  Lower  Akagera  Catchment  Master  Plan 
recommends that if and when groundwater aquifers are exploited in Murundi, Gahini and Mwiri, they 
should be closely monitored for diminishing water tables4.  
Environmental Flow:  There is no nationally set standard for environmental flow (EF), and the Rwanda 
Water  and  Forest  Authority  (RWFA)  determines  EF  on  a  case  by  case  basis.    However,  the  Lower 
Akagera Catchment Master Plan proposes an EF of 33% of the average monthly flow, but states that 
the water balance of the lower Akagera shows sufficient resources up till 2030, but environmental flow 
may be compromised during dryer years (1 in 20 dry year). 
Wetlands: In 2010, REMA listed and mapped all wetlands in the country and assigned them various 
1 REMA (2015). Baseline Climate Change Vulnerability Index. 
2 REMA (2015). State of the Environment and Outlook Report 
3 Rwanda National Water Resources Master Plan; Master Plan Report – Appendix 08NAKL. Catchment Master 
Plan – NAKL 
4 Op. cit. Lower Akagera Master Plan 
xiv 
protection  levels:  i)  total  protection  where  no  activities  are  allowed  to  take  place;  ii)  conditional 
exploitation which requires a basic environmental and social impact assessment to be carried out, and 
for which the EIA licence issued by the Rwanda Development Board stipulates the conditions and types 
of activities that are permitted to be conducted in those wetlands; and iii) unconditional exploitation 
which allows use under given conditions. Most of the proposed irrigaton schemes will draw water from 
conditional wetlands.  It is noted that the proposed scheme at Humure in Ndego Sector will draw its 
water  from  Lake  Ihema, where  the  shoreline  bordering  the  scheme  is  under  total  protection.   The 
scheme  design  will  therefore  have  to  consider  an  alternative  site,  or  alternative  methodology  for 
abstraction and pumping of water to the scheme. 
Vegetation and Forests: The savannah vegetation in the Project area comprises a mosaic of grassland, 
broadleaved and/or deciduous shrubland and forest.  Within the Akagera wetland complex south of 
the Akagera National Park, there are a total of 77 vascular plants of which two are endangered orchid 
species (Eulophia angolensis and Eulophia guineensis)5.   A major threat to the water bodies in the 
Project area is the invasion of lakes - including Lakes Ihema and Nasho – by Water Hyacinth (Eichhornia 
crassipes). There were three types of forests in Kayonza District: natural, agroforestry and forest lots 
(woodlots), but the only natural forests now left in the District are those in the Akagera National Park. 
Fauna/Wildlife:  Human  activity  throughout  much of  the  District  has  disturbed  faunal  habitats,  and 
there  is a paucity of large mammals in the  Project  area, apart from  Hippopotamus (Hippopotamus 
amphibious) which can be found in a number of dams/valley tanks in the Project area, Baboon (Papio 
anubis),  Vervet  Monkey  (Chlorocebus  pygerythrusantelope),  and  perhaps  some  smaller  species  of 
antelope.    Otherwise,  wildlife  in  the  Project  area  is  largely  confined  to  the  Akagera  National  Park.  
However, the wetlands in the Project area provide unique  habitats for a number of faunal species.  
Threats to aquatic fauna in the Project area include the decrease of native fish species in the lakes of 
the Nyabarongo-Akagera river system due to the invasion and increase of predator species, such as 
Protopterus aethiopicus and Clarias gariepinus. While no extensive faunal surveys have been carried 
out in the Project area,  it is likely that the wetlands to be utilised for Project activities may be inhabited 
by some  threatened or endangered  species.  The environmental impact  studies carried out for the 
proposed sites must therefore take this into consideration. 
Akagera National Park: The Akagera National Park (ANP) was established in 1934 and originally covered 
an area of more than 2,500 sq km.  Following the civil strife, a number of refugees settled around the 
park, and as a result the wildlife populations were severely affected by poaching for meat, and due to 
clearing for cultivation.  Since 1994, the park area has reduced by about 50% of its total area (it is now 
1,200 sq km in area) to provide land to returning refugees and too ensure protection of wildlife in the 
remaining area.   The ANP harbours a number of unique, vulnerable or threatened large mammals 
including the aquatic Sitatunga (Tragelaphus spekii), Elephant (Loxodonta africana - Vulnerable), Masai 
Giraffe (Giraffa camelopardolis tippelskirchi – Vulnerable) and Lion (Panthera leo - Vulnerable).  The 
Park is now an important tourist attraction. 
Demographics:  Kayonza District has a population of 350,211 individuals, of which about 55% of the 
population of Kayonza district are aged 19 years or younger6. It is the country’s least densely populated 
district  at  178  inhabitants  per  square  km  according  to  the  2012  National  Population  Census.    The 
selected KIIWP intervention sectors make up 67% of the district’s population with Murundi (37,738); 
Kabare  (36,365); Gahini (33,590); Kabarondo (30,811); Rwinkwavu (29,420); Mwiri (25,156); Ndego 
(20,900) and Murama (20,180). 
5 Fischer, E (2011). Biodiversity Inventory of Key Wetlands in Rwanda. Final Report. REMA. 
6 http://www.statistics.gov.rw/publication/size-resident-population 
xv 
Land Tenure:  Current land laws provide for equal access to land without discrimination based on sex 
or origin. It is mandatory to register land property to both spouses married in a community and spousal 
consent is now required for transfer of the property.  Rwandan owners of agricultural land in rural 
areas may be granted a 99 year renewable leasehold.  
Agriculture:  The main crops grown in the Project area are maize, beans, cassava, soya and rice.  Coffee, 
pineapple and fruit trees are also grown.  However, recurrent drought, occasional flooding, pestilence 
(locusts, army worm) and crop diseases have resulted in continuously poor yields or crop failures. 
Livestock:  Cows are very important in Kayonza District with 23 % (20,406 households) owning 53,051 
cows. Murundi sector has the highest number of households that own cows with the highest number 
of cows followed by Gahini and Mukarange sectors. 
Health:  The District has two hospitals in Gahini and Rwinkwavu, 15 health centres and 4 health posts. 
Key health challenges are malaria and malnutrition.  About 73% of the population is covered by health 
insurance. 
Social Protection:  Kayonza District has a large number of vulnerable households: 41,634 people from 
11,196 households are supported through the Ubudehe program.  0.7% of households are headed by 
persons under 21years of age and 4.2% of households are headed by disabled people and women. 
Only 20% of the District’s population is covered by the social protection system. 
Education:    Literacy  rate  for  persons  aged  15  years  and  older  is  67.1%.    Net  enrolment  rates  at 
secondary  and  primary  schools  are  is 19.1%  and 92.9%,  while  gross  secondary  and  primary  school 
enrolment rates are 38.4% and 150.9%.  Drop out rates are are 10.9% in primary, 13.1% in secondary 
and 2.4% in upper secondary. The main challenges in the education sector are inadequate classrooms 
and latrines both in primary, lower and upper secondary schools.   
Water Resources:  The majority of households use a public standpipe (37%), followed by a protected 
spring (27%). More than a quarter (28%) of households in  Kayonza District  still use  an unimproved 
drinking water; 22% of these use surface water (from lakes and rivers). 
Household Income: Household income in Kayonza District is based on agricultural production, wages, 
business, rent and transfers including remittances. 
Gender:  25% of households in Kayonza District are headed by females and 5% are de facto female-
headed households’, i.e. those headed by females during the absence of a male head who is ordinarily 
present. The  percentage  distribution of employment by gender in Kayonza District,  shows that  the 
majority of females in Kayonza District are small-scale farmer workers (78%), followed by wage farmer 
and independent non-farmer workers (both at 6%). 5% of females are wage non-farmer workers. Males 
are also involved in small-scale farm work at a lower percentage than females (61%). Males are wage 
non-farm workers and independent non-farmers in greater proportions than females, however (18% 
and 13% respectively). 
STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATIONS 
Key outcomes from consultations undertaken during the ESMF study are as follows: 
Cooperative  Approach  for  Delivery  of  KIIWP:  Target  beneficiary  stakeholders  and  opinion  leaders 
generally  demonstrated  awareness  of  and  experience  in  cooperative  frameworks  and  expressed 
xvi 
support  for  the  plans  to  deliver  KIIWP  interventions  in  this  modality.  Most  of  the  residents  of  the 
proposed  Kibare  pumped  irrigation  site  indicated  that  they  had  not  worked  in  cooperative 
arrangements and sought clarifications during the focus group discussion. 
Target  Beneficiary  Crop  Priorities  for  KIIWP:  Focus  group  discussions  with  target  beneficiaries  and 
opinion leaders in the proposed pumped irrigation sites of Kibare, Humure and Byimana in the Ndego 
sector and of Gakoma in Kabare sector were unanimous in indicating maize, beans and soya as priority 
crops.  Rice,  banana,  sugarcane  as  well  as  vegetable  crops  including  tomato  and  beetroot  were 
indicated as priority crops.  In the land husbandry support intervention areas, coffee was indicated as 
the highest priority due to its resistance to drought and favourable market prices.  Other priority crops 
included  pineapple,  avocado,  mango,  orange,  lemon,  tree-tomato  and  passion  fruit.  Banana  and 
cassava  were  also  indicated  as  priority  crops  but  these  have  suffered  disease  infestations  that 
destroyed their crops. 
Target Beneficiary Willingness to Invest in KIIWP: Focus group discussions indicated a willingness to 
invest in the necessary maintenance infrastructure for irrigation including pumping systems, dams and 
boreholes. Target beneficiary stakeholders said that they already invest resources and cash in growing 
crops every season for the required inputs, although the crops fail in most seasons due to drought. 
Some focus group discussions indicated a need for capacity development in business skills and financial 
management.  
Land Use Competition and Conflicts: Potential conflicts were flagged in some focus group discussions 
and discussions with individuals. In Kageyo, it was reported that farmers compete among themselves 
to  irrigate  rice,  and  for  watering  cattle  in  the  dry  season  when  the  flow  in  the  rivers  is  reduced. 
Stakeholders indicated a need to rehabilitate valley dams that were silted and for the construction of 
others  as  well  as  boreholes  for  livestock  water  requirements.  Similar  potential  for  conflict  was 
observed in Humure and Kibare where cattle graze and water in the area targeted by the Project for 
pumped irrigation. Human/wildlife conflict was also highlighted as a problem, especially with hippos 
and baboons. 
Community Sentiments:  The stakeholders expressed the need for help to mitigate effects of persistent 
droughts. The community of Humure gave an account of crop failures season after season while they 
see  the  neighbouring  Bramin  farm  prospering  with  bumper  harvests  from  irrigation.  They  were 
frustrated  that  the  Government  often  has  to  provide  them  with  food  relief  purchased  from 
neighbouring Tanzania whereas they are capable of feeding themselves by irrigating their crops from 
the same source that Bramin draws its water from. The same frustration was expressed by residents 
of Byimana and Gakoma in reference to the Buffet irrigation scheme located within a few kilometres 
from their fields. 
Target  Beneficiary  Grievance  Resolution  Views  for  KIIWP:  Focus  group  discussions  demonstrated  a 
good understanding of conflict resolution mechanisms within cooperative rules as laid out in corporate 
constitutions as well as national laws and regulations on cooperatives. It was explained that conflicts 
that  developing  within  a  cooperative  are  resolved  by  a  grievance/conflict  resolution  committee. 
Unresolved grievances in cooperatives must be escalated to the Rwanda Cooperative Agency (RCA), 
the  statutory  body  in  change  of  coop  regulation  and  management.  RCA  will  attempt  to  redress 
cooperative-born grievances through its mediation and arbitration system before forwarding them to 
the country’s court system if unable to resolve them. Complaints are escalated to local governance 
structures  when  settlement  is  not  reached  at  the  cooperative  level,  starting  with  sector  level  and 
escalating  to  the  district  level  if  still  not  resolved.  Court  systems  are  available  to  complainants  if 
conflicts  remain  unresolved  through  the  existing  resolution  mechanisms  and  local  governance 
xvii 
structures. The Court systems are available to complainants if conflicts remain unresolved through the 
existing resolution mechanisms and local governance structures. 
POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL AND CLIMATE-RELATED IMPACTS 
Beneficial Impacts 
The main positive impacts of KIIWP are envisaged as being crop diversification and increased value of 
production in hillside areas; increased value of agricultural production in marshlands;  reduced post-
harvest losses and increased sales in output markets;  increased value of livestock production;  and 
improved access to water for livestock and humans.  These impacts will contribute to improved food 
security  and  higher  household  incomes,  in  line  with  the  Project’s  development  objectives.    As 
mentioned above, KIIWP will target 50,000 rural households, directly and indirectly.  Most of KIIWP’s 
target group will comprise men and women farmers and livestock keepers, as well as men, women, 
youth  and  the  physically  challenged  in  wage  labour  and  off-farm  activities  along  the  target  value 
chains.   Overall, it is expected that women will account for at least 50% of total beneficiaries.   
Adverse Impacts 
Irrigation Schemes 
Although actual designs of the irrigation schemes are still to be developed, it is likely that the irrigation 
schemes will include one or more of the following: diversion weirs/intakes; headworks; dams, dam 
walls/embankments;  conveyance  canals,  secondary,  tertiary  and  field  canals;  pumps  and  pump 
houses; water storage facilities; distribution pipes; and drainage lines; workshops, sheds, offices; fuel 
storage;  access/scheme  roads,  bridges  and  footpaths.    The  most  significant  impacts  due  to  the 
construction and operation of the irrigation schemes are likely to be: 
•  Reduction in downstream flow as a result of diversion of water, which could compromise water 
availability downstream to satisfy human and livestock demand, and affect aquatic habitats 
and biodiversity (ie. environmental flow); 
Inundation of the river upstream, caused by damming or access roads, which could result in 
physical and economic displacement, hinder access to grazing and water sources for livestock, 
and destroy vegetation and natural habitats; 
• 
•  Soil erosion caused by scheme excavation works (including access/scheme roads, dams) and 
poorly managed upper catchment areas, leading to loss of cultivable land and/or siltation of 
canals; 
•  Soil degradation and salinization due to improper application of agrochemicals, overwatering 
and poor drainage; 
•  Reduction in water quality due  to application of agrochemicals or oil spills, affecting water 
potability for domestic and livestock use downstream, as well as causing poisoning of aquatic 
fauna; 
Loss  of  biodiversity  and  ecological  imbalances  caused  by:  clearing  land  for  agriculture, 
installing irrigation infrastructure (eg. intakes in wetlands or lakes), poaching as a result of the 
schemes’ proximity to the Akagera National Park, and from pesticides poisoning of non-target 
species, particularly bees and other beneficial insects; 
• 
•  Resistance to pesticides and pest resurgence due to poor application of pesticides; 
•  Temporary and permanent land take for construction sites and irrigation infrastructure leading 
to loss of land and assets; 
•  Denied or hindered access for livestock to water sources and/or pasture; 
xviii 
•  Community health and safety  risks  from:  construction activities;  storage,  handling, use and 
disposal  of  agrochemicals;  failure  of  dam  structures;  increase  prevalence  of  water-borne 
diseases such as malaria; 
•  Human/wildlife conflict as a result of wildlife raiding farms and destroying crops; 
•  Reduction  in  water  availability  due  to  climatic  events,  such  as  prolonged  dry  seasons  and 
subsequent drought, or due to diversion of water upstream for water supplies or irrigation 
subprojects;  
•  Flooding due to climatic events resulting in loss of soil and crop damage. 
Catchment Rehabilitation 
Although catchment rehabilitation and protection are intended to improve environmental conditions 
in catchment areas, some interventions could have adverse impacts.  The most significant ones relate 
to: 
•  Failure of structures due to poor design and/or construction, or excessive rain;  
•  Use  of  exotic  species  for  slope  protection  and  bio-engineering  resulting  in  the  spread  of 
invasive species; 
•  Denied or hindered access to natural resources or grazing areas; 
•  Permanent acquisition of land for catchment rehabilitation leading to loss of land and assets; 
• 
Loss of plants or trees of cultural and traditional significance. 
Provision of Water for Livestock  and Domestic Use 
Typical impacts resulting from construction and rehabilitation of valley tanks are likely to be: 
•  Soil erosion caused by scheme excavation works and concentration of livestock around valley 
tanks and boreholes; 
•  Poorly managed upper catchment area leading to siltation of valley tanks; 
• 
Loss of biodiversity due to flooding of land for valley tanks; 
• 
Loss of land, crops or assets due to land inundated by new valley tanks; 
•  Destruction of physical cultural resources due to land take for valley tanks. 
• 
•  Reduction in water availability in tanks and lowering of aquifer levels due to climatic events, 
Impacts on groundwater aquifers from over-abstraction of water at boreholes; 
such as prolonged dry seasons;  
•  Flooding  due  to  climatic  events  resulting  in  soil  erosion,  siltation  of  tanks,  overflowing  or 
• 
failure of tank structure;  damage to borehole infrastructure; 
Impacts on community health and safety from construction activities,  or as a result of tank 
structure failure; 
•  Human/wildlife conflict due to hippos inhabiting valley dams.  
Proposals to address the key risks and impacts are summarised in the last section of this Executive 
Summary. 
CLIMATE RISK ASSESSMENT 
According to SECAP’s climate risk classification guidelines as described above, KIIWP is classified as 
high risk because it promotes agricultural activity on areas subject to extreme climatic events, such as 
flooding,  drought,  tropical  storms  or  heat  waves;    climate  scenarios  for  the  Project  area  foresee 
changes in temperature, rainfall or extreme weather that will adversely affect  the Project’s impact, 
sustainability or cost over its lifetime; the Project promotes agricultural activity on marginal and/or 
xix 
highly degraded areas (such as on hillsides, deforested slopes or floodplains); and the Project lies in an 
area which regularly experiences weather-related losses and damages.    Indeed, studies indicate that 
temperatures  are  expected  to  rise  across  the  country  with  increased  rainfall  in  high  areas  of  the 
country  and  significant  reductions  in  the  low-lying  eastern  parts  of  the  country  including  Kayonza 
District.  Kayonza District lie within the highest climate change vulnerability index indicated for the 
Eastern Province.  
Climate  change  scenarios  on  one-way  inter-basin  transfer  into  the  Lower  Akagera  with  its  own 
contribution  diminished  could 
including  the  necessary 
environmental flow. The Project would therefore benefit from a detailed hydrological study that take 
into account the long term climate change impact scenarios. 
impact  on  the  hydrological  balance 
KIIWP is likely to alleviate opportunistic pests and diseases that take advantage of moisture stress and 
compromised immune systems of livestock due to inadequate forage and drinking water. However, it 
may contribute to an increase in vector-borne diseases such as malaria. 
All  the  three  components  of  the  Project  are  aimed  at  climate  resilient  agriculture  and  livestock 
husbandry.    However,  due  consideration  of  climate  change  factors  must  be  given  in  the  planned 
hydrological studies to be prepared as part of the suite of investigations to be carried out during the 
Project feasibility studies. 
RESETTLEMENT ACTION FRAMEWORK 
The Resettlement Action Framework (RAF) for KIIWP discusses the steps for preparing a resettlement 
action plan for KIIWP subprojects where  physical and economic displacement may occur.  The RAF 
describes, among others, processes for screening, establishing the need for a RAP, the requirements 
of the Project Affected Persons (PAP) census and socio-economic survey, land and asset surveys, the 
setting  up  of  a  grievance  redress  mechanism,  establishing  a  cut-off  date,  eligibility  criteria,  the 
entitlement  matrix,  valuation  methodology,  compensation  and  resettlement  measures,  RAP 
implementation,  budgets  for  RAP  implementation  and  monitoring, monitoring and  evaluation,  and 
disclosure.  
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL AND CLIMATE CHANGE MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES 
The SPIU-IFAD staff who will be involved in the implementation and coordination of KIIWP will include 
Coordinator,  Finance  Officer,  M&E  Officer,  Procurement  Officer,  Administration  Officer,  the 
Environmental and Climate Change Specialist and the agro-meteorologist.  Staff specifically dedicated 
to KIIWP within the SPIU will include the KIIWP Programme Manager, an accountant, an M&E officer 
in charge also of gender and youth, an irrigation engineer, a WUO Specialist, a Land Husbandry/Soil 
and Water Conservation (SWC) Engineer, and a Cooperative Development Officer.   At the District level, 
KIIWP  staff  will  consist  of  an  accountant,  a  WUO  Specialist,  a  Land  Husbandry  (SWC)  Engineer,  a 
Cooperative  Development  Officer,  a  horticulture  specialist,  and  an  irrigation  technician.  It  is 
recommended that  the KIIWP district team be complemented  with  an  Environmental and Climate 
Change Officer (ECCO), and a Social Safeguards Officer (SSO) as well. 
The first step in the environmental, social and climate change management procedures is to screen 
the subprojects to establish whether they are eligible to be supported through KIIWP.  This will be done 
by the KIIWP Project  Team.    It  should  be  noted  that  IFAD  will  not  fund  projects  in  areas  of critical 
habitats  or  which  result  in  conversion  or  degradation  of  such  habitats,  production  or  trade  in  any 
xx 
product or activity deemed illegal under host country laws or regulations or international conventions 
and  agreements,  or  subject  to  international  bans,  such  as  pharmaceuticals,  pesticides/herbicides, 
ozone depleting substances, PCB's, wildlife or products regulated under CITES; production or activities 
involving harmful or exploitative forms of forced labour  and/or harmful child labour. In addition, it is 
recommended that subprojects involving the physical and/or economic displacement of more than 20 
persons should not be implemented under KIIWP due to the complex logistics and funds required to 
properly implement the resettlement processes. 
The second screening step is to categorise the subprojects to determine the level of environmental 
and social risk, and therefore the level of assessment to be undertaken for those subprojects.  
Rwanda EIA guidelines define 3 Impact Level (IL) categories that are determined through the screening 
process: 
• 
IL1: Projects believed to have minimal adverse impacts, that can easily be identified through a 
Project Brief and not requiring further environmental analysis; 
IL2:  Projects  believed  to  have  adverse,  but  not  irreversible  environmental  impacts  and  for 
which mitigation and management measures can be readily designed and incorporated into 
the project; 
IL 3: Projects for which it is evident that there will be significant and adverse environmental 
impacts  whose  mitigation  measures  cannot  readily  be  prescribed,  and  thus,  must  undergo 
through a complete EIA process. 
• 
• 
SECAP prescribes the following screening categories: 
•  Category A projects require one or combination of a formal Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment 
(ESMF), 
Resettlement  Action  Framework  (RAF)/  Resettlement  Action  Plan  (RAP),  free,  prior  and 
informed consent (FPIC)/FPIC implementation plan and Indigenous People Plan. 
(ESIA)  or  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Framework 
•  Category  B  projects  are  those  that  may  have  some  adverse  environmental  and/or  social 
impacts on human populations or environmentally significant areas but the impacts are less 
adverse than those for Category A, are site-specific and few are-irreversible in nature, and can 
be readily remedied by appropriate preventive actions and/or mitigation measures. While no 
formal ESIA is required for Category B projects, in many cases further environmental analysis 
could be undertaken during project preparation or implementation.  In some cases, an ESMF 
is developed during project  preparation or implementation. Category B projects require  an 
ESMP. 
•  Category C projects generally do not require additional environmental analysis because the 
activities  have  positive  environmental 
impacts,  or  negligible  or  minimally  adverse 
environmental  impacts.    They  would  include,  for  example,  technical  assistance  grants  for 
agricultural research and training, grants to generate global environmental impacts, research, 
capacity building and institutional strengthening. 
The proposed subprojects under KIIWP have been accorded screening categorization as illustrated in 
Table E.2 below.  
Table E.2  Screening Categorisation of KIIWP Subprojects 
Infrastructure 
Comments 
REMA Risk 
Categorisation 
SECAP Risk 
Categorisation 
Rationale for Categorisation 
Irrigation 
Pumped irrigation 
3 sites in Ndego sector: Kibare 
(400 ha), Humure (600ha), 
Byimana (400ha) 
Source: Lakes Kibare, Ihema, 
Nasho respectively 
IL3 
Category A 
Command areas greater than 100ha 
Humure scheme borders Akagera National Park. 
Intake likely to be in totally protected wetland. The 
xxi 
Infrastructure 
Comments 
REMA Risk 
Categorisation 
SECAP Risk 
Categorisation 
Rationale for Categorisation 
park and its wetlands are areas of national 
importance and high biodiversity and endemism.  
Kibare and Byimana schemes intakes in conditional 
wetlands. 
Peculiar hydrological characteristics which need to 
be thoroughly studied: shallow lakes with reverse 
flow phenomenon from lakes upstream to Akagera 
River 
IL3 
Category A 
Command areas greater than 100ha 
Intake in conditional wetland 
Peculiar hydrological characteristics which need to 
be thoroughly studied: shallow lakes with reverse 
flow phenomenon from lakes upstream to Akagera 
River 
IL3 
Category A 
Command areas greater than 100 ha 
Medium-scale dams with dam height greater than 
5m 
IL2 
Category B 
Small scale water harvesting which will have minor 
impacts. 
IL2 
Category B 
Watershed management and soil and water 
conservation activities in non-sensitive areas. 
Unlikely that more than 20 people will be physically 
or economically displaced. 
1 site in Kabare sector: 
Gakoma (600ha) 
Source: Lake Nasho 
Small marshlands 
Farm-level ponds 
Dams to irrigate a total of 275 
ha both marshlands and 
hillsides  
Rwinkwavu/Kabare sectors, on 
River Gishanda, irrigating 125 
ha 
Kabarondo Sector on River 
Kanyeganyege irrigating 150 ha 
Source: rainwater 
Locations: Murama 
Selection criteria – a lot of land 
which has been terraced, but 
no water 
Pond size 50-200m3 
Catchment Conservation 
Land Husbandry 
(Terraces + 
agroforestry, 
mulching, liming, 
etc) 
7500 ha in total, including 2275 
ha irrigated and rainfed 
Kabare, Kabarondo, 
Rwinkwavu: dam or irrigation 
related 
Murama (900ha), Kabarondo 
(190ha): rainfed  
Criteria for selecting locations: 
terraced hillsides with water 
scarcity; non-terraced hillsides 
Av. Household land holding: 
0.3ha 
Provision of Water for Livestock and Domestic Use 
Valley tanks new 
Ndego, Gahini, Murundi and 
Mwiri Sectors. 
 7 new valley tanks  
Locations of new tanks not 
known.  
IL2 
Category B 
Valley tanks rehab 
Ndego, Gahini, Murundi and 
Mwiri Sectors. 
Rehabilitation of 15 existing 
valley tanks 
IL2 
Category B 
Involve natural drainage into valley depressions. 
May require walls, but these will be less than 5m in 
height;  
Possible economic or physical displacement but will 
affect than 20 people, particularly for acquisition of 
buffer zone. 
Impacts would revolve around degradation around 
borehole site which can be readily managed. 
Rehabilitation of existing structures, involving 
repairing tank walls, desilting and landscaping 
activities, as well as rehabilitation of degraded 
valley tank environs. 
Impacts would revolve around degradation around 
borehole site which can be readily managed. 
xxii 
Infrastructure 
Comments 
Boreholes 
Ndego Gahini, Murundi and 
Mwiri Sectors. 
Possibly 20 boreholes. 
Borehole location and capacity 
not known. 
No. of people and livestock to 
be supplied not established. 
REMA Risk 
Categorisation 
IL2 
SECAP Risk 
Categorisation 
Category B 
Rationale for Categorisation 
There are few boreholes in the area, and therefore 
if there is groundwater, the aquifer is unlikely to be 
stressed or overutilized. 
Impacts would revolve around degradation around 
borehole site which can be readily managed.  
Depending on the subproject siting and designs, other safeguards documents may be required, such 
as Resettlement Action Plans, Integrated Pest Management Plans, Dam Safety Plans, Physical Cultural 
Resources  (PCR)  Assessment,  Climate  Risk  Analysis,  or  other  management  plans  dealing  with 
environmental and social aspects.  
During consultations to be carried out for ESIAs/ESMPs, the processes for disclosure of the documents 
should  be  communicated.  IFAD’s  SECAP  procedures  also  require  that  sufficient  consultations  have 
been carried out with key stakeholders (ie. the communities) in order to satisfy its requirements for 
Free Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC).   The ESIAs, RAPs, IPMPs, Dam Safety Plans, PCR assessments 
will be disclosed by RAB and IFAD.  Approvals for ESIAs and ESMPs will be done by RDB, after review 
by IFAD.   RAPs will be approved by the Kayonza District Land Office and the Rwanda Land Management 
and Use Authority (RLMUA).  Dam Safety Plans will be approved by IFAD, the Ministry of Infrastructure 
(MININFRA) and the Ministry of Environment (MINIRENA). 
by 
Figure E1  KIIWP Grievance Redress Mechanism 
 A grievance redress mechanism (GRM) 
the 
will  be  prepared  by 
Scheme 
Grievance 
Committees,  and  will  follow 
either  the  Abunzi  system  if 
aggrieved  party 
is  not  a 
member  of  the  cooperative 
concerned,  or  it  would  follow 
resolution  mechanism 
the 
typically 
the 
used 
cooperatives  as  stipulated  in 
the  provisions  of  Law  N° 
28/06/2013 
48/2013 
establishing 
Rwanda 
Cooperative Agency (RCA). The 
RCA requires that cooperatives 
on 
request 
unresolved 
of 
registered  by  their  members. 
its  grievance 
RCA  evokes 
redress  mechanism,  failure  at 
which  it  is  escalated  to  the 
national  court  system.    Aggrieved  parties  who  are  not  members  of  a  cooperative  would  register 
grievances in the  Abunzi  system or directly  in the  national  courts, depending on  the  gravity of  the 
grievance.  This is illustrated in  Figure  E.1.    IFAD’s Complaints  Procedure  is also available to receive 
complaints from project-affected people via email at SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org. 
arbitration 
grievances 
of 
Performance  monitoring  will  ensure  that  safeguards  instruments  are  prepared  to  the  required 
standard  and  approved,  and  that  the  ESMPs  and  RAPs  are  being  implemented.    At  the  Project 
management  level,  this  will  be  done  by  the  SPIU  ECC  Specialist.    For  intervention  level  activities, 
xxiii 
performance  monitoring  will  be  done  by  the  IWUOs,  Cell  Socio-economic  Development  Officers 
(SEDOs),  sub-catchment  committees  and  livestock  water  user  organisations  (LWUOs).  Results 
monitoring  involves  the  monitoring  compliance  against  Project  level  environmental  and  social 
indicators, as well as measuring the effectiveness of the safeguards instruments.  Results monitoring 
will be carried out annually by the SPIU ECC Specialist, KIIWP Environment and Climate Change Officer, 
(ECCO) the Social Safeguards Officer (SSO) and the District Environment Officer (DEO).      
Quarterly  and  annual  reviews  will  be  undertaken  by  the  KIIWP  ECC  Officers  and  Social  Safeguards 
Officer. The reviews will produce a Quarterly and Annual Review Reports for each sector which will be 
submitted to the Project Steering Committee.  Workshops will be held each year where environmental, 
climate  change  and  social  performance  of  the  Project  will  be  reviewed  and  discussed,  and 
recommendations made for improved Programme performance.  
The KIIWP Project Management Team will be responsible for ensuring that environmental and social 
audits are carried out once a year during Project implementation for Category A subprojects and once 
in two years for Category B subprojects.  The audits will be carried out by independent consultants. 
The  KIIWP  Project  Management  Team  will  submit  quarterly  and  annual  environmental,  social  and 
climate resilience performance reports to the PSC and to IFAD.   
CAPACITY BUILDING 
MINAGRI  has  an  Environment  and  Climate  Change  (ECC)  Specialist  whose  primary  focus  is  on 
regulation  and  strategic  planning,  but  this  officer  will  not  be  directly  involved  in  KIIWP  oversight.  
Although  RAB  has  many  staff  with  high-level  specialised  expertise,  the  RAB  personnel  who  will  be 
responsible  for  overseeing  KIIWP  may  not  be  fully  aware  of  the  various  environmental,  social  and 
climate interactions that may occur from the KIIWP Project activities and how environmental, social 
and climate risk mitigation are to be mainstreamed into Project activities.  In Kayonza District, there is 
one  District  Environmental  Officer  (DEO)  who  is  responsible  for  inspection  of  all  environmental 
management activities.  The DEO works with the sector level specialists (such as the agronomist), but 
the  latter  do  not  have  any  training  in  environmental  issues.    Generally,  therefore  capacity  for 
monitoring environmental, social and climate-related issues is lacking at the district level.  There are 
no functional sector environmental committees.  However, at cell level Socio-economic Development 
Officers (SEDOs) are in charge of environmental management, but again have very little understanding 
of environmental issues. 
Training will be carried out targeting KIIWP Project Management Team at the SPIU and District level, 
the DEO, District and cell SEDOs, District Agriculture Inspector, Technical Service Providers, IWUOs and 
LWUOs, watershed and irrigation farmers, hydrographic basin committees and Project communities, 
including women, youth and the physically challenged.   Training will be carried out at national, district, 
sector and cell level, at the hydrographic basin level, through workshops, classroom sessions, farmer 
field schools, and roll out training.  Training topics will vary from group to group, but will include: 
•  Requirements  of  the  national  environmental,  social  and  climate  policies,  legislation  and 
administrative frameworks; 
•  Requirements of IFAD’s SECAP and ERNM, Climate, Land and Disclosure Policies; 
•  ESMF  processes,  procedures  and  institutional  arrangements  to  develop  and  implement 
required safeguards documents; 
•  Screening as prescribed in the ESMF; 
•  Environmental,  social  and  climate  impact  assessment,  IPMP,  RAP,  PCR  approaches  and 
requirements; 
•  Preparation, implementation and monitoring of ESMPs, ESIAs, IPMPs and RAPs; 
xxiv 
•  ESMPs  and  monitoring  key  environmental  and  social  performance  indicators  for  each 
subproject site; 
•  Reporting and monitoring implementation of ESMPs, IPMPs and RAPs; 
•  Environmental  and  social  best  practices  –  including,  for  example,  proper  application  of 
chemical inputs, pest management, water efficiency, water saving agronomic practices, soil 
fertility management, dam safety, gender empowerment and labour saving techniques; 
•  The use of climate and weather information in agriculture; 
•  Participatory mapping; 
•  Watershed management; 
•  Conservation agriculture techniques. 
Technical Assistance will be hired on temporary basis, as and when necessary, to support the Project 
Management  Team  and  other  key  Project  implementers  at  both  National  and  District  level  to 
mainstream environmental, social and climate issues, carry out training, prepare training materials and 
assist in the preparation of Project Implementation Manuals.  
ESMF IMPLEMENTATION BUDGET 
The cost for the implementation of activities proposed in this ESMF is estimated at USD 2,978,500.  
This covers costs for preparation of safeguards documentation, hiring of dedicated staff to oversee 
environmental,  social  and  climate-related  aspects  of  KIIWP  activities,  capacity  building,  Project 
compliance  monitoring,  annual  audits,  technical  assistance  and  annual  reviews.    The  ESMF 
implementation budget is summarized below: 
Table E.3  Estimated ESMF Implementation Budget 
Year 1 USD 
Year 2 USD  Year 3 USD  Year 4 USD  Year 5 USD 
Total cost 
USD 
Item 
Preparation of safeguards 
documents 
 RAP Implementation 
0 
90,000 
225,000 
130,000 
1,000,000 
170,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1,300,000 
315,000 
 KIIWP Staff Salaries 
15,500 
31,000 
31,000 
31,000 
31,000 
139,500 
 Capacity building 
140,000 
75,000 
225,000 
200,000 
50,000 
690,000 
 Project monitoring 
12,000 
24,000 
24,000 
 Annual Independent Audits 
0 
0 
100,000 
 Technical Assistance 
125,000 
25,000 
0 
24,000 
30,000 
0 
24,000 
108,000 
86,000 
216,000 
0 
150,000 
 Annual ESC Performance 
Workshops 
0 
15,000 
15,000 
15,000 
15,000 
60,000 
TOTAL COST (USD) 
422,500 
1,260,000 
790,000 
300,000 
206,000 
2,978,500 
SUMMARY OF KEY ISSUES ARISING AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR DESIGN 
Hydrology:  The hydrology of the Akagera River and its lakes are complex.  There is a “reverse flow” 
when the  Akagera River  is  in flood  as a result  of  rainfall in the upstream  catchments  (Akagera and 
Ruvubu) filling up the lakes.  The lakes are reportedly shallow, and the width and depth of the channels 
between Akagera River and lakes are a crucial factor for maintaining the hydrological functionality, and 
xxv 
therefore  any  alteration  to  the  channels  may  have  serious  consequences.    In  addition,  the  Lower 
Akagera  Catchment  Master  Plan  indicates  that  at  catchment  level  the  renewable  surface  water 
resources are sufficient to cater for irrigation use and other demand until 2030, after which resources 
will be stressed during the 1 in 20 dry year.  By 2040, the Plan states that water resources during the 
dry season will be stressed for most years, except when exceptionally wet years are experienced.  In 
order  to  accurately  ascertain  the  availability  of  water  resources  for  the  Project,  it  is  crucially 
important that a detailed hydrological study be carried out for the proposed Project area in order to 
substantiate or otherwise, the recommendations of the Lower Akagera Master Plan.   This will then 
inform the number of hectares that can be sustainably irrigated. 
Environmental  Flow:    There  is  a  need  for  maintaining  an  environmental  flow  to  sustain  aquatic 
ecosystems and to support human, agricultural, livestock and industrial demand downstream.  While 
the proposed dams are being filled, and when the irrigation schemes are drawing water from the river 
sources, a prescribed environmental flow will have to be released downstream.  The Lower Akagera 
Master Plan proposes an environmental flow of 33% of the average monthly flow.  This means that the 
amount of water released downstream will have to be adjusted according to monthly flow patterns.  
RWFA will propose a suitable environmental flow for each site, which will be stipulated in the Water 
Abstraction  Permit  for  that  site.    The  scheme  and  dam  designs  will  therefore  have  to  take  the 
recommended environmental flows into consideration as this will influence on the intake works as 
well as the potential area to be irrigated. 
Wetlands: A key concern for the proposed scheme at Humure in Ndego Sector is that the spur of Lake 
Ihema which protrudes outside the  Akagera National Park is classified as totally protected.  This is 
reasonable, since the rest of the lake lies within the ANP and any disturbance (for example in terms of 
water abstraction, sedimentation from erosion or pollution from agrochemicals) will affect the lake’s 
water quality and possibly quantity, and therefore its biodiversity.  IFAD will not support projects in 
areas of critical habitats or which result in conversion or degradation of such habitats.  An alternative 
source of water will have to be identified for the Humure scheme, or the scheme location shifted to 
enable water to be drawn from the conditional wetlands of Lake Kibare.  For interventions that will 
draw  water  from  conditional  wetlands  (namely  Kibare,  Byimana,  Gakoma,  and  the  dams  on  the 
Gishanda and Kanyeganyege Rivers), RDB will issue an EIA Certificate of Approval that will list a number 
of  conditions  for  the  respective  developments.      IFAD  will  specify  explicit  conditions  for  wetland 
protection  in  the  loan  agreement  which  will  need  to  be  adhered  to  during  subproject 
implementation. 
Biodiversity:  The wetlands within the Project area are likely to be rich in biodiversity, and may harbour 
some  endemic  faunal  and  floral  species.    Any  disturbance  to  these  wetlands,  for  example  due  to 
changes in water flow regimes as a result of abstraction for the proposed irrigation schemes, and due 
to dam construction, may affect these species.  An ecological risk assessment should be conducted to 
identify  and  assess  the  significance  of  risks  to  wetland  ecology  in  the  subproject  areas  that  are 
located upstream and downstream of the proposed irrigation sites, as well as any potential risks to 
biodiversity in the Akagera National Park.  If species of national or global importance are identified, 
scenario planning and an adaptive management strategy will have to be prepared, or the sites may 
have to be relocated, or alternative water sources sought, so as not to affect these species. 
Buffer Zones:  National requirements stipulate the need to maintain buffer zones for all water bodies.  
These vary from 20m to 50m, depending on the type of water body.  During the design of schemes 
and valley tanks, the national requirements for buffer zones must be accommodated.  In some cases, 
this may result in the acquisition of land or assets, and therefore will necessitate the preparation of 
a resettlement action plan.  If the schemes are close to the ANP, wetlands, woodland/ forest, a buffer 
zone should be established,  the width of which  should be based on discussions with ANP and on 
xxvi 
REMA  regulations,  and  applying  precautionary  principle  for  maximum  buffer  width  for  ANP  and 
wetlands. 
Dams:  The dams to be constructed for the schemes in Rwinkwavu and Kabarondo Sectors are expected 
to have wall heights between 5 and 15 m, and according to SECAP’s Guidance Statement #8 on Dams 
and their Safety, these are considered as large dams. To ensure dam safety, IFAD will require the loan 
agreement  to  contain  a  covenant  to  ensure  that  dams  and  reservoirs  are  designed,  constructed, 
operated,  maintained,  superintended  and  eventually  decommissioned  to  the  highest  possible 
standards. MINAGRI will need to engage a suitably qualified consultant with extensive experience 
and a proven record in dam design.  In addition, MINAGRI will have to adopt and implement dam 
safety measures for the design, bid tendering, construction, operation and maintenance of the dam 
and associated works. 
Climate Risk Analysis:  According to SECAP’s climate risk classification guidelines, KIIWP is classified as 
high risk because it promotes agricultural activity on areas subject to extreme climatic events, such as 
flooding,  drought,  tropical  storms  or  heat  waves;    climate  scenarios  for  the  Project  area  foresee 
changes in temperature, rainfall or extreme weather that will adversely affect  the Project’s impact, 
sustainability or cost over its lifetime;  the Project promotes agricultural activity on marginal and/or 
highly degraded areas (such as on hillsides, deforested slopes or floodplains);  and the Project lies in 
an  area  which  regularly  experiences  weather-related  losses  and  damages.      Although  the  Project 
interventions themselves are intended to reduce vulnerability to the effects of climate change, an 
in-depth climate risk analysis must be undertaken prior to the full design of the Project in order to 
inform the design and decision-making processes, as required by SECAP. 
Community Expectations: The communities’ expectations are high in regard to the propose irrigation 
interventions.    However,  until  the  hydrological  and  ecological  studies  mentioned  above  are 
undertaken, the sizes, and indeed the sustainability of the proposed schemes cannot be confirmed.  
The  studies  are  expected  to  be  completed  by  2020,  and  communities  may  lose  faith.    Therefore, 
community expectations need to be managed by the Kayonza District administration, particularly at 
cell level.  The ESIA studies to be prepared for the various schemes should include a Stakeholder 
Engagement  Plan  which  should  contain  a  Stakeholder  Communication  Strategy  detailing  how 
community  expectations  can  be  managed,  and  the  roles  that  the  authorities  and  KIIWP  Project 
Teams in implementing the Communication Strategy.  
Physical and Economic Displacement: This may occur due to land acquired for scheme infrastructure, 
catchment protection and to create and maintain buffer zones.  The eligibility criteria proposed in this 
ESMF recommends that subprojects that may physically or economically displace more than 20 people 
should not be considered under KIIWP, due to the capacity of the Project and District, and logistics 
required, to implement the necessary RAP and other safeguards requirements, as well as to carry out 
monitoring of displaced persons.  Where physical and economic displacement of 20 or less people 
may occur, a simple RAP is required, following the guidelines provided in Annex 4 of this ESMF. 
Health:  Malaria is responsible for 46.3% of morbidity cases in Kayonza District.  The proposed irrigation 
schemes will result in pools of stagnant water which provide breeding habitats for mosquitoes.  Since 
May 2018 the District Health Office has begun a campaign to plant mosquito repelling plants/trees 
such as Artemisia, Geranium and Neem around homesteads and fields. The Project should work with 
the District Health Office to acquire these plants and plant them around the proposed schemes and 
dams. 
Access to Pasture or Grazing:  Irrigation schemes may hinder access paths used by livestock to reach 
water sources or pasture, as observed at the pumped irrigation sites in Ndego and Kabare Sectors.  
xxvii 
Competition  between  land  for  grazing  and  land  for  catchment  protection  and  agriculture  was  also 
raised as a potential source  of conflict  during community consultations.  At the pumped irrigation 
sites, the design should consider the possibility of providing alternative watering points (eg. troughs) 
for livestock at locations as agreed with the communities and livestock owners. In addition, Village 
level land use plans need to be developed which demarcate  land use for different purposes, and 
more specifically for KIIWP purposes for agriculture, catchment protection and grazing. 
Human/Wildlife  Conflict:  Farmers reported that their farms are frequently raided by hippos which 
reside in the dams and valley tanks, and also by baboons.  This has led to substantial loss of crops, and 
poses a danger to farmers as well.  The Project aims to enhance crop yields, but may also encourage 
increased crop  raiding by wildlife.   The ESIA  studies should study this issue in detail, and propose 
measures for reducing or eliminating human-wildlife conflict. Usually fencing is proposed to keep 
wildlife out. In view of the size of the command areas, this would be a costly measure, but may have 
to be considered if no other alternatives prove effective.   
Community Involvement in Subproject Development:  Local involvement is key to sustainability and 
local  knowledge  is  very  important,  for  example  in  terms  of  siting  infrastructure.  The  communities 
expressed their desire to be involved in the subproject preparation, design and implementation and 
requested that they be consulted beforehand on how they would be expected to invest in the scheme 
development.   Therefore, it is important that the subproject communities are involved in all stages 
of the development of subprojects, including siting of infrastructure.  They must also be extensively 
consulted on their ability to contribute, and the modalities of how they can or are able to contribute, 
since  all  members  of  the  communities  do  not  have  access  to  cash  or  loans  at  any  given  time. 
Moreover, the Project design should be more specific about how youth and the physically challenged 
members of the community can be involved in Project activities.  
xxviii 
1 
Introduction 
1.1 
Background to the Kayonza Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management 
Project (KIIWP) 
Rwanda  has  abundant  untapped  water  resources  in the  form of  natural  lakes, rivers,  groundwater, 
marshlands and runoff.   The  United Nations’  Food and Agricultural Organisation’s  (FAO)  AQUASTAT 
estimates  Rwanda’s  internal  renewable  water  resources  at  31.9  x  109  m3/year  and  the  National 
Irrigation Master Plan (2010) identifies potential irrigable area of 589,711 ha. Buoyed by support from 
government  resources  and  development  partners,  Rwanda  has  sharply  increased  the  area  under 
irrigation from 8,000 ha in 2010 to the current 48,000 ha, but the country has an ambitious target of 
100,000 ha to achieve by 2020. 
In 2016, Rwanda’s Eastern Province was seriously affected by a severe drought which led to the death 
of 2,417 heads of cattle as well as poor crop yields during Season A (October to December).  As a result, 
more than 47,000 households in the districts of Kayonza, Nyagatare, Gatsibo, Ngoma and Kirehe were 
affected and became food insecure. The Government of Rwanda (GoR) had to provide food relief and 
water for livestock to support the affected districts. Although these districts have since come up with 
measures to mitigate drought-induced calamities, in order for these initiatives to achieve long-term 
impacts  and  deliver  increased  resilience,  the  Government  requested  IFAD  to  formulate  a  new 
integrated  irrigation  and  watershed  development  project  focussing  on  Kayonza  District,  which  was 
most seriously affected.   
Consistent national strategies and policies, including the second Economic Development and Poverty 
Reduction Strategy (EDPRS 2), the Strategic Plan for the Transformation of Agriculture (PSTA 4) and the 
National Strategy on Climate Change and Low-Carbon Development (NSCCLCD),  the Kayonza District 
Irrigation  and  Integrated  Watershed  Management  Project  (KIIWP)  will  improve  the  resilience  of 
smallholder farmers to droughts and effects of climate change through increased levels of production 
and productivity of selected food and cash crops, livestock and improved market access and business 
development.  Thus, KIIWP is expected to improve household food and nutrition security, income and 
asset ownership for smallholder farmers, particularly amongst vulnerable groups including women-
headed households and youth. This is in line with the United Nations’ Global Compact which supports 
the Zero Hunger Challenge7 to end hunger and malnutrition by 2030, as well as the Scaling Up Nutrition 
(SUN) movement8.   
1.2 
Goal and Objectives of KIIWP 
KIIWP’s Development Goal is to ‘Contribute to poverty reduction in the drought prone Eastern Province 
of  Rwanda’.  The  Development  Objective  is  to  ‘Improve  food  security  and  incomes  of  50,000  rural 
households  on  a sustainable  basis’. The  Project  design  includes  operational  synergies  with  ongoing 
activities supported by the GoR, the ongoing IFAD-supported projects in the country (PRICE, PASP and 
RDDP), and other Development Partner-supported programmes in the Project area. KIIWP will also 
build  on  the  experience  of  the  recently  completed  KWAMP,  the  successful  Community-based 
Watershed Management Project implemented in the neighbouring Kirehe District. 
7      The  five  pillars  of  the  UN’s  Zero  Hunger  Challenge  are:  i)  all  systems  are  sustainable  from  production  to 
consumption; ii) an end to rural poverty: double smallscale producer incomes and productivity; iii) adapt all food 
systems to eliminate loss of waste of food; iv) access adequate food and healthy diets for all people all year; v) 
an end to malnutrition in all its forms.  https://www.un.org/zerohunger/ 
8 http://scalingupnutrition.org/ 
1 
KIIWP’s goal will be achieved through the development of sustainable, profitable and intensive small-
scale agricultural activities supported through Public Private Producers Partnerships (4Ps) whenever 
opportunities exist in the selected Project sites and areas. 
The main expected outcomes and outputs of the Project include:  
•  Enhanced food security and incomes and reduced rural poverty in the Project area; 
•  Farmers’ drought resilience strengthened; 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Increased acreage of farmland under water-related infrastructure; 
Increased acreage of farmland under climate resilient management and practices; 
Increased farmers’ economic benefits from market participation and increased sales; 
Improved  capacity  of  Farmer  Organizations  and  local  development  actors,  including  local 
government. 
Map 1.1  KIIWP Project Area 
1.3 
Rationale and Objectives of this ESMF 
IFAD’s  Environment  and  Natural  Resource  Management  (ENRM,  2011)  Policy  stresses  that  project 
designs present opportunities to improve systematic integration and scaling up of environmental and 
2 
natural  resource  management.  Such  integration  can help  IFAD  to  engage  in  new  and strengthened 
partnerships with specialized entities for enhanced and effective responses to issues associated with 
natural  resources  and,  climate  variability  and  change.  IFAD’s  Social  Environmental  and  Climate 
Assessment Procedures (SECAP, 2017) describe how to better mainstream environmental, social and 
climate  change  considerations  into  the  project  cycle,  going  beyond  “doing  no  harm”  to  maximize 
development gains. 
IFAD’s Climate  Change  Strategy  (2010)  calls for a more  systematic  response  to increasing demands 
from the Fund’s clients for technical support and innovation to better respond to climate change. This 
means analysing and addressing climate change challenges during the early stages of programme and 
project design to build resilience and adaptive capacity. 
In line with IFAD’s project cycle processes, a SECAP review note was prepared during early design in 
August  2018.    KIIWP  investments  focus  on  irrigation  and  integrated  watershed  management  and 
planning, including integrated activities and investments on water harvesting and storage, irrigation 
schemes  and  the  development  of  marshland  development.      Some  of  the  Project  interventions  – 
especially the irrigation subprojects – will impinge on ecologically sensitive areas (namely the Akagera 
National Park and marshlands), irrigate fields that are greater than 100ha in area, and may necessitate 
a  significant  increase  in  the  use  of  agrochemicals.    Thus,  as  per  SECAP’s  screening  guidelines,  the 
Project has been accorded an overall Category A classification. 
The  exact  site  boundaries  and/or  locations  of  interventions  have  not  yet  been  determined,  and 
feasibility studies  have  not been carried out.  Therefore,  at  this stage,  it  is not possible to  prepare 
environmental and social impact assessments (ESIAs) and environmental and social management plans 
(ESMPs). The Environmental and Social Management Framework is therefore intended to guide the 
preparation of ESIAs or ESMPs for the subprojects. Subproject specific ESIAs will be undertaken during 
Project implementation for those schemes (or interventions) classified as Category A, while ESMPs will 
be prepared for schemes classified as Category B.  For interventions where physical and/or economic 
displacement  may  occur,  resettlement  action  plans  (RAPs)  will  be  prepared.    Some  Project 
interventions may hinder livestock access to water and grazing pastures, and may trigger the need for 
Free Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC)9: an FPIC Implementation Plan has been prepared to guide this 
process (see Annex 5).  
IFAD  recognises  that  GoR  has  its  own  systems  for  delivering  safeguards  and  that  supporting 
Government’s efforts to strengthen and use their systems would enhance country ownership, extend 
development impacts, and reduce transaction costs.  Indeed, the Government of Rwanda is committed 
to environmental protection and has taken significant steps to ensure a balance between economic 
development  and  environmental  protection,  as  well  as  to  prevent  environmental  degradation.  
Projects that affect the environment are subject to Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) prior to 
obtaining authorization for their implementation, issued by the Rwanda Development Authority (RDB).   
The specific objectives of the ESMF are to: 
9 Free, Prior and Informed Consent Principle:  FREE implies no coercion, intimidation or manipulation. PRIOR 
implies consent is sought far enough in advance of any authorization or commencement of activities, and the 
time  requirements  of  consultation  and  consensus  processes  are  respected.  INFORMED  implies  that  all 
information  relating  to  the  activity  is  provided  to  concerned  people  and  that  the  information  is  objective, 
accurate and presented in a manner or form that is understandable to these people. CONSENT implies that the 
concerned people have agreed to the activity that is the subject of the consultation. These people also have the 
prerogative to withhold consent or to offer it with conditions. Consultation and participation are key elements 
of a consent-seeking process. 
3 
• 
• 
Identify key linkages between rural poverty and environmental management and assess the 
potential impacts of the proposed Project on the environment, including the natural resource 
base, and on the health and livelihoods of communities in the target areas; 
Identify  potential  impacts  of  KIIWMP  and  explore  and  identify  key  options  for  advancing 
environmental and social sustainability.  
•  Prepare  a  generic  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plan  for  the  direct  impacts  and 
impacts  as  they  relate  to  the  proposed 
impacts,  as  well  as 
incremental 
indirect 
components/activities; 
•  Establish clear procedure and methodologies for the environmental and social assessments, 
review, approval and implementation of subprojects to be  financed under KIIWMP. Include 
specifying how unidentified subprojects whose exact location are unknown will systematically 
address environmental and social issues in the screening for environmental and social impacts 
and categorization, site selection criteria, mitigation measures, design, implementation and 
operational phases as well as maintenance of the subproject lifecycle; 
•  Specify  appropriate  roles  and  responsibilities,  and  outlining  reporting  procedures  for 
managing  and  monitoring  environmental  and  social  risks  associated  with  the  subprojects. 
Includes  project-level  grievance  redress  system  and  formulating  labour  management 
procedures for inclusion in contractor’s bids and contract documents; 
•  Determine  the  training,  capacity  building  and  technical  assistance  needed  to  successfully 
• 
implement the provisions of the ESMF; 
Identify key conditions relevant to the implementation of the ESMF that need to be included 
in the loan agreement; and 
•  Develop budgetary needs required to implement the ESMF requirements. 
1.4 
Approach and Methodology used for the Preparation of the ESMF 
The preparation of this ESMF has been guided by IFAD’s policies and SECAP as well as Rwanda’s legal 
framework for  environmental and social management.   Key requirements of these instruments are 
described in detail in Chapter 3. 
The  ESMF  conforms  with  IFAD’s  safeguard  policies,  including  the  Indigenous  Peoples Policy  (2009), 
Policy on Disclosure of Documents (2010), Climate Change Strategy (2010), Environment and Natural 
Resources Management Policy (2012) and Social, Environment and Climate Assessment Procedures 
(SECAP, 2017). These are also summarised in Chapter 3. 
The  ESMF  study  commenced  in  August  2018.    The  study  methodology  comprised:  collection  and 
review of primary and secondary baseline data; consultations with key stakeholders and Project area 
communities, site visits to all the eight Project districts, and report writing.   
This ESMF is based on the Project Design Report (PDR) dated August 2018.  It will be noted that the 
PDR is still under development, and although the sub-component descriptions may change, the types 
of interventions will remain the same.  Thus the approach to ensuring compliance with safeguards 
requirements presented in this ESMF will still apply.  
A validation workshop was held on 22nd November 2018 to present the findings of the ESMF study and 
elicit comments from key holders to be incorporated into the final version of the ESMF. 
The ESMF study team, sites visited and study timelines are presented in Annex 12.   
4 
1.5 
Stakeholder Consultations 
At the national level, the team met with officers from MINAGRI, REMA, MINIRENA’s Environment and 
Climate  Change  Department  and  Water  Resources Management  Department.    At  the  district  level, 
discussions were held with the Kayonza District Mayor, Vice Mayor for Economic Development and 
other district officials.  
In addition, discussions were held at the Project sites with 212 persons comprising opinion leaders, 
potential  beneficiary  farmers  and  livestock  keepers  as  well  as  other  members  of  the  Project 
communities.  
The list of persons consulted is presented in Annex 2.   Details of the outcomes of consultations are 
presented in Chapter 6, while notes on community consultations and participant list are provided in 
Annexes 9 and 10, respectively.  A validation workshop was convened for discussing the findings of this 
ESMF.  The workshop participants are listed in Annex 2. 
1.6 
Disclosure of this ESMF and FPIC Implementation Plan 
IFAD’s Policy on the Disclosure of Documents (2010) requires full disclosure to the public, and includes 
information notes on projects being developed for Board presentation, agreements for approved loans 
and grants, and project/programme design documents which include ESIAs, ESMFs, RAPs and RAFs.  
This ESMF and FPIC Implementation Plan (presented in Annex 5) will therefore be disclosed on IFAD’s 
official website (http://www.ifad.org). 
In  addition,  although  disclosure  of  ESMFs  are  not  provided  for  under  the  Rwandan  environmental 
framework, this ESMF will be disclosed on MINAGRI’s and RAB’s official website, and also at the District 
level, so that all interested and other parties are able to access the document. 
1.7 
Limitations and Assumptions 
Limitations 
The main limitations in the preparation of this ESMF have been: 
•  The  Project  Design  Report  was  still  in  the  process  of  being  developed  during  the  ESMF 
preparation,  and  the  proposed  sites,  the  types  and  specific  locations  of  various  the 
interventions were still under discussion.  Thus as mentioned above, the description of the 
sub-components  may  differ  in  the  various  versions  of  the  PDR.    The  Project  description 
adopted for the purposes of this ESMF is that from the PDR dated August 2018. 
•  Pre-feasibility or feasibility studies had not been prepared for any of the proposed sites.    
•  Baseline data was sourced from primary data where possible.  However, where district level 
data has not been officially submitted or disclosed, or was not always available or accessible, 
secondary data has had to be relied on, much of which has tended to be outdated.    
•  This  ESMF  is  intended  to  be  an  “umbrella  document”  to  guide  the  preparation  of  all  the 
environmental, social and climate assessments to be prepared under the Project.  Subproject 
specific ESIAs and ESMPs will be carried out for each of the selected sites, and where required, 
RAPs will be prepared.  At this stage, the number of ESIAs, ESMPs and RAPs that will need to 
be prepared cannot be established since the subproject feasibility and designs have not been 
done, and therefore the costs associated with these studies can only be estimates.  
•  The ESMF also proposes that a number of baseline studies be carried out to inform the Project 
design.  Costs for these baseline studies will be established during the scoping phase of the 
ESIA studies.  
5 
Assumptions 
The assumptions made are as follows: 
1.  At this stage of the Project, sites for the irrigation schemes have been selected but the area 
that is feasible for irrigation and the layout for each scheme have not been determined. While 
general  areas  for  catchment  protection  have  been  identified,  the  specific  boundaries  for 
catchment protection activities have not been established.  However, it is likely that proposed 
irrigation schemes and catchment protection activities will result in some physical or economic 
displacement  of  communities,  if  not  for  the  command  area  itself,  for  other  associated 
infrastructure such as pumping mains, canals and access roads, or access to grazing and water 
sources.   In such cases, RAPs will be prepared based on the Resettlement Action Framework 
(RAF) outlined in Chapter 9, and presented in more detail in Annex 4.  The RAP will be disclosed 
as a precondition to financing the subprojects. The process will entail meaningful consultation 
and negotiation with potentially affected people, according to the FPIC Implementation Plan 
presented  in  Annex  5.      Should  there  be  no  agreement  between  the  land  owner  and  the 
Project,  the  specific  interventions  associated  with  affected  people  will  be  modified,  or 
abandoned if changes are not possible.   
2.  A number of ESIAs, ESMPs and RAPs will be prepared for this Project.  It would be impractical 
to post all these documents on the IFAD site for disclosure.  All ESIAs and RAPs for Category A 
subprojects will be disclosed as required by IFAD’s Disclosure Policy.  However, it is assumed 
that the posting of this ESMF will satisfy the requirements of IFAD’s Disclosure Policy for the 
disclosure of ESMPs. 
1.8 
Report Presentation 
This report is presented in thirteen (13) chapters and twelve (12) annexes. 
Chapter 1 sets the context of the ESMF by describing the background to KIIWP, the Project’s goals and 
objectives, as well as rationale.  The methodology for developing the ESMF is described, as well as an 
overview of stakeholder consultations held. It also presents disclosure requirements for the ESMF, and 
limitations and assumptions made during the preparation of this ESMF. 
Chapter 2 describes the Project target regions and its components.  Chapter 3 describes the policy, 
legal  and  institutional  framework  for  environmental,  social  and  climate-related  management  in 
Rwanda. It presents IFAD’s Safeguard Policies, describes differences in IFAD and GoR policies and the 
requirements of international conventions and treaties to which Rwanda is party. 
Lessons  learned  from  completed  and  other  ongoing  IFAD-supported  projects  in  Rwanda,  namely 
Support Project to the Strategic Plan for the Agriculture Transformation (PAPSTA),  Kirehe Community-
Based Watershed Management Project (KWAMP), Post-harvest and Agribusiness Support Programme 
(PASP), and Project for Rural Income through Exports (PRICE) are summarised in Chapter 4.  Included 
in  that  chapter  are  lessons  from  the  World  Bank’s  Land  Husbandry,  Water  Harvesting  and  Hillside 
Irrigation Project under the Rural Sector Support Programme.   
Chapter 5 presents an environmental and social profile of Kayonza District.   
Chapter 6 summarises the outcome of the consultations held during the preparation of this ESMF and 
provides information on community priorities for agricultural development.    
Generic environmental, social and climate-related impacts due to irrigation schemes and watershed 
development and management initiatives, their mitigation and cumulative and synergistic impacts are 
6 
presented in Chapter 7.  This chapter also discusses site-specific key environmental and social issues 
that emerged during the site visits and consultations for each sector and which need to be considered 
during Project design.   
Chapter 8 discusses climate risk and its implications on the Project. 
An  outline  Resettlement  Action  Framework  is  provided  in  Chapter  9. This  is  intended  to  guide  the 
preparation  of  a  resettlement  action  plan,  which  may  be  required  in  the  event  that  physical  and 
economic displacement occurs. 
Chapter 10 describes the environmental and social management procedures for KIIWP and is therefore 
the  essence  of  this  ESMF.    Chapter  11  discusses  capacity  building  needed  to  implement  the 
requirements of the ESMF, while Chapter 12 gives an estimated budget for the implementation of the 
ESMF.  
Chapter 13 summarises the key environmental, social and climate risks and makes recommendations 
for those risks that should be considered during the Project development and design. 
The  annexes  contain:  References;  List  of  Persons  Consulted;  Sample  TORs  for  ESIA  Studies; 
Resettlement  Action  Framework;  FPIC  Implementation  Plan;  Guidelines  for  an  Integrated  Pest 
Management Plan; Guidelines for a Dam Safety Plan; Sample Contract Clauses for Environmental and 
Social  Management;  Minutes  of  Community  Consultations;  Potential  Beneficiary  Consultation 
Participant List; Proceedings of the ESMF Validation Workshop; and Study Team, Sites Visited and ESMF 
Timelines. 
7 
Lake NashoByimanaVillageNdegoSector: Byimanahillside irrigation siteMoringa 
2 
KIIWP Project Description 
The following description of the KIIWP is based on the draft Project Design Report (August 2018).  As 
the Project design evolves, there may be some changes to specific component activities.  However, it 
is believed that the Project description in this section fairly represents the nature and types of activities 
proposed under the Project.  
2.1 
Overview of the Project Area Characteristics 
Kayonza District is located in Eastern Province, Rwanda.  It is bordered to the north and north-west by 
Gatsibo District, Rwamagana District to the west, Ngoma District to the south-west and Kirehe District 
to the south.  Its shares its eastern border with Tanzania.  
The Project area comprises the eight drought-prone sectors of the District of Kayonza in the Eastern 
Province  of  Rwanda,  namely  Gahini,  Kabare,  Kabarando,  Murama,  Murundi,  Mwiri,  Ndego  and 
Rwinkwavu sectors.  The sectors are relatively hot and arid, with rainfall averaging 900 mm per year.  
However, the abundant surface water resources suggest that there is good potential for irrigation – 
estimated  at  some  30,000ha  for  Kayonza  District.      District  population  data  (2016  census)  put  the 
population of the District at 392,676, with 26,4% of the population living below the poverty line, and 
9,5%  living in extreme  poverty (EICV-4).   About 80% of the total active population  in the District  is 
engaged  in  agriculture  as  their  main  economic  activity  and  source  of  income.  The  landholding  per 
capita of 0.5 ha/household is moderately large compared with the rest of the country. In addition to 
crop production, livestock is intensified in the district. In the eight drought-prone sectors targeted by 
the Project, 58% of all households raise some type of livestock, 24% have cows.  
2.2 
Target Groups 
The 2016 census indicates that the number of people in the eight target sectors is 262,967, of which 
51,5% are women. Based on the national wealth ranking system (Ubudehe)10, and consistent with the 
targeting  strategy  laid  out  in  the  Results-Based  Country  Strategic  Opportunities  Programme  (RB-
COSOP),  KIIWP’s  direct  target  groups  will  comprise  about  50,000  poor  and  food  insecure  rural 
households (HH).   Almost all households (58,209 HH = 99,97%) are categorised as Cat 1, 2 or 3. Almost 
half of them (49%) fall into Categories 1 and 2, which is higher than the overall District (47%) and also 
higher than the national average (43,9%).  31% of the households are female-headed.   
KIIWP will directly target 28,000 households in the eight Project sectors: 
•  21,925 households that  are  members of the 54 farmer cooperatives  growing rice, maize  & 
beans or horticulture in these sectors, and will be supported through Farming as a Business 
(FaaB) skills, cooperative strengthening, and backward/forward linkages. Depending on their 
locations, a large part of these households will also benefit from other specific activities. 
10 Ubudehe is a classification of Rwandans based on economic status. Ubudehe categories are as follows: 
Category 1: Families who do not own a house or cannot pay a rent, have a poor diet and can hardly afford basic 
household tools and clothes; Category 2: Those who have a dwelling of their own or are able to rent one, 
mostly get food and wages  from working for others but rarely get full time jobs; Category 3: Those who have a 
job and farmers who go beyond subsistence farming to produce a surplus which can be sold; and Category 4: 
Those who own large-scale business, individuals working with international organisations and industries as well 
as public servants. 
8 
•  6,415 households that are not members of these cooperatives,  but may be supported by other 
specific activities. 
Out of the total 28,000 direct target households, 21,585 will receive specific support as follows: 
•  7,350 households benefiting from terracing and agro-forestry (estimated on basis of average 
0,3 ha land area per household); 
•  2,225  households  farming  in  marshlands  and  hillsides  that  will  be  developed  by  KIIWP 
(estimated on basis of average 0.3 ha land area per household); 
•  5,560 households in marshland schemes where no infrastructure development will take place, 
but organisational strengthening activities are geared towards sustainable water management 
by Water Users Organizations (WUOs); 
•  4,350 households to be included in small/holder schemes in Ndego pumping schemes; 
•  400 households benefiting from water harvesting infrastructure; 
•  1,700 households that have cows and benefit from water for animals. 
Indirectly,  all  households  farming  in  the  watersheds  (another  22,000  households)  will  be  targeted 
under  Catchment  Rehabilitation  and  Protection  Component  (Component  1.1)  and  will  thus  benefit 
from improved water retention and improved soil fertility.  Business development opportunities and 
market linkages will also benefit other farming families. 
Theory of Change 
The Theory of Change diagram below developed for KIIWP captures the rationale behind the Project’s 
components and activities, its outcomes and outputs.    
Figure 2.1 KIIWP Theory of Change 
9 
2.3 
Programme Components 
The  Project  will  comprise  two  core  technical  components  and  a  third  component  supporting 
institutional development and Project coordination.  These components, their sub-components and 
the linkages between them are described in more detail below. 
2.3.1 
Component 1: Strengthening Resilience to Drought 
Sub-component 1.1: Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection 
This component will support investments in infrastructure to rehabilitate and protect the degraded 
farmlands as well as considerably reduce the runoff from the catchments. The interventions will be 
selected with a view to reducing the volume and velocity of runoff and allow for rainwater to infiltrate 
in the soil.  This will be combined with land husbandry practices geared towards increasing vegetative 
cover in the farms which will increase the soil fertility and further reduce the erosive force of rainfall. 
Under this component, watershed management plans will be developed which will identify the zones 
in most need of protection and the action to be taken to rehabilitate and protect them. Such action 
will include, among others: slowing down runoff by construction of check dams, gabions, side drains, 
etc., along the runoff water courses as well as terracing and contour bunds in the farms as necessary. 
These will be complimented with agro-forestry activities including planting of selected agro-forestry 
trees, shrubs and grasses as well as pastures rehabilitation. 
Sub-component 1.2: Irrigation Development 
This sub-component is meant to strengthen the support of small-scale farmers with water for irrigation 
and to a lesser extent, water for livestock and domestic purposes.  Four different types of irrigation 
infrastructure are to be developed: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Infrastructure for marshland and hillside irrigation: This is to be achieved by harvesting and 
storing water from streams and runoff in the catchments. Kayonza District has relatively few 
and  modest  flow  springs,  which  are  the  same  springs  that  the  District  has  identified  for 
marshlands development. These springs will be assessed and where they are found to have 
enough  flow,  storage  dams  of  around  250,000m3  will  be  constructed  to  irrigate  both  the 
marshlands, which are relatively small and the surrounding hillsides. It is foreseen that it could 
be possible to get three springs where such storage could be possible. Each would store water 
that would enable supplemental irrigation for about 130 ha. The marshlands where the spring 
does not have enough flow to warrant impounding would be developed with a simple weir. 
Pumped  irrigation  systems:  The  sectors  neighbouring  the  Akagera  River  are  the  driest  and 
possibility of irrigation is through pumping systems, either from the river or from the lakes in 
the area.  A feasibility study has already been carried out for irrigation in one of the sectors, 
Ndego,  that  concludes  that  it  is  feasible  to  irrigate  with  water  pumped  from  Lake  Nasho. 
Already in Ndego, there is a private sector commercial entity, Bramin, carrying out irrigation 
from Lake Ihema which further reinforces the feasibility of pumped irrigation. A subproject 
will be developed for small scale farmers in the area to irrigate up to 1000 ha. The Project will 
explore  a  partnership  between  Bramin  and  the  smallscale  farmers  whereby  Bramin  will 
manage  the  irrigation  infrastructure  as  well  as  assure  the  farmers  of  a  reliable,  profitable 
market for their produce.  
Farm-level  rainwater  harvesting  structures:  These  will  be  small  ponds  that  would  harvest 
water of between 50 to 200m3, which will enable farmers to carry out supplemental irrigation 
in plots ranging between 230 to 950 m2. The ponds will be lined and covered with shade net 
as well as fenced for security reasons. The ponds will be allocated on graduated subsidies basis 
10 
iv. 
depending on financial status – mix of subsidies and loans based on livelihood status of the 
target farmers. 
Livestock  and  domestic  water  infrastructure:  Kayonza  District  has  plans  to  develop  and 
improve  water-related  infrastructure  for  livestock.  Towards  this  end,  KIIWP  would  support 
construction of seven new valley tanks and rehabilitation of 15 existing ones.  The valley tanks, 
which will be designed to store around 40 m3 each, will be equipped with a solar pumping 
system, plastic storage tanks, and livestock watering troughs. The Project will further support 
the drilling and equipping of around 20 boreholes that will provide water for livestock and for 
domestic  purposes.  Each  of  the  developed  boreholes  will  be  equipped  with  solar  pumping 
systems, and livestock troughs. 
In addition, the Project will develop and/or restore about 100km of feeder roads. The construction 
process will engage the local communities to carry out manual labour, during which they will be trained 
in road maintenance skill and capacitated to form ‘road brigades’ that will contracted by the District 
government to maintain the feeder roads. This activity will be entirely financed by the GoR. 
Sub-component 1.3: Infrastructure Management Institutions 
In  order  to  ensure  long-term  sustainability,  KIIWP  will  support  the  institutional  development  of 
infrastructure management institutions that will play an active role in the design, construction and 
operation  and  maintenance  of  infrastructure.  The  organisations  will  also  be  central  in  ensuring 
equitable access to water for its members, including farmers and livestock  keepers and developing 
drought contingency plans. In the drought-prone sectors these organisations will also be tasked with 
ensuring maximum water use  efficiency and environmental protection. Infrastructure management 
institutions  will  benefit  all  users  of  the  infrastructure  directly,  as  well  as  households  farming  in 
watersheds protected and managed by the committees.  The different institutions are presented in 
the  figure  below.  The  committees  (in  blue)  are  at  District  or  Scheme  level,  involving  a  mixture  of 
stakeholders. The institutions (in red) are Farmer Organisations, namely sub-catchment committees, 
Water Users Organisations, Water Livestock Users Organisations and Cooperatives. 
Figure 2.2 KIIWP’s Institutions at District Level 
Catchment 
committee
Scheme/District 
Level Steering 
Committee
Sub-catchment 
committees
WUOs
WLUOs
Cooperatives
Capacity  building  will  take  place,  covering  three  key  areas:  (i)  governance  (ii)  technical  water 
management (O&M), and (iii) monitoring and exchange of experiences. The capacity building will be 
based  on  a  participatory  Farmer  Field  School  approach.    Capacity  building  will  also  focus  on 
environmental, social and climate change aspects, as described in detail in Chapter 11.  
2.3.2 
Component 2: Support to Farm Business Development 
Sub-Component 2.1: Enhancing Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) Practices and Technologies. 
This sub-component will identify CSA practices and technologies through liaison between the RAB Crop 
Officers and Kayonza District  and Sector Agronomists,  and  the  Consultative Group on International 
11 
Agricultural  Research  (CGIAR),  the  International  Crop  Research  Institute  for  the  Semi-Arid  Tropics 
(ICRISAT), the Food and Agriculture Organization, the Departments of Research and Land Husbandry, 
Irrigation and Mechanization at RAB, but also the private sector, recent development projects  and 
Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) in order to compile a long list of existing CSA practices and 
technologies  and  select  the  most  appropriate  ones  for  KIIWP  target  groups  and  areas.  Short-term 
international technical assistance (TA) will then be sought to prepare training materials on best CSA 
practices and technologies. Training and demonstrations of the CSA practices will be delivered through 
800  Farmer  Field  Schools  and  the  establishment  of  80  demonstration  plots  on  both  rain-fed  and 
irrigated land. Short-term TA will be sought to develop a training module on basic nutrition education, 
which will be incorporated in the FFS training.  
A Gender Action Learning System (GALS) will be promoted in order to increase awareness of gender 
roles  in the households and communities by improving their capacity to negotiate  their needs and 
interests  and  find  innovative,  gender-equitable  solutions  in  livelihoods  planning  and  value  chain 
development.  
In  line  with  RAB  mechanization  programme  initiated  in  2009,  KIIWP,  through  the  FFS  training,  will 
sensitize farmers and cooperatives in using farm machinery in different farming operations such as 
land preparation, spraying, water pumping, small-scale irrigation and transportation of produce and 
fertilizers. KIIWP will also encourage the communication and dissemination of meteorological bulletins 
tailored to climate risks and vulnerabilities specific to selected cash and food crops suitable to Kayonza 
District. 
Sub-component 2.2: Developing Farming as a Business (FaaB) Skills 
KIIWP will impart business skills to assist farmers engaged in commercial production to acquire a better 
understanding of the market demands such as preferred varieties, quality criteria, quantity, required 
post-harvest practices, as well as to understand the gross margin calculations to assess profitability 
and plan production accordingly. A specific FaaB training module will be developed, and incorporated 
in the FFS curriculum.  
Business Development Service Providers (BDSPs) will be hired with a role of a coach or mentor; they 
will  support  the  Project  beneficiaries  through  dedicated  ad-hoc  assistance  based  on  the  specific 
challenges  they  meet,  and  along  the  different  stages  of  the  cropping  seasons.    Young  professional 
organisations,  such  as  the  Rwanda  Youth  in  Agribusiness  Forum11  and  the  Horticulture  in  Reality 
Cooperative12 , as well as physically challenged members of the Project communities, will be mobilized 
by the  Project  as  BDSPs whenever  the  need  and opportunities  arise,  in  both  rain-fed  and  irrigated 
areas.   
The  Project  will  also  ensure  that  the  farmer-based  organizations/cooperatives  are  capacitated  to 
develop  as  commercial  entities.  Farmers  supported  through  new  irrigation  or  water  for  livestock 
schemes  will  be  encouraged  to  join  existing  cooperatives,  or  form  new  cooperatives  that  will  be 
registered with the Rwanda Cooperative Agency (RCA). 
Sub-Component 2.3: Supporting Backward and Forward Market Linkages 
KIIWP  will  thus  strive  to  improve  access  to  and  use  of  adequate  financial  services  by  the  target 
population of Kayonza. To this effect, KIIWP activities in rural financial services will revolve around two 
11 http://www.ryaf.rw/spip.php?article1 
12 http://horecorwanda.com/background/ 
12 
types of interventions: (i) strengthening of Community Based Finance Institutions (CBFIs)13 and their 
active linkage to the cooperatives supported by KIIWP through the development of outreach plans and 
tailor-made delivery mechanisms; and (ii) facilitating their access to agricultural insurance systems that 
can alleviate farming risks. 
KIIWP will leverage on the existing resources of ICCO-STARS14 to scale-up its current interventions in 
Kayonza15.  ICCOs’ direct TA will be sought for capacity building of the 12 Umurenge SACCOS and 4 
MFIs  operating  in  Kayonza,  the  active  linkage  of  these  SACCOS  to  MFIs,  and  the  mobilization  of 
cooperative members to join SACCOS or MFIs. 
The Project will support MINAGRI’s technical support unit in piloting the first phase of the Multi Peril 
Crop Insurance (MPCI) scheme for maize and beans VCs in Kayonza, with a contribution of USD 200,000 
per year. It will also facilitate study tours for insurance companies and financial institutions’ managers, 
and raise awareness of the target 54 cooperatives on the MPCI mechanisms. 
In the specific case of pumped irrigation systems that are intended to develop a highly commercial 
smallholder  irrigated  production  system,  4P-like  arrangements  with  the  private  sector  will  be 
developed  whenever  feasible.  KIIWP  will  support  small-scale  farmers  with  irrigation  water  supply 
infrastructure, sensitization and FO institutional development, while neighbouring large-scale farmers 
will manage the production and delivery of irrigation water to smallholder farmers at a fee, ensure a 
reliable market for smallholder produce, and/or provide technical and farming-as-a-business advisory 
services in lieu of FFS and BDSPs. 
2.3.3 
Component 3: Institutional Development and Project Coordination 
Sub-component 3.1: Policy and Institutional Development 
This  sub-component  will  strengthen  institutions  that  can  support  directly  or  indirectly  the 
implementation  of  KIIWP  and  provide  policy  supports  that  are  needed  for  the  effective 
implementation  of  the  Project.    Support  for  policy  dialogue  will  be  provided  by  KIIWP  through  an 
evaluation of implementation and impact of new or existing policies related to the Project activities 
with relevant national, and district level stakeholders.  
To ensure gender mainstreaming into Project activities and outcomes, RAB in connection with the SPIU will 
prepare a brief gender action plan, building on work already done by MINAGRI and other IFAD-supported 
projects.  Specific  training  will  be  organised  to  familiarise  government  and  Project  staff  with  gender 
mainstreaming approaches, and special provisions will be made to ensure that gender equity concerns are 
adopted in the implementation of all Project components. 
Capacity building interventions will be identified for KIIWP staff under the SPIU, including RAB and district 
personnel engaged in KIIWP implementation. These capacity building activities will be preceded by a needs 
assessment to be elaborated for the SPIU, RAB and district personnel. 
13 Examples of CBFIs are the Savings and Credit Cooperative Societies (SACCOS), and Micro-Finance Institutions 
(MFIs) operating in the project areas. 
14 https://www.icco-cooperation.org/en/projects/stars 
15 Key data about STARS interventions in Kayonza District: Target 2,200 HH for value chain development (5 rice 
cooperatives; 10 maize cooperatives) and 1,000 HH for rural agricultural finance support  - Gender focus 50% 
women - Refinancing Duterimbere MFI for loans to farmers: USD 150,000 budget - MFI direct support and VC 
development: USD 56,000 budget.  
13 
Sub-component 3.2: Project Coordination 
The  Lead  Project  Agency  (LPA)  for  KIIWP  will  be  the  Rwanda  Agriculture  and  Animal  Resources 
Development Board (RAB) which will have the overall responsibility for the coordination and execution 
of the Project. Though the MINAGRI Permanent Secretary (PS) is currently the Chief Budget Officer, it 
is  expected  that  this  role  will  be  shifted  to  RAB  in  the  implementation  of  KIIWP,  as  well  as  the 
implementation of the ongoing projects: RDDP and PASP.  KIIWP will be integrated within the SPIU of 
IFAD  projects  (PASP  and  RDDP)  that  are  under  RAB.  The  SPIU  Coordinator  will  also  oversee  and 
coordinate  KIIWP  activities  that  will  be  implemented  at  both  the  central  and  district  level.  The 
structure of RAB and how the IFAD SPIU will be integrated within it is yet to be finalized and shared 
with IFAD.  Institutional arrangements for implementation of KIIWP activities are further described in 
the section below.  
2.4 
Institutional Arrangements for KIIWP Implementation 
2.4.1 
Project Oversight 
The Lead Project Agency for KIIWP will be the RAB which will have the overall responsibility for the 
coordination and execution of the Project.  KIIWP will be integrated within the SPIU of IFAD projects 
(PASP and RDDP) that are under RAB. The SPIU Coordinator will also oversee and coordinate KIIWP 
activities that will be implemented at both the central and district level. In addition to the existing IFAD 
SPIU  staff  performing  cross-cutting  functions  of  finance/accounting,  M&E,  procurement  and 
administration,  the  following  KIIWP  staff  are  proposed:    (i)  a  KIIWP  Programme  Manager;  (ii)  an 
accountant dedicated to KIIWP implementation and transactions; (iii) an M&E officer in charge also of 
gender and youth; (iv)  an Irrigation  engineer; (v) a WUO Specialist, (vi) a Land Husbandry/Soil and 
Water  Conservation  (SWC)  Engineer,  and  vii)  a  Cooperative  Development  Officer.    The  IFAD  SPIU 
Environmental and Climate Change Specialist will be responsible for monitoring the environmental, 
social and climate performance of the subprojects.  
A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be set up, where the PS of MINAGRI will be the chair of the 
PSC.    The  membership  of  the  PSC  will  be  determined  by  MINAGRI  and  shared  with  IFAD.    It  is 
recommended representatives from REMA and RWFA should be nominated to sit on the PSC.  
Component 1 activities will need more hands on management, both on a day to day basis and at the 
higher levels.  Component 2 activities which provide support to farm business development will mainly 
be  implemented  through  service  providers  and  implementing  partners,  including  RAB.  For  service 
providers  and  implementing  partners,  contracting  and  partnership  will  be  based  on  renewable 
performance-based contracts or Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs). 
2.4.2 
District Level 
At district-level, staff will include an accountant; a WUO Specialist; a Land Husbandry (SWC) Engineer; 
a Cooperative Development Officer; a horticulture specialist; and an irrigation technician all integrated 
in the district organization structure and paid by KIIWP.  It is recommended here that an Environmental 
and Climate Change Officer (ECCO), and a Social Safeguards Officer (SSO) are also taken on as part of 
the District KIIWP Project Team.  
A District Steering Committee chaired by the Kayonza Mayor and made up of members of the District 
Council, members representing the farmers, farmers organisations (FOs), and local institutions from 
the public and private sectors’ participating in the Project will be put in place. The committee is due 
to meet at least twice yearly, once to review the draft Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) and again 
at mid-year to review the implementation progress. It will be responsible for the technical oversight of 
14 
the implementation of the AWPB and the Project’s integration into the district structure. The Project 
will also work with Farmer Organizations, notably different commodity-based Cooperatives, WUOs and 
national and international Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs). Raising awareness and capacity 
building  are  key  elements,  especially  of  FOs  and  District,  Sector  and  Cell  level  staff.  Practically  the 
Project will avail a budget for twice yearly planning and M&E meetings. 
The management of infrastructure and optimal use of developed land at district level is ensured by a 
Scheme  Steering  Committee  for  irrigation  and  soil  conservation  activities  at  District  level.  The 
committee is composed of:  
a)  Vice Mayor in charge of Economy development and Finance: Chairperson; 
b)  Director of Agriculture and environment in the District: vice chairperson; 
c)  Officer in charge of Cooperatives: Secretary; 
d)  RAB Staff – from Eastern Zonal Head 
e)  District officer in charge of irrigation program; 
f)  Environment Officer; 
g)  Socio-economic Development Officer; 
h)  Gender Officer; 
i)  Officer from “One Stop Center”; 
j)  Executive Secretaries of sectors where the infrastructures are located; 
k)  Chairperson of cooperative/ or representative of farmers operating on the developed land, 
l)  Representative  of  irrigation  water  user  association  on  the  developed  land  with  irrigation 
canals;  
m)  Representative of the District Environmental Committee 
n)  Representatives of stakeholders, development projects and Government entities operating in 
the District in land development, conservation and optimal use programmes. 
Responsibilities of Scheme Steering Committee at District level are as follows: 
•  Mobilising  the  users  of  developed  land  to  adhere  to  cooperative  or  irrigation  water  user 
associations when developed land is equipped with irrigation infrastructures; 
•  Approving the action plan of cooperative or irrigation water user associations operating on 
developed land in the District; 
•  Monitoring the use of infrastructures available in developed schemes of the District; 
•  Advising  on  management  and  use  of  cooperative  and  irrigation  water  user  association 
resources on developed land; 
•  Monitoring  the  law  enforcement  with  regard  to  management  and  conservation  of  natural 
resources on developed land; 
•  Preventing and solving conflicts that may rise between land and water users; 
•  Following up erosion control activities on watersheds around the scheme; 
•  Following up on implementation of environmental and social management  and monitoring 
plans and climate risk mitigation plans prepared for each irrigation site; 
•  Following up on the implementation and monitoring of the Resettlement Action Plan; 
•  Reporting to competent Government authorities. 
It should be noted that MINAGRI has recently advertised for positions of District Agriculture Inspectors 
(DAIs) who will report directly to the PS MINAGRI.  This officer will represent MINAGRI in the district, 
and among other tasks, assist in the preparation and coordination of various programmes that the 
MINAGRI  is  implementing  in  the  District.    The  DAI  will  also  cooperate  and  collaborate  with  all  key 
players in the agricultural sector, work closely with District authorities, RAB stations and NAEB zonal 
staff.    
15 
2.4.3 
Scheme Level 
A Steering Committee will be established at scheme level to oversee infrastructure and optimal use of 
developed land.   The Committee at the scheme level will be composed of:   
a)  The Executive Secretary of the Sector in which the scheme is located: Chairperson; 
b)  Officer in charge of agriculture at sector level: Deputy chairperson; 
c)  Officer in charge of Development and social affairs in the cell where the scheme is located 
(Secretary); 
d)  The chairperson of the Cooperative/ Investor operating in the developed scheme; 
e)  The chairperson of water user association in the irrigated scheme or subproject; 
f)  A representative of environmental committees at sector level; 
g)  The representative of communities in subproject areas; 
h)  Representatives of the subcatchment committees; 
i)  Representatives  of  farmers’  cooperative  operating  in  watersheds  around  the  developed 
scheme.  
When  the  scheme  is  located  in  more  than  one  sector,  the  Management  committee  will  elect  an 
Executive Committee made of three people (Chairperson, deputy-chairperson and Secretary). 
At the scheme level, the Scheme Steering Committee will be in charge of: 
•  Approving the action plan of water user association and Cooperative operating in the scheme; 
•  Following  up  the  use  of  resources/property  of  Cooperative  and  water  user  association 
operating on developed land; 
•  Monitoring the use of infrastructures in the developed schemes;  
•  Enforcing the laws and regulations governing the management and conservation of natural 
resources;  
•  Following up all erosion control activities on watersheds around the developed scheme;  
•  Following up on implementation of environmental and social management  and monitoring 
plans and climate risk mitigation plans prepared for each site; 
•  Following up on the implementation and monitoring of the Resettlement Action Plan; 
•  Preventing and solving conflicts that may rise among land and water users. 
2.4.4 
Sub-Catchment Level 
Sub-catchment  Committees  will  be  set  up  for  each  selected  watershed  and  will  work  closely  with 
sector  development  committees  (known  as  SDCs)  and  with  FOs  and  various  other  associations,  as 
shown  in  Figure  2.2  above.  They  will  be  responsible for the  implementation of  work  plans,  quality 
control  related  to  contracted  services,  and  the  use  of  allocated  resources.  They  are  the  primary 
decision-makers,  as  long  as  their  decisions  do  not  conflict  with  the  basic  principles,  approach  and 
modalities of the Project or the district and sector priorities, as set out in the District Development 
Plan (DDP). As at the time of design the number of sub-catchment or watersheds was not known.   
2.5 
Selection of Sites for Intervention under KIIWP 
2.5.1 
Participatory Approach 
The selection of where the investments will be made will be done through participatory assessments 
in the sub-catchments and potential scheme areas during which the community institutions formed 
under  Sub-component  1.3  (Infrastructure  Management  Institutions)  will  be  expected  to  be  active 
participants.  The participatory approach involves establishing the types of crops that the smallholder 
farmers  are  already  growing,  and  what  they  would  like  to  produce.  They  will  also  be  involved  in 
16 
identifying markets. They must also be consulted in regard to their capacity to contribute to the Project 
(whether in cash or kind), how they can contribute (for example at what point during the year are they 
able to contribute, whether they prefer to stagger their contribution over the Project period, etc).  
2.5.2 
Technical Considerations 
The main technical factors affecting site selection are: 
•  Water availability; 
•  Availability of land for irrigation and catchment protection activities; 
•  Climatic factors; 
•  Soil characteristics, stability and suitability; 
•  Topography; 
•  Proximity to settlements; and 
•  Accessibility of the proposed sites. 
2.5.3 
Economic Considerations 
There  are  two  key  economic  considerations  in  developing  sites  for  irrigation:  investment  cost  per 
hectare, and a favourable Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR).   
Map 2.1 Location of Potential Sites 
2.5.4 
Selected Sites 
irrigation 
Based on  the  above,  under  Sub-components 
1.1 and 1.2, four sites have been selected for 
pumped 
in  Ndego  and  Kabare 
Sectors totaling 2000 ha, about 275 ha of land 
will be  developed for marshland irrigation in 
Rwinkwavu,  Kabare  and  Kabarondo  Sectors; 
and  in  Muruma  Sector,  farm  ponds  will  be 
constructed  for  rainwater  irrigation  of  some 
10ha  of  land.    Catchment  rehabilitation  and 
protection interventions will include terracing 
and agroforestry and will cover an estimated 
1300ha.    It  is  also  proposed  that  in  Ndego, 
Gahini,  Murundi  and  Mwiri  Sectors,  7  new 
valley  tanks  will  be  constructed,  15  valley 
tanks will be rehabilitated, and 20 boreholes 
will be installed to provide water for livestock 
and domestic use.   
irrigation 
Source: RAB, April 2018 
Based on  the  above,  under  Sub-components 
1.1 and 1.2, four sites have been selected for 
pumped 
in  Ndego  and  Kabare 
Sectors totaling 2000 ha, about 275 ha of land will be developed for marshland irrigation in Rwinkwavu, 
Kabare and Kabarondo Sectors; and in Muruma Sector, farm ponds will be constructed for rainwater 
irrigation of some 10ha of land.  Catchment rehabilitation and protection interventions will include 
terracing  and  agroforestry and  will  cover  an estimated  1300ha.    It  is  also  proposed  that  in  Ndego, 
Gahini,  Murundi  and  Mwiri  Sectors,  7  new  valley  tanks  will  be  constructed,  15 valley  tanks  will  be 
rehabilitated, and 20 boreholes will be installed to provide water for livestock and domestic use.   The 
proposed interventions are presented in Table 2.1 below.  It should be noted that IFAD will fund the 
necessary  studies  as  well  as  the  implementation  of  these  interventions,  except  for  the  pumped 
17 
irritation schemes in Ndego Sector, where IFAD will fund only implementation, but not the preparatory 
studies.  
Table 2.1  Selected Sites and Respective Interventions 
Infrastructure 
No.  Unit 
Comments 
Av. 
Size 
(ha) 
Total 
area 
(ha) 
Irrigation 
Pumped irrigation 
Small marshlands 
3 
1 
ha 
ha 
400 
600 
400 
600 
600 
275 
Farm-level ponds 
200  ha 
0.05 
10 
1400  Ndego sector: 3 sites (Kibare, Humure, Byimana) 
Source: Lakes Kibare, Ihema, Nasho 
Kabare sector: 1 site (Gakoma) 
Source: Lake Nasho 
To irrigate both marshlands and hillsides  
Sectors: Rwinkwavu, Kabare (River Gishanda) 125 ha 
Kabarondo (River Kanyeganyege):150 ha 
Source: rainwater 
Locations: Murama 
Selection criteria – a lot of land which has been terraced, 
but no water 
Pond size 50-200m3 
Catchment Conservation 
Land Husbandry (Terraces + 
agroforestry, mulching, 
liming, etc) 
ha 
7500  
Includes 2275 irrigated and rainfed Kabare, Kabarondo, 
Rwinkwavu: dam or irrigation related 
Murama (900ha), Kabarondo (190ha): rainfed  
Criteria for selecting locations: terraced land with water 
scarcity; non-terraced land 
Av. Household land holding: 0.3ha 
Provision of Water for Livestock and Domestic Use 
Valley tanks new 
m3 
40 
7 
Valley tanks rehab 
15  m3 
Boreholes 
20 
- 
? 
-  
280 
? 
20 
Ndego, Gahini, Murundi and Mwiri Sectors 
Locations of new tanks and boreholes not known. 
Borehole capacity not known. 
No. of people and livestock to be supplied not yet 
established.  
Gahini Sector 
18 
3 
Policy, Legal and Institutional Framework for Environmental 
Management in Rwanda 
This chapter describes the administrative, policy and regulatory framework relevant to environmental 
and climate change concerns in Rwanda that my trigger the IFAD SECAP.  
3.1 
Constitutional Provisions and Vision 2020 
The  Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  Rwanda,  promulgated  in  2003  and  revised  in  December  2015, 
articulates  the  rights  and  responsibilities  of  all  citizens  and  the  role  of  the  state  regarding  the 
environment by providing that every citizen is entitled to a healthy and satisfying environment and 
that very person has the duty to protect, safeguard and promote the environment under Articles 22 
and 53 respectively. Guidance of the Constitution on environmental preservation and management as 
a cross cutting issue is reflected in the National Vision 2020 and the National Policy on Environment of 
2003. 
The Constitution recognizes ownership of property and every person’s right to private property (Article 
34).  Consequently,  private  property,  whether  individually  or  collectively  owned,  is  inviolable.  
Exceptionally, the right  to property may be overruled in the case of public interest. In these  cases, 
circumstances and procedures are determined by the law and subject to fair and prior compensation 
(Article 34).  Article 35 stipulates that private ownership of land and other rights related to land are 
granted by the State. The constitution provides that a law should be in place to specify modalities of 
acquisition, transfer and use of land.  
The  Constitutional  rights  as  articulated  in  Vision  2020  and  Environment  Policy  are  given  effect  by 
Organic Law No. 4/2005 of 8 April 2005 as amended in 2018. Principle 1 of Article 7 in the Organic Law 
stipulates precautionary measures that are informed by the results of both environmental assessment 
of  policies,  plans,  projects,  and  development  activities  and  the  assessment  of  social  well-being. 
Chapter  IV,  Articles  67-70,  Organic  Law  sets  out  specific  guidelines  for  Environmental  Impact 
Assessment (EIA) and stipulates that every project, and those programmes and policies that may affect 
the environment, shall be subjected to EIA before obtaining authorization for implementation. 
3.2 
Policies and Strategic Provisions 
Rwanda National Environment Policy 
The National Environment Policy of 2003 seeks to achieve its overall objective of the improvement of 
human  wellbeing,  the  judicious  utilization  of  natural  resources  and  the  protection  and  rational 
management  of  ecosystems  for  a  sustainable  and  fair  development  through  improved  health  and 
quality of life for every citizen and promotion of sustainable socio-economic development through a 
rational management and utilization of resources and environment, integrating environmental aspects 
into all the development policies, planning and in all activities carried out at the national, provincial 
and local level, with the full participation of the population, conservation, preserve and restoration of 
ecosystems and maintenance of ecological and systems functions.  
The key principles mention among others that:  
i. 
It is every person’s right to live in a safe and stable environment, but on the other hand, they 
must keep it healthy;  
19 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
The  national  economic  growth  must  be  based  on  rational  use  of  resources  and  take  into 
account environmental dimensions; 
Active  and  effective  participation  of  the  whole  population  for  environment  protection  and 
management;  
A special emphasis must be laid on environmental education and sensitization programme at 
all levels with more involvement of women and the youth;  
Environmental impacts are to be analysed while conducting studies of development projects.  
Further, the policy proposes the elaboration or updating of master plans and special planning in urban 
areas  with  regard  to  population  and  land  development  aspects.  In  natural  resources  management 
(including land and water), the policy proposes:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Ensure the preservation and protection of soils against any form of degradation;  
Ensure  that a prior study of environmental impact which underlines  costs and benefits 
from  slopes  and  underlying  ecosystems  protection  is  conducted  for  any  development 
projects and; 
Encourage programmes of rainwater collection, stocking and use.  
The policy also proposes the following in regard to biodiversity, forests, wetlands management and 
other natural reserves and or ecosystems: 
i. 
ii. 
Set up protection measures for slopes to avoid degradation of swamps;  
Promote  the  rehabilitation  of  ecosystems  under  degradation  and  restoring  endangered 
species.  
On  the  issue  of  environmental  education,  information  and  research,  the  policy  proposes  among 
others:  
i. 
ii. 
To reinforce the human and institutional capacity building with regard to environment and  
To sensitize the population to protect the environment.  
On health and sanitation, the policy proposes among others:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Set up a system of waste collection, transport, disposal and elimination;  
Establish norms of zone protection between dumps, human buildings and water sources;  
Set up an appropriate canal and evacuation system for waste waters and rainwater in towns 
and resettlement sites/Villages “Imidugudu”.  
The  Environment  Policy  harmonizes  other  policies  like  on  agriculture,  energy.  The  policy  further 
proposes that the Central Government will be concerned with conservation and protection policies 
while tourism and environmental management will be transferred to the District and Kigali City levels.  
Land Policy 
The Land Policy of 2004 introduces the consideration of master plans for use and sound management 
of land resources. The policy also provides development of land use plans based on suitability of the 
areas/lands thus distinguishing the different categories of land and their purpose. The policy promotes 
irrigating  areas  that  are  more  or  less  flat  and  semi-arid  to  support  agricultural  production  while 
discouraging  overgrazing  and  pasture  burning.  On  the  use  and  management  of  hillsides  and 
marshlands,  the  policy  stipulates  that  marshlands  meant  for  agriculture  should  be  cultivated  after 
adequate planning and Environmental Impact Assessment.  
20 
Agriculture Policy  
The objectives  of  national Agriculture  Policy of 2018 are  aligned to  the  Malabo  Declaration  (2014) 
under the CAADP framework of the AU and cover increased contribution to wealth creation; economic 
opportunities  and  prosperity;  improved  food  security  and  nutrition;  and  increased  resilience  and 
sustainability. Pillar 3 of the policy stipulates productivity and sustainability through the increase of 
countering  of  the  adverse  effects  on  land  resources  and  climate  change  with  continued  efforts  to 
increase inputs and sustainable climate smart practices.  Actions under this pillar for the promotion of 
irrigation and sustainable water management include the following: 
Increase the area under irrigation; 
• 
•  Promote  private  sector-led  models  of  irrigation  scheme  management  and  establish 
maintenance fee collection; 
•  Attract private sector and external finance for irrigation development; 
•  Support efforts to increase the capacity of on-farm water harvesting, storage, and use; develop 
groundwater and improve drainage and flood management.  
Fertilizer Policy 
The  national  Fertilizer  Policy  of  2014  aims  to  contribute  to  increased  agricultural  productivity, 
economic returns and incomes through increased and sustainable access and use of fertilizers. 
The policy’s specific objectives are stated as the following: 
•  Create  an  enabling  environment  for  the  development  of  a  privately  driven  and  liberalized 
fertilizer importation and distribution system that fosters competition and innovation; 
•  Promote  fertilizer  trade  by introducing appropriate  and effective  incentives that  encourage 
investment by the private sector; 
•  Establish  an  efficient  regulatory  and  monitoring  system  that  is  private  sector  friendly  and 
ensures the sustainable supply to high quality fertilizer products along the distribution chain 
in a manner that safeguards human health and the environment; 
•  Create awareness and improve knowledge of the benefits of fertilizers; 
•  Promote  diverse  fertilizer  products  and  technologies  (improved  seeds,  irrigation,  soil 
conservation, lime) that enhance efficient utilization of fertilizers; 
•  Promote  integrated  nutrient  management  and  conservation  agriculture  for  environmental 
sustainability. 
•  Establish incentives that permit increased access and use of fertilizers at affordable rates by all 
the  farmers.  Such  incentives  shall  not  be  limited  to  Agriculture  Finance,  Insurance  and 
Subsidies. 
•  Support agricultural research and development to improve farmers’ returns to investment to 
fertilizers through establishing crop and area specific soil nutrient requirements and fertility 
levels to improve the fertilizer use efficiency, higher yields. 
•  Facilitate the application of balanced fertilizer in line with crop and area specific soil nutrient 
requirements  of  the  different  cropping  systems  and  agro-ecological  zones,  based  on  soil 
testing and fertilizer trials; 
•  Support the local production of fertilizers through the exploration of local resources (methane 
and lime) and fertilizer manufacture and blending to ease access and reduce cost of fertilizers; 
•  Foster institutional linkages and gender issues in implementing the policies; and 
•  Promote the harmonization of fertilizer policies at regional levels. 
The  policy  provides  for  the  improvement  of  supply  through  privatization  and  liberalization  of  the 
fertilizer market. It stipulates that the private sector shall be primarily responsible for fertilizer trade 
and marketing and that Government shall facilitate the private sector and perform a regulatory role in 
21 
implementing the above-listed objectives. The policy stipulates that the distribution of fertilizers in the 
country  shall  be  informed  by  district  fertilizer  requirements  in  terms  of  crop  requirements  and 
quantities.  It  also  provides  the  fertilizer  distribution  channel  existing  comprising  the  importer-
distributor/agro dealer cooperatives-agro dealers-farmers shall be monitored and fertilizer inspected 
along the distribution chain to ensure quality is maintained and delivery is timely. 
The  policy  recognizes  that  inappropriate  use  of  fertilizers  could  have  a  negative  effect  on  the 
environment such as leaching to underground water sources and the emission of “greenhouse gases”, 
which  contributing  to  global  warming  and  climate  change.  It  provides  for  mitigation  actions  for 
minimizing  greenhouse  gas  emissions  from  fertilizer application  practices  as  well  as  environmental 
safety and sustainability.  
The policy stipulates that Government shall be responsible for regulating fertilizers the quality fertilizer 
products that traded in the country according to the law governing the use of Agrochemicals and the 
Ministerial  Instructions  Regulating  the  control  of  Agro  chemicals,  agro  dealers  and  premises.  The 
Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) is mandated with the implementation of the 
national fertilizer policy with the support of partner institutions including REMA, Rwanda Inspection 
and Competition Authority (RICA), the Rwanda Standards Board (RSB) and Private Sector Federation 
(PSF). 
The policy recognizes that women play a very significant contribution to agriculture but often have a 
lesser  role  in  decision  making  and  are  disadvantaged  compared  to  their  male  counterparts  in 
benefiting from opportunities that arise for the fertilizer sub-sector (in terms of access to and use of 
fertilizers, and Fertilizer trade). In this regard, the policy stipulates the assurance that women have a 
fair chance to benefit from opportunities in fertilizer extension, trade, and use. 
National Policy for Water Resources Management  
The goal of the national Policy for Water Resources Management of 2011 is to manage and develop 
the water resources of Rwanda in an integrated and sustainable manner, so as to secure and provide 
water of adequate quantity and quality for all social and economic needs of the present and future 
generations  with  the  full  participation  of  all  stakeholders  in  decisions  affecting  water  resources 
management.  The  policy  recognizes  the  impacts  of  climate  change  on  the  water  resources  and 
provides for a comprehensive programme to introduce flow control, irrigation and storage. The policy 
further recognizes that as climatic variability increases over the medium term, decision-makers will be 
increasingly challenged to manage the water resource as the objectives of different sectors diverge. 
The Green Growth and Climate Resilience Strategy 
Rwanda adopted the national Green Growth and Climate Resilience Strategy (GGCRS) in 2011 with the 
vision  for  Rwanda  to  be  a  developed  climate-resilient  and  low-carbon  economy  by  2050.  The 
mainstreaming  and  implementation  of  the  GGCRS  is  mandated  to  the  ministry  responsible  for 
environment and climate change, which is currently the Ministry of Environment. The GGCRS stipulates 
4 strategic objectives: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Energy  security  and  a  low-carbon  energy  supply  that  supports  the  development  of  Green 
Industry and Services; 
Sustainable land use and water resource management that results in food security; 
Appropriate urban development and preservation of biodiversity and ecosystem Services; and 
Social  protection,  improved  health  and  disaster  risk  reduction  that  reduce  vulnerability  to 
climate change. 
22 
The strategic objectives are elaborated in an implementation framework of 14 Programmes of Action. 
Rwanda  submitted  its  Intended  Nationally  Determined  Contributions  (INDC)  for  adaptation  and 
mitigation  under  the  requirements  of  the  UNFCCC  in  2015  and  subsequently  confirmed  Nationally 
Determined Contributions (NDCs) in 2016 following the ratification of the Paris Agreement. The NDCs 
were developed with the 14 Programmes of Action of the GGCRS as the main reference. Rwanda’s 
NDCs are also appropriately aligned to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) agenda 2030. 
Adaptation and climate risk management programmes of action of the GGCRS involve the “Sustainable 
Intensification  of  Small  Scale  Agriculture”  and  “Agricultural  Diversity  in  Local  and  Export  Markets” 
which are aligned to NDC measures for mainstreaming agro ecology, utilizing resource recovery and 
reuse, using fertilizer enriched compost, mainstreaming IPM and adding value to agricultural products. 
The programmes are also in alignment with SDG 2: “End hunger, achieve food security and improved 
nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture”. 
GGCRS programmes of action, NDCs measures and SDGs targets are also linked to the fourth phase of 
the Strategic Plan for Agricultural Transformation (PSTA 4) and the first phase of the 7-year National 
Strategy for Transformation (NST1) that runs from 2018 to 2024. PSTA 4 actions as featured in NST-1 
include the following: 
•  Development of biological soil conservation practices;  
•  Farmer practice of integrated pest management;  
•  Farmer improvement feed and fodder through technologies; and  
•  Dissemination of weather and climate information products and services to farmers. 
National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan  
This strategy defines the objectives and priorities for the conservation and sustainable management 
of biodiversity. The plan includes hillsides and wetlands and protected areas as some of the areas that 
need to be conservation. The strategy focuses on five major aims: improved conservation of protected 
areas  and  wetlands;  sustainable  use  of  biodiversity  in  natural  ecosystems  and  agro-ecosystems; 
rational use of biotechnology; development and strengthening of policy, institutional, legal and human 
resources frameworks; and equitable sharing of benefits derived from the use of biological resources. 
The Action Plan consists of urgent and priority actions which are attainable in a period of five years. 
However, the plan is not based on the actual status quo of wetlands which is one of the most important 
ecosystems in Rwanda. There is need to undertake inventory of wetlands in the country which will 
allow planning of these ecosystems.  
Health Sector Policy  
The overall objective of the national Health Sector Policy of 2015 is to ensure universal accessibility (in 
geographical and financial terms)  of equitable and affordable  quality health services  (preventative, 
curative,  rehabilitative  and  promotional  services)  for  all  Rwandans.  The  policy  recognizes  the 
importance of strengthening coordination with several development sectors (agriculture, education, 
social protection) in the fight against malnutrition. 
The National Strategy for Transformation (NST) 
Until this year, Rwanda’s medium term development implementation framework followed a phase 5-
year Economic Development  and Poverty reduction Strategy (EDPRS) that  started in  2008  -2012 as 
phase  1  and  2013-2018  as  phase  2.  The  EDPRS  framework  ran  parallel  to  the  7  Government 
Programme but was out of phase by 2 years. A new 7-year framework that merges the 2 frameworks 
known as the National Strategy for Transformation (NST) has been adopted with the phase 1 running 
23 
from  2019  to  2024  as  NST-1.  NST-1  lays  out  Priority  7  as  “Sustainable  Management  of  Natural 
Resources and Environment to Transition Rwanda towards a Carbon Neutral Economy”. The carbon-
neutral  transformation  priority 
increased  sustainability  and  profitability  of  forestry 
management,  increased sustainability of land use  systems, integrated water resource management 
and accelerated growth in Green Innovation. 
includes 
3.3 
National Legislation 
National Environment Law  
Chapter  IV of Title  III  of  the  Organic Law  n° 04/2005  of 08/04/2005  determining  the modalities  of 
protection, conservation and promotion of environment in Rwanda regulate the Environmental impact 
Assessments. In its Article 67, every project shall be subjected to environmental impact assessment, 
before obtaining authorization for its implementation. This applies to programmes and policies that 
may affect the environment.  
Article 68 specifies the main points that an Environmental Impact Assessment must include. Article 69 
stipulates that the environmental impact assessment shall be examined and approved by the Rwanda 
Environmental  Management  Authority  or  any  other  person  given  a  written  authorization  by  the 
Authority. The environment impact assessment shall be carried out at the expense of the promoter. 
Article 70 states that an order of the Minister having environment in his attributions establishes the 
list  of  projects  for  which  the  public  administration  shall  not  warrant  any  authorization  without  an 
Environmental Impact Assessment describing direct and indirect consequences of the project to the 
environment.  
Under Title VI of this Organic Law, Article 81 stipulates that the following activities are prohibited:  
•  Dumping or disposal of any solid, liquid waste or hazardous gaseous Substances in a stream, 
river, lake and in their surroundings;  
•  Damaging the quality of air and of the surface or underground water;  
•  Non authorized bush burning;  
•  Smoking in public and in any other place where many people meet; 
•  Defecating or urinating in an inappropriate place;  
•  Spitting, discarding mucus and other human waste in any place.  
For Article 87, it is prohibited to construct houses in wetlands (rivers, lakes, big or small swamps), in 
urban or rural areas, to build markets there, a sewage plant, a cemetery and any other buildings that 
may damage such a place in various ways. All buildings shall be constructed in a distance of at least 
twenty (20) meters away from the bank of the swamp. If it is considered necessary, construction of 
buildings  intended  for  the  promotion  of  tourism  may  be  authorized  by  the  Minister  having 
environment in his or her attributions.  
It is also prohibited to carry out any activities, except those related to research and science, in reserved 
swamps. For the purpose of enforcement, Article 95 announces that anyone or association that does 
not carry out environmental impact assessment prior to launching any project that may have harmful 
effects on the environment is punished by suspension of his or her activities and closure of his or her 
association  and  without  prejudice  to  be  ordered  to  rehabilitate  the  damaged  property,  the 
environment,  people  and  the  property.  Falsification  and  alteration  of  documents  of  environmental 
impact assessment is punished in the same manner as what is provided for in paragraph one of this 
Article. 
24 
Law No. 43/2013 Governing Land in Rwanda (2013)  
The Land Law has been developed to determine the modalities of allocating, acquiring, transferring, 
using  and  managing  land  in  Rwanda.  Article  3  of  the  law  reaffirms  the  States  supreme  power  in 
management of land and the right to expropriate in the public interest. Under Article 6, any citizen can 
be granted freehold title, and as per Article 7, for an area up to 5 hectares. The Minister may allow for 
freehold titles in excess of 5 hectares.  
Article 10 notes that private individual land shall comprise land acquired either through customary or 
written law. Article 17 notes that in addition to freehold title, the right to land may be granted by the 
State  in the form of emphyteutic lease (specifying that  the lessee must improve  the property with 
construction), for between 3 and 99 years, which can be renewed. Article 18 states that allocated or 
leased land shall be evidenced by a certificate of land registration issued by the registrar of land titles. 
Article 20 notes that registration of land is obligatory. 
In terms of land use consolidation, Article 30 notes that it is prohibited to subdivide agricultural land 
plots if this would result in a plot of less than 1 hectare. Owners of lands which are prohibited from 
subdivision should co-own and use the land. Article 34 notes that landowners have the right to exploit 
their land in accordance with the law, and freely own land, except in the case of expropriation in the 
public interest. 
Law No. 32/2015 Relating to Expropriation in the Public Interest  
Article 2 defines expropriation in the public interest as, ‘an act based on power of Government, public 
institutions and local administrative entities with legal personality to remove a person from his/her 
property in the public interest after fair compensation’. Further, fair compensation is defined as, ‘an 
indemnity equivalent to the value of land and the activities performed thereon given to the person to 
be  expropriated  and  calculated  in  consideration  of  market  prices  as  well  as  compensation  for 
disturbance due to expropriation’.  
Article 3 notes that, ‘No person shall hinder the implementation of the program of expropriation in 
the public interest on pretext of self-centred interests.’  Article 17 states that after the publication of 
a decision on expropriation in the public interest, complete with a list of holders of rights registered 
on  land  titles  and  property  incorporated  on  land,  land  owners  shall  not  develop  any  long-term 
activities on the land, otherwise such activities shall not be compensable during expropriation.  
In terms of valuation, Article 22 states that land values and prices for property consistent with the 
prevailing market rates shall be established by the Institute of Real Property Valuers in Rwanda.  Article 
23 states that independent valuers certified by the Institute of Real Property Valuers in Rwanda should 
conduct  valuation  of  land  and  property.  In  accordance  with  Article  25,  the  valuation  of  land  and 
property  should  be  conducted  in  the  presence  of  the  landowner/property  owner  or  their  lawful 
representatives, and in the presence of representatives of local administrative entities.  
According to Article 26 land titles must be produced as evidence of ownership, and evidence of marital 
status  as  applicable.  Any  persons  dispossessed  of  land,  or  unlawfully  occupying  land,  or  having 
developed activities prohibited after the enactment of relevant laws shall receive no compensation.   
Article  27  reaffirms  that  compensation  for  land  must  include  any  improvements  on  the  land  and 
compensation for disruption associated with expropriation.  
Article 28 notes that the value of land and property should be calculated on the basis of size, nature 
and location and the prevailing market rates. The compensation for disruption caused by expropriation 
25 
to be paid to the expropriated person shall be equivalent to five percent (5%) of the total value of 
his/her property expropriated.  
Article 32 refers to sign-off by the owner once he/she is satisfied with the valuation.  Article 33 allows 
for any person not  satisfied with the valuation to contest  in writing within seven days. Any person 
contesting the assessed value must engage the services of a valuer or a valuation firm recognized by 
the  Institute  of  Real  Property  Valuers  in  Rwanda,  at  their  own  expense,  to  carry  out  a  counter-
assessment  of  the  value. Under  Article  34  if  unsatisfied  the  matter  may  be  referred  to  the  courts. 
However, the compensation will be paid pending the court decision so as not to delay expropriation.  
In  terms  of  payment  of  compensation,  Article  35  notes  that,  ‘fair  compensation  can  be  paid  in 
monetary  form  in  the  Rwandan  currency  or  in  any  other  form  mutually  agreed  upon  by  the 
expropriator  and  the  person  to  be  expropriated’.  The  fair  compensation  must  be  paid  to  the 
expropriated person before he/she relocates. Article 36 notes that compensation must be paid within 
120 days of approval by the  Ministry, or otherwise becomes  null and void, unless mutually  agreed 
otherwise. After payment, the affected person has a further 120 days to relocate. In this time they 
should not plant any crops that would take more than 120 days of growth before harvesting.  
Article  38  stipulates  that  compensation  shall  be  deposited  into  a  bank  account  with  a  recognized 
locally-based bank or financial institution. When, in case of joint ownership, compensation must be 
paid  to  more  than  one  person,  such  as  family  or  a  legally  married  spouse,  compensation  will  be 
deposited into an account which requires co-authorization to withdraw money.  
Article 39 allows for payment of compensation in-kind as opposed to cash. During public consultation 
with PAPs, they confirmed that they need compensation in cash not in kind. KIIWP will trigger this law 
in case of loss of property of economic benefit resulting project activities. 
Law N° 30/2012 of 01/08/23012 On Governing of Agrochemicals 
This Law governs the manufacturing, importing, distribution, use, storage, sale and disposal and burial 
of agrochemicals for the protection of human and animal health and the environment, to avoid injury 
and contamination which may result from their use.  The Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources 
(MINAGRI) has the responsibility for its implementation.   
Ministerial Order No. 001/2006 Determining the Structure of Lands (2006)  
This ministerial order determines the structure of Land Registers, and the responsibilities and functions 
of the District Land Bureau. The responsibilities of the land bureau include among others to implement 
land registration, keep land registers, monitor and approve activities pertaining to valuation of land 
and property, and demarcate and approve land cadastral maps. Rural populations with customary land 
rights are being encouraged to register their land through these institutions. 
Presidential Order No. 54/01 (2006)  
This  presidential  order  determines  the  structure,  the  responsibilities,  the  functioning  and  the 
composition  of  Land  Committees.  Article  9  of  the  order  gives  the  office  of  the  land  committee 
independence in the discharge of its daily technical duties. Therefore, it receives no instructions from 
any other organ.  
26 
Ministerial Order No. 002/2008 Determining Modalities of Land Registration (2008)  
The Ministerial Order includes dispute resolution procedures in relation to land registration, including 
the  use  of  a  Cell  Land  Adjudication  Committee  (LAC).  The  LACs  are  comprised  of  five  members, 
supplemented  by  five  members  of  the  particular  village  (imidugudu)  where  demarcation  and 
adjudication is taking place. The cell executive secretary acts as the LAC secretary, although he or she 
has no voting rights.  
Article 17 grants parties to a dispute the right to take that dispute to the LAC. Where disputes are 
resolved with the assistance of the LAC, the parties are bound by that agreement, and may not later 
raise the issue. Article 20 provides procedures for the LAC when hearing disputes, including that the 
hearing is open to the public and announced eight days in advance. 
Ministerial  order  N°  003/2008  of  15/08/2008  relating  to  the  requirements  and  procedure  for 
environmental impact Assessment (EIA)  
Article  1  (1)  stipulates  that  Environmental  Impact  study  is  a  systematic  way  of  identifying 
environmental, social and economic impacts of a project before a decision of its acceptance is made. 
In Article 3, the developer submits an official application which includes a project brief of the proposed 
project to the authority. Article 4 specifies that within thirty (30) calendar days after receipt of the 
project brief and after its analysis, the Authority shall submit the Terms of reference to the developer 
for the Environmental impact study. 
Ministerial order N°004/2008 of 15/08/2008 establishing the list of works, activities and projects 
that have to undertake an environment impact assessment 
Article  2  and  the  appendix  of  this  Order  specify  the  works,  activities  and  projects  that  have  to 
undertake an environmental impact assessment before being granted permission to commence. The 
present project is classified under Agriculture and infrastructure Development.  
Ministerial Order for Establishing the List of Protected Animals and Plant Species in Rwanda, Order 
No 007/2008 of 15/08/2008  
This Ministerial Order establishes protected animal and plant species list in Rwanda. The list of animals 
that include Mammals, Birds and Reptiles is shown under Appendix I while the protected plant species 
is shown under Appendix II of the Order document.  The present project does not involve clearance of 
natural vegetation or affect any of the listed protected animals and plant species. 
3.4 
Institutional Framework for Environmental Regulation 
Ministry of Environment  
The Ministry of Environment (MINIRENA) is the ministry responsible for the environment as provided 
by Prime Minister’s Order Nº 131/03 of 23/12/2017. Ministry of Environment has the following main 
responsibilities: 
•  To  develop  and  disseminate  the  environment  and  climate  change  policies,  strategies  and 
programs  
•  To monitor and evaluate the implementation and mainstreaming of environment and climate 
change policies, strategies and programs across all sectors, especially productive sector;   
27 
•  To  oversee  and  evaluate  institutions  under  its  supervision  by  providing  guidance  on  the 
implementation of specific programs to be realised by the institutions under its supervision 
and local government;  
•  To mobilise the necessary resources for the development, protection and conservation of the 
environment for the climate change adaptation and mitigation.    
Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA)  
The Organic Law No. 04/2005 and its regulations in the form of Ministerial Orders are implemented 
through Law No. 16/2006 of 2006 as amended in 2013 that established the Rwanda Environmental 
Management Authority (REMA) as the regulating agency and determined its organization, functions, 
and responsibilities. The law provides that REMA is the authority in charge of supervising, monitoring 
and ensuring that issues relating to environment are integrated in all national development programs. 
Article  3  of  the  REMA  law  defines  the  environmental  regulation  mandate  including  Section  6  that 
stipulates close monitoring and assessment of development programs to ensure compliance with the 
laws on environment  during their preparation and implementation. In this regard, REMA put place 
environmental management tools and guidelines, including general and sector-specific guidelines for 
EIA that are available to the public via various media, including internet resources. 
REMA is charged with the following functions:  
•  To implement Government environmental policy and decisions of the Board of Directors. 
•  To  advise  the  Government  on  legislative  and  other  measures  for  the  management  of  the 
environment  or  the  implementation  of  relevant  international  conventions,  treaties  and 
agreements in the field of environment, as the case may deem necessary.  
•  To take stock and conduct comprehensive environmental audits and investigations, to prepare 
and publish biannual reports on the state of natural resources in Rwanda.  
•  To undertake research, investigations, surveys and such other relevant studies in the field of 
environment and disseminate the findings.  
•  To ensure monitoring and evaluation of development programs in order to control observance 
of  proper  safeguards  in  the  planning  and  execution  of  all  development  projects,  including 
those  already  in  existence,  that  have  or  are  likely  to  have  significant  impact  on  the 
environment.  
•  To participate in the setup of procedures and safeguards for the prevention of accidents and 
phenomena  which  may  cause  environmental  degradation  and  propose  remedial  measures 
where accidents and those phenomena occur. 
•  To render advice and technical support, where possible, to entities engaged in natural resource 
management and environmental protection. 
•  To provide awards and grants aimed at facilitating research and capacity-building in matters of 
environmental protection. 
•  To  publish  and  disseminate  manuals,  codes  or  guidelines  relating  to  environmental 
management and prevention or abatement of environmental degradation.  
REMA was initially responsible for reviewing and approving EIA reports. However, this function has 
been delegated to the Rwanda Development Board (RDB), as discussed below. 
Rwanda Development Board  
The mandate for implementing Articles 67-70 regarding EIA of development activities is delegated to 
the One Stop Centre within the Rwanda Development Board16. The RDB EIA Unit provides certification 
16 http://rdb.rw/one-stop-centre/#environmental-impact-assessment 
28 
services to developers free of charge for the time being, although a legal instrument it being put in 
place for developers to pay for the service.  The EIA certification procedure involves the provision of a 
project brief checklist for the developer to ascertain whether or not the development activity required 
an EIA; a site visit and issuance of terms of reference for carrying out  the  EIA within a period of 2 
weeks, reviewing the EIA report and issuance (or denial) of the EIA Certificate within a period of 20 
days.  
With regard to environmental safeguards, RDB EIA Unit plays the following roles:  
•  Reviewing Project Briefs so as to advise on Terms of Reference; 
•  Providing  information  or  advice  to  developers  and  EIA  Experts  when  consulted  during  EIA 
process; 
•  Reviewing EIA reports and provide comments to the developers;  
•  Organizing public hearings;  
• 
Issuing certificates of approval. 
Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources  
Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) has a primary mandate for the development, 
transformation and modernization of agricultural sector in Rwanda in its broadest sense. The task force 
on  Irrigation  and  Mechanization  is  the  technical  agency  responsible  for  the  exploitation  and 
management of wetlands for agricultural purposes. It oversees, and implements where necessary, all 
irrigation and marshland development  programs in Rwanda and ensures their sustainability. It also 
facilitates  the  implementation  of  mechanization  in  agriculture  at  the  village  level,  improves  data 
collection  on  irrigation  activities  to  ensure  that  the  monitoring  and  future  policy  actions  can  be 
effective and ensure capacity building at cooperative and farm level in irrigation and mechanization 
techniques  to  ensure  sustainability.  The  Ministry  oversees  the  facilitation  of  access  to  agricultural 
inputs according to the country’s regulations including N° 30/2012 of 01/08/23012 Law on governing 
of agrochemicals. 
Rwanda Agriculture and Animal Resources Development Board (RAB) 
Rwanda Agriculture and Animal Resources Development Board (RAB) has a mandate to coordinate all 
activities in relation with agriculture and animal resources development. RAB is an autonomous body 
established by LAW N°38/2010 OF 25/11/2010. The law specifies that RAB has the general mission of 
championing  the  agriculture  sector  development  into  a  knowledge  based,  technology  driven  and 
market oriented industry, using modern methods in crop, animal, fisheries, forestry and soil and water 
management in food, fibre and fuel wood production and processing. 
Rwanda Water and Forestry Authority (RWFA) 
The Rwanda Water and Forestry Authority (RWFA) was established to carry out the following functions: 
Implement policies, laws, strategies and Government decisions related to the management of 
forests and natural water resources; 
• 
•  Advise Government, monitor and coordinate the implementation of strategies related to the 
management of forests and natural water resources;  
•  Assist public and private institutions in charge of management of forests and natural water 
resources in a bid to fight erosion; 
•  Establish programmes and strategies for production of tree seeds;  
•  Prepare  programmes  of  reforestation,  forest  promotion  and  appropriate  management  and 
support districts in the management of forests and natural water resources;  
29 
•  Undertake  research,  studies  and  other relevant  activities  with  regard  to  the  importance  of 
forests in the national economy and to the exploitation of trees and wood based products and 
disseminate the findings;  
•  Assist in the establishment of standards and regulations relating to the management of forests 
and natural water resources;  
•  Receive, check and advise on applications for permission for the use of water resources 
•  Monitor the respect of conditions to get permission for water use;  
•  Provide advice on determining fees to be paid for the use of natural water resources;  
•  Monitor  the  execution of agreements  related  to  natural  water  resources management  and 
distribution at the regional and international level; and 
•  Cooperate with other institutions and international organizations whose mission is related to 
forests and natural water activities. 
Local Governments  
Eastern  Province  and  Kayonza  District  and  other  local  government  entities  under  the  General 
Guidelines and Procedure for EIA are tasked to perform the following functions:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
At the request of RDB, review Project Briefs so as to advise on Terms of Reference; 
Provide information or advice to developers and EIA Experts when consulted during the EIA 
process; 
At the request of RDB, review EIA reports and provide comments to RDB; 
Assist RDB in organizing public hearings; 
Host public hearings; 
Host individual consultations;  
Gather written comments from public and transmit them to RDB; 
To be actively involved in the implementation of Environmental Management and Monitoring 
Plan (EMMP) and work closely with all concerned Stakeholders. 
3.5 
International Treaties and Conventions 
3.5.1 
Environmental Impact Assessment on International Context  
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) process operates within and towards the global concept of 
sustainable  development.  It  is  intended  to  achieve  benchmarks  and  embrace  commitment  to 
international  environmental  conventions  agreed  upon  in  Ramsar  (1971),  Vienna  (1985),  Montreal 
(1990), Rio (1992), Kyoto (1998), Stockholm (2001) and Durban (2011) to all of which, Rwanda is a 
party.  EIA  as  an  invaluable  tool  for  environmental  management  in  a  trans-  boundary  context,  it 
provides  a  framework  for  promotion  of  efficient  decision-making  in  project  approval;  enables 
implementation of environmental safeguards to mitigate significant negative impacts, avoid ecological 
damage and large-scale irreversible loss of natural resource; play a role in information dissemination 
between  Rwanda  and  neighbouring  countries  and  widen  the  scope  of  understanding  of  impacts 
beyond its borders. EIA process in Rwanda provides a basis for future international cooperation and 
conflict resolution concerning environmental impacts at a regional level.  
3.5.2 
International Conventions  
Rwanda has signed and ratified the following environmental international conventions which are to 
varying extents relevant to KIIWP and its applicable national policies and laws:  
•  The international Convention on Biological Diversity and its habitat signed in Rio de Janeiro in 
Brazil on 5 June 1992, as approved by Presidential Order No 017/01 of 18 March 1995;  
30 
•  The Cartagena Protocol on biodiversity to the Convention on Biological biodiversity signed in 
Nairobi from May 15, to 26, 2000 and in New York from June 5th, 2000 to June 4th, 2001 as 
authorized to be ratified by Law No 38/2003 of 29 December 2003;  
•  The  United  Nations  Framework  Convention on  Climate  Change,  signed  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  in 
Brazil on 5th of June 1992, as approved by Presidential Order No 021/01 of 30th May 1995;  
•  The Kyoto Protocol to the framework on climate change adopted at Kyoto on March 6th, 1998 
as authorized to be ratified by Law No36/2003 of December 2003;  
•  The  Ramsar  Convention  of  February  2,  1971  on  Wetlands  of  International  Importance, 
especially  as  water  flows  habitats  as  authorized  to  be  ratified  by  Law  No  37/2003  of  29 
December2003;  
•  The Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants, signed in Stockholm on 22 May 
2001, as approved by Presidential Order No 78/01 of 8 July 2002;  
•  The Rotterdam Convention on the establishment of the international procedures agreed by 
states  on  commercial  transactions of  agricultural  pesticides  and  other  poisonous  products, 
signed in Rotterdam on 11 September 1998 and in New York from 12 November1998 to 10 
September 1999 as approved by Presidential Order No 28/01of August 2003 approving the 
membership of Rwanda;  
•  The Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and 
their disposal as adopted at Basel on 22nd of March 1989, and approved by Presidential Order 
No 29/01 of 24 August2003 approving the membership of Rwanda;  
•  The Montreal  Conventional  on  Substances  that  Deplete  the Ozone  Layer,  signed  in  London 
(1990),  Copenhagen  (1992),  Montreal  (1997),  Beijing  (1999),  especially  in  its  Article  2  of 
London  amendments  and  Article  3  of  Copenhagen,  Montreal  and  Beijing  amendments  as 
approved  by  Presidential  Order  no  30/01  of  24August  2003  related  to  the  membership  of 
Rwanda;  
•  The Bonn Convention opened for signature on June 23, 1979 on conservation of migratory 
species of wild animals as authorized to be ratified by Law No 35/2003 of 29 December 2003;  
•  The Washington agreement of March 3, 1973 on International trade in Endangered Species of 
Wild Flora and Fauna (CITES) as authorized to be ratified by presidential Order No 211 of 25 
June 1980. 
GoR has domesticated these treaties and conventions, as reflected in the various policies and laws 
described.  The relevance of these treaties and conventions are summarised in the table below.  
Table 3.1  International Treaties and Conventions 
International Treaty / Convention 
Stipulations/ Requirements 
Relevance to KIIWP 
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD, 
1992)  
Cartagena  Protocol  on  Biosafety  to  the 
Convention on Biological Diversity 
Aims  to  conserve  biological  diversity,  promote 
the  sustainable  use  of  the  components  of 
fair  and 
biological  diversity,  and  ensure 
equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of 
the utilization of genetic resources.   
Aims to ensure the safe handling, transport and 
(LMOs) 
living  modified  organisms 
use  of 
resulting from modern biotechnology that may 
have  adverse  effects  on  biological  diversity, 
taking also into account risks to human health. 
Schemes  may  require  the  clearing  of 
vegetation  but  also  may  affect  aquatic 
is  not 
if  environmental  flow 
ecology 
maintained.   
May be relevant if modified seed is to be 
used on the schemes.  
The  Nagoya  Protocol  on  Access  to 
Genetic  Resources  and  the  Fair  and 
Equitable  Sharing  of  Benefits  Arising 
from their Utilization   
A supplementary agreement to the Convention 
on  Biological  Diversity  which  provides  a  legal 
framework for the effective implementation of 
the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising 
May be relevant if traditional legumes are 
to be replaced by cash crops, and where 
plants  traditionally  used  for  medical  or 
31 
International Treaty / Convention 
Stipulations/ Requirements 
Relevance to KIIWP 
Convention  on  the  Conservation  of 
Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS) 
UN  Framework  Convention  on  Climate 
Change (UNFCCC) 
out of the utilization of genetic resources. The 
Protocol  addresses 
traditional  knowledge 
resources  with 
associated  with  genetic 
provisions  on  access,  benefit-sharing  and 
compliance. It also addresses genetic resources 
where  indigenous  and  local  communities  have 
the established right to grant access to them. 
A  framework  convention  which  provides  a 
global  platform  for  the  conservation  and 
sustainable use of migratory animals and their 
habitats. 
for 
framework 
Provides  a 
international 
cooperation  to  combat  climate  change  by 
limiting  average  global  temperature  increases 
and  the  resulting  climate  change,  and  coping 
with its impacts. 
Kyoto Protocol  to the UNFCCC   (1997) 
Legally  binds  developed  country  Parties  to 
emission reduction targets. 
Paris Agreement to the UNFCCC (2015) 
Seeks  to  accelerate  and  intensify  the  actions 
and  investment  needed  for  a  sustainable  low 
carbon  future.  Its  central  aim  is  to  strengthen 
the  global  response  to  the  threat  of  climate 
change by keeping a global temperature rise this 
century well below 2 degrees Celsius above pre-
industrial  levels  and  to  pursue  efforts  to  limit 
the  temperature  increase  even  further  to  1.5 
degrees  Celsius.  The  Agreement  also  aims  to 
strengthen the ability of countries to deal with 
the impacts of climate change 
United  Nations  Convention  to  Combat 
Desertification (UNCCD, 1994)  
levels, 
and/or 
drought 
Aims to combat desertification and mitigate the 
effects  of  drought  in  countries  experiencing 
serious 
desertification, 
particularly in Africa, through effective action at 
all 
international 
cooperation and partnership arrangements.  It 
specifically  addresses  the  arid,  semi-arid  and 
dry  sub-humid  areas,  known  as  the  drylands, 
where some of the most vulnerable ecosystems 
and peoples can be found. 
supported 
by 
cultural  practices  may  be  destroyed  due 
to conversion of wetlands or rangelands. 
will 
activities 
KIIWP 
affect 
marshlands/wetlands  where  migratory 
fowl  frequent, 
including  the  Akagera 
wetland complex 
climate 
focusses  on 
KIIWP 
smart 
agriculture  and  requires  a  climate  risk 
assessment to be undertaken in order to 
guide  Project  design 
in  coping  with 
climate-related impacts on livelihoods. 
KIIWP  focuses  on  the  drought-prone 
district of Kayonza. 
Convention concerning the Protection of 
the World Cultural and Natural Heritage 
(World Heritage Convention, 1972)  
Rwanda has a number of UNESCO World 
Heritage  Sites.  However,  the  Project  will 
have  no  interaction  with  these.  As  such, 
requirements  under  the  convention  will 
not be triggered 
Requires state parties to recognize that the duty 
of  ensuring  the 
identification,  protection, 
conservation, presentation and transmission to 
future  generations  of  the  cultural  and  natural 
heritage  situated  on 
its  territory,  belongs 
primarily to that State. It will do all it can to this 
end,  to  the  utmost  of  its  own  resources  and, 
international 
where  appropriate,  with  any 
assistance  and  co-operation, 
in  particular, 
financial, artistic, scientific and technical, which 
it may be able to obtain. 
The Rotterdam Convention (formally, the 
Rotterdam  Convention  on  the  Prior 
Informed Consent Procedure for Certain 
Promotes  shared  responsibilities  in  relation  to 
importation  of  hazardous  chemicals.  The 
convention  promotes  open  exchange  of 
Agrochemicals used on the schemes must 
be  those  that  are  registered  with,  and 
approved  by,  the  MINAGRI  and  properly 
32 
International Treaty / Convention 
Stipulations/ Requirements 
Relevance to KIIWP 
Hazardous  Chemicals  and  Pesticides  in 
International Trade) 
information and calls on exporters of hazardous 
include 
chemicals  to  use  proper 
labeling, 
inform 
directions  on  safe  handling,  and 
purchasers of any known restrictions or bans.  
labelled for safe handling, disposal, etc.  In 
addition, farmers must be trained on the 
hazards of these agrochemicals  and  how 
to store, handle and use them.  
Signatory nations can decide whether to allow 
or ban the importation of chemicals listed in the 
treaty,  and  exporting  countries  are  obliged  to 
make 
their 
sure 
jurisdiction comply. 
that  producers  within 
The  Basel  Convention  on  the  Control  of 
Transboundary Movements of Hazardous 
Wastes  and  Their  Disposal  (the  Basel 
Convention, 1989) 
to 
reduce 
Designed 
the  movements  of 
hazardous  waste  between  nations,  and 
specifically  to  prevent  transfer  of  hazardous 
waste  from  developed  to 
less  developed 
countries (LDCs). It does not, however, address 
the  movement  of  radioactive  waste.  Also 
intended to minimize the amount and toxicity of 
wastes 
their 
environmentally sound management as closely 
as possible to the source of generation, and to 
sound 
assist 
management  of  the  hazardous  and  other 
wastes they generate. 
environmentally 
generated, 
ensure 
LDCs 
to 
in 
of 
assistance 
Of  particular  relevance  to  KIIWP  is  the 
the 
provision 
management  of  hazardous  and  other 
wastes  –  in  this  case  it  applies  to  the 
disposal  of  expired  agrochemicals  and 
their containers. 
in 
Stockholm  Convention  on  Persistent 
Organic Pollutants (1992)  
Aims to eliminate or restrict the production and 
use of persistent organic pollutants (POPs). 
Convention  on  International  Trade  in 
Endangered  Species  of  Wild  Fauna  and 
Flora  (CITES)  (Washington  Convention, 
1975).  
The  Bamako  Convention  on  the  ban  on 
the Import into Africa and the Control of 
Transboundary 
and 
Management  of  Hazardous  Wastes 
(Bamako  Convention, 
within  Africa 
1991). 
Movement 
international  trade 
Aims to protect endangered plants and animals 
and  to  ensure  that 
in 
specimens of wild animals and plants does not 
threaten the survival of the species in the wild.  
It accords varying degrees of protection to more 
than 35,000 species of animals and plants. 
Prohibits the import of any hazardous (including 
radioactive) waste into Africa 
Agrochemicals  used  in  KIIWP  schemes 
must  be  those  that  are  registered  with 
and approved by MINAGRI. 
KIIWP schemes’ proximity to the Akagera 
National  Park  may  indirectly  encourage 
in  endangered 
trade 
poaching  and 
species. 
in  the  event  that  expired 
Relevant 
agrochemicals  and  their  containers  are 
taken to other countries for disposal.  
3.6 
IFAD Safeguard Polices 
Policy on Improving Access to Land and Tenure Security 
The IFAD land policy provides a conceptual framework for the relationship between land issues and 
rural poverty, and identifies the major implications of this relationship for IFAD’s work.  The policy 
acknowledges the complexity and dynamics of evolving rural realities and articulates guiding principles 
for  mainstreaming  land  issues  in  the  Fund’s  main  operational  instruments  and  processes.    It  also 
provides a framework for the subsequent development of operational guidelines and decision tools. 
The main principles of the policy are: 
i. 
ii. 
Align with national priorities and support to poverty reduction strategies; 
Adhere to the “do-no-harm” principle at all times;  
33 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
Appreciate  the  diversity  and  dynamic  nature  of  existing  agrarian  structures  and  tenure 
systems; 
Support the centrality of the empowerment of poor rural people and the organizations that 
represent them; 
Forge complementary partnerships with like-minded actors; 
Focus on the gender dimension of land rights; 
Adhere to the principle of free, prior and informed consent; 
Support to production services and market linkages to maximize the positive effects of access 
to land and tenure security. 
Anchored in this policy are the tenets of Free Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC). 
Policy on Disclosure of Documents, 2010 
IFAD’s Policy on the Disclosure of Documents enables project design documents to be disclosed prior 
to the Executive Board session at which the project is to be considered. The Consultation also directed 
the Executive Board to review policy provisions with regard to the disclosure of previously undisclosed 
documents.  
Under IFAD’s current disclosure policy, the following documents are disclosed to the public at the same 
time that they are made available to Executive Board representatives and Governors:  
•  All  documents  submitted  to  the  Governing  Council 
(including 
its  Replenishment 
Consultations); 
•  All documents submitted to the Executive Board (including the Evaluation Committee); 
• 
Information/status notes on projects being developed for presentation to the Executive Board 
following internal approval of the inception memorandum; 
•  Agreements for loans and grants once they are signed and effective;  
•  Amendments to loan and grant agreements once signed and countersigned; 
•  Previously  undisclosed  documents  that  are  eligible  for  disclosure  under  the  current  policy 
(upon request or as necessary) 
All evaluation reports and documentation submitted to the Evaluation Committee are made available 
to  the  general  public  on the  website  of  the  IFAD  Office of  Evaluation  (IOE),  which  is  part  of  IFAD’s 
corporate website.  Project/programme design documents are disclosed to the public in their original 
language prior to the Executive Board session at which the project/programme is to be considered.  
The policy also discusses the process for disclosure of previously undisclosed documents, the language 
of disclosure and appeals. 
Climate Change Strategy, 2010 
The goal of IFAD’s Climate Change Strategy is to maximize IFAD’s impact on rural poverty in a changing 
climate through: 
•  Supporting  innovative  approaches  to  helping  smallholder  farmers  build  their  resilience  to 
climate change; 
•  Helping smallholder farmers take advantage of available mitigation incentives and funding; 
• 
Informing a more  coherent  dialogue  on climate  change,  rural development  agriculture  and 
food security. 
34 
The strategy aims to empower local communities and their institutions to participate in climate-change 
related decision-making processes, and to build their capacity to respond using their own and others’ 
experience.  IFAD’s  focus  is  to  develop  key  partnerships  on  the  ground,  such  as  community-based, 
farmers’  and  women’s  organizations,  NGOs,  and  national  and  local  public  institutions,  including 
agriculture ministries.  Based on its growing in-country presence, IFAD also engage where appropriate 
in  country-level  climate  and  environment  coordination  efforts,  working  closely  with  bilateral  and 
multilateral donors, and taking advantage where appropriate of the capacity of partner organizations.  
Environment and Natural Resources Policy, 2012 
IFAD’s Environment and Natural Resources Policy aims to enable poor rural people to escape from and 
remain  out  of  poverty  through  more-productive  and  resilient  livelihoods  and  ecosystems,  by 
integrating  the  sustainable  management  of  natural  assets  across  its  activities  and  its  partners’ 
activities.  
The Policy sets out 10 core principles to guide its support, namely:  
1.  Scaled-up 
investment 
in  multiple  benefit  approaches 
for  sustainable  agricultural 
intensification; 
2.  Recognition and greater awareness of the economic, social and cultural value of natural assets; 
3. 
4.  Greater attention to risk and resilience in order to manage environment- and natural-resource 
‘Climate-smart’ approaches to rural development; 
related shocks; 
5.  Engagement in value chains to drive green growth; 
6. 
Improved governance of natural assets for poor rural people by strengthening land tenure and 
community-led empowerment; 
7.  Livelihood diversification to reduce vulnerability and build resilience for sustainable natural 
resource management; 
8.  Equality  and  empowerment  for  women  and  indigenous  peoples  in  managing  natural 
resources; 
Increased access by poor rural communities to environment and climate finance; and 
9. 
10. Environmental commitment through changing its own behaviour. 
Social, Environment and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP), 2017 
SECAP endeavours to ensure that IFAD’s goal of enabling poor rural people to improve their food and 
nutrition  security,  increase  their  incomes  and  strengthen  their  resilience,  particularly  to  climate 
change,  is  done  in  an  environmentally  and  socially  responsible  manner.    The  procedures  set  the 
minimum  standards  for  the  assessment  of  social,  environmental  and  climate  change  risks  of  IFAD 
projects which apply throughout the project cycle.  The procedures aim to: 
i. 
Analyse potential risks and provide information to strengthen the social, environmental and 
climate dimensions of programmes and projects; 
ii.  Maximize social, environmental and climate change adaptation and mitigation benefits, and 
iii. 
avoid or minimize negative impacts; and 
Increase the consistency, transparency and accountability in decision-making concerning these 
dimensions of IFAD’s results-based country strategic opportunities programmes (RB-COSOPs), 
country strategy notes (CSNs), and programmes and projects in a timely fashion. 
SECAP provides a step-wise description of the processes and guidance to assess risk at each phase of 
a project or programme cycle, as follows: 
35 
•  Step  1:  Project  Concept:  environmental  and  social  categorisation  and  criteria,  climate  risk 
classification,  nature  and  sensitivity of  project  location,  significance  of  impacts,  cumulative 
and induced impacts;  
•  Step 2: Early Design: environmental and social impact assessment, climate risk analysis;  
•  Step 3:  Late  Design:  Review  of  ESIA  and  Climate  Risk  Analysis  reports  and  incorporation  of 
recommendations into design;  
•  Step 4: Loan Negotiations: financing agreement, including clauses, covenants, and provisions 
for environmental, social and climate related actions; 
•  Step 5: Board Approval: final ESIA/ESMP report disclosed; 
•  Step  6:  Project  Implementation:  implementation  of  social,  environmental  and  climate 
adaptation/mitigation actions/measures contained in the ESMP, RAP, IPP and other relevant 
loan covenants; 
•  Step 7: Project completion and ex-post ESIA: analysis of the impact of social, environmental 
and climate issues  arising from project implementation. 
With  regard  to  categorisation,  Category  A  projects  have  significant  environmental  and  social 
consequences that are sensitive, irreversible or unprecedented, affect an area broader than the sites 
or facilities subject to physical interventions, and are not readily remedied by preventive actions or 
mitigation measures. KIIWP is categorised as Category A because the Project’s activities may: 
•  Develop wetlands; 
•  Result in the loss of natural habitat and loss of biodiversity or environmental services provided 
by a natural ecosystem in sensitive areas – protected areas (Akagera National Park) and their 
buffer zones, ecologically sensitive areas such as wetlands, coral reefs, mangroves swamps, 
small 
Involve the construction of large-scale irrigation schemes rehabilitation/development (above 
100 hectares per scheme); 
• 
•  Require  significant  abstraction  or  diversion/containment  of  surface  water  leaving  the  river 
flow below 20 per cent environmental flow plus downstream user requirements. 
•  Necessitate economic or physical displacement (ie. land, potable water and water for other 
uses), or physical resettlement of more than 20 people, or impacting more than 10 per cent of 
any one community’s or individual farmer’s or household’s assets. 
Category  A  projects  require  one  or  combination  of  a  formal  Environmental  and  Social  Impact 
Assessment (ESIA) or Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Resettlement Action 
Framework  (RAF)/  Resettlement  Action  Plan  (RAP),  free,  prior  and  informed  consent  (FPIC)/FPIC 
implementation plan and Indigenous People Plan. 
Category B projects are those that may have some adverse environmental and/or social impacts on 
human populations or environmentally significant areas but the impacts are less adverse than those 
for Category A,  are  site-specific and few  are-irreversible in nature,  and can be readily remedied by 
appropriate  preventive  actions  and/or  mitigation  measures.  While  no  formal  ESIA  is  required  for 
Category B programmes/projects, in many cases further environmental analysis could be undertaken 
during project preparation or implementation.  In some cases, an ESMF is developed during project 
preparation or implementation. Category B projects require an ESMP. 
Category C projects generally do not require additional environmental analysis because the activities 
have positive environmental impacts, or negligible or minimally adverse environmental impacts.  They 
would include, for example, technical assistance grants for agricultural research and training, grants to 
generate global environmental impacts, research, capacity building and institutional strengthening. 
36 
SECAP also provides for climate risk classification based on available information about historic climate 
hazard occurrences, current climate trends, and future climate change scenarios, as follows:  
•  High risk programmes or projects can be expected to be highly vulnerable to climate-related 
hazards and thus would benefit from an in-depth climate risk analysis as part of the design or 
initial implementation stage. This analysis should  include an analysis of GHG emissions and 
present  recommendations  for  risk  management  –  for  example,  practical  climate  risk 
management  measures  that  can  be  integrated  into the  project  design  and  implementation 
phases  and  could  be  used  to  mobilize  climate  finance  for  the  co-financing  of  targeted  risk 
reduction and adaptation/mitigation measures. 
•  Medium risk programmes or projects can be expected to be moderately sensitive to climate 
risks and thus requires a basic integration of climate issues to be undertaken during the project 
design phase. This process should result in practical adjustments under the project to reduce 
losses and damages from climate hazards to IFAD’s client group and capitalize on opportunities 
to strengthen local risk-management capacities. 
Low  risk  programmes  or  projects  are  unlikely  to  be  vulnerable  to  climate  risks  and  thus 
voluntary  measures  could  be  incorporated  into  the  detailed  design  and  implementation 
phases based on the SECAP project assessment recommendations. These projects generally 
focus  on  investments  which  do  not  have  a  direct  physical  or  geographical  interface  with 
climate hazards. 
• 
In this regard, KIIWP has been classed as high risk due to the recent droughts and the vulnerability of 
the Eastern Province to extreme events.  This is discussed in more detail in Chapter 8 of this ESMF. 
Figure 3.1 Social Environmental and Climate Screening Flow Diagram 
Source: SECAP 2017 
37 
Included in SECAP are a series Guidance Statements which are applicable in the context of KWIIP: these 
include Biodiversity; Agrochemicals; Energy; Fisheries and Aquaculture; Forest Resources; Rangeland-
based Livestock Production; Water; Dams, their Safety and SECAP; Physical Cultural Resources; Rural 
Roads;  Development  of  Value  Chains,  Microenterprises  and  Small  Enterprises;  Rural  Finance;  and 
Physical and Economic Resettlement; and Community Health. 
Where physical or economic displacement is envisaged affecting access and user rights to land and 
other resources, SECAP requires  that Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) is obtained from the 
affected  people,  the  stakeholder  engagement  and  consultation  process  is  documented,  and  a 
resettlement action plan (RAP) or resettlement action framework (RAF) is prepared. 
Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment Policy, 2012 
IFAD’s Gender Policy goal is to deepen the impact and strengthen the sustainability of IFAD- supported 
development  initiatives,  in  order  to  increase  IFAD’s  impact  on  gender  equality  and  strengthen 
women’s empowerment in poor rural areas. The Policy has three strategic objectives:  
•  Strategic objective 1: Promote economic empowerment to enable rural women and men to 
have equal opportunity to participate in, and benefit from, profitable economic activities. 
•  Strategic  objective  2:  Enable  women  and  men  to  have  equal  voice  and  influence  in  rural 
institutions and organizations. 
•  Strategic objective 3: Achieve  a more  equitable balance  in workloads and in the  sharing of 
economic and social benefits between women and men. 
To achieve these objectives, the Policy outlines five action areas aiming to: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
Systematically address gender equality and women’s empowerment issues in IFAD-supported 
country programmes and projects; 
Improve IFAD contributions to advocacy, partnerships and knowledge management on gender 
equality; 
Strengthen capacity of partners to address gender issues in agriculture and rural development; 
Develop corporate approaches and procedures with IFAD that support gender and diversity; 
and 
Ensure  IFAD’s  corporate  human  and  financial  resources,  and  monitoring  and  accountability 
systems fully support gender equality and women’s empowerment. 
Targeting Policy 
IFAD’s  mandate  defines  its  “target  group”  as  rural  people  living  in  poverty  and  experiencing  food 
insecurity in developing countries. Within this broad group, IFAD proactively strives to reach extremely 
poor people (as defined by MDG 1) who have the potential to take advantage of improved access to 
assets  and  opportunities  for  agricultural  production  and  rural  income-generating  activities.    IFAD’s 
Targeting  Policy  focuses  on  improving  livelihoods  through:    ensuring  national  and  international 
resources  are  used  effectively,  policy  support  is  dedicated  to  rural  and  agricultural  development; 
encouraging  local  and  national  governments  to  focus  on  enabling  the  rural  poor  to  improve  their 
livelihoods; economically and socially empowering rural poor; and encouraging national ownership of 
interventions. 
The Policy’s guiding principles are to: 
•  Focus on rural people who are living in poverty and experiencing food insecurity, and who are 
able to take advantage of the opportunities to be offered; 
•  Expand  outreach to  proactively  include  those  who  have  fewer  assets  and opportunities,  in 
particular extremely poor people; 
38 
• 
Include  marginalized  groups,  such  as minorities  and  indigenous  peoples, and  address  their 
specific needs; 
•  Address  gender  differences  and  have  a  special  focus  on  women  within  all  identified  target 
groups – for reasons of equity, effectiveness and impact – with particular attention to women 
heads of household, who are often especially disadvantaged; 
•  Recognize that relative wealth or poverty can change rapidly due to external shocks and that 
this vulnerability needs to be addressed; 
•  Clearly identify at the programme or project design stage who the intended target groups are 
and why, and consistently apply these categories, during implementation, in monitoring and 
evaluation (internal and external) of targeting performance;  
Identify and work with like-minded partners at local, country, regional and international levels 
to develop a shared understanding of both the dynamics of rural poverty in different contexts 
and successful targeted approaches; 
• 
•  Pilot and share learning on successful approaches to targeting hard-to-reach groups; and 
•  Build innovative  and complementary  partnerships with actors that  can reach target groups 
that IFAD cannot reach with the instruments at its disposal. 
3.7 
Differences in GoR and IFAD Policy Requirements 
Table 3.2 below summarises the differences in the Rwanda Government policies and IFAD policies.   
Table 3.2  Comparison of Government of Rwanda and IFAD Requirements 
Requirement 
GoR Policy Requirements 
IFAD SECAP and Other Policies 
Environmental and Social 
Screening and 
Categorisation 
Rwanda EIA guidelines define 3 Impact Level 
(IL) categories that  are determined through 
the screening process: 
IL1:  Projects  believed  to  have  minimal 
adverse impacts, that can easily be identified 
through  a  Project  Brief  and  not  requiring 
further  environmental  analysis.  IL1  project 
are exempt; 
IL2:  Projects  believed  to  have  adverse,  but 
not  irreversible  environmental  impacts  and 
for  which  mitigation  and  management 
measures  can  be  readily  designed  and 
incorporated into the project. 
IL 3: Projects for which it is evident that there 
will be significant and adverse environmental 
impacts  whose  mitigation  measures  cannot 
readily  be  prescribed,  and  thus,  must 
undergo through a complete EIA process. 
The  guidelines  do  not  provide  quantitative 
parameters for IL categorization of irrigation 
schemes.  However,  the  guidelines  indicate 
that proposed projects will not be exempted 
if among other criteria, the project will result 
in  and/or  “Changes  in  water  use  through 
irrigation,  drainage  promotion  or  dams, 
changes  in  fishing  practices”.  It  is  therefore 
39 
areas 
water 
buffer 
zones, 
agrochemicals; 
SECAP  assigns  Category  A  to  projects 
located  in,  or  proximate  to,  ecologically 
sensitive areas such as wetlands, national 
parks, 
of 
global/national  biodiversity  significance; 
projects  that  will  require  significant  use 
of 
based 
development  where  it  is  believed  that 
significant  depletion and/or reduce flow 
ma  have  occurred  from  the  effects  of 
climate  change  or  from  overutilization; 
risk  of  project-induced  pollution  on 
sensitive  ecosystems;  dam  construction 
more than 15m  high  wall or more than 
500m crest or with a reservoir exceeding 
3million  m3;  construction  of  irrigation 
schemes  above  100  ha  per  scheme  in 
area;  affecting  more  than  20  people  or 
than  10%  of  a 
impacting  more 
community’s  or 
farmer’s 
individual 
assets.  For Category A projects a  formal 
ESIA,  RAP  and/or  IPP,  as  applicable,  are 
required with ESMP elaboration.  
Category  B  projects  include  irrigation 
below  100  ha  of  land  per  scheme;  dam 
projects with capacity less than 3million 
m3;  natural  resource-based  value  chain 
development;  watershed  management 
Requirement 
GoR Policy Requirements 
expected  that  the  KIIWP  irrigation  projects 
will require a full EIA. 
IFAD SECAP and Other Policies 
or  rehabilitation;  those  physically  or 
economically  displacing  fewer  than  20 
people.  Category  B  projects  do  not 
require  formal  ESIA,  but  in  many  cases 
further 
is 
requested  during  project  preparation  or 
implementation in the form  of an ESMP 
which may be a stand-alone document or 
an output from environmental analysis. 
environmental 
analysis 
Climate Risk Classification 
The  Rwanda  EIA  guidelines  do  not  have  a 
risk  classification  methodology. 
climate 
However,  Rwanda’s  guidelines  for  Strategic 
Environmental Assessment suggests climate 
risk 
analytical 
during 
development  of  qualitative  profile  of  areas 
affected by a policy, programme or plan. 
analysis 
the 
Consultations and FPIC 
The  environmental  regulation  framework  is 
provided  for  in  the  2008  Ministerial  Order 
relating to the requirements and  procedure 
for  Environmental 
Impact  Assessment. 
Article  6  of  the  Ministerial  Order  stipulates 
that  the  EIA  shall  be  done  with  due 
consideration  of  the  opinion  of  all  the 
relevant  stakeholders.  This  provision 
is 
elaborated the Country’s EIA guidelines that 
40 
a 
Climate 
provides 
Risk 
SECAP 
which 
Classification  methodology 
specifies  that  projects  that  have  high 
vulnerability  to  climate  risk  are  for 
example: those that promote agricultural 
activity  on  marginal  and/or  highly 
degraded  areas;  projects  that  establish 
infrastructure in areas with a track record 
of extreme weather events; and projects 
in  areas  in  which  rural  development 
projects  have  experienced  weather-
related  losses  and  damages  in  the  past. 
IFAD  requires  that  projects  classified  as 
high  risk  undertake  an  in-depth  climate 
risk  analysis.  Examples  of  medium  risk 
projects include projects that make use of 
climate-sensitive  resources,  but  do  not 
focus  on  these  resources  as  a  main 
commodity  (such  as  irrigation  projects); 
projects which invest in infrastructure not 
directly  exposed  to  extreme  weather 
events  but  have  potential  to  become 
more  resilient  through  adaptation  of 
green  technologies;  and  projects  which 
focus  on  institutional  development  and 
capacity  building  for  rural  institutions  in 
climatically  heterogeneous  areas,  where 
opportunities 
strengthen 
indigenous  climate  risk  management 
capabilities.  Low risk projects are those 
that  are  not  likely  to  be  vulnerable  to 
climate risks (eg.development of a micro-
finance 
  Projects  under 
KIIWP  are  therefore  considered  to  lie 
within the high and medium climate risk 
category. 
institution). 
exist 
to 
SECAP  emphasises  the  need  for  greater 
consultation  by  communities  (especially 
the marginalized poor) and stakeholders 
that  are  likely  to  be  affected  by  IFAD’s 
operations 
respective 
programme/project  cycle,  in  order  to 
input  to  the  project  design, 
provide 
receive feedback on the draft ESIA report, 
ensure broad community support to the 
during 
the 
Requirement 
GoR Policy Requirements 
emphasise public participation as a valuable 
source of information on potential impacts, 
mitigation measures and viable alternatives. 
improving 
Public  participation  aims  at 
project  design,  environmental  soundness 
and social acceptability. 
guidelines 
that 
recommend 
EIA 
consultations 
involve  a  minimum  of 
government ministries and local government 
bodies 
proposed 
to 
development,  private  sector  organizations, 
local  communities,  the  general  public  and 
NGOs. 
relevant 
the 
Public Disclosure 
Compensation and 
Resettlement 
EIA  experts  are  required  to  conduct  local 
community  consultations  during  the  EIA 
study,  particularly  during 
the  scoping 
process.  
REMA, in consultation with the lead agency 
determines whether or not a public hearing 
is necessary based on the submitted project 
brief  of  the  proposed  development.  REMA 
arranges  and  facilitates  at  least  3  public 
consultations on the final report from which 
justified objections my result in the refusal to 
proceed. 
Rwanda’s  National  Land  Policy  of  2004  in 
reference  to  the  constitutional  principle  of 
equality  of  all  citizens,  states  that  all 
Rwandans enjoy the same rights of access to 
land without any discrimination whatsoever. 
The  policy  elaborates  the  principle  by 
stipulating  that  women,  married  or  not, 
should not be excluded from the process of 
land  access, 
land 
control, and female descendants should not 
be excluded from the process of family land 
inheritance. 
land  acquisition  and 
However,  Article  3  of  Organic  Law  No. 
08/2005  of  2005  determining  the  use  and 
management  of  land  in  Rwanda  stipulates 
that state also has rights to expropriation due 
to  public  interest,  settlement  and  general 
land  management 
through  procedures 
provided  by  law  and  prior  to  appropriate 
compensation. 
Expropriation is implemented under Law No. 
32-2015  of  Relating  to  Expropriation  in  the 
Public Interest. Rwandan laws provide for fair 
compensation  only  for  legal  land  property 
owners  and  land  tenants  in  recognition  of 
existing written and unwritten rights and civil 
41 
IFAD SECAP and Other Policies 
project,  and  to  ensure  that  affected 
people endorse the proposed mitigation/ 
risk 
and  management 
measures. 
reduction 
In addition to public consultations, SECAP 
requires  FPIC  for  all  projects  that  are 
likely to affect land or user rights to land, 
whether  or  not  the  affected  people 
belong to historically underserved groups 
or  minorities.    Some  schemes  being 
considered  under  KIIWP  may  therefore 
require FPIC.  
(2010) 
requires 
IFAD’s  Policy  on  the  Disclosure  of 
full 
Documents 
disclosure  to  the  public,  and  includes 
information  notes  on  projects  being 
developed 
for  Board  presentation, 
loans  and 
agreements  for  approved 
grants,  and  project/programme  design 
documents  which  include  ESIAs,  ESMFs, 
RAPs and RAFs.  
the 
Targeting 
IFAD’s Policy on Improving Access to Land 
Tenure  Security  stresses  the  need  for 
Free Prior Informed Consent and the “Do 
no Harm” Principles.  These principles are 
in  other  IFAD  policies 
also  reflected 
including 
Policy, 
Engagement  with  Indigenous  Peoples 
Policy and Gender Equality and Women’s 
Empowerment Policy.   The core tenets of 
IFAD’s  principles  on  compensation  and 
resettlement are that wherever possible, 
any  physical  or  economic  resettlement 
that  could  negatively  impact  affected 
people should be avoided or minimised; 
that  all  land  and  natural  resource  users 
with a legitimate claim will be recognised 
having 
including 
informal/customary  rights;  and  that  no 
affected person should be left worse off, 
and  preferably 
in  a  better  position 
through proper and timely compensation 
and other mitigation measures.   
people 
IFAD SECAP and Other Policies 
adversely 
IFAD  has  developed  a  Complaints 
Procedure  for  “Alleged  Non-Compliance 
with its Social and Environmental Policies 
and  Mandatory  Aspects  of  Its  Social 
Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment 
Procedures”. 
or 
Parties 
potentially  adversely  affected  by  IFAD-
funded  projects  and  programmes  may 
bring issues to the Fund’s attention using 
SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org.    Complaints 
must  be  put  forward  by  at  least  two 
people  who  are  both  nationals  of  the 
country  concerned  and/or  living  in  the 
project  area.  Complaints  from  foreign 
locations  or  anonymous  complaints  will 
not  be  taken  into  account.  Complaints 
projects/programmes 
must 
currently 
or 
design 
implementation.  Complaints concerning 
closed  projects,  or  those  that  are  more 
than  95  per  cent  disbursed,  will  not  be 
IFAD  does  not  provide 
considered. 
monetary  compensation 
resolve 
complaints.  The IFAD website provides a 
clear summary of the steps involved and 
guidance on how to report issues. 
concern 
under 
to 
Requirement 
Grievance Mechanisms 
GoR Policy Requirements 
and  original  customary  rights.  However, 
registration of these ownership rights is now 
mandatory  under  Section  4  of  Article  29  of 
the Organic Land Law. 
Article 19 of the national Expropriation Law 
provides for an application to revoke a public 
interest  expropriation  within  15  days  of 
publication  and  that  a  decision  must  be 
provided  within  30  days  of  receipt  of  the 
application.  Further,  Articles  33  and  34 
provide for contestation of valuation results 
for  land  and  property  by  the  person  to  be 
expropriated with 7 days of the approval of a 
valuation  report  at  own  cost  and  that  the 
counter 
contestant 
valuation 
report  within  10  days  of 
application. 
should  provide  a 
in 
as 
for 
target 
The Government of Rwanda as the borrower 
indicated  that  the  KIIWP  will  be 
has 
implemented 
community 
beneficiaries 
in  cooperative  frameworks. 
Target  community  consultations  indicated 
that  grievance  addressing  mechanism  were 
governance 
cooperative 
integral 
framework 
cooperative 
such 
constitutions. Consensus was apparent  that 
the  cooperative  grievance  mechanisms 
worked well and that escalation mechanisms 
were  also  provided 
local 
government structures and court systems. It 
is  also  common  practice  in  development 
projects  that  grievance  mechanisms  are 
formulated  during  project  design  for  all 
stages  of  the  project  in  order  that  affected 
parties  present  grievances  to  the  project 
authorities without cost and with assurance 
of  satisfactory  and  timely  solutions.  They 
commonly include institution of a grievance 
resolution  committee  and 
its  working 
procedures as well as grievance logging and 
monitoring systems. 
through 
for 
Physical Cultural 
Resources 
EIA  guidelines 
indicate  criteria  for  EIA 
compliance requirements to include location 
and  potential  to  affect  environmentally 
sensitive areas including National Parks and 
Protected  Areas,  wetlands,  productive 
agricultural  land,  important  archaeological, 
historical  and  cultural  site  and  areas 
containing rare or endangered flora or fauna. 
42 
in 
In cases where physical cultural resources 
are  found,  IFAD  assists  borrowers  in 
avoiding,  minimising  or  mitigating 
adverse 
the 
impacts  on  PCR 
development programmes/ projects that 
it  finances.  Due  diligence  is  carried  out 
through  applying  SECAP  to  ensure  that 
PCR 
and 
adequately  addressed  and  that  any 
measures to protect PCR comply with the 
borrower’s national legislation as well as 
with 
relevant 
international  treaties  and  agreements.  
its  obligations  under 
are  properly 
identified 
Requirement 
GoR Policy Requirements 
IFAD SECAP and Other Policies 
SECAP  prescribes  general  steps 
for 
programmes/ projects that apply in cases 
involving PCR: screening; collecting data; 
formulating 
impacts;  and 
assessing 
mitigating measures. 
Safety of Dams 
Small  Dams  Safety  Guidelines  of  2012 
developed by MINAGRI to provide owners of 
small dams with the requirements that they 
must meet to construct and operate a small 
dam.  The  guidelines  utilize  the  World  Bank 
distinction between small and large dams for 
application of its policy on safety of dams, OP 
4.37,  that  states  that  small  dams  are 
normally less than 15 meters in height  that 
include farm ponds, local silt retention dams, 
and low embankment  tanks. The guidelines 
provide 
on 
safety 
responsibility 
for  dam  safety;  role  of 
government;  leadership  and  management 
for  dams  and 
for  safety; 
reservoirs;  optimization  of  protection, 
limitation of risk to individuals; protection of 
present  and  future  generations,  prevention 
of  accidents;  and  emergency  preparedness 
and response. 
justification 
principles 
dam 
based 
SECAP’s Guidance Statement #8 on Dams 
categorises  dam  sizes  in  relation  to  the 
level  of  environmental 
investigation 
required  (see  above).    Since  the  risk  of 
small dams failing is higher than that for 
large  dams,  the  Guidance  Statement 
recommends following international best 
practices 
the  World 
Commission  on  Dams  recommended 
(including  gaining  public 
procedures 
acceptance,  an  options  assessment, 
ensuring  sustainability  of  rivers  and 
livelihoods), as well as ensuring adequate 
planning,  quality  of  the  design  and 
construction,  optimum  use  of  storage 
infrastructure  after  construction,  and 
safety monitoring. 
on 
In general, there are no great deviations between the two policy streams.   The main differences are 
that the GoR policies do not specifically provide for climate risk categorisation, and  FPIC and livelihood 
restoration where physical and economic displacement may occur.  
43 
4 
Lessons Learnt  
The GoR has requested that KIIWP takes note of experiences from other past and ongoing  projects 
such  as  PAPSTA,  KWAMP,  PASP  and  LWH,  and  incorporates  good  practices  on  water  harvesting, 
irrigation infrastructure development, natural resource management, food crop and livestock fodder 
production,  borehole  domestic  water  supply  systems,  post-harvest  management  and  access  to 
backward and forward markets.  Specific considerations applicable to KIIWP from these projects are 
described below.  
4.1 
IFAD-Supported Projects 
4.1.1 
Support Project to the Strategic Plan for the Agriculture Transformation (PAPSTA)17  
PAPSTA was implemented by MINAGRI between 2006-2013 with the overall goal being to contribute 
to achieving EDPRS through support to the implementation of PSTA I&II in-order to improve income 
and nutrition of the  poor rural population. The project’s purpose was to improve  the institutional, 
professional,  and  technical  capacities  of  central,  provincial  and  district  level  institutions,  including 
farmers’  groups  and  their  umbrella  organizations,  and  ensure  the  coordination,  efficiency  and 
effectiveness in the implementation and delivery of PSTA priority programmes. 
Key lessons from the PAPSTA approach were: 
•  Community  ownership  was  the  key  to  ensure  the  success  and  sustainability  of  projects, 
specifically  the  need  to  make  these  communities  aware  of  the  impact  of  erosion  on  their 
production levels and of the interrelatedness between the two;  
•  Farmers being able to decide on options appropriate to their farms;  
•  A growing acknowledgment of the watershed as a unit of planning in SWC to ensure optimum 
use and preservation of soil and water resources. 
4.1.2 
Kirehe Community-Based Watershed Management Project (KWAMP)18 
KWAMP  operated  in  Kirehe  District  between  2009  and  2016  as  an  agricultural  investment  project 
implemented by MINAGRI, co-financed by IFAD and the GoR.  Its development goal was the reduction 
of  rural  poverty  in  Kirehe  District,  to  be  evidenced  by  a  step  improvement  in  household  food  and 
nutrition security, asset ownership and quality of life indicators among vulnerable groups, including 
woman- headed households, orphans and those living with HIV/AIDS. 
Key lessons from KWAMP are: 
•  MINAGRI staff were seconded to the project to support implementation of its activities. While 
this  arrangement  had  its  benefits  in  terms  of  providing  the  project  with  highly  skilled  and 
technical staff when required, these staff had other responsibilities within the Ministry, and 
therefore could not dedicate sufficient full time to the project.   
•  As a result of the low capacity at District level and under-staffing, many of the project activities 
were not implemented or seen through, particularly livestock, soil and water conservation and 
value chain initiatives.    
17 
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714182/39732735/Rwanda+PPA+Executive+Summary_2015.pdf/0e39a6f9
-49c1-4ed2-a2e2-6b12cf892c52?version=2.0 
18 IFAD (2017). Kirehe Community-based Watershed Management Project (KWAMP), Project Completion 
Report: Main report and appendices. 
44 
•  The early formation of IWUOs, and building capacity and empowering in the earliest stages of 
the project (ie. during planning and construction) have lent to them taking over responsibility 
for Operation and Maintenance of irrigation schemes.  Capacity building and empowerment 
of IWUOs needs a scheme-based approach. 
•  During the initial capacity building of IWUOs, academic workshop approaches were applied 
with minimal results.  Subsequently the approach changed to onsite coaching and mentoring, 
and also involved a wider range of stakeholders (as opposed to the IWUO committees only).  
Local leaders were taken on as trainers for the on-site training.  This proved very effective.  
•  Several  cooperatives  were operating  in  the  project  area,  and  although  they  were  receiving 
support,  they  faced  organizational  and  governance  issues.    Comprehensive  and  tailored 
capacity building is therefore required for these cooperatives and farmers’ organisations. 
It is important to engage technically competent service providers (SPs) for the preparation of 
the  technical  designs  of  irrigation  infrastructure.  KWAMP  experienced  cost  variations  for 
hillside  irrigation  infrastructure  mainly  due  to  underestimated  foundation  depth  during 
design, and inadequate water for one particular dam as a result of poor runoff estimates at 
design.  Changes in design must also be well-scrutinised.  
• 
•  Accessible  feeder  roads  are  crucial  for  marketing  produce  from  the  irrigation  schemes.  
KWAMP  initiated  the  formation  of  ‘road  brigades’  to  undertake  regular  road  maintenance.  
Kirehe  District  now  formally  recognizes  their  role,  and  transfers  funds  from  the  road 
maintenance budget to enable the brigades to undertake the work. 
•  KWAMP introduced the Peruvian Community Competitions and Innovations model which had 
a high level of success, but it was realized that for any innovations or new ideas from other 
countries or projects to be adapted or replicated effectively, they should be introduced early 
in  the  design  stages  in  order  for  the  communities  and  farmers  to  fully  understand  the 
processes involved.   
•  Feasibility  studies  and  EIAs  were  carried  out  for  hillside  and  marshland  schemes.    KWAMP 
collaborated  with  REMA  from  the  design  stage  to  the  validation  of  ESIAs  and  watershed 
management plans.  Mitigation measures such as the protection of buffer zones by planting 
grasses,  agroforestry  trees,  forestry  and  soil  erosion  control  measures  were  implemented 
based  on  advice  provided  by  REMA.  KWAMP  worked  closely  with  Ministry  of  Natural 
Resources (MINIRENA) which was involved in the capacity building of hydrographic committee 
members.  The  collaboration  between  KWAMP  and  these  agencies  served  to  bridge 
communication  between  different  Ministries  but  also  contributed  to  the  wider  GoR 
commitment to address climate change, biodiversity and land degradation issues. 
•  The  project  introduced  biogas  systems  aimed  at  reducing  the  consumption  of  firewood  to 
reduce deforestation and protect catchments.  However, low-cost biogas technologies were 
not  considered early enough in the design stage to enable monitoring of performance and 
intervention  to  watershed  and  natural  resource 
assessing  the  contribution  by  this 
management. 
4.1.3 
Post-harvest and Agribusiness Support Programme (PASP)19 
PASP is a partnership between the Government of Rwanda and IFAD to support agriculture production 
processing operations to help developing an efficient post-harvest system driven by the private sector 
to reduce post-harvest losses and ensure food security of staple crops in Rwanda.   PASP facilitates and 
supports organized smallholders and SMEs to set up and manage aggregation and post-harvest market 
chain  businesses  (eg.  grain  drying  and  handling  facilities,  potato  cleaning/packaging,  cassava 
preparation or milk collection centres) and partnerships with private sector, MFIs and other service 
providers in the priority CIP crops and dairy development.  
19 IFAD (2017). PASP Mid Term Review, April 2017. https://operations.ifad.org/documents/654016/052e9c5b-
8048-446f-8863-0356d242571d 
45 
Lessons learnt to date are: 
•  Trust between farmers and buyers in forming commercial linkages is essential for off-takers to 
become  co-investors  with  farmers  and  instrumental  in  helping  farmers  access  financial 
services and other market and product quality information that are needed to add value and 
grow their businesses to scale. 
•  PASP  hubs  provide  training  and  business  advisory  services,  advancement  of  farmer 
cooperatives, construction/rehabilitation of post-harvest infrastructures, creation of market 
linkages,  engagement of private  sector and access to financial services.  In order to ensure 
sustainability, capacity building and hub development need to systematically involve District 
and sector level staff and local leaders, who should be provided with ToT on hub development, 
business development and 4P arrangements. 
•  Horticulture is a labour-intensive industry characterized by high incomes per square meter and 
quick returns on investments.  This is likely to attract youth who typically cannot access much 
land and are particularly interested in quick wins.  
4.1.4 
Project for Rural Income through Exports (PRICE)20 
PRICE’s goal is to raise smallholder farmers’ income through promoting sustainable increased returns 
to farmers from key export-driven agricultural value chains through increased volumes and quality of 
production, improved marketing and effective farmer organizations.   An important take-away from 
PRICE experiences is that: 
• 
Limited access  to financial services  is a key bottleneck  for smallholder farmers to graduate 
from subsistence farming to commercial farming. PRICE-supported performance-based grant 
scheme proved that horticulture is a bankable sector and it attracted 35 Financial Institutions 
(FIs) 
Institutions,  Savings  and  Credit  Cooperatives  (SACCOs), 
Microfinance banks, Commercial Banks and the Rwanda Development Bank. 
including  Microfinance 
4.2 
Other DP-supported Projects 
4.2.1 
Rural  Sector  Support  Program  (RSSP)21  and  Land  Husbandry,  Water  Harvesting  and 
Hillside Irrigation Project (LWH)22 
The World Bank-supported RSSP began in 2001, and is now in its third phase.  The objectives of the 
Program  are  to  increase  the  agricultural  productivity  of  organized  farmers  in  the  marshlands  and 
hillsides of sub-watersheds targeted for development in an environmentally sustainable manner, and 
to strengthen the participation of women and men beneficiaries in market-based value chains. There 
are three components to the project.  
The LWH commenced in 2009 and complements RSSP activities.   It aims to increase the productivity 
and  commercialization  of  hillside  agriculture  in  target  areas  by  increasing  productivity  of  targeted 
irrigated  command  areas,  increasing  productivity  of  targeted  non-irrigated  command  areas,  and 
increasing the share in commercialized products from targeted areas. 
Key following lessons are learned from the RSSP and the parent LWH project:  
20 IFAD (2015). PRICE Mid Term Review. https://operations.ifad.org/documents/654016/1bec6b12-b16d-4206-
982c-640757fa7e7a 
21 http://projects.worldbank.org/p126440/third-rural-sector-support-project?lang=en&tab=overview  
22 http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/178141468307134222/pdf/LW0AF00P14754300PID0VM0140 
Oct02013.pdf 
46 
• 
It is important to have clearly defined criteria to guide the selection of sites, otherwise project 
priorities  may  not  always  be  well  reflected,  and  opportunities  may  be  missed  to  develop 
irrigation in a participatory, cost effective and sustainable way.  
• 
•  Capacity building among project beneficiaries is necessary to ensure maximum benefit from 
project activities, as is the need for buy-in and ownership by the communities which is gained 
through consultation and technical empowerment of the farmers. 
In order to ensure the effective implementation of the safeguards policies triggered by the 
project, there is a need to enhance capacity at MINAGRI.  Active capacity building measures 
for  RSSP2  led  to  successful  preparation  and  implementation  of  Resettlement  Action  Plans 
(RAPs).  This is important as lessons from RSSP2 showed that national capacity of consulting 
services in this regard were scarce.  
•  Supply  side  efforts  need  to  be  balanced  with  demand  considerations  and  value  chain 
development. 
•  The watershed approach needs to incorporate land, soil, water, vegetation and topography, 
and in particular, the human watershed community.  
During  discussions  with  the  LWH-RSSP  SPIU,  the  need  for  involvement  by  the  communities  at  the 
earliest stages was further emphasised, particularly as many of the farmers had not worked together 
as farmers organisations or cooperatives.  This required a good deal of sensitisation to change their 
mindsets.  
47 
5 
Environmental and Social Profile of the Project Area 
5.1 
Administrative Structure 
In Rwanda, the District is the basic political-administrative unit of the country. Kayonza is one of the 
30 districts of the Country. Districts are administratively divided into sectors and cells.  Kayonza District 
is made up of 12 Sectors of Murundi, Kabare, 
Gahini,  Rukara,  Nyamirama,  Mukarange, 
Kabarondo,  Rwinkwavu,  Mwiri,  Ndego, 
Murama  and  Ruramira.  The  district  has  50 
cells and 421 villages. 
Map 5.1 Administrative Map of Kayonza District 
Kayonza District is headed by a Mayor and 2 
Vice  Mayors  who  make  the  Executive 
Committee that is governed by a 22-member 
District  Advisory  Council  that  includes  a 
Chairperson  and  2  deputies.  Below  the 
Council  and  Executive  Committee  in  the 
administrative  hierarchy 
is  the  District 
Executive  Secretary  and  Corporate  Services 
Division  Manager  and  Directors  of  Human 
Resources and Administration, Planning and 
M&E, Agriculture, Good Governance, Social 
Development, 
Business 
Development,  Construction  Permitting, 
Education,  Finance  and  an  Advisor  to  the 
Executive Committee.  
Health, 
The  District  services  are  provided  under 
administrative 
units 
including the following: 
operational 
and 
•  Office  of  the  District  Executive 
Secretary; 
•  One 
Stop 
Centre: 
land 
infrastructure  and 
Source: Kayonza District Profile 2015 
administration, 
property management, maintenance engineering; building inspection, water and sanitation, 
ICT and GIS; 
•  Social Development Unit: Social affairs, disability support, trauma counselling; 
•  Health  Promotion  and  Disease  Promotion  Unit:  Hygiene  and  sanitation,  M&E,  Fortified 
Blended Food (FBF); 
•  Education Unit; 
•  Business Development Unit: Investment promotion, SMEs and Cooperatives Development 
•  Human Resources Unit; 
•  Finance Unit; 
•  Agriculture and Livestock and Forestry; 
•  Good Governance Unit. 
Sector Administration is made  up of the  Sector Council as political organ elected from the Cells to 
approval of sector action plans and programmes  and to ensure  follow-up of their implementation. 
48 
Sector  services  are  provided  through  a  Sector  Executive  committee  composed of 10 members  and 
monitors, elected by the Sector Council. The Sector Executive Committee is supported by the Political 
and Administrative (PAC) and the Community Development technical sub-committees. 
Cell administration is made up of a Cell Council that is composed of all citizens of the cell who are over 
18 years of age. he  CEC executes  functions related to administration and community development 
including the policy orientation and technical advisory for the implementation of the decisions taken 
by  the  Cell  Council.  The  Cell  Executive  Committee  works  through  its  technical  committee  (the 
Community  Development  Committee)  to  identify  and  prioritize  needs,  design  development  plans, 
mobilize development resources and implement the plans. 
5.2 
Bio-Physical Environment 
5.2.1 
Topography  
Kayonza District covers an average area of 1,954 sq km.  It lies in what is described as the Eastern Plain.   
The  altitude  of  the  District  varies  between  around  1,700m  and  1,200m  above  sea  level,  generally 
decreasing towards the east.  The Project area is  characterised by a series of hills that run roughly 
north to south through the middle of the district (the Eastern Plateau).  The hills give way to valleys 
where floodplains and wetlands are found.   To the east of this line of hills is a large gently undulating 
expanse – the Eastern Savannah – which slopes towards the Akagera wetlands system.   
The map below illustrates Rwanda’s topography.  
Map 5.2 Topography of Rwanda 
Source: REMA (2011). Atlas of Rwanda’s Changing Environment 
49 
Map 5.3  Average Annual Precipitation in Rwanda 
5.2.2 
Climate  
during 
typically 
Kayonza District has wet tropical 
  the  rainy 
bimodal  climate: 
being 
seasons 
and 
March/April 
October/November. 
The 
District’s annual average  rainfall 
is  around  900mm,  with  greater 
precipitation 
the 
  Annual 
rains. 
March/April 
average 
range 
temperatures 
between  18oC  and  26oC.    The 
Project  area,  however,  has  an 
average  rainfall  below  700mm, 
and 
temperatures, 
frequently  exceeding  30oC 
in 
February  and  July-August.    The 
Project area is therefore subject 
to prolonged periods of drought.  
This is illustrated in Map 5.3.   
higher 
Source: REMA (2011) 
The  Baseline  Climate  Change 
Vulnerability Index23 for Rwanda 
indicates  that  Eastern  Province  is  most  vulnerable  in  terms  of  exposure,  sensitivity  and  adaptive 
capacity  to  climate  change.    Climate  change  impacts  are  predicted  to  be  due  to  change  in  the 
temperature and heat episodes, shift in rainfall start dates and changes in the amount of rainfall.   A 
discussion on climate risk is presented in Chapter 8. 
5.2.3 
Geology, Soils and Mineral Resources 
Geology 
The geology of Rwanda generally comprises metamorphic rocks and granitic rocks of the Precambrian 
Period.   Metamorphic rocks are mostly schists produced by low to medium pressure metamorphic 
actions  of  sandy  to  muddy  sediments,  while  the  granitic  rocks  are  intrusive  rocks  originating  from 
metamorphic actions.  Metamorphic rocks of quartzite and schist and sedimentary rocks of mudstone 
and sandstone run in a north-south direction through the middle of Kayonza District (see Map 5.4).   
The  lakes  and marshes  have  sedimented  alluviums, and  alluvial  layers  composed  of  clay,  sand  and 
gravel layers are distributed along rivers and valley floors.24 
Soils 
The soils in the Project area are mainly oxisols particularly around the lakes and water bodies, vertisols 
where the wetlands are found, inceptisols in the lowland areas between the wetlands and the Akagera 
National Park, and small occurrences of entisols.  Most of the Project sites lies in relatively flat or gently 
undulating terrain, and soil loss is considered to be low. 
23 REMA (2015). Baseline Climate Change Vulnerability Index. 
24 MININFRA (2010).  The Study of Improvement of Rural Water Supply in Eastern Province. Prepared by Japan 
Techno Co Ltd And Nippon Koei Co Ltd with support from JICA. 
50 
Map 5.4 Geological Map of Eastern Province 
Source: MININFRA, 2010. 
Mineral Resources 
Mineral  resources  found  in  Kayonza  District  are  wolfram  (tungsten),  cassiterite  (tin)  and  coltan  in 
Rwinkwavu, Murundi, Ruramira, Mwili, Rukara, Ndego and Kabarondo Sectors.  At present there are 
15 mining concessions, of which 7 are currently active25.   Within the Project sectors there are five 
active companies all of which mine only cassiterite. The Wolfram Mining and Processing Company Ltd 
in Rwinkwavu has the largest concession area (8250ha) and mines about 5 tonnes of cassiterite per 
month.      The  others  are:  MUNSAD  in  Mwiri  Sector  (401ha),  and  Alfa  Minerals  (400ha),  KOPAMU 
(100ha) and Real Brothers (193.3ha) in Murundi Sector.  Generally only water is used to remove the 
cassiterite from its ore, but in some cases, chlorine is also used.   According to the Kayonza District 
Minerals Field Officer, the Wolfram Mining and Processing Company have high effluent management 
standards and water is treated before discharge.  The others simply use water which is disposed of into 
the environment.  Monitoring of effluent/tailrace discharge quality is done visually, not quantitatively.  
A major impact from mining operations is soil erosion and landslides.   In addition, discussions with 
25 Rwanda Mines, Petroleum and Gas Board (May 2018?); Mineral Field Officer’s Annual Report 2017-2018, 
Kayonza District. 
51 
the  LWH/RSSP  SPIU  revealed  that  terraces  have  been  undermined  due  to  members  of  the  local 
communities digging them up to look for cassiterite.     
There are also a number of legal and illegal quarries (gravel, aggregate) in Ndego, Rwinkwavu, Kabare 
and Murundi Sectors.  The location of mines and quarries are illustrated in Map 5.5 below. 
Map 5.5 Mines and Quarries in Kayonza District 
Source: Minerals Officer, Kayonza District, September 2018. 
5.2.4 
Hydrology and Water Resources 
Hydrology 
Rwanda has two drainage basins:  the Congo Basin which drains west towards the Atlantic Ocean, and 
the Nile Basin which flows through Tanzania into Lake Victoria (see Map 5.6).  The Nile Basin covers 
some 67% of the total land area of the country. 
52 
Map 5.6 Rwanda Hydrological Drainage Basins 
Source: REMA (2011) 
Kayonza  District  falls  within  two  major  catchments:  the  Upper  Agakera  Catchment  and  the  Lower 
Akagera Catchment.  According to the National Water Resources Master Plan26, approximately 77% of 
Kayonza  District  falls  within  the  Lower  Akagera  Catchment,  and  this  comprises  32  %  of  the  total 
catchment  area.    This  is  catchment  straddles  the  boundary  with  Tanzania.    It  drains  the  area 
downstream of Rusumo Falls up to the confluence of the Akagera with the Muvumba River27.  Average 
rainfall in the Lower Akagera Catchment is 835 mm, of which 624 mm (75%) is lost through evaporation 
and  plant  transpiration  processes.  The  remaining  211  mm  (25%)  contributes  to  the  catchment 
hydrological  flow.    Of  this,  125  mm  (15%  of  rainfall  or  59%  of  flow)  is  base  flow  supplied  from 
groundwater recharge28. The Project area falls entirely within the Lower Akagera Catchment as shown 
in Map 5.7 below. 
26 Sher Ingenieurs-Conseils s.a. (May 2014).  Rwanda National Water Resources Master Plan; Master Plan 
Report, Main Volume; Final Version. Rwanda Natural Resources Authority. 
27 REMA (2015). State of the Environment and Outlook Report. 
28 Sher Ingenieurs-Conseils s.a. (February 2014).  Rwanda National Water Resources Master Plan; Master Plan 
Report – Appendix 08NAKL. Catchment Master Plan – NAKL; Final Version. Rwanda Natural Resources 
Authority. 
53 
Map 5.7 The Lower Akagera Catchment 
Source: Rwanda National Water Resources Masterplan (2014) 
Surface Water 
The eastern part of Kayonza District has abundant lakes and rivers.  The Akagera River flows along the 
District’s eastern border with Tanzania.  The River has several small tributaries, such as the Kadiridimba 
River and Cyizange River, that originate to the south west of the District, and flow north through the 
Project area to join the Akagera River to the north of the national park. In addition, there are a number 
of  lakes  in  the  Project  area,  namely  Lakes  Nasho,  Chyambwe,  Gishanda  and  a  small  section  in  the 
southern part of Lake Ihema.  The rest of Lake Ihema lies in Mwiri Sector within the Akagera National 
Park, together with Lakes Hago, Kivumba, Ngerenke, Kihari and the southern tip of Lake Kisanju. (See 
Map 5.8 below).  The lakes in the Akagera/Nasho complex shallow (less than 10 m in depth). They have 
high nutrient values, species diversity and productivity.29 
29 Op. cit. REMA (2015). State of the Environment and Outlook Report 
54 
Map 5.8 Surface Water Resources in the Project Area 
Source: REMA (2015) 
The  Lower  Akagera  Catchment  Master  Plan  notes  that  the  Akagera  River  shows  bidirectional  flow 
patterns which depend on the sequence, magnitude and duration of hydrological events in upstream 
catchments and within the lower Akagera catchment itself.  “Reverse flow” occurs when the Akagera 
River is in flood as a result of rainfall in the upstream catchments (Akagera and Ruvubu) filling up the 
lakes.  The Master Plan states that the width and depth of the channels between Akagera River and 
lakes are a crucial factor for maintaining the hydrological functionality, and warns that any tampering 
with these channels may have serious consequences, particularly for the lakes. If substantial water is 
abstracted  from  the  lakes  for  irrigation,  the  deficit  will  be  filled  from  the  river.  Thus,  it  has  been 
recommended that abstraction of water for agricultural use between the Akagera River and its lakes 
should be avoided30.    
30 Op. cit. Rwanda National Water Resources Master Plan; Master Plan Report – Appendix 08NAKL. Catchment 
Master Plan – NAKL 
55 
The  adjusted  water  balance  for  the  Lower  Akagera  Catchment  as  presented  in  the  Master  Plan 
indicates that at catchment level the renewable resources are sufficient to cater for demand until 2030, 
after  which  resources  will  be  stressed  during  the  twenty-year  dry  year.    However,  by  2040,  water 
resources during the dry season will be stressed for most years, except when exceptionally wet years 
are experienced. The Master Plan suggests that inter-basin transfers from the upstream catchments 
could  make  up  the  deficit  in  these  cases,  but  this  would  have  international  implications,  since  the 
upstream catchments extend across a number of countries – namely Burundi, Tanzania and Rwanda. 
Moreover, the ecological impacts of inter-basin transfers are complex and would have to be thoroughly 
assessed. This then highlights the need for water conservation and efficient use of water resources, 
particularly in irrigation schemes.  
The table below summarises projected annual demand distribution as described in the Lower Akagera 
Master Plan. 
Table 5.1  Projected Annual Demand Distribution 
Year 
2012 
Percentage of 
Use of 
Renewable 
Resources 
2% 
2020 
14% 
2030 
30% 
2040 
43% 
Use 
Comment 
Rural  water  supply,  surface 
water 
irrigation 
from dams and for livestock 
irrigation, 
irrigation, 
Surface  water 
groundwater 
irrigation, 
marshland  irrigation,  rural 
water  supply  and  irrigation 
from dams.  
surface 
water 
Mainly 
groundwater 
irrigation, 
irrigation, 
marshland 
irrigation and irrigation from 
dams, and some rural water 
supply  
irrigation 
categories 
All 
(except 
rainwater 
harvesting).  Small  increase 
in  demand  for  rural,  urban, 
industrial  water  supply  and 
fisheries.  
The  distribution  of  demand  over  the 
year  is  somewhat  uneven  with  an 
increase during the dry season months 
and a slight decrease in April. 
There 
is  a  marked  difference  of 
demand  during  the  season  with  over 
half  the  demand  required  during  the 
dry  season  and  a  significant  decrease 
in  April;  both  are  related  to  the 
importance of the irrigation sector. 
The  skewed  distribution  of  demand 
(more  than  double  during  the  dry 
season  months)  over 
the  year 
continues  over  this  time  span  with  a 
large decrease in April which highlights 
the relative  insignificance of  the non-
irrigation demand. 
The  skewed  distribution  of  demand 
remains  due  to  the  irrigation  sector 
dominance. 
Source:  Adapted from Sher Ingenieurs-Conseils s.a. (February 2014) 
The above water balances are based on catchment-wide data.  For KIIWP, the hydrological studies to 
be carried out for the selected schemes will need to establish water balances for each scheme at the 
micro-catchment level, taking into consideration aspects such as water source, scheme size, crop water 
requirements, and soil conditions.  
56 
Groundwater 
The Rwanda Irrigation Master Plan (RIMP, 2010) 31 indicates that in terms of  groundwater exploitation,  
the highest potential would be in volcanic soils, followed by alluvial beds and then areas having altered 
quartzites. Areas having granites, schists and overlying sands show the least potential.  The RIMP notes 
that the greatest need for groundwater exploitation is in the eastern part of the country where water 
is needed for cattle and human consumption. In these areas the only existing aquifers are granitic, 
characterised by very low transmissivities and yields in the 1–5 m3/h range. 
The map below shows that the Project area is dominated by permeable fractured aquifers (quartzites 
on schist base) and low permeable fractured aquifers (schist and micaschist) and thus likely to have 
low suitability for groundwater.   
Water  for  Growth,  in  collaboration  with  RWFA,  has  recently  commissioned  a  study  to  carry  out  a 
groundwater,  recharge  and  storage  enhancement  investigation  in  the  Eastern  Province  and  to 
identify/confirm main aquifers, understand their hydrodynamic behaviour, potentiality and recharge 
mechanisms.  The study is ongoing at the moment, and the final report is expected to be submitted at 
the end of September.   This study will be important in informing the KIIWP design regarding the use 
of  groundwater  as  a  source  for  irrigation  and/or  for  provision  of  water  for  livestock  and  for 
communities.  
The Lower Akagera Master Plan recommends that if and when groundwater aquifers are exploited in 
Murundi, Gahini and Mwiri, they should be closely monitored for diminishing water tables.  
Environmental Flow 
The Brisbane Declaration on Environmental Flows (2007)32 definition of environmental flow (EF) was 
revised in 2017 as being “… the quantity, timing, and quality of freshwater flows and levels necessary 
to  sustain  aquatic  ecosystems  which,  in  turn,  support  human  cultures,  economies,  sustainable 
livelihoods, and well-being”.   This is now the accepted definition of environmental flow.   Discussions 
with  the  Rwanda  Water  and  Forest  Authority  (RWFA)  revealed  that  there  is  no  set  standard  for 
environmental flow, and the Water Resources Management Authority determines EF on a case by case 
basis,  although  the  Lower  Akagera  Catchment  Master  Plan  proposes  an  EF  of  33%  of  the  average 
monthly flow.   The Master Plan  purports that water balance of the lower Akagera  shows sufficient 
resources  up  till  2030,  although  environmental  flow  may  be  somewhat  compromised  during  dryer 
years (1 in 20 dry year). 
5.2.5  Wetlands  
Wetlands provide crucial ecosystem services such as storing and purifying water, controlling flooding 
by acting as a natural sponge, releasing water gradually to allow year-round stream flow, absorbing 
sediments and pollutants such as heavy metals, and regulating climate by recirculating moisture that 
cools the surroundings. They also provide important habitats for fauna and flora. 
RIMP classifies the wetlands in the Project area as being low altitude marshes.  In 2010, REMA listed 
and mapped all wetlands in the country and assigned them various protection levels: i) total protection 
where  no  activities  are  allowed  to  take  place;  ii)  conditional  exploitation  which  requires  a  basic 
environmental and social impact assessment to be carried out, and for which the EIA licence issued by 
31 MINAGRI (2010). Rwanda Irrigation Master Plan (RIMP).  Ebony Enterprises Ltd and the World Agroforestry 
Centre (ICRAF). 
32 http://riversymposium.com/about/brisbane-declaration/ 
57 
the Rwanda Development Board stipulates the conditions and types of activities that are permitted to 
be  conducted  in  those  wetlands;  and  iii)  unconditional  exploitation  which  allows  use  under  given 
conditions.  
The map below shows the wetlands in the Project area and their categorisation, together with the 
potential subproject sites in the eight Project sectors. It is seen that most of the proposed irrigaton 
schemes will draw water from conditional wetlands.  One site - Humure in Ndego Sector – will draw 
its water from Lake Ihema, but the shoreline bordering the proposed scheme is under total protection.  
The scheme design will therefore have to consider an alternative site for abstraction and pumping of 
water to the scheme. 
Map 5.9 Wetlands in the Project Area and their Categorisation 
Source:  REMA (2015) 
5.2.6 
Vegetation/Flora  
The  savannah  vegetation  in  the  Project  area  comprises  a  mosaic  of  grassland,  broadleaved  and/or 
deciduous shrubland and forest. The grass savannah is dominated by Themeda triandra, Hyparrhenia 
58 
sp., with Sporobolus pyramidalis and Botriochloa insculpta. Acacia species are the most common trees 
found  in  the  forest  savannah;  these  include  Acacia  senegal,  A.  Sieberiana,  A.  polyacantha 
campylacantha, A.gerardii and A. brevispica.  Combretum sp are also found. 33 
Fischer (2011) prepared a biodiversity inventory for various important wetlands in Rwanda.34  He notes 
that within the Akagera wetland complex south of the Akagera National Park, there are a total of 77 
vascular  plants  of  which  two  are  endangered  orchid  species  (Eulophia  angolensis  and  Eulophia 
guineensis). The wetland vegetation is dominated by Papyrus reed (Cyperus papyrus) and Phragmites 
(Phragmites  Mauritianus),  and  reeds  such  as  Echinochloetum  pyramidalis  and  Cyperetum  latifolii.    
Shrubs along the swamp edges are characterised by Syzygium cordatum and Myrica kandtiana, while 
along the lake and river edges, Sesbania sesban and Phoenix reclinata, Aeschyomene elaphroxylon and 
Mimosa pigra  are dominant. Aquatic plants occurring in the open water surfaces are Nymphaea sp, 
Ceratophylletum Demersi, Azolla nilotica and Eichhornia crassipes (Water Hyacinth). 
One the major threats to the water bodies in the Project area is the invasion of lakes by Water Hyacinth 
including Lakes Ihema and Nasho, and other water bodies, especially in the Nyabarongo-Akagera river 
system and the Akagera wetland complex35. 
5.2.7 
Forests  
There were three types of forests in Kayonza District: natural, agroforestry and forest lots (woodlots).  
The only natural forests left in the District are those in the Akagera National Park (see Section 5.2.9 
below).  Outside the park, all the natural forests have now been converted to pasture.  The District is 
now trying to rehabilitate some of these areas, and plans to plant 7000 ha with agroforestry species 
such as Grevillea spp and Senna spp, and about 1511 ha has already been planted with Eucalyptus spp 
on the hilltops.  The main threats to forests are the cutting down of trees for fuelwood (about 80% of 
the District’s population uses wood for fuel), and clearing for agriculture.  Other challenges include 
fire, low sapling survival rates, quality of seeds for tree nurseries, and lack of personnel at the district 
level - there is only one forester for the entire district (pers. Comm. District Forest Officer, Kayonza 
District, August 2018).  
5.2.8 
Fauna 
Human activity throughout much of the District has disturbed faunal habitats, and there is a paucity 
of large mammals in the Project  area, apart  from  Hippo (Hippopotamus  amphibious)  which can be 
found in a number of dams/valley tanks in the Project area, Baboon (Papio anubis), Vervet Monkey 
(Chlorocebus  pygerythrusantelope),  and  perhaps  some  smaller  species  of  antelope.    Otherwise, 
wildlife in the Project area is largely confined to the Akagera National Park (see Section 5.2.9 below).    
However,  the  wetlands  provide  unique  habitats  for  a  number  of  faunal  species.    In  the  Akagera 
Complex south of the Akagera National Park, Fischer (2011) recorded 16 amphibian species, of which 
two species of frogs  (Phrynomantis  bifasciatus  and Hylarana albolabris)  do not  occur elsewhere  in 
Rwanda,  and  a  newly  identified  frog  species  (Phrynobatrachus  spp)  is  possibly  endemic  to  the 
Albertine  Rift;  13  reptiles;  54  bird  species  of  which  the  Papyrus  Yellow  Warbler  (Chloropeta 
gracilirostris)  is  vulnerable  and  the  Papyrus  Gonolek  (Laniarius  mufumbiri)  is  near  threatened;  11 
mammal species, of which the Hippo (Hippopotamus amphibious) is vulnerable36.    
33 REMA (2009). State of the Environment Report 2009. 
34 Fischer, E (2011). Biodiversity Inventory of Key Wetlands in Rwanda. Final Report. REMA. 
35 https://www.cbd.int/countries/profile/default.shtml?country=rw 
36 Op. cit. Fischer (2011).  
59 
Threats to aquatic fauna in the Project area include the decrease or extirpation of native fish species 
in  the  lakes  of  the  Nyabarongo-Akagera  river  system  due  to  the  invasion  and  increase  of  predator 
species, among which are Protopterus aethiopicus and Clarias gariepinus, with the most threatened 
species  being  Barbus  kerstenii,  Clarias  liocephalus,  Mastacembelus  frenatus  and  Oreochromis 
macrochir.37 
While no extensive faunal surveys have been carried out in the Project area, based on the foregoing, 
it is likely that the wetlands to be utilised for Project activities may be inhabited by some of the species 
listed here.  The environmental impact studies carried out for the proposed sites must therefore take 
this into consideration.  
5.2.9 
Protected Areas: the Akagera National Park 
The Akagera National Park (ANP) was established in 1934.  It lies between the eastern border of the 
Project area, and the western border of Tanzania with Rwanda which is demarcated by the Akagera 
River.   The park has a rich biodiversity due to its varied ecosystems:  it contains six forest fringed lakes, 
the largest protected wetland in Central Africa, savannah plains, the Akagera River and the Mutumba 
Hills reaching an altitude of nearly 2,000 m asl. 
The ANP originally covered an area of more than 2,500 sq km.  However, following the civil strife, a 
number of refugees settled around the park, and as a result the wildlife populations were severely 
affected by poaching for meat, and due to clearing for cultivation.  In 1997 the park area was reduced 
by about 50% of its total area (it is now 1,200 sq km in area) to provide land to returning refugees and 
too ensure protection of wildlife in the remaining area.   In 2009, Rwanda Development Board and 
Africa Parks (a conservation organisation) signed a joint management agreement in which the Akagera 
management company was established to help both bodies manage the park.38 
The  ANP  is  home  to  12  species  of  antelope  including  Eland  (Tragelaphus  oryx),  Impala  (Aepyceros 
melampus),  Oribi  (Ourebia  ourebi)  and  the  aquatic  Sitatunga  (Tragelaphus  spekii),  Spotted  Hyena 
(Crocuta  crocuta),  Elephant  (Loxodonta  africana  -  Vulnerable),  Burchell’s  Zebra  (Equus  quagga 
burchellii  -  Near  Threatened),  African  Buffalo  (Syncerus  caffer)  and  Masai  Giraffe  (Giraffa 
camelopardolis tippelskirchi – Vulnerable) and recently introduced Lion (Panthera leo - Vulnerable).   
Tree species found in the gallery forest around the ANP lakes and other water bodies including Acacia 
polycantha,  Acacia  sieberana,  Albizia  gummifera,  Cordia  Africana,  Crotonmacrostachis,  Dombeya 
burgessia, Dombeta kirkii, Erythria absysniica, Newtonia buchananii and Techlea nobilis. There are also 
some  rare  or  threatened  species  can  also  be  found,  such  as  Acacia  kirkii,  Impantiens  irvingii, 
Markhamia lutea, Eulophia guineensis and Pterygota mildbraedii.39 
5.3 
Socio-Economic Environment 
5.3.1 
Demographic Characteristics of the Scheme Areas 
Kayonza District with 350,211 individuals contributes 3% of the current resident population of Rwanda 
of 12,089,721m  40according to the National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR)  and is the least 
37 Op.cit. www.cbd.int 
38 https://www.akageranationalpark.org/ 
39 Op. cit. REMA (2009). 
40 http://www.statistics.gov.rw/publication/size-resident-population 
60 
densely populated at 178 inhabitants per square km according to the 2012 National Population Census. 
About 55% of the population of Kayonza District are aged 19 years or younger. People aged 65 years 
and above make up 3%. About 52% of the population is female and the majority of this population 
group is young, with about 83% still under 40 years of age. 
The  selected  KIIWP  intervention  sectors  make  up  67%  of  the  district’s  population  with  Murundi 
(37,738); Kabare (36,365); Gahini (33,590); Kabarondo (30,811); Rwinkwavu (29,420); Mwiri (25,156); 
Ndego (20,900) and Murama (20,180). 
5.3.2 
Land Tenure 
The 2004 National Land Policy provides general guidance on a rational and planned use of land while 
ensuring  sound  land  management  and  efficient  land  administration.  The  policy  was  developed  to 
address  land-related  challenges,  including  a  land  tenure  that  was  dominated  by  customary  law, 
resulting  in  land  fragmentation,  a  practice  that  reduces  further  the  size  of  family  farms  below  the 
threshold of the average surface area that is economically viable. 
Law  no  43/2013  of  16/06/2013  governing  land  in  Rwanda  determines  land  allocation  modalities, 
acquisition,  transfer,  use  and  management.  The  law  clearly  stipulates  private  or  individual  land 
ownership in Article 10, the certificate of land allocation in Article 18 and the transfer of land rights 
upon  prior  consent  by  all registered  rights  holders on  the  land  title  in  Articles 21  and  22.  The  law 
maintains the supreme powers of the State to manage all national land in the interest of Rwandans, 
for sustainable economic development and to ensure social welfare. The law substantiates how land 
will remain a domain of the past, present and the future. Furthermore, the 2015 expropriation law 
determines the procedures for land expropriation in the public interest. 
Law  No  43/2013,  currently  governing  land  in  Rwanda,  provides  equal  access  to  land  without 
discrimination based on sex or origin. It is mandatory to register land property to both spouses married 
in a community and spousal consent is now required for transfer of the property. The law provides 
further guidance on land access through emphyteutic leases. Owners of agricultural land in rural areas 
may be granted 99 year renewable leasehold and shorter leases of up to 49 years for foreigners. 
5.3.3 
Land Use 
The  4th  phase  of  Rwanda’s  Strategic  Plan  for  the  Transformation  of  Agriculture  (PSTA  4)  for  2018-
202441    indicates  that  96%  of  rural  households  rely  directly  or  indirectly  on  agriculture  for  their 
livelihoods.  PSTA 4 observes  that  30%  of the  households  cultivate  less than  0.2  ha  (accounting  for 
about five per cent of total arable land), while about 25% cultivate more than 0.7 ha (accounting for 
65 per cent of the national farm-land). It further states that the remaining 15% of rural household farm 
less  than  0.1ha  many  of  whom  are  female-headed  households,  cultivating  only  1.32%  of  national 
cultivable land.     
The Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey (EICV 3) of 201342 reported that the proportion of 
households  cultivating  the  smallest  areas,  with  under  0.3  ha  of  land  represent  46.4%  in  Kayonza 
District; slightly higher than the national level average (46%). Figure 4 displays a proposed land use 
map of Kayonza District featuring land use socio-economic, infrastructure and environment land use 
classes. Socio-economic classes of land use include urban areas, built up areas, imidugudu (villages), 
41 http://www.minagri.gov.rw/fileadmin/user_upload/documents/AJSR/PSTA_4_Approved_by_the_ 
Cabinet.pdf 
42 http://www.statistics.gov.rw/survey-period/integrated-household-living-conditions-survey-3-eicv-3 
61 
educational facilities, health facilities, markets and trading centres, milk collection stations, industrial 
plants,  mineral  deposits  and  mining  concessions  and  areas  of  national  interest  for  tourism.  The 
infrastructure land use class features national roads with 22m road reserves, district roads with 16m 
road reserves, power lines with 200m buffer areas around them. 
Map 5.10 Proposed Land Use in Kayonza District 
Source: Kayonza District One Stop Centre, September 2018. 
The National Land Use and Development Master Plan (NLUDMP) of 201343 establishes environment 
land use buffer zones as follows: 
•  Hydrological lines - 10m  
• 
Lakes -  50m  
•  Wetlands - 20m,  
•  Valuable agriculture land, forest, Akagera National Park, economic zones of Akagera National 
Park, slopes of more than 30 degrees proposed for reforestation and drought risk area - 1km. 
However,  the  enforcement  of  the  1  km  buffer  zone  remains  a  challenge,  as  people  are  already 
inhabiting and cultivating within the buffer zones, and moreover, the GoR has also given concessions 
for development within 1km of the parks, for example for the Bramin and Buffet schemes.  REMA has 
recently commissioned a revision of the National Land Use and Development Master Plan specifically 
to review the 50m buffer zone and land use within the buffers by the lakes, as well as for steep slopes.  
.  The same with the slope.  It should also be noted that the Master Plan remains a plan, is not yet 
supported by any legal instrument (such as a Presidential or Ministerial Order).   
43 http://www.minirena.gov.rw/index.php?id=61&tx_ttnews%5Btt_news%5D=182&cHash= 
83e58f1a5f0daba584733e8d69be3182 
62 
5.3.4 
Agriculture in Kayonza District 
A  different  land  use  categorization  is  used  by  the  district  for  current  land  use  categories  land 
consolidation, marshland development, hillside irrigation development and mechanization and use of 
machinery. Land consolidation is described in PSTA 4 as an arrangement in which farmers voluntarily 
put  together their plots in cooperative organizations and produce  crops and are  facilitated in post-
harvest  value  chain  including  being  linked  with  agro-processors  and  markets  under  contract 
arrangements.  PSTA  4  articulates  the  role  of  the  government  that  ensures  conducive  policies, 
strengthening  farmers  to  make  good  choices,  and  making  sure  contract  farming  agreements  are 
respected. It is also confirmed in the strategy that farmers continue to have rights on their lands and 
that they are not forced to consolidate their plots. 
Table 5.2 Yields as Percentages of Targets set as KPIs by 
Sector 
reported 
13,040ha 
The  Imihigo  (Key  Performance  Indicators) 
report for agricultural land use in Kayonza 
District for the year 2017-2018 highlighted 
the  problem  of  crop  failures  due  climate 
related  problems  including  drought  and 
that 
flooding.  The  District 
although 
land  was 
consolidated  achieving  93%  of  the  set 
target,  drought  in  8  sectors  out  of  12 
caused failure of the maize crop in Season 
2018 A with the KIIWP target intervention 
sectors of Ndego, Rwinkwavu and Kabare 
being  worst  hit  (see  Table  5-2).    Season 
2018 B was constrained by the pest attack 
of the Fall Army Worm (FAW) on 1,865ha. 
of 
Observations  provided  by  the  District 
Agricultural  Officer  on  the  performance  of  the  maize,  beans,  cassava,  soya  and  rice  included  the 
following: 
•  Planted area of beans increased because the soya seed was not available for the first growing 
season (Season 2018 A). In the second season (2018 B) the late maturing Safari Soya seed that 
is suitable for wetland areas that enabled the increase of total planted area. 
•  RAB  provided  85,000  cuttings  to  farmers  to  complement  seed  sharing  among  the 
communities.  However,  most  of  the  cassava  that  was  available  for  propagation  through 
community sharing were infected with the Kabore disease. 
•  Soya seed was not available in Season 2018 A from RAB. Farmers therefore used the seeds 
they had among themselves. In Season 2018 B the Safari Soya variety that requires long rains 
became available and was therefore planted in wetland areas as it would not be successful on 
hillside areas with the short rains of season B. 
•  Rice  provided  comparatively  good  yield  levels  among  other  crops  during  the  drought 
conditions. However, flooding caused losses of rice due for harvest in Kabare sector, and in 
Gacaca village in Rwinkwavu sector. 
It was also reported that almost 100% of the 2000 ha targeted area covered for hillside irrigation was 
achieved. Machine-cultivated irrigated area exceeded the target of 1,200ha by 82ha. 
The  Imihigo  report  also  included  information  on  the  number  of  Twigire  associations  in  the  district 
growing maize, beans and cassava by sector. PSTA 4 explains that Twigire-Muhinzi (for crop farmers) 
and  Twigire  Mworozi  (for  livestock  producers)  are  extension  models  that  give  farmers  access  to 
63 
Maize yield as % of targetBeans yield as % of targetCassava yield as % of targetSoya yield as % of targetRice yield as % of target1Kabarondo59.654.666.948.02Ruramira91.138.925.346.43Nyamirama92.072.30.04Gahini52.728.829.35Ndego0.838.695.01.06Rwinkwavu1.79.517.188.27Mwili43.331.915.051.78Murama29.851.346.69Rukara10Kabare9.515.50.00.011Mukarange76.959.780.045.012Murundi48.338.532.336.438.646.040.063.727.145.6Perfromance Contract Year: 2017-2018Average yield as% of targetNoSector 
advisory  services,  appropriate  agricultural  technologies,  and  knowledge.  It  further  explains  that 
Twigire complements the services delivered by public extension officers. 
As reported in Table 5.3 below, 3,323 Twigire associations were created in the 12 sectors of Kayonza 
District with 19,016 members growing maize, beans and cassava on 206 sites and over total area of 
19,562ha.  Farmer  organization  initiatives  will  be  relevant  to  the  design,  development  and 
implementation  of  KIIWP  in  view  of  considerations  of  intervention  delivery  through  cooperative 
and/or other farmers’ organizations. 
Table 5.3 Twigire Association Information by Crop Site and by Sector, Kayonza District 
Twigire Associations 
Maize 
Beans 
Cassava 
No. 
Sector 
No. 
Associations 
No. of 
Association 
Members 
No. of 
Sites 
Area 
(ha) 
No. of 
Sites 
Area 
(ha) 
No. of 
Sites 
Area 
(ha) 
1 
Kabare 
2  Murundi 
3 
4 
Ruramira 
Kabarondo 
5  Murama 
6  Mukarange 
7 
8 
9 
Gahini 
Ndego 
Rwinkwavu 
10  Mwili 
11 
Rukara 
12  Nyamirama 
2,108  
174  
43  
149  
151  
77  
33  
96  
165  
121  
136  
70  
190  
3,480  
683  
1,696  
1,827  
1,542  
442  
1,625  
2,624  
1,876  
1,981  
1,050  
 - 
 - 
8  
-  
13  
4  
8  
7  
21  
8  
 - 
20  
 - 
-  
106  
-  
650  
480  
703  
735  
2,167  
1,051  
-  
946  
 - 
 - 
3  
 - 
16  
3  
8  
15  
21  
8  
-  
20  
 - 
-  
48  
 - 
903  
2,500  
703  
735  
2,167  
1,051  
 - 
946  
 - 
 - 
1  
 - 
6  
-  
-  
8  
4  
4  
-  
2  
-  
 - 
6  
-  
597  
80  
-  
  2,069  
427  
402  
 - 
90  
Total 
89  
Source: Kayonza District Agriculture Office, August 2018 
19,016  
3,323  
 6,838  
         94  
  9,053  
        25  
  3,671  
According to EICV3, the mean share of harvest sold for fruit and vegetables was lower (9.9%) than for 
staple crops (28.5%) in Kayonza District; this follows the pattern at national level and in urban and rural 
areas.  
5.3.5 
Livestock 
Livestock is another important source of income and food for households in Kayonza District.  Data 
obtained from the District indicated that 51,084 households (58%) own domestic animals. Cows are 
very  important  in  Kayonza,  with  23  %  (20,406  households)  owning  53,051  cows.  Murundi  has  the 
highest number of households that own cows with the highest number of cows, followed by Gahini 
and Mukarange as shown in Table 5.4 below.  
64 
Table 5.4  Kayonza District Livestock Ownership by Sector 
No. 
Sector 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Murama 
Murundi 
Rukara 
Rwinkwavu 
Kabarondo 
Gahini 
Ndego 
Ruramira 
Kabare 
10  Mukarange 
11  Mwiri 
12 
Nyamirama 
No. of 
HHs 
HHs with 
Livestock 
HHs 
without 
Livestock 
HHs 
with 
Cows 
No. of 
Cows 
HHs with 
other 
Livestock 
HHs with 
Improved 
Cows 
Cows provided 
in Girinka 
Programme 
 5,155  
 9,057  
7,698  
7,399  
7,450  
8,319  
5,422  
4,951  
9,135  
8,779 
6,289  
8,427  
 3,849  
5,094  
4,183  
5,052  
2,951  
4,064  
2,675  
2,974  
6,883  
4,889  
2,956  
5,514  
178  
586  
886  
2,303  
3,272  
8,507  
1,351  
597  
1,552  
664  
1,405  
3,653  
3,436  
1,142  
2,969  
 1,363  
2,779  
7,225  
750  
1,263  
3,283  
1,291  
1,370  
3,562  
662  
971  
1,858  
4,830  
2,998  
7,794  
2,114  
1,647  
4,282  
1,089  
1,189  
3,091  
2,963  
1,610  
213  
3,506  
1,809  
1,361  
1,257  
1,328  
5,025  
1,891  
1,309  
2,499  
174  
659  
159  
710  
927  
422  
515  
320  
335  
1,878  
323  
627  
456  
196  
336  
505  
301  
654  
382  
423  
388  
547  
381  
981  
TOTAL 
88,081  
Source: Kayonza District Livestock Office, August 2018 
14,455  
51,084  
20,406  
53,051  
24,771  
7,049  
5,550  
Kayonza livestock district statistics also reported small stock comprising 54,661 goats, 4,089 sheep, 
7,266 pigs and 43,729 poultry.  
Water availability and access to water 
is  a  critical  problem  for  livestock  as 
they are equally affected by drought. 
KIIWP  interventions  are  planned  to, 
rehabilitate  and 
among  others, 
construct  additional  valley  tanks  as 
well as drill boreholes where feasible 
to increase availability of, and access 
to,  water  for  livestock.  Table  5.5 
below shows the existing valley dams 
in the District, the livestock numbers 
they cater for and beneficiary details. 
Table 5.5  Valley Dams in Kayonza District 
Source: Kayonza District Agriculture Office, August 2018 
5.3.6 
Health Status in the Project District 
Information from the District  indicated that  72.8% of the population have medical insurance  cover 
(known in French as Mutuelle des Santé).  In regard to child health, under five-year mortality rate is at 
129  per  1000  born,    infant  mortality  is  66  per  1000,  proportion  of  1-year  old  children  immunized 
against measles are 89.1% and 68.4% of children born are delivered at health facilities.  39% of the 
population practise family planning is at 39%.  The five top causes of morbidity are: malaria (46.3% of 
cases, and causes 7.7% of all deaths), respiratory diseases, enterological illnesses (diarrhea, intestinal 
parasites,  etc),  dental  infections  and  ophthalmic  problems.  HIV/AIDS  prevalence  rate  is  3.8%.  
Malnutrition is low at 0.6%.  The population is served by 2 district hospitals in Gahini and Rwinkwavu, 
15 health centres and 16 health posts and 6 private clinics.  There are 8 ambulances to facilitate access 
to  health  services.  The  district  has  challenges  of  inadequate  health  facilities  especially  in  Gahini 
hospital, and Rutare and Mukarange health centres.  
65 
MaleFemaleMukarangeBuhabwaKinyamusenye201413020Karamba11127015Sekimondo1504909Makanika14979413Karugenge9938122MwiriKageyoNdago26158411Total914353190BeneficiariesSectorCellVelley DamCows 
The District has put in place a strategy to convene rice farmers and miners to train them in malaria 
prevention, and providing with basic prevention knowledge.  This began in early 2018 in Rwinkwavu, 
Kabare,  Muruma,  Ndego,  and  targets  members  of  cooperatives.    The  responsibility  for  training  / 
sensitisation has been delegated to the health centres.   In addition, since May 2018 the District Health 
Office has begun a campaign to plant mosquito repelling plants/trees such as artemisia, geranium, 
neem around homesteads and fields. Have already started up a nursery with 100 altenesia.  MINAGRI 
also have a malaria contingency plan, which proposes the introduction of fish to eat mosquito larvae, 
and to distribute nets for people in Ubudehe categories 1 and 2. 
Kayonza District is intending to put much emphasis to eradication of malnutrition from 0.6% to 0.0% 
through  improved  accessibility  to  nutrition  education  and  promotion  of  kitchen  gardens.  Improve 
family planning from 39% (EICV3) to 70% in order to reduce fertility rate by increasing availability of 
contraceptives and collaborating with private sector to provide family planning services. The district 
also will put much emphasis on sensitization on delivery in health facilities to reduce maternal and 
child  mortality  rate,  increase  population  access  to  medical  facilities  like  VCT  and  reduce  HIV/AIDS 
prevalence  rate  from 3.7% to 2.0%  and reduce death caused by malaria from 7.7% to 0.0% will be 
achieved through mass mobilization on use of mosquito nets and to have improved sanitation most 
especially to pregnant mothers. This will demand measures to ensure community participation and 
improved quality service delivery to achieve high population coverage.  
Behavioural  change  and  education  communication  will  be  emphasized  to  promote  appropriate 
reproductive health behaviour to reduce maternal and new born and child deaths. Involving males in 
all issues relating to female and child health will be strengthened. Conduct orientation workshops for 
community leaders and use mass media campaigns to curb Gender Based Violence. The district will 
endeavour to sensitize population on the dangers of non-communicable diseases and use of training 
as the remedy. Prenatal and post-natal education to married couples will be strengthened for better 
child  development  and  care.  The  district  will  put  emphasis  on  issues  of  hygiene  and  environment 
protection to minimize communicable diseases. Emphasis on improved sanitation facilities at schools, 
health centres, hospitals, markets and all public places. (Source: Kayonza DDP 2013-2018). 
5.3.7 
Social Protection 
A big challenge in the district on social issues is the large number of vulnerable households where by 
41,634 people from 11,196 households are under support of Ubudehe program.  0.7% of households 
are headed by persons under 21years of age and 4.2% of households are headed by disabled people 
and  women.      The  District  provides  social  protection  to  historically  marginalised  persons  (by  for 
example paying for school fees and short courses), and to  genocide survivors, where 5,313 houses of 
the  vulnerable were  constructed  and  4,213  cows  were  distributed  through  the  Girinka  program  to 
vulnerable groups.   The social protection system in the district also covers persons with disabilities: 
there are 3,426 disabled people in Kayonza District total, 1,198 of them are children, 442 are in schools, 
109 dropped out due to lack of support and the remaining 604 were not able to join formal education.  
The District provides monthly support of RWF 7500 for an individual, RWF 14000 for a couple, RWF 
21000 for families of 3 or more people.  Those who are poor but have other means of support get work 
through the Ministry of Works for 20 days per month.  
Key challenges are that only 20% of the District’s population is covered by the social protection system, 
and VUP programs are only implemented in 4 sectors.  Government resources are limited so focus is 
on most vulnerable people and can only employ them for 20 days in a month.   People with disabilities 
66 
are still stigmatised, and there are no special needs schools (although Gahini has a school for the blind).  
Many of the youth suffer from drug addiction. 
5.3.8 
Education Status of Subproject Communities 
In education, the literacy and secondary school attainment rates are lower than the national averages. 
Literacy rate for 15yrs and older is 67.1%.  Secondary school attainment is at 34.4%.  Net enrolment 
rates at secondary and primary schools are is 19.1% and 92.9%, while gross secondary and primary 
school enrolment rates are 38.4% and 150.9%.  Computer literacy for persons 15 years and older is at 
2.5%. 351 classrooms for the 9 YBE and 12 YBE were constructed, 88% of adults have been trained in 
adult literacy, 5 Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) institutions were constructed. 
The qualified teachers are 65% in primary and 52% in secondary, 20 teachers’ houses constructed to 
motivate  teacher,  5  laboratories  are  available  which  were  constructed  to  encourage  the  study  of 
science  subject.  The  district  is  still  having  some  social  challenges  like  inadequate  classrooms  and 
latrines both in primary, lower and upper secondary schools. 
High  repetition  and  drop-out  rates  have  negative  impact  on  human  capital  capacity  and  skills 
development hence the District education system should take appropriate measures to address the 
issues.  National repetition rates are 12.7% in primary, 5.8% in secondary and 1.6% in upper secondary. 
The drop-out rates are 10.9% in primary, 13.1% in secondary and 2.4% in upper secondary.  
Availability of primary, secondary and tertiary schools and facilities 
None  of  the  31  registered  higher  learning  institutions  with  branches  in  17  districts  of  Rwanda  is 
operating in Kayonza District. Pupil-teacher ratio in primary is 68 pupils to one teacher, and 22 pupils 
to one teacher in secondary schools. These figures are respectively 62 and 29 pupils for one teacher 
at national level.  
Classroom ratio is now 91 students per classroom in primary schools and 39 students per classroom 
in secondary schools  in  Kayonza District. At national level these  figures are  respectively 83 and 40 
students per classroom. The average walking distance to a primary school in Kayonza is 29.7 minutes 
and 88.2% of households being between 0 and 59 minutes walking distance to a primary school. EICV3 
results show that this walking distance to a primary school in Kayonza District is almost the same as 
the national average (27.2 minutes). It is generally accepted that professional skills are acquired in 
post primary education and training; hence over 90.8% female and 88.6% male in Kayonza District are 
unskilled.  
Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) 
TVET  institutions  in  Kayonza  District  are  comprised  of  5  Vocational  Training  Centres  (VTC)  and  1 
Technical Secondary School (TSS) offering programmes that include electricity, automobile, tailoring 
and  accountancy,  secretarial,  computer  science,  tourism,  carpentry,  hotel  management,  welding, 
plumbing and masonry. TSS schools offer various programmes that include accountancy, secretarial, 
computer science, electricity and tourism. 
67 
5.3.9 
Access to Services 
Energy 
Energy use for lighting is summarized in the Table 5.6.  It 
can be seen that kerosene lanterns are the most commonly 
used source of lighting, followed by battery power.  Of note 
is  the  relatively  low  use  of  fuelwood  compared  with  the 
national average.  
The  most  dominant  mean  used  for  cooking  in  Kayonza 
District is firewood which is at 92.7% which is higher than 
the  national  average  of  86.3%,  charcoal  is  used  at  6.7% 
compared to 10.6% of national average and 0.5% use other 
means apart from those mentioned above. 
Table 5.6  Sources of Lighting 
of 
Source 
Lighting 
Electricity 
Oil lamp 
Firewood 
Candle 
Kerosene 
Battery 
power 
Other 
% District 
Population 
7.5 
7.5 
2.3 
1.7 
69.8 
10.5 
% National 
Population 
10.8 
9.7 
8.8 
5.9 
34.7 
28.6 
0.7 
1.5 
Source: Kayonza DDP (2013-2018) 
Hygiene and sanitation  
According  to  the  current  data  published  by  National  Institute  of  Statistics,  66.4%  of  population  in 
Kayonza District have access to improved sanitation facilities namely toilets and 72% have access to an 
improved water sources. 67.1% of the households walk less than 30 minutes to an improved water 
source and 44.3% walk less than 15 minutes. The average time to an improved water source in Kayonza 
District is 16.1 minutes, which is higher than the national average (14.4 minutes).  
Telecommunication 
EICV3 report revealed that, mobile phone ownership at 50.1% compared to 45.2% at national level; 
landline phone was at 0.8% which is equivalent to the national level also at 0.8%, computer ownership 
was at 0.3% which is below national average of 1.7%, radio ownership was at 65.0% compared to 60.3% 
of the national average, TV set at 3.9% against 6.4% at national level and video/DVD player ownership 
at  0.3%  compared  to 1.7%  of  the  national  average.     EICV3  information  showed  that  96.4%  of the 
population aged 6 years and above never used a computer before compared to 93.5% at national level, 
1.8% used computer before but not confident to use it again compared to 2.6% of national average 
and 1.7% used computer before and confident to use it again compared to 3.9% of national average. 
The usage rate for internet  services facility is also low where 0.2%  use  internet  regularly, 3.1%  use 
internet often, 1.8% sometimes use internet, 14.9% not at all and 79.9% do not know about internet 
service. 
5.3.10  Water Sources  
The EICV3 results showed that 72% of Kayonza District households use an improved drinking water 
source. Improved drinking water sources include protected springs, public standpipes, water piped 
into  dwelling/yard,  boreholes,  protected  wells  and  rainwater  collection,  as  defined  by  the  World 
Health Organisation (WHO). The majority of households use a public standpipe (37%), followed by a 
protected  spring  (27%).  More  than  a  quarter  (28%)  of  households  in  Kayonza  District  still  use 
unimproved drinking water; 22% of these use surface water (from lakes and rivers). 
5.3.11  Household Income and Expenditure 
Household income in Kayonza District is based on agricultural production, wages, business, rent and 
transfers  including  remittances.  Household  agricultural  income  comes  from  land  cultivated  on  and 
from livestock. Wage income includes cash and in-kind payments received from farm and non-farm 
work. In-kind payments include food and other agricultural products, provision of shelter and other 
benefits received for the work. Non-farm self-employment (business) includes income received net of 
labour and other inputs whereas from rent includes actual rent received from renting out livestock, 
68 
agricultural  equipment  and  land.  The  EICV3  results  shows  that  at  the  national  level  agriculture 
contributes the largest share of a household’s income (46%), followed by wage income (25%), business 
income (i.e. self-employment), transfers, and rents. 
The improvement and increase of agricultural productivity in Kayonza District remain hampered by the 
low  use  of  agricultural  inputs  as  confirmed  by  the  data  in  EICV3,  revealing  that  the  percent  of 
households spending on chemical fertilizers is 13.0% compared to 30% of the national average; organic 
fertilizers are at 2.4% compared to 9.7% of the national average. Households that purchase seeds were 
at  15.5%  compared  to  19.5%  of  national  average  and  purchase  of  pesticides  at  0.5%  compared  to 
31.2% of national average. Households with irrigation expenditures were at 0.7% with an average of 
expenditure on terracing of 0.4%. 
5.3.12  Tourism 
Tourism has great socio-economic development potential for Kayonza District. The District has a great 
advantage as the host of the Akagera National Park, the Akagera River and a multitude of scenic inland 
lakes where several tourist projects and activities could be undertaken. However, with the exception 
of one game lodge within the Park and a few motels and small restaurants in the town of Kayonza, 
accommodation and catering facilities are almost non-existent. Challenges are linked to the investment 
support for the sector, the lack of basic infrastructure such as good quality transportation, electrical 
energy,  water,  hotels,  and  competent  labour  force.  There  is  also  inadequate  knowledge  about  the 
added value of touristic economy. 
5.3.13  Gender 
25%  of  households  in  Kayonza  District  are  headed  by  females  and  5%  are  de  facto female-headed 
households’, i.e. those headed by females during the absence of a male head who is ordinarily present. 
The percentage distribution of employment by gender in Kayonza District, shows that the majority of 
females  in  Kayonza  District  are  small-scale  farmer  workers  (78%),  followed  by  wage  farmer  and 
independent non-farmer workers (both at 6%). 5% of females are wage non-farmer workers. Males 
are also involved in small-scale farm work at a lower percentage than females (61%). Males are wage 
non-farm workers and independent non-farmers in greater proportions than females, however (18% 
and 13% respectively).  Consultations with the Kayonza District gender monitoring offer highlighted 
achievements in gender equality in the districts with examples on belonging to producer organizations; 
shared family responsibilities; personal financial management. Female owned producer cooperatives 
were sited that include a coffee processing plant and an irrigated maize and vegetables scheme. It was 
mentioned  that  previously  women  worked  on  the  fields  but  that  currently  both  men  and  women 
participate in organized agriculture. It was also highlighted that the government campaign aimed at 
promoting financial independence between men and women through bank account transfer payments 
for services rendered was very successful and that most women had own bank accounts. It was also 
indicated  that  government  efforts  were  now  focused  on  gender  equity  at  family  level,  educating 
families about shared family responsibility.  
Youth are defined as people between the years of 16 and 30 years.  Apart from the issue of drugs 
mentioned  above,  youth  face  several  challenges  which  preclude  them  from  being  involved  in 
agriculture including:  they do not own land, and therefore do not have access to finance/investment, 
nor can they lease land; agriculture is practised by youth who did not go to school - educated youth 
do  not  want  to work  in  the  fields,  and wait  for  other  jobs;  intellectual  property  is  not  valued  as  a 
contribution in agricultural projects, so youth do not feel there are opportunities in the sector in which 
they can excel.  
69 
6 
Stakeholder Consultations 
6.1 
Background and Rationale 
Stakeholder  consultations  were  carried  in  order  to  obtain  first-hand  information  on  concerns, 
perceptions and opinions on the proposed KIIWP Project. 
Both institutional, local governance and target beneficiary 
stakeholder  views  are  critical  for  confirming  relevance  of 
proposed interventions, for effectiveness and efficiency of 
proposed approaches and for impact and sustainability of 
the  intended  positive  changes.  In  this  regard,  national 
policies,  regulatory  and  procedural 
imperatives  and 
concerns needed to be established upfront and assessed in 
terms  of  alignment  with  IFAD’s  policy  requirements,  and 
mitigation 
significant 
discrepancies  became  apparent.  Beneficiary  perceptions 
and opinions were also sought to confirm that planned interventions were understood and acceptable 
as effective and sustainable solutions to their problems and challenges. 
considered  where 
strategies 
Consultation processes started with stakeholder identification for the KIIWP Project through briefings 
with relevant IFAD and MINAGRI officials including RAB, SPIU staff involved in similar projects. Office 
visits  involving  discussions  and  interviews  were  carried  out  with  officials  of  MINAGRI,  REMA, 
MINIRENA  (Water  Resources  Management  Department),  and  the  Kayonza  District  Mayor  with  the 
heads of respective district service units. Identified potential beneficiary stakeholders were consulted 
at proposed Project sites within the targeted drought prone intervention sectors of Ndego, Kabare, 
Murama,  Kabarondo,  Rwinkwavu,  Mwiri,  Gahini  and  Murundi.  These  consultations  involved  focus 
group discussions, discussions with  individuals, members and leaders of crop and livestock producer 
cooperatives and sector-level opinion leaders44.   
6.2 
Consultation Locations 
Consultations  were  initiated  in  Kigali  with  stakeholder  institutions  for  identification  of  other 
stakeholders but also in their regulatory and lead institution capacities in the cases of MINAGRI (RAB, 
Climate  Change  Mainstreaming  and  SPIU),  Water  Resources  Management  Department  and  REMA. 
Other stakeholder institutions consulted include in Kigali include the Agriculture Technical Assistance 
Facility (Agri-TAF) that is supporting MINAGRI to piloting climate mainstreaming in sector development 
and investment planning. 
Initial discussions were held with the Mayor and the Vice Mayor of Kayonza District at their offices 
together with the various heads of district service delivery units. 
44 The Kayonza District sector-level opinion leaders comprise farmers, entrepreneurs, community development 
associations and interest groups who act as development change agents. 
70 
Beneficiary  focus  group  discussions  were  held  in  the  8  target 
sectors.  In Ndego sector, focus group discussion were held with 
target beneficiaries at the Kibare irrigation site in Insangano cell 
and at the Humure irrigation site in Kiyovu cell that both lie in 
the  Akagera  Level  3  Catchment  of  the  Rwanda’s  hydrological 
system; and at the Byimana irrigation site in Byimana Cell that 
lies  in  the  Kakireke  Level  3  Catachment.  A  focus  group 
discussion  was  also  held  with  opinion  leaders  at  the  Ndego  sector  office,  facilitated  by  the  Sector 
Executive Secretary. The stakeholder consultations team also visited the Ndego Milk Collection Centre 
(MCC) operated  by  a  cooperative  where  it  obtained opinions  of the  MMC management  as well  as 
technical staff.  In all, 212 persons participated in the consultations.  Table 6.1 below summarises the 
consultation locations and the number of people participating at each location. 
Kibare Irrigation Scheme 
In  Kabare  sector  focus  groups  discussion  with  target  beneficiaries  at  Gakoma  irrigation  site  in  the 
Rubumba cell that lies in the Kakireke Level 3 Catchment and with opinion leaders at the Kabare sector 
office. The potential dam site on Gishanda stream within the Gishanda Level 3 Catchment at Cyambare 
village  in  Kabare  sector  and  Mukoyoyo  village  in  Rwinkwavu  sector  within  the  Rugazi  Level  3 
Catchment. 
Gakoma Irrigation Scheme 
In Kabarondo sector, a potential dam site was visited at Rwagikeri in Cyinzovu cell and at Kanyegenyege 
rice scheme within the Gashonyi-Nkungu Level 3 Catchment and a focus group discussion held with 
opinion leaders at the Kabarondo sector office.  
In  Murama  sector,  land  husbandry  site  was  visited  at 
Ngoma in Muko cell within the Rugazi Level 3 Catchment 
and a focus group discussion held with opinion leaders at 
the Murama sector office. 
In  Mwiri  sector, 
focus  group 
a 
discussion  was 
held 
with 
pastoral  farmers 
at  the  Kageyo 
MCC 
the 
in 
intervention site for valley dam rehabilitation and borehole 
development  withing  the  Akagera  Level  3  Catchment.  The 
valley dams and borehole development sites were visited at 
Nyabombe  in  Juru  cell  and  at  Rukore  in  Kahi  cell  within 
Gahini  sector  and  at  Gakoma 
in  Buhabwa  cell  and 
Rwakabanda  in  Ryamanyoni  cell  within  Murundi  cell.  A 
50km-drive rapid appraisal stretching north from Mwiri through Gahini to Murundi sectors along on 
the edges of a complex of wetlands of Migera (World Bank supported rice schemes), Nyamwashama 
Mwiri, Kageyo MCC 
Murama Sector 
71 
wetland of Kageyo with rice schemes and the wetland sof Kizi and Nyamashuri in the livestock land 
use zone. A short meeting was also held with the Executive Secretary of the Murundi sector. 
Table 6.1  Sites Visited for Stakeholder Consultations 
Date 
Sector 
Site 
Site Name 
Village/Cell 
27/08/2018  Kayonza District Mayor and Staff 
28/08/2018  Ndego 
Milk Collection Centre staff 
28/08/2018  Ndego 
Ndego Sector Opinion Leaders 
28/08/2018 
Site 1 
Kibare 
Isangano 
28/08/2018 
Ndego 
Site 2  Humure 
Kiyovu 
29/08/2018 
Site 3 
Byimana 
Byimana 
29/08/2018  Kabare 
Site 1  Gakoma 
Rubumba 
29/08/2018 
Kabare 
Rwinkwavu 
30/08/2018  Kabarondo 
Site 2  Gishanda 
Cyambare 
Mukoyoyo 
Site 1 
Rwakigeri 
Rwakigeri 
Site 2 
Kayeganyege 
Kanyeganyege 
30/08/2018  Murama 
Site 1  Ngoma 
Muko 
30/08/2018  Gahini 
Site 1  Nyabombe 
Site 2 
Rukore 
Juru 
Kahi 
No. of persons 
consulted 
8 
5 
 20 
28 
20 
38 
6 
Site appraisal only 
10 
11 
04/09/2018  Rwinkwavu 
Site 1 
Rwinkwavu 
Muko 
Site appraisal only 
05/09/2018  Murundi 
05/09/2018  Mwiri 
05/09/2018  Kayonza CBD 
Site 1  Gakoma 
Buhabwa 
Site 2 
Rwakabanda 
Ryamanyoni 
Site 1 
Kageyo 
Kageyo 
Livestock farmers meeting 
Source: ESMF Study Consultations, August 2018. 
Total 
29 
37 
212 
Planned Area (ha) 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
1,400 
600 
150 
125 
Farm level ponds 
7 new valley dams; 
15 valley dams for 
rehabilitation; 20 
boreholes; 
Agroforestry (fruit 
trees; coffee) 
6.3 
Issues Discussed during Consultations 
Target  beneficiaries  were  consulted  on  KIIWP  interventions  of  pumped  irrigation,  land  husbandry, 
valley dam rehabilitation and maintenance and ground water exploitation. Beneficiary stakeholders 
were consulted in on their crop priorities in view of the proposed interventions by KIIWP. Opinions and 
perceptions were also sought on the cooperative approach for delivering the interventions as well as 
beneficiary ability and willingness to invest in the necessary inputs including operational requirements 
as  well  as  maintenance  of  infrastructure  and  equipment.  Grievance  resolution  frameworks  and 
practices were also discussed with the target beneficiaries as well as with opinion leaders in separate 
focus group discussions. Stakeholders were asked to share lessons from past experiences that may be 
relevant and beneficial to KIIWP implementation. All issues discussed with KIIWP target beneficiary 
communities trigger SECAP’s FPIC procedures, for which an FPIC Implementation Plan is proposed in 
Annex 5 of this ESMF. 
72 
6.4 
Summary of Outcomes of Consultations 
6.4.1 
Cooperative Approach for Delivery of KIIWP 
Target  beneficiary  stakeholders  and  opinion  leaders  generally  demonstrated  awareness  of,  and 
experience  in,  cooperative  frameworks  and  expressed  support  for  the  plans  to  deliver  KIIWP 
interventions in this modality. Most of the residents of the proposed Kibare pumped irrigation site 
indicated that they had not worked in cooperative arrangements and sought clarifications during the 
focus group discussion. The Kibare residents expressed support after the clarifications were provided 
by the local agronomist and the RAB official that were present at the forum. 
6.4.2 
Target Beneficiary Crop Priorities for KIIWP 
Focus  group  discussions  with  target  beneficiaries  and  opinion  leaders  in  the  proposed  pumped 
irrigation sites at Kibare, Humure and Byimana in the Ndego sector and at Gakoma in Kabare sector 
were  unanimous  in  indicating  maize,  beans  and  soya  as  priority  crops.    In  addition,  rice,  banana, 
sugarcane as well as vegetable crops such as tomato and beetroot were also preferred. 
In the land husbandry support intervention areas coffee was indicated as the highest priority mainly 
because of its resistance to drought.  Other priority crops indicated included pineapple, avocado and 
other  fruit  trees  that  include  mango,  orange,  lemon,  tree-tomato  and  passion  fruit.  Banana  and 
cassava  were  popular  crops  but  the  stakeholders  lamented  the  widespread  problem  of  disease 
infestations that destroy both these crops. 
6.4.3 
Target Beneficiary Willingness to Invest in KIIWP 
Focus group discussions indicated a willingness to invest in the necessary maintenance infrastructure 
for  irrigation  including  pumping  systems,  dams  and  boreholes.  Target  beneficiary  stakeholders 
indicated that they already invest resources and cash in growing crops every season for the required 
inputs, although the crops fail in most seasons due to drought. Willingness to invest more and to seek 
commercial credit with the assurance of irrigation. Some focus group discussions indicated a need for 
capacity development in business skills and financial management. Others also mentioned that they 
should be consulted on how they may (or are able to) invest, since access to cash may not be easy for 
all beneficiaries at any given time.  
6.4.4 
Land Use Competition and Conflicts 
Potential conflicts were flagged in some focus group discussions and discussions with individuals. In 
Kageyo, it was indicated that farmers compete among themselves to irrigate rice and to water cattle 
in  the  dry  season  when  water  availability  is  reduced. 
Stakeholders  indicated  a  need  to  rehabilitate  valley  tanks 
that were silted and to construct more valley tanks as well 
as  boreholes  for  livestock  water  and  human  domestic 
requirements. Similarly, potential for conflict was observed 
in Humure and Kibare where cattle graze and drink on the 
targeted  sites  for  the  proposed  pump  irrigation  schemes. 
Human/wildlife conflict was also reported, especially with 
hippo and baboons.  Hippos were particularly problematic 
at many of the intervention sites (lakes and valley tanks), as 
was also observed by the study team. 
Humure, Ndego Sector 
73 
There was a general feeling of frustration among the stakeholders in regard to the need for assistance 
to  mitigate  the  effects  of  persistent  drought.  At  Humure,  the  community  gave  an  account  of  crop 
failures season after season while they see the neighbouring Bramin farm prospering with bumper 
harvests  as  a  result of  irrigation.  They  expressed  disappointment  that  the GoR  must  often  provide 
them  with  food  relief  purchased  from  neighbouring  Tanzania,  whereas  they  would  be  capable  of 
feeding themselves by irrigating their crops from the same source that Bramin draws its water from. 
The same frustration was expressed by residents of Byimana and Gakoma in reference to the Buffet 
irrigation scheme located within a few kilometres of their fields. 
6.4.5 
Target beneficiary grievance resolution views for KIIWP 
Stakeholders  were  confident  that  conflicts  arising  during  the  development  and  implementation  of 
KIIWP  interventions  would  be  readily  resolved.  Focus  group  discussions  demonstrated  a  good 
understanding  of  conflict  resolution  mechanisms  within  cooperative  rules  as  laid  out  in  corporate 
constitutions  as  well  as  national  laws  and  regulations  on  cooperatives.  They  explained  that  any 
conflicts that develop within a cooperative are resolved by a grievance/conflict resolution committee. 
Complaints are escalated to local governance structures when settlement is not reached within the 
cooperative, starting with sector level and then escalated to district level if still not resolved. Court 
systems  are  available  to  complainants  if  conflicts  remain  unresolved  through  the  resolution 
mechanisms and local governance structures.   
6.5 
Priorities for Interventions 
A key observation from the focus group discussions was that consultations with the beneficiaries and 
other stakeholders need to be undertaken continuously at all stages of Project development, from the 
feasibility to design, and then implementation of subprojects in order that benefits are sustainable. It 
was  also  observed  that  stakeholders  had  expectations  from  the  GoR  for  assistance  with  irrigation 
infrastructure for them to reach the potential demonstrated by neighbouring irrigation schemes. 
Murundi Sector 
74 
7 
Potential Environmental, Social and Climate-Related Impacts 
of KIIWP Interventions and their Mitigation 
7.1 
Benefits of KIIWP 
KIIWP’s  development  objective  is  to  improve  food  security  and  incomes  of  rural  households  on  a 
sustainable  basis.  The  proposed  interventions  to  achieve  this  objective  are:  development  of  water 
infrastructure; promotion of climate smart agriculture practices; building capacity for farmers to access 
markets  for  agricultural  inputs,  finance  and  outputs;  and  promoting  sustainable  land  and  water 
management  practices.  These  interventions  and  associated  activities  are  expected  to  result  in  a 
number of quantifiable benefits including:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
Crop diversification and increased value of production in hillside areas;  
Increased value of agricultural production in marshlands;  
Reduced post-harvest losses and increased sales in output markets;  
Increased value of livestock production;  
Improved access to water for livestock and for humans.  
KIIWP will target 50,000 rural households, directly and indirectly.  Most of KIIWP’s target group will 
comprise  men  and  women  farmers  and  livestock  keepers,  as  well  as  men,  women,  youth  and  the 
physically challenged in wage labour and off-farm activities along the target value chains.   Overall, it 
is expected that women will account for at least 50% of total beneficiaries.  Some 28,000 households 
are expected to benefit from the Project in various ways:  over 50 farmer cooperatives growing rice, 
maize and beans or horticulture in the Project area will be supported through Farming as a Business 
(FaaB) skills, cooperative strengthening, and backward/forward linkages.  Households in the Project’s 
target  area  will  directly  benefit  from  terracing  and  agro-forestry;  pumped  irrigation  schemes; 
marshland irrigation interventions; water harvesting infrastructure and the provision of livestock water 
sources.  Women, youth and the physically challenged will be encouraged to participate as smallholder 
farmers or in other activities in and around value chains.  Men and women from poorer households 
will be engaged as labourers in the infrastructure construction activities.  
Indirectly, catchment rehabilitation and protection interventions in the watershed areas will contribute 
to improved water retention and improved soil fertility, as a result of which another 22,000 households 
farming in the watersheds are expected to gain from increased agricultural productivity.   
7.2 
Potential Environmental, Social and Climate-Related Consequences 
The  Project  components  have  been  described  in  detail  earlier  in  this  report  (Section  2.3).    All  the 
Project components will, to some extent, have implications on environmental, social and/or climate-
related  aspects.    In  this  regard,  the  main  risks  apply  to  Component  1  (Strengthening  Resilience  to 
Droughts) which involves with the construction of irrigation infrastructure, landscaping and associated 
activities for soil and water conservation in the catchment areas and the provision of water to livestock.  
In addition, after the aforementioned infrastructure is in place, there will be environmental, social and 
climate-related risks and impacts from the resulting agricultural activities. Component 2 (Support to 
Farm Business Development) focusses on training and application of climate smart agriculture, as well 
as  good  nutrition  practices,  and  as  such  will  have  minimal  risks,  but  is  expected  to  realise  positive 
socio-economic outcomes.  While KIIWP is expected to support the development of values chains for 
both provision of staple food and income generation, the types of value chain activities have not been 
identified as yet. Once these have been determined, they will have to be screened, and ESIAs or ESMPs 
75 
prepared  as  appropriate,  together  other  safeguards  documents  where  required.    Component  3 
(Institutional  Development  and  Project  Coordination) 
is  not  expected  to  have  any  direct 
environmental, social or climate-related risks, but management and maintenance are key aspects in 
ensuring environmental and social sustainability, as well as climate resilience.  Thus, the description of 
risks and impacts in this chapter focuses mainly on Component 1, while institutional capacity building 
to ensure Project sustainability is discussed in Chapter 11. 
Irrigation Infrastructure 
At this stage, the actual infrastructure for the proposed schemes has not been confirmed.  But it is 
likely that the irrigation schemes will have one or more of the following elements:   
• 
Irrigation infrastructure: Diversion weirs/intakes; headworks; dams, dam walls/embankments; 
conveyance  canals,  secondary,  tertiary  and  field  canals;  pumps  and  pump  houses;  water 
storage facilities; distribution pipes; and drainage lines; 
•  Ancillary facilities: depending on the scheme size, this could include workshops, sheds, offices 
and fuel storage; 
•  Access  infrastructure:  access  roads,  bridges  and  footpaths.    However,  these  will  not  be 
implemented through KIIWP.  
Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection 
Interventions  for  catchment  rehabilitation  and  protection  essentially  focus  on  soil  and  water 
conservation activities, as follows: 
•  Soil conservation:  contour bunds, terraces, and biological measures (planting of appropriate 
plant materials such as trees, including fruit trees, and different types of grasses); production 
techniques such as conservation agriculture for rainfed cropping, and fodder production and 
conservation, possibly using exotic species; 
•  Water  conservation:    water  harvesting  using  contour  bunds  /  benches,  micro-catchments; 
water storage facilities, such as valley tanks. 
Provision of Water for Livestock and Domestic Use 
Interventions for the provision of water for livestock and domestic use will take place in the driest parts 
of the Project area, where livestock keeping is predominant.  These will be: 
•  New valley tanks: construction of 7 small valley tanks, which are effectively depressions where 
rainwater runoff collects. Here water troughs will be provided for livestock.  
•  Rehabilitation of existing valley tanks:  rehabilitation activities, such as fixing the tank walls, 
fencing the tanks, provision of troughs for watering livestock, controlling access to the tanks 
to prevent erosion and degradation around the tank sites. 
•  Boreholes: provided hydrogeological studies confirm viable groundwater sources,  about  20 
boreholes  will  be  drilled  to  supply  both  domestic  water  for  livestock  and  communities; 
construction of standpipes, and livestock watering troughs.  
7.3 
Anticipated Adverse Environmental and Social Impacts of KIIWP 
7.3.1 
Irrigation 
Typical environmental and social impacts that may be expected from the construction of the proposed 
irrigation schemes and their operation – or conditions which could affect the schemes - are tabulated 
76 
in Table 7.1 below, together with some typical measures for mitigation.  The most significant adverse 
ones are: 
•  Reduction in downstream flow as a result of diversion of water, which could compromise water 
availability downstream to satisfy human and livestock demand, and affect aquatic habitats 
and biodiversity (ie. environmental flow); 
Inundation of the river upstream, caused by damming or access roads, which could result in 
physical and economic displacement, hinder access to grazing and water sources for livestock, 
and destroy vegetation and natural habitats; 
• 
•  Soil erosion caused by scheme excavation works (including access/scheme roads, dams) and 
poorly managed upper catchment areas, leading to loss of cultivable land and/or siltation of 
canals; 
•  Soil degradation and salinization due to improper application of agrochemicals, overwatering 
and poor drainage; 
•  Reduction in water  quality due  to application of agrochemicals or oil spills, affecting water 
potability for domestic and livestock use downstream, as well as causing poisoning of aquatic 
fauna; 
Loss  of  biodiversity  and  ecological  imbalances  caused  by:  clearing  land  for  agriculture, 
installing irrigation infrastructure (eg. intakes in wetlands or lakes), poaching as a result of the 
schemes’ proximity to the Akagera National Park, and from pesticides poisoning of non-target 
species, particularly bees and other beneficial insects; 
• 
•  Denied or hindered access for livestock to water sources and/or pasture; 
•  Resistance to pesticides and pest resurgence due to poor application of pesticides; 
•  Temporary and permanent land take for construction sites and irrigation infrastructure leading 
to loss of land and assets; 
•  Community health and safety  risks  from:  construction activities;  storage,  handling, use and 
disposal  of  agrochemicals;  failure  of  dam  structures;  increase  prevalence  of  water-borne 
diseases such as malaria; 
•  Human/wildlife conflict as a result of wildlife raiding farms and destroying crops; 
•  Reduction  in  water  availability  due  to  climatic  events,  such  as  prolonged  dry  seasons  and 
subsequent drought, or due to diversion of water upstream for water supplies or irrigation 
subprojects;  
•  Flooding due to climatic events resulting in loss of soil and crop damage. 
Well-designed  schemes,  diligent  supervision  during  construction  and  proper  management  during 
operation  will  ensure  that  many  of  these  adverse  impacts  are  avoided  or  substantially  mitigated.  
KIIWP focusses on climate resilience as climate-related impacts are unpredictable in terms of type of 
impact,  timing  and  significance,  and  by  incorporating  climate  resilient  approaches  into  scheme 
designs, it is anticipated that the impact of these event(s) will be diminished.  
In  addition,  the  Programme  Implementation  Manual  (PIM)  will  provide  guidance  for  incorporating 
environmental mitigation measures  at  the various stages  of the  subprojects,  as well as contractual 
clauses  that  will  ensure  necessary  mitigation  measures  are  included  in  scheme  design  and  during 
construction.  
77 
Table 7.1  Typical Environmental and Social Impacts of Irrigation and their Mitigation 
Aspects/Causes of Impact 
Environmental/ Social/Climate Impact 
Mitigation Measures 
ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES 
Over-abstraction of water from 
sources (rivers, lakes, groundwater) 
Unavailability or reduction of water for 
downstream use in the case of river 
source, particularly in the dry season. 
Changes in hydrological regime of micro-
catchment 
-  Install water abstraction monitoring 
infrastructure (gauges) 
-  Install infrastructure to measure flow levels in 
rivers 
-  Train IWUOs in keeping monitoring records for 
abstraction and river flow, and to manage use 
of irrigation water requirements, particularly 
during dry seasons.  
-  Determine and maintain environmental flow 
requirements for rivers taking into account 
human, livestock and ecological needs. 
Threats to aquatic and terrestrial 
biodiversity in lake systems and rivers, 
particularly in the dry seasons 
-  Assess impacts of over-abstraction on 
biodiversity and ecosystem services in lakes 
and rivers, and propose necessary mitigation 
-  Maintain environmental flow. 
Aquifer depletion. 
-  Install water abstraction monitoring gauges 
-  Install infrastructure to measure discharge 
rates for groundwater sources (boreholes, 
wells, springs) 
-  Train IWUOs in keeping monitoring records for 
abstraction, and to manage use of irrigation 
water requirements, particularly during dry 
seasons.  
-  Train IWUOs to monitor abstraction so as to 
ensure compliance with specified abstraction 
rates through.   
Reduced availability of water for other 
planned developments. 
Unavailability of water for irrigation, 
particularly in the dry season 
-  Implement catchment rehabilitation/ 
protection interventions under KIIWP 
Unavailability or reduction of water 
downstream  
Loss of biodiversity due to inundation 
upstream 
-  Determine and maintain environmental flow 
requirements for rivers taking into account 
human, livestock and ecological needs. 
-  Assess impacts of inundation on biodiversity 
and ecosystem services, and propose 
necessary mitigation 
Deterioration of water quality 
-  Minimise/prevent soil erosion by controlling 
earthworks, installing and maintaining 
drainage structures and erosion control 
measure; use zero-till/reduce till methods of 
land preparation. 
-  Establish 50 m buffer zone along river bank 
and 20 m buffer zone around dam sites, in 
accordance with REMA regulations;  
-  Existing riparian vegetation should be 
maintained (not cleared) 
-  Careful supervision of clearing activities so 
that only areas required for infrastructure and 
agricultural infrastructure are cleared.  
78 
Degradation of catchment areas due 
to poor agricultural practices, 
overgrazing 
Damming of rivers 
Soil erosion due to excavation and 
clearing activities for roads, canals, 
workshops.  
Removal of vegetation (including 
riparian vegetation) for clearing land 
Pollution of water due to foulwater 
leaching into water sources (from pit 
latrines provided on schemes) 
Pollution due to leaching, seepage or 
transmission of agrochemicals 
through the soil into water sources 
Aspects/Causes of Impact 
Environmental/ Social/Climate Impact 
Mitigation Measures 
-  Drains from the fields should lead to a 
collection pond where the water can be tested 
and treated before discharge to a river 
-  Install proper sanitation facilities which 
include a form of treatment (eg.2-chamber 
latrines). 
-  Latrine location and design should take into 
consideration distance from water sources, 
soil types, and estimated usage. 
-  Minimise use of agrochemicals through 
adopting conservation agriculture techniques, 
explore organic/natural fertilizers, 
agrochemicals 
-  Manual removal of weeds 
-  If water is available, keep dust down by 
watering exposed/ worked surfaces 
-  If possible, schedule earthworks such that 
they avoid the height of the dry seasons. 
-  Controlling the speed of construction vehicles 
-  Where fuel is stored in bulk, the fuel tank 
should be contained in a bund of 110% tank 
capacity 
-  Where fuel drums are used these should be 
stored on sump pallets. 
-  Establish procedures for fuel delivery; 
decanting/draining; use, storage; spill 
response; disposal of waste oil; handling of oil 
products. 
-  Minimise need for having fuel oil on site – 
explore options for solar powered pumps or 
connect to national grid. 
-  Provide PPE to personnel working in areas 
exposed to excessive noise levels 
-  Dispose of construction waste and solid waste 
as per REMA’s Solid Waste Guidelines 
-  Sensitise farmers on waste management 
practices 
-  Recycle, reuse, recover and reduce waste 
Excavation and clearing activities 
during construction of dams, roads, 
canals, workshops, etc 
Speeding construction vehicles 
Air pollution – dust 
Oil spills from storing, handling and 
disposal of fuel, oils and lubricants 
Oil pollution  
Excessive noise levels 
Construction traffic, construction 
works. 
Pump houses where water from the 
river is being pumped to the 
schemes. 
Generation of waste during 
construction, including debris and 
packaging. 
Proliferation of pests and vermin (snakes, 
rats, mosquitoes) posing health risks to 
communities 
Waste generated during operation, 
eg. food waste, packaging, scrap 
metal, etc. 
Over-watering of fields 
Water logging, poor drainage, salinization 
-  Provide drainage for access roads 
-  Fields should have slight gradients so as to 
allow drainage of excess water 
-  Maintain drainage canals and other drainage 
structures 
79 
Aspects/Causes of Impact 
Environmental/ Social/Climate Impact 
Mitigation Measures 
Soil erosion 
-  Control earthworks 
Excavation and clearing activities, 
including removal of vegetation 
during construction. 
Clearing for planting new crops. 
Erosion caused by rain, runoff and 
wind. 
Excavation and clearing activities 
along the edge of riverbanks 
Removal of riparian vegetation 
during clearing 
Poor cultivation practices, eg. tilling, 
excessive use of chemical inputs, 
mono-cropping for long periods of 
time 
Riverbank erosion 
Soil degradation 
Poor application of, and/or excessive 
use of agrochemical inputs 
Chemical pollution of soils, groundwater 
and surface water 
Resistance to pesticides 
Loss of biodiversity, ecological imbalances, 
caused by poisoning of non-target species, 
particularly bees and other beneficial 
insects 
Pest resurgence 
Clearing of vegetation during scheme 
construction, including dam 
construction, and for cultivation of 
crops 
Soil erosion 
Loss of biodiversity 
80 
-  Install and maintain drainage structures to 
regulate stormwater and runoff/run on 
-  Install and maintain erosion control measures 
-  Use zero-till/reduce till methods for land 
preparation 
-  Establish 50 m buffer zone along river bank in 
accordance with REMA regulations; existing 
riparian vegetation should be maintained (not 
cleared) 
-  Use best practices for growing crops 
recommended conservation agriculture 
techniques, such as zero tillage or reduced 
tillage, 
-  Intercropping to strengthen soil structure; 
-  Green fertilization and green harvesting to 
cover soil with crop residue. 
-  Implement Integrated Soil Conservation and 
Nutrient Management systems 
-  Minimise use of agrochemicals through 
adopting conservation agriculture techniques, 
select natural organic alternatives 
-  Careful supervision of application of 
agrochemicals 
-  Use agrochemicals approved by MOA, WHO 
and FAO 
-  Train farmers in in proper use, handling, 
storage, and disposal of agrochemicals. 
-  Ensure chemical containers are disposed of as 
hazardous waste 
-  Keep records of chemicals used, application 
amounts. 
-  Set up an Agrochemical Management system 
and draw up a Pest Management Plan 
-  Careful supervision of clearing activities so 
that only areas required for infrastructure and 
agricultural infrastructure are cleared. 
-  Assess impacts of land inundated by dams on 
vegetation 
-  Conserve/maintain woodlands or forest areas 
within schemes to preserve biodiversity 
Aspects/Causes of Impact 
Environmental/ Social/Climate Impact 
Mitigation Measures 
Installing scheme intakes in wetlands 
or lakes 
Loss of biodiversity and ecosystem 
services 
Conversion of wetlands for 
marshland irrigation 
Loss of biodiversity and ecosystem 
services 
Pollution of river water due leaching 
of agrochemicals into river 
Threat to aquatic ecology, including bio-
magnification of toxins in tissues of 
aquatic fauna, and/or species die off 
Proximity of schemes to national 
park, woodlands/forests - leading to 
illegal felling of trees for charcoal 
production 
Loss of biodiversity and ecosystem 
services 
-  Assess impacts of locating intake works in 
wetlands or lakes on biodiversity and 
ecosystem services, and propose necessary 
mitigation 
-  Assess impacts of draining wetlands on 
biodiversity and ecosystem services, and 
propose necessary mitigation 
-  Careful application of agrochemicals – develop 
agrochemical management plan 
-  Monitor water quality in rivers, downstream 
of diversion weirs and abstraction points. 
-  Monitor aquatic ecology periodically for signs 
of poisoning 
-  Establish community fuelwood plantations 
-  Conserve/maintain existing forest stands to 
preserve biodiversity 
-  Provide buffer zone between scheme and 
national park, wetlands, woodland/ forest 
based on discussions with ANP and on REMA 
regulations, applying precautionary principle 
for maximum buffer width for ANP and 
wetlands 
Sourcing of construction materials, 
excavation of borrow pits, quarries, 
sand  
Destruction of environment, changes in 
landscape and land use. 
-  Assess environmental impacts due to 
materials for construction 
-  Restoration/ rehabilitation of land disturbed 
for purposes of acquiring materials. Requires 
proper management of quarries and borrow 
pits, and sand mining.  
-  In some cases, communities may request that 
quarries or borrow pits are left open to serve 
as water pans.  In these cases, the excavated 
areas should be landscaped in order to 
facilitate safe access to the water pans. 
-  Solid and liquid waste management plans to 
be developed for construction and operation 
phases. 
-  Provide proper sanitation facilities to 
workforce 
Setting up Workman’s / Contractor’s 
camp 
Generation of solid and liquid waste 
SOCIAL/SOCIO-ECONOMIC ISSUES 
Grazing land being taken for 
agriculture, consequently less land 
available and large numbers of 
livestock.  
Access to water and pasture for 
livestock blocked (eg.by cultivated 
fields, canals, or dams). 
Livestock drinking water from canals 
damaging structures 
Land use conflicts arising between 
livestock keepers and farmers 
-  Develop land use plans that provide land for 
livestock grazing and watering points 
-  Allow livestock access routes to water sources 
and grazing pastures.    
-  Alternatively provide watering points for 
livestock located along on existing livestock 
routes to water and pasture, and through 
consultations with the communities  
-  Sensitise communities on preventing livestock 
from drinking from canals and damaging 
irrigation infrastructure 
81 
Aspects/Causes of Impact 
Environmental/ Social/Climate Impact 
Mitigation Measures 
Abstraction upstream of river source 
resulting in insufficient flow left in 
rivers downstream 
In-migration due to potential job 
opportunities, and spin off 
employment activities. 
-  Establish local monitoring system to reduce 
conflicts and manage them at early stage 
Conflicts between upstream and 
downstream farmers  
-  Install water abstraction monitoring 
infrastructure (gauges) 
-  Install infrastructure to measure flow levels in 
the river. 
-  Determine and maintain environmental flow 
requirements taking into account human, 
livestock and ecological needs. 
-  Train IWUOs in keeping monitoring records for 
abstraction and river flow, and manage use of 
irrigation water requirements during dry 
seasons 
Growth of settlements due to induced in-
migration 
-  Plan for population increase and consequent 
demand on public utilities 
-  Dialogue between local leadership, farmers 
and immigrants 
-  Initiate educational campaigns for HIV/AIDS 
awareness, drug abuse prevention, security, 
etc 
-  Give employment preference to members of 
local communities  
Insecurity concerns among host 
communities 
-  Dialogue between local leadership, farmers 
and immigrants 
-  Give employment preference to members of 
local communities 
Setting up Workman’s / Contractor’s 
camp 
Pressure on water sources, fuelwood 
/energy sources and other public services. 
-  Consult cell authorities to identify camp 
location. 
Competition for local food 
Risks of increased rates of STIs, including 
HIV/AIDS 
Permanent acquisition of land for 
scheme infrastructure including 
dams, canals, roads 
Loss of land, (including agricultural land), 
structures, trees and crops 
82 
-  Develop clear specifications for camps with 
regard to sanitation facilities, accommodation, 
provision of water, health and safety, etc. 
-  Contractor to supply workforce with food 
ensuring that local food supplies are not 
compromised in times of food shortages. 
-  Contractor to conduct HIV/AIDS prevention 
and awareness campaign targeting his 
workforce as well as local communities. 
-  Avoid physical or economic displacement if 
possible, or minimise as much as possible by 
changing siting of infrastructure 
-  Develop land use plans to identify location of 
infrastructure and affected persons. 
-  Verify identity of project affected people, 
particularly vulnerable people 
-  Prepare RAP 
-  Implement RAP. 
-  Where land is available within the cell, land 
for land to be given.  Otherwise compensation 
Aspects/Causes of Impact 
Environmental/ Social/Climate Impact 
Mitigation Measures 
Temporary acquisition of land for 
construction camps 
Loss of land, (including agricultural land), 
structures, trees and crops 
Insufficient flow left in rivers 
downstream of schemes and dams 
Pollution of river water due leaching 
of agrochemicals into river 
Threat to fisheries:  loss of aquatic 
habitats, bio-magnification of toxins in 
tissues of aquatic fauna, and/or species 
die off 
to be paid for loss of crop production, in 
accordance with the national laws. 
-  Livelihood restoration activities to be 
implemented for severely affected PAPs 
-  Compensation to be paid for all property on 
land to temporarily acquired for scheme 
works, including road construction and dam 
construction  
-  Restoration/ rehabilitation of land acquired 
temporarily for construction purpose 
-  Establish and maintain environmental flows 
-  Careful application of agrochemicals, guided 
by an agrochemical management plan 
-  Establish aquatic ecological baseline 
-  Monitor water quality in rivers, downstream 
of diversion weirs and abstraction points. 
Cash crops grown in preference to 
food crops – no provision made for 
growing food crops on schemes. 
Poor application and handling of 
agrochemicals resulting in farmers 
touching, inhaling or ingesting toxic 
chemicals 
Construction activities posing danger 
to site personnel (eg. working at 
heights, lifting, handling machinery, 
etc) 
Food insecurity 
-  Promote production of food crops in parallel 
Health effects: respiratory, dermatological 
or gastric ailments, poisoning. 
with cash crops 
-  Provide support to farmers to improve food 
crop production 
-  Introduce cash savings from crop sales for 
purchasing food especially during times of 
food shortages  
-  Develop agrochemical management plan 
describing handling, storage, use and disposal 
of all agrochemicals used on the schemes. 
-  Train farmers in the handling, storage, 
application and disposal of all agrochemicals. 
Occupational health and safety risks 
-  Contractor to ensure compliance with national 
OHS requirements and best practice 
-  Site personnel to be properly trained in 
relevant OHS requirements to ensure their 
safety 
-  Provide appropriate PPE to all construction 
workers and enforce use 
-  Contractor and his labour force to be 
sensitised in regard to community health and 
safety, including safe driving, signage and 
cordoning off working areas. 
-  Contractor to conduct sensitisation of 
communities in regard to hazards from 
construction activities.  
-  Conduct awareness campaigns on prevention 
and cure of waterborne diseases 
-  Plant mosquito repelling plant species such as 
Artemisia, Neem and Geranium, around dams 
and schemes.  Communities should also be 
encouraged to grow these species around 
their homes.  
Construction activities eg. excavation, 
heavy vehicle movement) posing 
danger to neighbouring communities 
Health and safety risks (including 
accidents) to community as well as labour 
force  
Presence of a large permanent water 
body (dam) 
Community health and safety risks eg. 
waterborne diseases such as malaria; 
incidences of drowning 
83 
Aspects/Causes of Impact 
Environmental/ Social/Climate Impact 
Mitigation Measures 
Excavation of borrow pits and 
quarries, in which may water 
accumulate  
Community health and safety risks eg. 
waterborne diseases, danger of 
children/livestock falling into borrow 
pits/quarries 
-  Erect warning signs at possible entry/access 
points to dam 
-  Cordon off all borrow pits/quarries to prevent 
children/livestock falling in 
-  Materials sites should be excavated with 
specified entry and egress routes 
-  Borrow pits and quarries should be excavated 
so that water drains out of them 
-  Conduct awareness campaigns on prevention 
and cure of waterborne diseases 
-  Plant mosquito repelling plant species such as 
Artemisia, Neem and Geranium, around dams 
and schemes.  Communities should also be 
encouraged to grow these species around 
their homes.  
Community health and safety risks – loss 
of life, damage to property 
-  Ensure sound dam design, taking into account 
climatic, geological/seismic aspects. 
Increase in the prevalence of HIV/AIDS 
and other STIs 
Children dropping out of school as 
employment is more attractive than 
school or because their families need the 
money 
Construction traffic, excavation 
activities, immigrant labour with 
surplus cash. 
Disturbance to the public, disruption of 
livelihoods and routines, dust emissions, 
nuisance 
Failure of dam structures due to poor 
design and/or construction, excessive 
quantities of water stored behind 
them as a result of extreme rainfall 
events, or seismic movement 
Transient and immigrant labour for 
construction and spin off 
employment opportunities. 
Increased incomes in local 
communities leading to promiscuity. 
Children working on the schemes or 
associated spin off activities - for 
money (and in violation of national 
labour laws). 
Construction traffic, and during 
operation tractors or carts for 
collection. 
More vehicular traffic due to 
improved roads/better access in the 
Project area. 
Proximity of schemes to national 
parks, or wildlife habitats (including 
wetlands) 
Human-wildlife conflicts, including crop 
raiding 
84 
-  Ensure dam maintenance – checking 
structures, desilting, etc 
-  Prepare dam break analysis and emergency 
response plan 
-  Carry out situational analysis of HIV/AIDS in 
Project area 
-  Workplace HIV/AIDS prevention and 
awareness programme 
-  Sensitise parents 
-  If possible, introduce / strengthen provision of 
food in schools through KIIWP. 
-  IWUOs should develop a labour policy 
prohibiting child labour 
-  Sensitisation / awareness raising among 
communities on Project details, timing etc. 
-  Diligence on the part of contractor/ 
construction workers to minimise disturbance 
to communities  
-  Construct diversions road to reduce 
inconvenience to road users 
-  Improve footpaths along construction traffic 
routes so that pedestrians need not use the 
roads 
-  Provide buffer zone between scheme and 
national park, wetlands, woodland/ forest 
based on discussions with ANP and on REMA 
regulations, applying precautionary principle 
for maximum buffer width for ANP and 
wetlands 
Increased number of road accidents 
causing injury or loss of live 
-  Prepare and implement road safety 
programme 
Aspects/Causes of Impact 
Environmental/ Social/Climate Impact 
Mitigation Measures 
-  Where possible, fence off schemes from 
wildlife habitats 
Poaching 
-  Raise awareness raising among scheme 
Disturbance of graves within scheme 
areas. 
Personal / emotional stress to relatives of 
the deceased if graves are to be relocated 
communities. 
-  IWUOs to assist in monitoring poaching 
-  As far as possible avoid disturbing graves. 
-  Identification and relocation of graves as per 
local customs and national laws 
Destruction of, or damage to, 
physical cultural resources near or 
within scheme areas 
Clearing of, or inundation of, 
vegetation/woodlands and forest 
stands, resulting in destruction/loss 
of traditional plants, trees. 
Loss of cultural heritage or item of 
traditional value 
-  As far as possible avoid disturbing physical 
cultural resources 
-  Develop a procedure to manage “chance 
finds” of cultural and traditional significance.  
Loss of indigenous knowledge and cultural 
heritage 
-  Develop a procedure to manage culturally / 
traditionally important plants.  
CLIMATE-RELATED ISSUES 
Climate change resulting in reduced 
rainfall. 
Unavailability of water for irrigation and 
downstream use, particularly in the dry 
season 
Excessive rain, floods 
Water logging, poor drainage, eventually 
causing salinization 
-  Identify and preserve traditional plants and 
trees having cultural/traditional value  
-  Allocate special areas within the catchment 
conservation areas to grow and preserve 
indigenous tree/plant species of cultural value 
-  If feasible, design and install off river storage 
facilities to capture spate water. 
-  Design and install water harvesting techniques 
to capture run off and run on. 
-  Train IWUOs to manage use of irrigation water 
requirements during dry seasons. 
-  Implement catchment rehabilitation/ 
protection interventions as proposed under 
KIIWP 
-  Provide drainage for access roads 
-  Fields should have slight gradients so as to 
allow drainage of excess water 
-  Maintain drainage canals and other drainage 
structures to regulate stormwater and runoff 
Soil erosion 
-  Control earthworks during construction. 
-  Use zero-till/reduce till methods for land 
preparation  
-  Install and maintain drainage structures to 
regulate stormwater and runoff/run on 
-  Install and maintain erosion control measures 
-  IWUOs to establish early warning systems 
-  Develop alternative livelihood means through 
safety nets 
Damage to crops, and therefore loss of 
income 
85 
Aspects/Causes of Impact 
Environmental/ Social/Climate Impact 
Mitigation Measures 
Extreme climatic events such as 
excessive rain or prolonged drought 
Pestilence 
Clearing of vegetation for land 
preparation for cultivation, and other 
scheme infrastructure (including 
canals, roads, market sheds) 
Tilling land releases carbon stored in 
soil. 
Excessive use of fertilizers where 
unabsorbed ammonia and nitrates 
may subsequently be released into 
the air. 
Clearing of vegetation during scheme 
construction and for cultivation of 
crops 
GHG emissions 
Carbon releases 
-  IWUOs to establish early warning systems 
-  Develop alternative livelihood means through 
safety nets 
- Adopt zero tillage so carbon is stored in soils, 
and less carbon released to the air 
- Adopt best practices for soil management 
(aeration, careful application of inputs) to 
minimise emissions of ammonia and nitrates. 
-  Green crop production including adopting 
conservation agriculture techniques 
-  Woodlot afforestation  
-  Implement a re-afforestation programme 
7.3.2 
Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection 
Table  7.2  presents  typical  impacts  resulting  from  interventions  for  catchment  rehabilitation  and 
protection.   Although catchment rehabilitation and protection are intended to improve environmental 
conditions in catchment areas, some interventions could have adverse impacts.  The most significant 
ones relate to: 
•  Denied or hindered access to natural resources or grazing areas; 
•  Failure of structures due to poor design and/or construction, mining; 
•  Use of exotic species for slope protection. 
•  Soil erosion caused by excavation works; 
• 
• 
•  Destruction of physical cultural resources due to land take. 
•  Climatic events resulting in soil erosion, failure of structures; 
• 
Loss of biodiversity due to clearing of vegetation; 
Loss of land, crops or assets due to land take for catchment protection sites; 
Impacts on community health and safety from possible failure of structures.  
Table 7.2  Typical Impacts from Catchment Rehabilitation and Protection Interventions 
Aspects/Causes of Impact 
Environmental / Social Impact 
 Mitigation Measures 
ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES 
Failure of structures due to poor 
design and/or construction (eg. check 
dams, catchwater drains). 
Failure of structures due to mining of 
terraces for minerals 
Soil erosion, gully formation 
-  Ensure sound design of all structures, 
considering soil susceptibility to erosion 
-  Ensure structures are continuously and 
routinely maintenance – checking structures 
soundness (erosion around edges), desilting, 
etc 
-  Sensitise communities on the importance of 
maintaining and need for protecting 
structures 
86 
Aspects/Causes of Impact 
Environmental / Social Impact 
 Mitigation Measures 
Soil erosion due to clearing activities 
before replanting for conservation. 
Erosion caused by rain, runoff and 
wind. 
Deterioration of water quality 
-  Minimise/prevent soil erosion by controlling 
earthworks, installing and maintaining 
drainage structures and erosion control 
measures 
Clearing activities before replanting 
Loss of native/endemic species 
-  Identify and preserve endemic plants and 
trees  
-  Allocate special areas within catchment 
conservation areas to grow and preserve 
native/endemic tree and plant species  
Spread of invasive species 
-  Use only exotic species that are already 
Use of exotic plant species in 
catchment rehabilitation/protection 
and soil conservation activities 
commonly found and used in the Project area, 
and approved by district environmental 
authority 
-  Manage the growth of exotic species so that 
they do not spread beyond the desired area 
and do not threaten native/endemic species 
-  Avoid use of genetically modified forage crops 
-  Develop land use plans that demarcates land 
for livestock grazing and land for agriculture 
and catchment protection 
-  Grow fodder as part of catchment 
rehabilitation and protection activities which 
can be sold or given to the livestock owners 
-  Make provision for livestock access routes to 
other grazing areas.    
-  LWUOs to establish local monitoring system to 
pre-empt and reduce conflicts and manage 
them at the earliest stages 
-  Avoid physical or economic displacement if 
possible, or minimise as much as possible by 
changing siting of proposed catchment 
protection area 
-  Develop land use plans to identify location of 
catchment areas and affected persons within 
these areas. 
-  Verify identity of project affected people, 
particularly vulnerable people 
-  Prepare RAP 
-  Implement RAP. 
-  Where land is available within the cell, land 
for land to be given.  Otherwise compensation 
to be paid for loss of crop production, in 
accordance with the national laws. 
-  Implement livelihood restoration activities for 
severely affected PAPs 
-  Ensure sound design of all structures, taking 
into account soil susceptibility to erosion 
SOCIAL/SOCIO-ECONOMIC ISSUES 
Grazing land being taken for 
catchment protection activities 
Land use conflicts arising between 
livestock keepers and farmers 
Permanent acquisition of land for 
catchment rehabilitation and 
protection 
Loss of land, (including agricultural land), 
structures, trees and crops 
Failure of structures due to poor 
design and/or construction 
Community health and safety risks 
87 
Aspects/Causes of Impact 
Environmental / Social Impact 
 Mitigation Measures 
Disturbance of graves within 
catchment protection areas 
Personal / emotional stress to relatives of 
the deceased if graves are to be relocated 
-  Ensure structures are continuously and 
routinely maintained – checking structures for 
soundness (cracks, erosion around edges), 
desilting, etc 
-  As far as possible avoid disturbing graves. 
-  Identification and relocation of graves as per 
local customs and national laws 
Destruction of, or damage to, 
physical cultural resources near or 
within areas where catchment 
rehabilitation and protection 
activities take place 
Destruction/loss of plants or trees of 
cultural or traditional significance 
Loss of cultural heritage or item of 
traditional value 
-  As far as possible avoid disturbing physical 
cultural resources 
-  Develop a procedure to manage “chance 
finds” of cultural and traditional significance.  
Loss of indigenous knowledge and cultural 
heritage 
-  Develop a procedure to manage culturally / 
traditionally important plants.  
CLIMATE-RELATED ISSUES 
Failure of structures due to excessive 
rain 
Soil erosion, gully formation, downstream 
flooding 
-  Identify and preserve traditional plants and 
trees having cultural/traditional value  
-  Allocate special areas within the catchment 
conservation areas to grow and preserve 
indigenous tree/plant species of cultural value 
-  Ensure sound design of all structures which 
must consider resilience to severe climatic 
events  
-  Ensure structures are continuously and 
routinely maintenance – checking structures 
soundness (cracks, erosion around edges), 
desilting, etc 
-  Sensitise communities on the importance of 
maintaining and need for protecting 
structures 
Prolonged dry season or drought 
Poor survival rate of saplings 
-  Establish nurseries to replace dead trees 
7.3.3 
Provision of Water for Livestock and Domestic Use 
Typical impacts resulting from construction and rehabilitation of valley tanks, and from the drilling of 
boreholes are summarised in Table 7.3 below.  The most significant adverse impacts are likely to be: 
•  Soil erosion caused by excavation works  and concentration of livestock around valley tanks 
and boreholes; 
•  Poorly managed upper catchment area leading to siltation of valley tanks; 
• 
Loss of biodiversity due to flooding of land for valley tanks; 
• 
Loss of land, crops or assets due to land inundated by new valley tanks; 
•  Destruction of physical cultural resources due to land take for valley tanks. 
• 
•  Reduction in water availability in tanks and lowering of aquifer levels due to climatic events, 
Impacts on groundwater aquifers from over-abstraction of water at boreholes; 
such as prolonged dry seasons;  
•  Flooding  due  to  climatic  events  resulting  in  soil  erosion,  siltation  of  tanks,  overflowing  or 
• 
failure of tank structure, or damage to borehole infrastructure; 
Impacts on community health and safety from construction activities, or as a result of tank 
structure failure; 
88 
•  Human/wildlife conflict due to hippos inhabiting valley dams.  
Table 7.3  Typical Impacts from Interventions to Provide Water for Livestock and Domestic Use 
Aspects/Causes of Impact 
Environmental / Social Impact 
Possible Mitigation Measures 
ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES 
Excavation and clearing activities, 
including removal of vegetation for 
construction of new valley tanks and 
rehabilitation of existing ones. 
Rain, runoff and wind. 
Failure of valley tank structures due 
to poor design and/or construction  
Concentration of livestock around 
valley tanks and boreholes 
Soil erosion 
-  Control earthworks 
Soil erosion, gully formation due to large 
amounts of water being released from 
tank  
-  Install and maintain drainage structures to 
regulate stormwater and runoff/run on 
-  Install and maintain erosion control measures 
-  Ensure sound design of all structures, taking 
into account soil susceptibility to erosion 
-  Ensure structures are continuously and 
routinely maintenance – checking structures 
soundness (cracks, erosion around edges), 
desilting, etc 
-  Establish buffer zone requirement taking into 
consideration climatic conditions and land 
status (in terms of degradation), runoff 
volumes, but also applying precautionary 
principle where maximum width is 50m where 
information is not available 
-  Prepare analysis of risks of tank structure 
failing, and emergency response plans 
Soil erosion, soil compaction, overgrazing 
-  Control access to water sources by livestock. 
Livestock watering directly in valley 
tanks 
Deterioration of water quality in valley 
tanks (due to eutrophication) 
Clearing activities for new valley 
tanks 
Deterioration of water quality in 
downstream water sources due to soil 
erosion 
-  Rehabilitate degraded areas 
-  Fence off valley tanks 
-  Provide watering point/trough outside fenced 
area with controlled access 
-  Minimise/prevent soil erosion by controlling 
earthworks, installing and maintaining 
drainage structures and erosion control 
measures 
Loss of native/endemic species  
-  Identify and preserve endemic plants and 
Inundation of land for valley tanks 
Loss of biodiversity and ecosystem 
services 
trees, assess impacts of clearing on 
native/endemic species 
-  Allocate special areas to grow and preserve 
native/endemic tree/plant species  
-  Assess impacts of land inundation on 
biodiversity and ecosystem services, and 
propose necessary mitigation 
Degradation of catchment areas due 
to poor agricultural practices, 
overgrazing 
Unavailability/reduction of water supply, 
particularly in the dry season  
-  Implement catchment rehabilitation/ 
protection interventions under KIIWP 
Siltation of valley tanks 
-  Minimise/prevent soil erosion by controlling 
earthworks, installing and maintaining 
drainage structures and erosion control 
measures 
Over-abstraction of water from 
boreholes  
Unavailability of water for livestock and 
domestic supply 
-  Install water abstraction monitoring 
infrastructure  
89 
Aspects/Causes of Impact 
Environmental / Social Impact 
Possible Mitigation Measures 
SOCIAL/SOCIO-ECONOMIC ISSUES 
Acquisition of land for new valley 
tanks including inundated land and 
buffer zone 
Loss of land, physical and economic 
displacement, including land take for 
agricultural land, structures, trees and 
crops, and buffer zones. 
. 
Grazing land being taken new valley 
tanks 
Land use conflicts arising between 
livestock keepers, farmers and other water 
users 
Dangerous wildlife (eg. 
hippopotamus) inhabiting valley 
tanks  
Failure of structures due to poor 
design and/or construction 
Danger to livestock keepers and 
community 
Community health and safety risks 
Disturbance of graves within valley 
tank area to be inundated 
Personal / emotional stress to relatives of 
the deceased if graves are to be relocated 
-  Install infrastructure to measure flow levels in 
the river or discharge rates for groundwater  
-  Train IWUOs in keeping monitoring records for 
abstraction  
-   
-  Verify identity of project affected people, 
particularly vulnerable people 
-  Establish land area, assets and crops 
lost/affected 
-  Prepare RAP 
-  Implement RAP. 
-  Where land is available within the cell, land 
for land to be given.  Otherwise compensation 
to be paid for production, in accordance with 
the national laws. 
-  Livelihood restoration activities to be 
implemented for severely affected PAPs 
-  Develop land use plans that provide land for 
livestock grazing and watering points 
-  Locate site of valley tank based on discussions 
with livestock keepers and farmers and other 
water users 
-  Fence off tanks 
-  Ensure that a watchman is on duty at all times 
to warn tank users. 
-  Ensure sound design of all structures, taking 
into account soil susceptibility to erosion 
-  Ensure structures are continuously and 
routinely maintenance – checking structures 
soundness (cracks, erosion around edges), 
desilting, etc 
-  Prepare analysis of risks of tank structure 
failing, and emergency response plans 
-  As far as possible avoid disturbing graves. 
-  Identification and relocation of graves as per 
local customs and national laws 
Destruction of, or damage to, 
physical cultural resources within 
valley tank land to be inundated or 
acquired for buffer zones 
Destruction/loss of traditional plants, 
trees due to clearing for valley tank 
or inundation 
Loss of cultural heritage or item of 
traditional value 
-  As far as possible avoid disturbing physical 
cultural resources 
-  Develop a procedure to manage “chance 
finds” of cultural and traditional significance.  
Loss of indigenous knowledge and cultural 
heritage 
-  Identify and preserve traditional plants and 
trees having indigenous value  
-  Develop a procedure to manage “chance 
finds” of cultural and traditional significance.  
-  Allocate area near tank to grow and preserve 
indigenous tree/plant species of cultural value 
90 
Aspects/Causes of Impact 
Environmental / Social Impact 
Possible Mitigation Measures 
Lack of, or poor, maintenance of 
valley tanks and boreholes 
Reduced or no water for livestock and 
domestic use 
-  Train IWUOs to manage and maintain valley 
tanks and boreholes 
CLIMATE-RELATED ISSUES 
Failure of structures (eg. tanks, pipes, 
troughs, water points) due to 
excessive rain 
Soil erosion, gully formation, downstream 
flooding 
Prolonged dry periods leading to 
drought  
Reduction of water availability in valley 
tanks, and lowering of groundwater 
aquifers due to insufficient recharge 
Clearing of vegetation for valley tanks  Carbon releases 
-  Ensure sound design of all structures which 
must consider resilience to severe climatic 
events  
-  Ensure structures are continuously and 
routinely maintenance – checking structures 
soundness (cracks, erosion around edges), 
desilting, etc 
-  Prepare analysis of risks of tank structure 
failing, and emergency response plans  
-  Sensitise communities on the importance of 
maintaining and need for protecting 
structures 
-  Institute water conservation practices and 
water use management to save available 
water, eg. maintenance of tank structures to 
minimise leaks, planting trees around tanks to 
reduce evaporation. 
-   Implement re-afforestation programmes to 
create micro-climates 
-  Offsetting through woodlot afforestation or 
re-afforestation initiatives 
7.4 
Cumulative and Synergistic Impacts 
Cumulative environmental and social impacts are those that result from “the successive, incremental, 
and/or  combined  effects  of  an  action,  project,  or  activity  when  added  to  other  existing,  planned, 
and/or  reasonably  anticipated  future  ones”45.  Thus,  cumulative  impacts  occur  when  several 
developments  of  a  similar  or  different  nature,  and  within  the  same  project/programme  or  from 
unrelated projects, result in a combined effect on the biological, physical or social environments.  They 
may be caused by past, current and future activities.  
In the context of KIIWP, for example, valley tanks may be located such that they collect runoff from 
only one micro-catchments, thus compromising the amount of water that can be stored in each tank.  
Similarly, if two irrigation schemes were to use the same water source, that water source may become 
stressed particularly in the dry season.  Or if an agro-processing plant is releasing effluent into a river, 
and an irrigation scheme located downstream is using the same river, the quality of water downstream 
of  the  scheme  will  be  affected  by  both  the  effluent  agro-processing  plant  and  leaching  of 
agrochemicals  from  the  irrigation  scheme.  A  synergistic  impact  occurs  when  two  or  more  factors 
produces an effect greater than the sum of their individual impact.  An example of a synergistic impact 
would be if an agro-processing plant is being planned or built under an altogether different project but 
is located close to a proposed irrigation scheme, this may influence the types of agricultural produce 
that the farmers will want to grow.  This is both beneficial to the agro-processing plant as well as to 
45 IFC (2013).  Cumulative Impact Assessment and Management: Guidance for the Private Sector in Emerging 
Markets – Good Practice Handbook. 
91 
the farmers.  Similarly, if a new road is going to be constructed, this will open up markets for produce 
beyond the village or cell, and on the other hand, the road becomes economically more feasible. 
ESIAs and ESMPs conducted for KIIWP subprojects will therefore have to establish other economic and 
development activities in the district, sectors and villages to determine the types of cumulative and 
synergistic impacts that may result from such activities on, or due to, the biological, physical and social 
environments that may affect KIIWP activities.  
7.5 
Site Specific Environmental, Social and Climate Observations 
This  section  focuses  mainly  on  the  proposed  irrigation  schemes  and  dams,  as  sites  for  catchment 
rehabilitation and protection, valley tanks and boreholes have not as yet been identified, and highlights 
specific  issues  that  were  observed  during  the  site  visits  which  have  implications  on  design  and/or 
scheme environmental and social sustainability, and climate resilience.  
7.5.1 
Ndego Sector 
Humure Pumped Irrigation Scheme 
•  Source: The source of water for the scheme is Lake Ihema.  The scheme will be located about 
500m away from the lake and the command area will cover 600 ha. The lake is part of  the 
Akagera Wetlands Complex, and most of it lies within the Akagera National Park.  The proposed 
intake is located at the tip of an arm of the lake that protrudes outside the park.   
•  Protected area: The actual abstraction point has not been identified at this stage.  But most of 
the tip of Lake Ihema from where water is to be abstracted is a totally protected wetlands. The 
Bramin scheme adjacent to the Humure site takes water from a small section of the shoreline 
that lies between the Akagera National Park and the protected wetlands along the shoreline 
that lie outside the park.  It should be highlighted that IFAD will not support and developments 
that could affect potentially critical habitats, and therefore an alternative intake site may need 
to  be  identified.      Otherwise  SECAP  requires  that  an  ecological  risk  assessment,  scenario 
planning and adaptive management strategy if abstraction from the protected wetlands to be 
considered (Guidance Statement #1).   
•  Pollution:  The command area slopes towards Lake Ihema (albeit gently), and therefore the 
lake is a potential receptor for agri-pollutants as well as sedimentation from soil erosion. 
Land take: Although land take will be minimised as the target beneficiaries are those farmers 
who already have land within the command area, land take will be necessary for rising main, 
tank and conveyance pipes/canals, workshops and ancillary infrastructure.  
• 
•  Human/wildlife conflict:  Farmers indicated that, although the ANP boundary itself is fenced, 
there have been cases where hippos and baboons have raided their farms, leading to loss of 
crops.  The irrigated fields under the proposed subproject may attract more wildlife to raid the 
farms.  
•  Access to water for livestock: Cattle pass through the proposed scheme site to access water, 
and  the  scheme  is  likely  to  block  the  access  currently  used.   This  triggers  FPIC.  Alternative 
watering sites will therefore have to be considered, and this must be done in collaboration and 
through consultation with the livestock keepers and farmers.   
•  Community requests:  The community have expressed the need for their involvement during 
scheme design.  They also wanted to discuss their contributions in terms of what and how 
much they can and cannot contribute.  
92 
Google  Earth  image  of  part  of  the  Project  area  showing 
Lakes Ihema, Kibare and Nasho, Bramin Scheme  
Map of same part of the Project area indicating potential 
sites,  Lakes Ihema, Kibare and Nasho, and Bramin Scheme  
 Kibare Pumped Irrigation Scheme 
•  Source:  The  source  of  the  scheme  is  Lake  Kibare,  which  is  part  of  the  Akagera  Wetland 
Complex.  The scheme will be located about 500m away from the lake. The command area will 
cover 400ha.   
•  Pollution:  The command area slopes towards Lake Kibare (albeit gently), and therefore the 
lake is a potential receptor for agri-pollutants as well as sedimentation from soil erosion. 
•  Wetlands:  Along a part of the lake shore, a trench demarcates the buffer zone between the 
wetlands  bordering  the  lake  (protected  area).    Some  parts  of  the  lake  shore  are  totally 
protected,  and  other  parts  are  conditionally  protected.    Therefore,  the  intake  should  be 
located with care so as to avoid the totally protected wetland areas.  The EIA certificate issued 
by  RDB  will  give  conditions  for  development  in  conditional  wetlands  and  these  must  be 
adhered to.  In addition, IFAD does not invest in projects that could affect critical habitats or 
that may result in the degradation of such habitats.  For projects that are located in wetland 
areas,  IFAD’s SECAP requires an ecological risk assessment, scenario planning and adaptive 
management strategy (Guidance Statement #1).  IFAD will also indicate measures to protect 
the wetlands which will be included in the loan agreement.   
•  Human/wildlife  conflict:  Farmers  reported  that  their  farms  are  frequently  raided  by  hippos 
which reside in the lake and also baboons.  This has led to substantial loss of crops, and poses 
a danger to farmers as well.  The Project aims to enhance crop yields, but this may also result 
in increased raiding by wildlife.  
•  Social integration:  The farmers in this area have not worked together before.  They need clarity 
on what the Project involves, and were concerned about how benefits and farming activities 
are shared through a cooperative, especially in cases where some farmers have large plots and 
others have small ones. 
•  Grievance redress: Various grievance redress mechanisms are in place: i) Gacaca system which 
was  established  to  resolve  issues  after  the  genocide;  ii)  cooperatives  have  a  social  affairs 
committee who will first receive the complaint, after which it goes to the village; iii) there is 
also a local government grievance redress system.  
93 
Byimana Pumped Irrigation Scheme 
•  Source:  The  source  of  the  scheme  is  Lake  Nasho,  which  is  part  of  the  Akagera  Wetland 
Complex.  The scheme will be located about 500m away from the lake. The command area will 
cover 400ha.  
•  Wetland:  The source lies in a conditional wetland and therefore conditions will be imposed 
by RDB and IFAD for the construction of the scheme.   
•  Pollution:  The command area slopes towards Lake Nasho, and therefore the lake is a potential 
receptor for agri-pollutants as well as sedimentation from soil erosion. 
•  Access to grazing:  Here again, the scheme may hinder access by livestock keepers to grazing 
or indeed take up grazing land, and this would trigger FPIC.   Access to grazing must be ensured 
through consultations with the livestock keepers and farmers.  
•  Cooperatives/Scheme  Management:  The  community  have  had  some  bad  experiences  with 
previous cooperatives – one where maize was grown, harvested but no one came to collect 
the maize.  They feel they have lost a lot of investment (time, money).  There was an initiative 
by the army to provide pumps to grow potatoes, but the farmers didn’t have the capacity to 
manage  the  pumped scheme  –  did not  have money to buy fuel.  In another case,  a REMA 
supported  solar-powered scheme  was set up by the lake  -  this has not been functional for 
about 7 years as one component for the solar pumps was missing and the community haven’t 
been able to get it/have been waiting for it to be installed. Farmers indicated that they do not 
understand or don’t have time for paperwork, so getting finances from banks is a problem. 
•  Community contributions:  The community indicated that they were cash strapped, so would 
not be able to contribute to the Project up front.  They would therefore like the Project to 
support them fully for a few years in the initial stages to buy inputs and manage the scheme. 
•  Power Supply:  The Rural Dairy Development Programme (RDDP) is supporting the installation 
of infrastructure for an electricity supply line to Ndego for the Milk Collection Centre. It may 
be possible to tap into this power source for the scheme pumps.  
7.5.2 
Kabare Sector 
Gakoma Pumped Irrigation Scheme 
•  Source:  The  source  of  the  scheme  is  Lake  Nasho,  which  is  part  of  the  Akagera  Wetland 
Complex.  The scheme will be located about 500m away from the lake. The command area will 
cover 600ha.  
•  Wetland:  The source lies in a conditional wetland and therefore conditions will be imposed 
by RDB and IFAD for the construction of the scheme.   
•  Pollution:  The command area slopes towards Lake Nasho, and therefore the lake is a potential 
receptor for agri-pollutants as well as sedimentation from soil erosion. 
•  Access to grazing:  In the dry season, cattle use this area for grazing.  The scheme may hinder 
access by livestock keepers to grazing or take up their grazing land, triggering FPIC.   Access to 
grazing must be ensured through consultations with the livestock keepers and farmers.  
•  Road access:  Road access to this site is poor. 
•  Cooperatives:  Many of the farmers already belong to cooperatives and are therefore familiar 
with how they work, and what will be required of them.  
•  Grievance Redress Mechanism:  These are already in existence. If there is any conflict to do 
with land, etc, in the cooperatives ask neighbouring cooperatives to mediate. The cooperatives 
have different zones and each zone has a leader.  So, grievances first go to the zone leader, 
then to the cooperative management, then village authorities. 
•  Community  requests:  They  community  wanted  to  be  involved  in  the  Project  design  at  the 
earliest stages. Some farmers also mentioned experiences from the Buffet project in Kirehe 
94 
where  the  inputs  cost  more  than  the  farmers  received  for  their  crops.    The  farmers  were 
therefore not any better off, in fact felt they were poorer. 
 Gishanda Marshland Irrigation Scheme 
•  Source: The source of this scheme is Lake Gishanda, which reportedly a man-made water body. 
The plan would be to increase the dam wall here to collect more water. The site lies on the 
border of Kabare Sector and Rwinkwavu Sector.  
•  Environmental flow: Some farmers have dammed the river downstream of the proposed dam 
and scheme site where they practice fish farming.  It is therefore important that the dam does 
not adversely affect their fishing activities.  
•  Pollution. Leached agrochemicals from the scheme may affect the water quality, and therefore 
the fish that are being bred in the fish farms. 
Weir downstream of Gishanda Dam location 
7.5.3 
Rwinkwavu Sector 
Gishanda Marshland Irrigation Scheme 
•  As above. 
Rwinkwavu Watershed  
•  Terracing:  There  are  no  terraces  so  these  will  have  to  be  constructed,  farm  level  rainwater 
harvesting and agroforestry proposed. 
95 
•  Current downstream activities: Extensive cultivation of rice are being carried out here.  This is 
an  extension of  the  LWH/RSSP  scheme  that  takes  water  Rwinkwavu Dam  on the  border  of 
Murama and Kabarondo Sectors. 
7.5.4 
Murama Sector 
Ngoma Watershed 
•  Terracing:  There are 990 ha of terraces existing already, but there is a shortage of water for 
growing crops.  Farm level ponds have therefore been recommended here. 
•  Community  requests:  The  area  targeted  for  watershed  activities  lies  on  both  sides  of  the 
Rwinkwavu Dam which was built to irrigate rice in Rwinkwavu, but is located on the boundary 
of Murama and Kabarondo sectors.  Communities in Murama and Kabarondo Sectors feel that 
Rwinkwavu is benefiting from water sourced from their counties, yet they are struggling to 
farm.  Farmers  would  also  like  to  fish  farm  using  cages  where  the  Ngoma  stream  meets 
Rwinkwavu dam.   
7.5.5 
Kabarondo Sector  
 Rwakigeri Watershed 
•  Terracing:  The target area is very hilly, and at present there is no terracing.  Consequently, it is 
prone to serious erosion.  
Kanyeganyege Marshland Irrigation Scheme  
•  Source:  The proposal is to build a dam on the Kanyeganyege River.  The community reported 
that the river has never been dry.  
•  Environmental  flow:    Downstream  from  the  proposed  dam  site,  there  is  a  very  successful 
cooperative that operates a rice scheme, which also draws its water from the Kanyenganyege 
River.  It is therefore important to maintain an environmental flow in the river, which will not 
affect that rice scheme. 
7.5.6 
Mwiri Sector  
Kageyo Valley Dams/Boreholes 
•  Farmers capacity: LWH has rice fields here but these are not in good condition – the project is 
closing down in October 2018.  This implies that there is a strong need for capacity building to 
ensure  sustainability:  farmers  must  not  rely  on  the  project  for  inputs  and  scheme 
management. 
•  Wetlands: There is potential for farming approx. 200ha in the marshlands just below Kageyo 
village. The wetland map shows this is a protected marshland, but there is agriculture going 
on here and cattle grazing. Some marshlands have been created as a result of access roads 
being constructed for the LWH rice scheme.  
•  Groundwater:  There  are  no  groundwater  sources  as  far  as  the  community  know.    So  the 
options for water sourcing are rainwater and surface water 
•  Valley dams: In the past the government had put up valley tanks downstream of agriculture 
and grazing areas, but these got silted up very quickly (due to erosion of soils). 
•  Access  to  water  resources:  Water  is  being  used  for  rice  cultivation.  There  may  be  conflict 
between rice farmers and livestock keepers. REMA introduced bamboo planting around the 
wetlands  as  a  buffer  and  have  fenced  off  these  areas.  Consequently,  access  to  water  for 
livestock has been blocked.  
96 
7.5.7 
Gahini Sector 
Nyabombe and Rukore  Kahi Valley Dams/Boreholes 
•  Sites:  The locations for valley dams and boreholes have not been established as yet.  
•  Wetlands:  There is a long stretch of conditional wetlands that runs from just north of Kageyo 
village through Gahini Sector.    
7.5.8 
Murundi Sector 
Gakoma and Rwakabanda Valley Dams/Boreholes 
•  Sites:  The locations for valley dams and boreholes have not been established as yet.  
•  Wetlands: At the end of the 45km stretch proposed for livestock interventions, there is a dam 
(Musenyeni Dam).  The Sector Executive Secretary, the entire stretch of wetland from north 
Mwiri to Murundi is a totally protected wetland – this was confirmed by the updated wetland 
map (see Section 5.2.5, Map 5.9). 
97 
8 
Climate Risk Assessment 
8.1 
Introduction 
The main justification for the proposed KIIWP Project the mitigation of frequent drought occurrences 
that may be exacerbated by the effects of climate change that include reported persistent crop failures 
due to moisture stress, crop diseases and pest attacks. Studies indicate that temperatures are expected 
to rise across the country with increased rainfall in high areas of the country and significant reductions 
in the low-lying eastern parts of the country including Kayonza District.  Kayonza District lie within the 
highest  climate  change  vulnerability 
indicated  for  the  Eastern  Province.  Catchment 
rehabilitation, development of infrastructure for irrigation and for livestock consumption by the KIIWP 
Project are expected to relieve the effects of the persistent drought occurrences. 
index 
8.2 
Climate Risk Analysis 
8.2.1 
Key Considerations 
The  KIIWP  target  beneficiaries  are  households  who  depend  on  rainfed  subsistence  agriculture  and 
livestock husbandry. Residents of the Ndego, Kabare, Murama, Kabarondo, Rwinkwavu, Mwiri, Gahini 
and Murundi sectors testified to persistent crop failures and expressed to droughts as their greatest 
livelihoods threat.   
Although the proposed Project area has lower rainfall than the rest of the country, it suffers frequent 
extreme weather events that include high winds during the rainy season that destroy trees and crops 
as well as blowing away roofs. The communities have adopted a building design whereby walls are 
made higher than the roofs to prevent them from being blown off by high winds. As mentioned above, 
the area is also prone to dry spells during the growing seasons and fully-fledged droughts with the 
negative effects already discussed. 
The  Project  interventions  are  designed  to  mitigate  changes  in  temperature,  rainfall  and  extreme 
weather and would not be affected by same. However, the one of the main components of the Project 
involves  of  the  abstraction  of  water  for  irrigation  from  the  Akagera  lake-wetland  complex  which 
includes Lakes Ihema, Kibare and Nasho in the Lower Akagera Catchment. The Akagera River conveys 
flow from four upstream large perennial rivers, these being the Nyabarongo and Mukungwa Rivers in 
Rwandan  territory,  as  well  as  Akanyaru  and  Ruvubu  Rivers  from  Burundi  running  north  through 
territories of Uganda and Tanzania into Lake Victoria to become the Nile river. 
The Lower Akagera Master Plan provides detailed information of the water balance in the catchment 
and indicates surface water supply data for potential irrigable areas with more than adequate surplus 
for environmental flow. The master plan discusses the 'reverse' flow pattern that fills up the lakes when 
the Akagera River is in flood from rainfall in the upstream catchments. The Master Plan argues that in 
case of substantial abstraction from the lakes for irrigation, the deficit would be filled from the river.  
However, the Master Plan does not take due consideration of climate change scenarios based on the 
indications that temperatures will continue to rise across the country in the long term with significantly 
increased  rainfall  in  the  higher-lying  upstream  catchments  and  significantly  reduced  rainfall  in  the 
eastern  low-lying  eastern  catchments  that  include  the  proposed  Project  area.  Climate  change 
scenarios on one-way inter-basin transfer into the Lower Akagera with its own contribution diminished 
could  impact  on  the  hydrological  balance  including  the  necessary  environmental  flow.  The  Project 
would therefore benefit from a detailed hydrological study that take into account the long term climate 
change impact scenarios. 
98 
The Project is likely to alleviate opportunistic pests and diseases that take advantage of moisture stress 
and compromised immune systems of livestock due to inadequate forage and drinking water as well 
as aiding the spread of contagious diseases such as foot and mouth disease. However, there may be 
an  increase  in  vector-borne  diseases  such  as  malaria  and  diseases  caused  by  ticks.  However, 
interventions  involving  irrigation  are  known  to  be  associated  with  such  vectors  and  therefore 
preventive measures should be considered in the Project design.   
Weather-related risks or climate extremes could impact upon harvest and post-harvest stages of key 
value  chains  in  the  Project.  Value  chains  for  the  Project  have  not  yet  been  identified.  Subsequent 
studies  should  address  the  possible  weather  and  climate  change  in  the  value  chains  that  will  be 
identified. 
8.2.2 
Risk Classification  
The purpose of climate risk screening is to determine the exposure of the Project to climate-related 
risks  (High,  Moderate  or  Low)  based  on  available  information  about  historic  climate  hazard 
occurrences,  current  climate  trends  and  future  climate  change  scenarios,  as  well  as  to  assess  the 
likelihood  of  the  Project  increasing  the  vulnerability  of  the  expected  target  populations  to  climate 
hazards.  It  provides  an  opportunity  to  integrate  climate  issues  into  Project  design  and  therefore 
increase Project resilience and hence sustainability.   
IFAD’s climate risk screening criteria are presented in Table 8.1 below. 
Table 8.1  Climate Risk Screening 
Climate Categorisation 
Types of Projects 
High Risk  
Projects that promote agricultural activity on areas subject to extreme climatic  events, 
such as flooding, drought, tropical storms or heat waves 
Medium Risk 
Projects where climate scenarios for the area foresee changes in temperature, rainfall or 
extreme weather that will adversely affect project impact, sustainability or cost over its 
lifetime; 
Projects  that  promote  agricultural  activity  on  marginal  and/or  highly  degraded  areas 
(such as on hillsides, deforested slopes or floodplains). 
Projects in areas in which rural development projects have experienced weather-related 
losses and damages in the past. 
Projects  that  establish  infrastructure  in  areas  with  a  track  record  of  extreme  weather 
events (e.g. water points in drought-prone areas) 
Projects  that  target  groups  entirely  dependent  on  natural  resources  (such  as  seasonal 
crops, rainfed agricultural plots, migratory fish stocks) that have been affected by in the 
last decade by climate trends or specific climatic events; 
Projects  where  climate  variability  is  likely  to  affect  agricultural  productivity  (crops, 
livestock and fisheries) access to markets and/or the associated incidence of pests and 
diseases for the project target groups; 
Projects investing in climate-sensitive livelihoods that are diversified; 
Projects investing in infrastructure that is exposed to infrequent extreme weather events;  
Projects investing in institutional development and capacity-building for rural institutions 
(such as farmer groups, cooperatives) in climatically heterogeneous areas;  
Projects that have the potential to become more resilient through the adoption of green 
technologies at a reasonable cost;  
99 
Climate Categorisation 
Types of Projects 
Projects  with  opportunities  to  strengthen 
capabilities;  
indigenous  climate  risk  management 
Projects with opportunities to integrate climate resilience aspects through policy dialogue 
to improve agricultural sector strategies and policies;  
Projects  with  potential  to  integrate  climate  resilience  measures  without  extensive 
additional costs (e.g. Improved building codes, capacity-building, or including climate risk 
issues in policy processes); 
Projects that would benefit from a more thorough climate risk and vulnerability analysis 
to  identify  the  most  vulnerable  rural  populations,  improve  targeting,  and  identify 
additional complementary investment actions to manage climate risks. 
Projects that are not likely to be vulnerable to climate risks and thus voluntary measures 
could be incorporated into the detailed design and implementation phases based on the 
SECAP  project  assessment  recommendations.  These  projects  generally  focus  on 
investments which do not have a direct physical or geographical interface with climate 
hazards (such as the development of a micro-finance institution).  
Low Risk 
Source: IFAD (2017), SECAP 
According to SECAP’s climate risk classification guidelines as described the Table 8.1 above, KIIWP is 
classified as high risk because: 
• 
It promotes agricultural activity on areas subject to extreme climatic events, such as flooding, 
drought, tropical storms or heat waves;  
•  Climate  scenarios  for  the  Project  area  foresee  changes  in  temperature,  rainfall  or  extreme 
weather that will adversely affect the Project’s impact, sustainability or cost over its lifetime;  
•  The Project promotes agricultural activity on marginal and/or highly degraded areas (such as 
on hillsides, deforested slopes or floodplains);  
•  The Project lies in an area which regularly experiences weather-related losses and damages.   
The  Project  is  considered  high  risk,  although  the  Project  interventions  themselves  are  intended  to 
reduce vulnerability to the effects of climate change.  It is therefore recommended that an in-depth 
climate risk analysis be undertaken prior to the full design of the Project in order to inform the design 
and decision-making processes. 
Gakoma Site 
8.3 
Climate Risk Resilience Measures 
All  the  three  components  of  the  Project  are  aimed  at  climate  resilient  agriculture  and  livestock 
husbandry.    However,  due  consideration  of  climate  change  factors  must  be  given  in  the  planned 
hydrological studies to be prepared as part of the suite of investigations to be carried out during the 
Project feasibility studies. 
100 
9 
Summary of the Resettlement Action Framework 
This chapter presents a summary of the Resettlement Action Framework (RAF) proposed for KIIWP.  
The RAF itself is presented in Annex 4 of this ESMF. 
9.1 
Approach to the Preparation of a Resettlement Action Plan for KWIIP 
SECAP’s Guidance Statement #13 on Physical and Economic Resettlement  defines resettlement not 
only  as  the  physical  relocation  of  people  but  also  as  restrictions  on  or  loss  of  access  to  means  of 
livelihoods. Specifically, physical displacement refers to relocation, loss of residential land, or loss of 
shelter, while economic displacement implies the loss of land, assets, access to assets, income sources, 
or means of livelihoods.  Physical and economic resettlement could be either agreed/negotiated or 
involuntary - the two settings have very different implications for IFAD, as explained below: 
• 
Involuntary  Resettlement:  Resettlement  is  considered  involuntary  when  affected  people  or 
communities  do  not  have  the  capacity  to  refuse  it  –  because  the  free,  prior  and  informed 
consent (FPIC) principle is not properly implemented and they do not have power of choice – 
or their rights to refuse it are over-ridden by national law or are simply denied. 
•  Agreed/Negotiated  Resettlement:  There  is  agreed/negotiated  resettlement  when,  in  the 
respect  of  the  do-no-harm  principle  and  after  having  properly  informed  people  and  gone 
through  the  FPIC  process,  people  potentially  involved  in  the  resettlement  agree  on  being 
relocated  and/or  selling  or  relinquishing  access  to  assets,  against  fair  and  timely 
compensations for their losses. 
The preparation of a RAP that may be required for any KIIWP scheme should take direction from the 
principles  of  free  prior  and  informed  consent  and  “do  no  harm”.    IFAD’s  Land  Policy  requires 
involuntary resettlement to be avoided wherever possible.  IFAD’s Land Policy specifies that “while 
working on ‘doing good’, IFAD will adhere to a ‘do no harm’ principle at all times, so as to minimize 
physical and potential economic impacts”.  The policy requires all viable alternative Project designs to 
be explored in order to address risks of physical and economic displacement, and it also stipulates the 
need to restore livelihoods to improve the standards of living of affected persons. The approach and 
level  of  measures  taken  should  be  proportional  to  the  range  of  IFAD’s  operations.  Hence  IFAD’s 
principles with regard to physical and economic displacement are: 
• 
IFAD  will  avoid  or  minimize  wherever  possible  any  physical  or  economic  resettlement  that 
could negatively impact the affected people; in any case this should be only for a common 
interest (such as in an irrigation scheme benefitting IFAD’s target groups) and based on positive 
outcomes of FPIC.  
•  All land and natural resource users with a legitimate claim will be recognized–including people 
having informal/customary rights. 
•  No affected person will be left worse off, and preferably should be left in a better position than 
before, through proper  and timely compensation or any other mitigation  measures  agreed 
upon. 
The  RAP  should  also  be  guided  by  the  IFC’s  Performance  Standard  5  on  Land  Acquisition  and 
Involuntary Resettlement46, which describe the principles of Involuntary Resettlement as:  
46 IFC (2012); IFC Performance Standards: Performance Standard 5 – Land Acquisition and Involuntary 
Resettlement. https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/topics_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/ 
sustainability-at-ifc/policies-standards/performance-standards/ps5sustainability-at-ifc/policies-
standards/performance-standards/ps5 
101 
• 
Involuntary resettlement should be avoided where feasible, or minimized, exploring all viable 
alternative Project designs; 
•  Where it is not feasible to avoid resettlement, resettlement activities should be conceived and 
executed as sustainable development programs, providing sufficient investment resources to 
enable the persons displaced by the Project to share in Project benefits.  
•  Displaced  persons  should  be  meaningfully  consulted  and  should  have  opportunities  to 
participate in planning and implementing resettlement programs. 
•  Displaced persons should be assisted in their efforts to improve their livelihoods and standards 
of  living  or  at  least  to  restore  them,  in  real  terms,  to  pre-displacement  levels  or  to  levels 
prevailing prior to the beginning of Project implementation, whichever is higher. 
Thus, objectives of the RAP will be to: 
•  To avoid, and when avoidance is not possible, minimize displacement by exploring alternative 
Project designs; 
•  To avoid forced eviction; 
•  To  anticipate  and  avoid,  or  where  avoidance  is  not  possible,  minimize  adverse  social  and 
economic  impacts  from  land  acquisition  or  restrictions  on  land  use  by  (i)  providing 
compensation  for  loss  of  assets  at  replacement  cost  and  (ii)  ensuring  that  resettlement 
activities are implemented with appropriate disclosure of information, consultation, and the 
informed participation of those affected; 
•  To improve, or restore, the livelihoods and standards of living of displaced persons; 
•  To  improve  living  conditions  among  physically  displaced  persons  through  the  provision  of 
adequate housing with security of tenure at resettlement sites. 
9.2 
Methodology for RAP Preparation 
The general steps in preparing a RAP are described below, while detailed methodology and guidelines 
for RAP preparation and implementation is provided in the Resettlement Action Framework in Annex 
4.   
Desktop Research 
Familiarisation with the Project context, components and implementation modalities will be obtained 
through review of various documentation. From information available on the potential KIIWP schemes 
(such as the socio-economic and hydrological studies conducted as part of the Feasibility and Design), 
pumped irrigation schemes, dam construction and land husbandry works requiring major resettlement 
will be identified, and an estimate will be made of the number of people likely to be affected.    Maps 
and drawings will be referred to where available. 
Legal Framework 
A  number  of  policy  legal  instruments,  which  govern  issues  pertaining  to  compensation  and 
resettlement,  will  be  reviewed.  Rwanda’s  National  Land  Policy  of  2004  in  reference  to  the 
constitutional principle of equality of all citizens, states that all Rwandans enjoy the same rights of 
access  to  land  without  any  discrimination  whatsoever.  The  policy  is  explicit  in  the  principle  by 
stipulating that women, married or not, should not be excluded from the process of land access, land 
acquisition  and  land  control,  and  female  descendants  should  not  be  excluded  from  the  process  of 
family land inheritance.  Other legal documents pertinent to the RAP include: 
•  The Constitution of the Republic of Rwanda; 
• 
Land Policy (2004); 
102 
• 
• 
• 
Law No. 43/2013 Governing Land in Rwanda; 
Law No. 32/2015 Relating to Expropriation in the Public Interest; 
Law  No.17/2010  of  12/05/2010  Establishing  and  Organizing  the  Real  Property  Valuation 
Profession; 
•  Ministerial Order No. 001/2006 Determining the Structure of Lands;  
•  Presidential Order No. 54/01 (2006); 
•  Ministerial Order No. 002/2008 Determining Modalities of Land Registration (2008). 
Institutional Framework 
Key  institutions  responsible  for  resettlement  and  compensation  policy,  legislation  and  regulations 
relevant to KIIWP include the following: 
•  Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI); 
•  Rwanda Agriculture and Animal Resources Development Board (RAB); 
•  Kayonza District; 
•  Ministry of Environment (MINIRENA); 
•  Rwanda Environmental Management Authority (REMA); 
•  Rwanda Development Board (RDB); 
•  Rwanda Land Management and Use Authority (RLMUA); 
•  Department of Water Resources. 
Differences in GoR and IFAD Approaches to Compensation and Relocation 
There  are  a  number  of  differences  between  the  Rwandan  legal  framework  for  resettlement  and 
compensation and IFAD’s Guidance  Statement for physical and economic  resettlement, Land Policy 
and FPIC requirements. The RAP will give proposals for addressing the differences so that both GoR 
and IFAD are satisfied. 
Initial Meetings, Consultations and Field Visits 
Meetings will be held with the KIIWP team, IFAD, MINAGRI and RAP, in order discuss the approach to 
the RAP, and to obtain relevant information and documentation, as well as to set up meetings with the 
relevant Kayonza District authorities and arrange the necessary field visits.  Meetings will be also be 
held  with  relevant  national  agencies  and  key  District  authorities  in  order  to  establish  national 
processes for compensation and resettlement and procedures for identifying Project affected people, 
as well as the natural the resources that may be affected (such as wetlands or the Akagera National 
Park).   
Consultations with the Kayonza District authorities will:   
•  Confirm  their  commitment  (written,  signed  and  stamped)  to  the  entire  resettlement  and 
compensation process, and to inform the public accordingly.  
•  Confirm that the Kayonza Districts authorities will assist in the identification of PAPs, and in 
confirming the eligibility of listed PAPs. 
•  Agree on the “cut off” date for compensation, for example if it should be set as the starting 
date of the PAP survey.   
•  Specify the responsibilities of the Kayonza District authorities regarding the monitoring of the 
compensation and resettlement process. 
•  Establish  the  mechanisms  for  redress  of  grievances  that  will  be  most  appropriate  for  the 
affected communities. 
103 
• 
Identify existing social networks and social support systems, that can help persons affected by 
the Project, and ways in which support can be given. 
•  Minute the details from the consultations with the district administrations and the PAPs will 
be recorded. 
Consultations  with  communities  will  focus  on  issues  such  as  land  acquisition,  compensation, 
entitlement, institutional arrangements for implementing and monitoring the RAPs, grievance redress 
mechanisms.  The meetings will also establish how the communities can be involved in the RAPs at all 
stages  –  from  PAP  identification,  surveys, valuation, entitlements,  implementation, monitoring  and 
evaluation. Of importance is the need to inform the PAPs of the cut-off date. 
Screening  
A screening checklist will be developed with the aim of establishing whether the Project will: 
•  Reduce access to economic and natural resources, such as land, pasture, water, public services; 
•  Result in resettlement of individuals or families; 
•  Require  the  acquisition  of  land  (public,  usufruct,  temporary  or  permanent)  for  its 
development; 
•  Result in the temporary or permanent loss of perennial or annual crops or fruit trees; 
•  Affect  household  infrastructure  such  as  the  main  residence,  outside  toilets,  cowsheds, 
granaries, kitchens; 
•  Affect commercial premises such as shops, coffee houses; 
•  Affect institutional premises such as churches, mosques or schools; 
•  Affect physical cultural resources; 
•  Affect  vulnerable  people  (elderly,  poor,  orphans,  women  headed  households,  widows  or 
people with disabilities). 
Establishing the need for a RAP  
The  need  for  resettlement  will  then  be  described  in  terms  of  geographical  scope,  processes  for 
identification of PAPs, estimated of numbers of households and assets affected, a general description 
of the total areas of land affected and types of assets and structures affected; general description of 
PCR or sites of personal value (such as graves and graveyards) and public services that may need to be 
relocated (such as water supply lines, power lines). 
Project Affected Persons Census 
Following confirmation of Project affected persons, a socio-economic survey of the PAPs and census 
and asset inventory of each intervention site. A population census of PAPs should be carried for the 
following reasons: 
•  Determining legitimate beneficiaries that discourages opportunistic local migrants; 
•  Determining the scale of the required physical and economic resettlement; 
•  Provide indicators for monitoring and evaluation; and 
•  Providing a sampling frame for subsequent socio-economic research needed to establish fair 
compensation  rates  according  to  the  law  and  to  design,  monitor  and  evaluate  sustainable 
income restoration or development interventions. 
104 
PAP Socio Economic Survey 
The  RAP  will  develop  detailed  baseline  surveys  for  each  Project  affected  person/household. 
Information that will need to be collected for the PAP survey will include:   
•  Personal data (name/age/sex of respondent, residency, occupation, ethnic group, religion); 
•  Household  composition  and  education  levels (number  of  adult  men  and  women,  boys  and 
girls, education levels of each); 
•  Household activities and income (main source of income, other income sources, bartering); 
•  Household expenditure (amount spent on basic goods); 
•  Health status (main illnesses suffered); 
•  Relocation options (extent of affectation, current use of property/land, preferred options for 
resettlement, preferred time for relocation, types of assistance required, other support needs, 
perceived problems during and after relocation). 
Land and Asset Surveys 
The RAP will assess and inventories land and property/assets affected by the proposed schemes.   A 
land/property  assessment  form  will  be  developed  for  use  during  the  survey,  and  may  include 
information such as: 
• 
Location of the affected plot/house/structure; 
•  Category of the land (public/private/institutional); 
•  Property  characteristics  (types  of  structures  affected,  quality  of  structure,  type  of 
construction, roof type); 
•  Measurements of the structure/compound, and value of affected area; 
•  Occupancy details (tenant/squatter/owner); 
•  Affected area under cultivation (crop type, area under cultivation); 
•  Affected area not under cultivation (current land use, area affected); and 
•  Affected trees. 
Grievance Redress Mechanisms 
Based  on  discussions  and  consultations,  the  RAP  will  develop  a  grievance  redress  mechanism 
specifically for the RAP process and in accordance to Rwanda’s law on expropriation, indicating the 
ways  in  which  grievances  can  be  registered,  and  processes,  timescales  and  stages  for  responses, 
redress and appeal.  An outline is provided in Annex 4. 
Cut Off Date 
The RAP will develop a methodology for determining the cut-off date.  This is the date beyond which 
persons occupying the Project area are not eligible for compensation and/or resettlement assistance. 
Similarly, fixed assets (such as built structures, crops, fruit trees, and woodlots) established after the 
cut-off  date  will  not  be  compensated.    The  cut-off  date  is  determined  in  consultation  with  local 
authorities, and is usually the  date of completion of the  census and  assets  inventory,  or any other 
mutually agreed date.  
Eligibility Criteria 
Eligibility criteria will be defined in order to identify PAPs and affected structures and assets.  This will 
be based on Rwandan laws, but will also take into account those with no formal legal rights over their 
land  holdings,  in  accordance  with  IFAD  and  other  development  partner  requirements.  However,  it 
105 
should be noted that in Rwanda registration of land rights is mandatory by law and fair compensation 
only  eligible  to  legal  land  property  owners  and  land  tenants  in  recognition  of  existing  written  and 
unwritten rights and civil and original customary rights. 
Entitlement Matrix 
An Entitlement Matrix will be prepared indicating the types of impacts on agricultural land,  grazing 
land, commercial land, residential land, buildings and structures, standing crops, trees, and temporary 
acquisition of land, types of persons affected, and to establish types of compensation, entitlements 
and benefits that will be accorded.  In addition, sites for the relocation of the PAPs will be identified 
together with the Kayonza authorities, should this be necessary. 
Valuation Methodology 
The  RAP  will  describe  methodologies  used  for  valuing  affected  structures,  assets,  crops  and  trees.  
Where land is to be acquired, methodologies for valuation and compensation in kind or cash will be 
described.  Other  infrastructure  that  may  be  affected includes  water  pipelines,  power  lines, fences, 
hedges, which must also be considered in the valuation methodology.   
Compensation and Resettlement Measures 
Based on the entitlements and valuation methodology, the RAP will describe compensation payment 
and resettlement processes.  Cultural preferences will be borne in mind.  There is also need to address 
the treatment of vulnerable groups, such as living below the poverty line, the landless, the elderly, 
women  and  children.  The  RAP  will  describe  the  requirements  of  livelihood  restoration  plans  for 
severely  affected  PAPs. The  RAP  will  also  stress  that,  in  accordance  with  IFAD policies,  programme 
activities can only begin once compensation has been fully paid and resettlement completed.   
The RAP will develop detailed livelihood restoration plans for severely affected and vulnerable PAPs.  
It  will  also  stress  that,  in  accordance  with  IFAD  policies,  subproject  activities  can  only  begin  once 
compensation has been fully paid and resettlement completed.   
Site Selection, Site Preparation and Relocation 
The RAP will describe the process for identification and preparation of relocation sites and will describe 
the institutional and technical arrangements for identifying and preparing relocation sites to ensure 
that  these  sites  selected  are  comparable  to  those  that  have  been  lost.    Procedures  for  physical 
relocation, including the timetables for site preparation and transfer will be drawn up. 
Housing Infrastructure and Social Services 
The  RAP  will  describe  the  process  of  providing  housing  for  resettled  persons,  and  their  access  to 
infrastructure and social services, and any assistance required by the PAPs for accessing these services.  
Environmental Protection and Management 
There may be environmental impacts as a result of any resettlement. The RAP will propose means to 
assess the impact of the relocation process on the bio-physical and social environment.  If necessary, 
an environmental impact assessment study will be carried out. The roles of the different stakeholders, 
106 
and specifically  of the  displaced and host  communities  will be  specified in terms of environmental 
protection. 
RAP Implementation and Schedule 
The  RAP  will  describe  the  institutional  framework  for  the  implementation  of  the  RAP.    It  will  also 
contain an implementation schedule  describing  the various implementation activities that must  be 
undertaken by the RAP and when these will be undertaken.  The RAP implementation schedule should 
be sensitive to seasonal demands of the affected persons and communities (eg. rainy season, planting 
and harvest seasons). 
Budget for RAP Implementation 
The RAP will list all compensation activities and activities related to other forms of assistance that need 
to be costed in the RAPs.  This will include allowances for inflation, and will indicate sources of funds, 
and flow of funds. 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Procedures  for  internal  monitoring  which  will  include  tracking  of  the  RAPs  will  be  developed.  
Monitoring indicators should be specified so that progress of the RAPs can be evaluated through which 
the  physical  progress  of  the  RAP  can  be  measured.    The  RAP  should  also  propose  how  Impact 
monitoring  should  be  done  to  assess  the effectiveness  of  the  RAPs and  their  implementation with 
respect  to  meeting  the  needs  of  the  PAPs  and  in  terms  of,  for  example,  appropriateness  of  the 
relocation sites, practicality of the implementation schedule; the effectiveness of grievance redress 
mechanisms and mechanisms for assisting vulnerable groups. 
Disclosure of the Resettlement Action Framework 
The RAP shall be made available to the district, sector, cell and village (unmudugudu) levels so that the 
affected communities may comment or seek clarification on any issues of concern prior to preparation 
of individual RAPs where these may be required.  Interested or affected parties may therefore submit 
their comments, verbally or in writing, to the sector, cell of village committees.  The RAP will also be 
disclosed on the IFAD website as required by IFAD’s Disclosure Policy. 
107 
10 
Environmental, Social and Climate Change Management for 
KIIWP 
10.1 
ESIA Procedures 
The ESIA process in Rwanda as prescribed in REMA’s EIA Guidelines47 consists of the following 
phases: 
i. 
Project  Brief  Submission  and  Registration:    As  a  first  step  in  the  EIA  process,  a  developer 
proposing to start a project shall notify RDB in writing by submission of a Project Brief. The 
purpose of a Project Brief, is to provide information on the proposed activity so as to enable 
RDB and Lead Agencies establish whether or not the activity is likely to have significant impact 
on  the  environment,  and  thus  determine  the  level  of  EIA  necessary.  The  project  brief 
submitted to RDB by a developer will be registered as the formal application for an EIA. 
Screening: Screening refers to the process by which RDB makes a decision as to whether an 
EIA is required or not, based on information in the Project Brief, and then classifies proposed 
projects as either of impact level (IL) 1, 2 or 3. 
Scoping and Consideration of Alternatives. Scoping is carried out by the developers (or their 
EIA  experts)  in  consultation  with  Lead  Agencies  and  all  relevant  stakeholders.  Scoping 
establishes  important  issues  to  be  addressed  in the environmental  impact  assessment  and 
eliminate the irrelevant ones. After scoping, RDB approves the terms of reference (TOR) that 
would be used for carrying out the environmental impact study. 
Baseline Data Collection and Analysis of Initial State: Baseline data describes status of existing 
environment at a location before intervention of the proposed project. Site-specific primary 
data  on  and  around  a  proposed  site  should  be  collected  by  experts  conducting  the 
environmental impact study to form a basis for future environmental monitoring. 
Impact Prediction and Analysis of Alternatives: Impact prediction is a way of forecasting the 
environmental  consequences  of  a  project  and  its  alternatives.  This  action  is  principally  a 
responsibility of an EIA expert. For every project, possible alternatives should be identified and 
environmental  attributes  compared.  Alternatives  should  cover  both  project  location  and 
process technologies. Alternatives should then be ranked for selection of the most optimum 
environmental and socio-economic benefits to the community. Once alternatives have been 
analysed, a mitigation plan should be drawn up for the selected option and is supplemented 
with  an  Environmental  Management  Plan  (EMP)  to  guide  the  developer  in  environmental 
conservation.  
EIA Report: An environmental impact study culminates into preparation of a report by the EIA 
expert(s). An EIA report (EIR) should provide clear information to the decision-maker on the 
different  environmental  scenarios  without  the  project,  with  the  project  and  with  project 
alternatives.  The  developer  is  also  required  to  produce  an  environment  management  plan 
(EMP). Any modifications made by a developer to the EIA report should be presented in form 
of  an  Environmental  Impact  Report  Addendum.  All  these  three  documents  should  then  be 
submitted to RDB by the developer.  
Public Hearing: After completion of EIA report the Organic Law requires that the public must 
be  informed  and  consulted  on  a  proposed  development.  RDB  may,  if  it  deems  necessary, 
conduct  a public hearing before EIA reports are  appraised by its Technical Committee. Any 
stakeholders  likely  to  be  affected  by  the  proposed  project  are  entitled  to  have  access  to 
unclassified sections of the EIA report and make oral or written comments to RDB. RDB shall 
consider public views when deciding whether or not to approve a proposed project.  
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
47 REMA (2006). General Guideline and Procedure for Environmental Impact Assessment. 
108 
viii. 
ix. 
Decision-Making:    During  the  decision-making  and  authorization  phase,  EIA  documents 
submitted to the Authority shall be reviewed by two decision-making committees: a Technical 
Committee and an Executive Committee constituted by RDB. If the project is approved, the 
developer  will  be 
issued  with  an  EIA  Certificate  of  Authorization,  which  permits 
implementation of the project in accordance with the mitigation measures in the EIA Report 
and any additional approval conditions.  
Environmental  Monitoring:    Monitoring  should  be  done  during  both  construction  and 
operation  phases  of  a  project.  It  is  done  not  just  to  ensure  that  approval  conditions  are 
complied with but also to observe whether the predictions made in the EIA reports are correct 
or not. Where impacts exceed levels predicted in the environmental impact study, corrective 
action  should  be  taken.  Monitoring  also  enables  RDB  to  review  validity  of  predictions  and 
conditions  of  implementation  of  the  Environmental  Management  Plan  (EMP).  During 
implementation and operation of a project, monitoring is a responsibility of the developer and 
RDB. 
The process is illustrated in Figure 10.1 below.  
Figure 10.1 REMA’s ESIA Procedures 
Source: REMA (2006). General Guideline and Procedure for Environmental Impact Assessment 
109 
Table 10.1 describes the functions of the various entities involved in the ESIA process, as stipulated by 
the national EIA guidelines and requirements.  It also illustrates IFAD’s roles in the review and approval 
processes. For the purposes of clarification, REMA requires Environmental Impact Reports (EIRs) to be 
submitted  for  IL2  and  IL3,  although  the  level  of  assessment  differs  proportionately  according  to 
screening category.  IFAD on the other had refers to the assessment report for Category B projects 
(equivalent  to  IL2)  as  ESMPs  and  assessment  reports  for  Category  A  projects  (equivalent  to  IL3)  as 
ESIAs.  In the description in this chapter, the term ESMPs and ESIAs are used to distinguish assessments 
and reports for IL2 and IL3 projects respectively.  
Kabarondo Sector 
110 
Table 10.1  Functions of Various Stakeholders in the ESIA Process 
            Functions  
RAB/SPIU 
IFAD 
RDB 
REMA 
Lead Agencies 
District, Cells and 
Villages 
Project Communities / 
Beneficiaries 
ESIA Stages 
Application for 
ESIA. 
Submit application in 
form of Project Brief. 
Screening 
Scoping & 
developing 
Terms of 
Reference 
Hire REMA-registered 
consultant to carry out 
scoping, and prepare 
TOR. 
Assessment of 
Impacts 
Submission of EIA 
documents to 
RDB. 
Hire REMA-registered 
consultant to carry out 
ESIA study and prepare 
EIR 
Submit ESIA/ESMPs to 
RDB 
Prepare SECAP 
Review Note 
Determine project 
categorisation  
Receive and register 
EIA application (Project 
Brief) submitted by 
developer. 
Review Project Brief to 
determine project 
classification.  
Identify relevant Lead 
Agency to participate in 
project screening. 
Review and comment 
on scoping report 
and ToRs 
Transmit Project Brief 
to REMA, Lead Agency, 
Local Government. 
Organize publication & 
consultation on the 
Project Brief. 
Collect public 
comments. 
Approve experts to 
conduct EIA study. 
Write ToRs and send 
them to the developer. 
Provide information 
when consulted by EIA 
experts during impact 
studies. 
Receive ESIAs/ESMPs 
Provide comments to 
ESIAs/ESMPs 
Receive prescribed 
number of copies of 
ESIAs/ESMPs and 
Addendum (if 
111 
Participate in screening. 
Receive and review 
copy of Project Brief 
from RDB.   
Receive and review 
copy of Project Brief 
from RDB. 
Send advice on Project 
Brief to RDB. 
Send comment/ advice 
on Project Brief back to 
RDB. 
Receive and review copy 
of Project Brief from RDB. 
Send comment/ advice 
on Project Brief back to 
RDB. 
Provide information to 
EIA Expert / and or 
developer during 
impact studies. 
Provide information to 
EIA Expert /and or 
Developer.  
Provide feedback during 
community consultations.  
            Functions  
RAB/SPIU 
IFAD 
RDB 
REMA 
Lead Agencies 
District, Cells and 
Villages 
Project Communities / 
Beneficiaries 
ESIA Stages 
Public & 
stakeholder input. 
Together with ESIA 
consultant, present 
ESIAs/ESMPs at public 
meetings 
Disclose ESIAs and 
RAPs 
Review process & 
Decision making 
Instruct ESIA consultant 
to incorporate 
comments into EIR 
Receive and review 
final ESIAs 
Approve final ESIAs 
applicable) from 
developer. 
Verify that submitted 
EIA documents are 
complete.  
Transmit copy of 
ESIAs/ESMPs to REMA, 
Local Government(s), 
Lead Agencies and 
communities. 
Organize public 
hearings.  
Appoint Public Hearing 
presiding officer 
(Chairperson) from its 
staff.  
Receive public 
comments. 
Appoint the Technical 
and Executive 
Committees to review 
ESIAs/ESMPs 
documents and make 
final decision, 
respectively.  
Be member of the 
Technical Committee. 
Transmit ESIAs/ESMPs 
& Public Hearing  
Report to Technical 
Committee. 
Chair the Executive 
Committee.  
Serve on public hearing 
panel 
Receive and review 
copy of ESIAs/ESMPs 
from RDB (if not 
member of Technical 
Committee).  
Serve on public hearing 
panel 
Receive and review 
copy of ESIAs/ESMPs 
from RDB. 
Assist RDB in organizing 
public hearings. 
Host public hearings. 
Receive and review copy 
of ESIAs/ESMPs from RDB 
Send comments on 
project to Local Authority. 
Participate in public 
hearings. 
Host individual 
consultations. 
Collect written 
comments from general 
public. 
Send collected public 
comments to RDB. 
Serve on the Technical 
Committee. 
Serve on the Technical 
Committee. 
Serve on the Executive 
Committee. 
Serve on the Executive 
Committee. 
Endorse or reject 
decision by RDB 
112 
            Functions  
RAB/SPIU 
IFAD 
RDB 
REMA 
Lead Agencies 
District, Cells and 
Villages 
Project Communities / 
Beneficiaries 
ESIA Stages 
Project 
implementation, 
monitoring & 
auditing 
Hire REMA-registered 
consultant to carry out 
independent audits 
Prepare quarterly and 
annual monitoring 
reports 
Take decision and 
communicate to 
developer. 
Receive and review 
annual monitoring 
reports  
Undertake routine 
inspection and auditing 
to enforce compliance. 
Take action when 
project not in 
compliance 
Receive and review 
audit reports and 
quarterly and annual 
reports 
Undertake 
supervision missions 
ensure ESIA-ESMPs 
are implemented and 
compliance with 
SECAP requirements. 
Take action when 
project not in 
compliance 
Inspect to ensure 
environmental 
compliance during 
project implementation.  
Receive and review 
audit reports and annual 
monitoring reports  
Cross-check monitoring 
results. 
Undertake routine 
inspection and auditing 
to enforce compliance. 
Take action when 
project not in 
compliance. 
Assist in inspecting and 
monitoring 
environmental 
compliance during 
project implementation 
Receive and review 
audits and annual 
monitoring reports. 
Environmental officers 
at district level assist in 
inspecting and 
monitoring 
environmental 
compliance during 
project implementation. 
Source: Adapted from REMA (2006) General Guidelines and Procedures for Environmental Impact Assessment, and IFAD (2017) SECAP. 
113 
10.2 
KIIWP Environmental, Social and Climate Change Management Procedures 
The  ESCC  management  procedures  for  KIIWP  subprojects  will  follow  the  national  guidelines  and 
processes  as  described  in  the  preceding  section,  as  well  as  IFAD’s  safeguard  requirements  as 
elaborated in SECAP.  This section elaborates on those processes to ensure that the environmental and 
social assessments conducted for KIIWP subprojects are aligned with IFAD’s safeguards requirements.  
It must be noted that at this stage, interventions focussing on the development of values chains for 
both  provision  of  staple  food  and  income  generation  have  not  been  identified.    However,  all  such 
interventions will have to follow the procedures outlined below, including screening, preparation of 
ESIAs and/or ESMPs and other safeguards documentation, review and approvals, disclosure, setting 
up grievance mechanisms, monitoring, auditing and reporting.  
10.2.1 
Implementation and Coordination  
The institutional arrangements for KIIWP implementation are described in Section 2.4, which gives an 
overview of the roles of the Project Management Team and the KIIWP District Team, including the SPIU 
Environmental and Climate Change (ECC) Specialist and the KIIWP Environmental and Climate Change 
Officer  (ECCO)  and  Social  Safeguards  Officer  (SSO).    Specific  responsibilities  in  relation  to  ESIA 
procedures and safeguards requirements are described in the sections below.  
10.2.2  Screening 
Exclusion List 
The purpose of screening is to provide an initial indication of the complexities of a project, after which 
it can be categorised to determine the level of investigation necessary to ensure that the project causes 
no harm to the environment or the project communities, and to ensure that the project is acceptable 
and sustainable in terms of environmental, social and climate risks and impacts.  
At the outset it is important to state the types of projects that IFAD does not implement. In the context 
of the KIIWP subprojects, these are:   
•  Projects  in  areas  of  critical  habitats  or  which  result  in  conversion  or  degradation  of  such 
habitats. Emphasis will be to identify alternatives and ensure that any potential degradation 
or conversion is firstly avoided, and if not avoided, appropriately mitigated.  This is relevant to 
KIIWP because the Ndego borders the Akagera National Park, and will source its water from 
Lake Ihema, which is mostly located in the park.  In addition, a number of the interventions 
will affect wetlands, and although most of these are categorized as “conditional marshlands” 
by  REMA,  some  of  the  marshlands  contain  biodiversity  exhibiting  high  endemism  (refer  to 
Sections 5.2.6 and 5.2.8).  
•  Production  or  trade  in  any  product  or  activity  deemed  illegal  under  host  country  laws  or 
regulations  or  international  conventions  and  agreements,  or  subject  to  international  bans, 
such as pharmaceuticals, pesticides/herbicides, ozone depleting substances, PCB's, wildlife or 
products regulated under CITES. KIIWP will have to ensure beneficiary farmers use approved 
pesticides and herbicides, and that electrical appliances (transformers for power supply to the 
schemes) do not use PCBs. An indirect impact of KIIWP may result in an increase in poaching 
or  killing  of  threatened  or  endangered  species  that  may  raid  the  irrigated  fields,  given  the 
proximity  of  the  proposed  Humure  Scheme  in  Ndego  Sector  to  the  Akagera  National  Park.  
Therefore,  KIIWP must  also ensure  that  sufficient  provision  is made  for  the  protection  and 
conservation of wildlife, flora and their habitats.  
114 
•  Production  or  activities  involving  harmful  or  exploitative  forms  of  forced  labour48  and/or 
harmful child labour49.  As such forced labour may not be an issue for KIIWP subprojects, but 
it should be noted that IFAD requires that farm hands/casual workers are paid decent living 
wages,  and  that  labour  and  working  conditions  and  well-being  of  workers  and  local 
communities are fully considered and in line with ILO conventions (see Section 3.6).  In rural 
societies, children often skip school during the harvest period in order to assist their families 
on  the  farms.   Children  working on  agricultural  projects  are  especially  susceptible  to  harm 
from  poor  use  and  management  of  agrochemicals.  KIIWP  subprojects  will  therefore  have 
ensure that harvesting (and other) activities do not interfere with children’s education, and 
that children do not handle agrochemicals and are not otherwise exposed to these substances. 
•  Projects  that  involve  the  physical  and/or  economic  displacement  of  more  than  20  persons. 
SECAP  specifies  that  a  full  RAP  is  required  where  more  than  20  persons  are  physically  or 
economically displaced.  However, the logistics of properly resettling and fairly compensating 
a  large  number  of  affected  people,  as  well  as  restoring  and  improving  their  livelihoods, 
monitoring their well-being thereafter and managing the impacts on host communities, will 
be beyond the capacity of KIIWP’s staff and resources.  It is therefore recommended that IFAD 
does not implement subprojects involving the physical and/or economic displacement of more 
than 20 people.  
Screening Categorisation 
Rwanda EIA guidelines define three levels of impact which are determined through the screening 
process as follows:  
•  Projects for which it is evident that there will be significant and adverse environmental impacts 
whose mitigation measures cannot readily be prescribed must undergo through a complete 
assessment process and thus require a detailed EIA. These projects are categorised as Impact 
Level 3 (IL3).  REMA’s guidelines indicate that projects that will result in changes in water use 
through irrigation, drainage promotion or dams fall under IL3.  
•  Projects believed to have adverse, but not irreversible environmental impacts and for which 
mitigation  and  management  measures  can  be  readily  designed  and  incorporated  into  the 
project fall into category Impact Level 2 (IL2).  They require environmental impact assessments 
to be carried out but these may not require detailed analysis.  
•  Projects  believed  to  have  minimal  adverse  impacts,  that  can  easily  be  identified  through  a 
Project Brief and not requiring further environmental analysis are categorised as Impact Level 
1 (IL1).  These projects do not require environmental impact assessments.  
IFAD’s screening categories as specified in SECAP (2017) are as follows: 
•  Category A projects are those that may have significant adverse environmental and/or social 
implications that: (i) are sensitive, irreversible or unprecedented; (ii) affect an area broader 
than the sites or facilities subject to physical interventions; and (iii) are not readily remedied 
by preventive actions or mitigation measures.  These require full ESIAs to be conducted.  SECAP 
lists types of developments which would fall into Category A. These include projects involving 
wetland  development;  loss  of  natural  habitat  and  loss  of  biodiversity  or  environmental 
services  provided  by  a  natural  ecosystem  in  protected  areas  and  their  buffer  zones, 
ecologically sensitive areas, areas of global/national significance for biodiversity conservation 
48 Forced labor means all work or service, not voluntarily performed, that is extracted from an individual under 
threat of force or penalty. 
49  Harmful  child  labor  means  the  employment  of  children  that  is  economically  exploitive,  or  is  likely  to  be 
hazardous to, or to interfere with, the child's education, or to be harmful to the child's health, or physical, mental, 
spiritual, moral, or social development. 
115 
and/or biodiversity-rich areas, and habitats dependent on by endangered species.   Project 
that may lead to significant increased use of agrochemicals which may lead to life-threatening 
illness  and  long-term  public  health  and  safety  concerns;  and  water-based  (ground  and/or 
surface)  development  where  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  significant  depletion  and/or 
reduced  flow  may/has  occurred  from  the  effects  of  climate  change  or  from  overutilization 
(above recharge capacity). With regard to infrastructure, Category A projects include medium- 
and large-scale dam/reservoir construction (over 5 metre high wall, more than 500 metre long 
crest, and/or with a reservoir exceeding 3 million m3); and the construction/rehabilitation of 
irrigation  schemes  above  100  hectares.    For  social  aspects,  projects  that  could  potentially 
cause economic or physical displacement or physical resettlement of more than 20 people, or 
impacting more than 10 per cent of any one community’s or individual farmer’s or household’s 
assets also fall into Category A. For these projects, RAPs are also required. 
•  Projects  involving  agricultural  intensification  and/or  expansion  of  cropping  area  in  “non-
sensitive  areas”,  watershed  management  or  rehabilitation,  large-scale  soil  and  water 
conservation  measures;  small-scale  irrigation  and  drainage  projects  and  small and  medium 
(capacity < 3 million m3) dam subprojects are classified as Category B.  These projects require 
ESMPs to be prepared.  Included in this category are projects that would result in economic 
and physical displacement affecting fewer than 20 people or impacting less than 20 per cent 
of any one community’s or individual farmer’s or household’s assets. A simple RAP must then 
be conducted.  
•  Category  C  projects  will  have  negligible  or  no  environmental  or  social  implications,  and 
therefore no further environmental and social analysis is required.  
Based on the above guidelines, the KIIWP interventions have been categorised as shown in Table 10.2 
below.  
Table 10.2  Categorisation of KIIWP Interventions 
Infrastructure 
Comments 
REMA Risk 
Categorisation 
SECAP Risk 
Categorisation 
Rationale for Categorisation 
Irrigation 
Pumped irrigation 
3 sites in Ndego sector: Kibare (400 
ha), Humure (600ha), Byimana 
(400ha) 
Source: Lakes Kibare, Ihema, Nasho 
respectively 
IL3 
Category A 
1 site in Kabare sector: Gakoma 
(600ha) 
Source: Lake Nasho 
IL3 
Category A 
116 
Command areas greater than 
100ha 
Humure scheme borders 
Akagera National Park. Intake 
likely to be in totally protected 
wetland. The park and its 
wetlands are areas of national 
importance and high 
biodiversity and endemism.  
Kibare and Byimana schemes 
intakes in conditional wetlands. 
Peculiar hydrological 
characteristics which need to 
be thoroughly studied: shallow 
lakes with reverse flow 
phenomenon from lakes 
upstream to Akagera River 
Command areas greater than 
100ha 
Intake in conditional wetland 
Peculiar hydrological 
characteristics which need to 
Infrastructure 
Comments 
REMA Risk 
Categorisation 
SECAP Risk 
Categorisation 
Rationale for Categorisation 
IL3 
Category A 
be thoroughly studied: shallow 
lakes with reverse flow 
phenomenon from lakes 
upstream to Akagera River 
Command areas greater than 
100 ha 
Medium-scale dams with dam 
height greater than 5m 
IL2 
Category B 
Small scale water harvesting 
which will have minor impacts. 
IL2 
Category B 
Watershed management and 
soil and water conservation 
activities in non-sensitive areas. 
Unlikely that more than 20 
people will be physically or 
economically displaced. 
Small marshlands 
Farm-level ponds 
Dams to irrigate a total of 275 ha 
both marshlands and hillsides  
Rwinkwavu/Kabare sectors, on 
River Gishanda, irrigating 125 ha 
Kabarondo Sector on River 
Kanyeganyege irrigating 150 ha 
Source: rainwater 
Locations: Murama 
Selection criteria – a lot of land 
which has been terraced, but no 
water 
Pond size 50-200m3 
Catchment Conservation 
Land Husbandry 
(Terraces + 
agroforestry, 
mulching, liming, 
etc) 
7500 ha in total, including 2275 ha 
irrigated and rainfed Kabare, 
Kabarondo, Rwinkwavu: dam or 
irrigation related 
Murama (900ha), Kabarondo 
(190ha): rainfed  
Criteria for selecting locations: 
terraced hillsides with water 
scarcity; non-terraced hillsides 
Av. Household land holding: 0.3ha 
Provision of Water for Livestock and Domestic Use 
Valley tanks new 
Ndego, Gahini, Murundi and Mwiri 
Sectors. 
 7 new valley tanks  
Locations of new tanks not known.  
IL2 
Category B 
Valley tanks rehab 
Ndego, Gahini, Murundi and Mwiri 
Sectors. 
Rehabilitation of 15 existing valley 
tanks 
IL2 
Category B 
Boreholes 
Ndego Gahini, Murundi and Mwiri 
Sectors. 
Possibly 20 boreholes. 
IL2 
Category B 
117 
Involve natural drainage into 
valley depressions. May require 
walls, but these will be less 
than 5m in height;  
Possible economic or physical 
displacement but will affect 
than 20 people, particularly for 
acquisition of buffer zone. 
Impacts would revolve around 
degradation around borehole 
site which can be readily 
managed. 
Rehabilitation of existing 
structures, involving repairing 
tank walls, desilting and 
landscaping activities, as well as 
rehabilitation of degraded 
valley tank environs. 
Impacts would revolve around 
degradation around borehole 
site which can be readily 
managed. 
There are few boreholes in the 
area, and therefore if there is 
groundwater, the aquifer is 
Infrastructure 
Comments 
REMA Risk 
Categorisation 
SECAP Risk 
Categorisation 
Rationale for Categorisation 
Borehole location and capacity not 
known. 
No. of people and livestock to be 
supplied not established. 
unlikely to be stressed or 
overutilized. 
Impacts would revolve around 
degradation around borehole 
site which can be readily 
managed.  
10.2.3  Environmental, Social and Climate Safeguards Documentation 
The basic purpose and requirements of various safeguards instruments are described below.   
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) 
For KIIWP, any subproject with significant adverse environmental, social and climate risks and impacts, 
is categorised as REMA IL3 (IFAD Category A) and requires a full ESIA study, which is presented as an 
Environmental Impact Report (EIR) – hereinafter referred to as an ESIA Report for ease of reference.  
The ESIA enables both environmental, climate change and social issues to be taken into account during 
all stages of project design and implementation.  It identifies, predicts, evaluates and communicates 
the potential environmental, climate, and social impacts and risks of the project in a systematic and 
objective  way.    It  also  recommends  appropriate  preventive  actions  and  mitigating  measures,  and 
maximizes environmental opportunities where possible.  
The ESIA Report must cover, among others: 
•  Administrative  and 
for  environmentally  sound 
implementation  of  the  environmental  management,  applicable  national  and  international 
environmental legal and policy frameworks and their relevance to the project; 
institutional  arrangements  required 
•  A  detailed  description  of  the  proposed  project  components,  as  well  as  all  ancillary  works 
including  location,  technologies  to  be  used,  materials  and  their  quantities,  construction 
period, etc; 
•  A  detailed  description  the  biophysical  and  socio-economic  baseline  conditions,  bearing  in 
mind that these provide the basis for impact analysis and monitoring; 
•  A description of other ongoing or planned developments in the project area that could have 
cumulative or synergistic effects on the project outcome; 
•  Outcomes  of  stakeholder  consultations  and  public  participation  and  recommendations  for 
• 
addressing stakeholder concerns in design and implementation; 
Identification and analysis of anticipated adverse impacts and risks, and cumulative impacts, 
as well as beneficial impacts;  
•  Analysis  of  alternatives,  including  project  sites,  access  options,  technologies,  construction 
methodologies, etc, and a ‘no project’ alternative;  
•  Preventative, mitigation and enhancement measures; 
•  Recommendations for changes to project design; 
•  Environmental, social and climate risk management plan (ESCMP – which includes climate risk 
resilience proposals); 
•  Grievance redress procedure; 
•  Monitoring and auditing requirements and procedures; 
•  Costs  for  environmental  and  social  management  and  monitoring,  and  climate  resilience 
measures. 
118 
As  ESIAs  and  ESMPs  are  done  in  tandem  with  the  feasibility  studies  and  design  development,  it  is 
important that: 
•  Stakeholder concerns – particularly those of the communities and project affected persons - 
are addressed in the ESMPs, and if they are not, reasons for doing so should be explained; and 
•  The project design should be presented to the communities. 
The ESIAs for Category A subprojects will be prepared by consultants hired by the RAB. 
Reference should be made to the Law No. 48/2018 of 13/08/2018 on Environment, Ministerial Order 
of  2008  relating  to  the  Requirements  and  Procedure  for  Environmental  Impact  Assessment,  and 
REMA’s  General  Guidelines  and  Procedure  for  Environmental  Impact  Assessment  (2006).    SECAP 
provides a model terms of reference for undertaking ESIAs, and recommends a format for the ESIA 
Report.  Annex 3 provides a sample TOR for ESIA studies for KIIWP irrigation subprojects. 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 
For  subprojects  that  have  no  major  environmental  and  social  issues  are  categorised  as  IL2  (IFAD 
Category B), also require environmental and social impact assessments to be conducted and presented 
as EIRs, but they do not require the level of detailed analysis as for IL3 projects.   In SECAP terminology, 
this  less  detailed  analysis  of  risks  and  impacts  is  referred  to  as  an  environmental  and  social 
management plan (ESMP).   However, an ESMP must contain: 
•  A detailed description of the project components; 
•  A baseline which focuses on baseline information required for the analysis of impacts and also 
for the purposes of monitoring; 
•  An analysis of positive and negative environmental, social and climate-related impacts; 
•  Mitigation measures for negative impacts; 
•  Details  on  the  implementation  of  mitigation  measures,  including  at  what  stage/when  they 
should be incorporated, responsibilities for implementing mitigation, cost of mitigation; 
•  Details  on  monitoring  requirements, 
including  responsibilities  for  monitoring  during 
construction and operation, monitoring indicators, monitoring baseline, frequency and means 
of monitoring, costs of monitoring. 
The ESMPs for Category B subprojects will be prepared by the KIIWP Project Management Team. It 
may be that the team does not have the capacity to do this, in which case they may hire a consultant 
to prepare the ESMP.    
Again,  stakeholder  concerns  must  be  addressed  in  the  ESMPs,  and  the  project  design  should  be 
presented to the communities. 
The REMA Guidelines on the preparation of ESMPs as well as SECAP’s ESMP formats should be closely 
followed.    
Climate Risk Analysis 
The purpose of climate risk screening is to determine the exposure of the project to climate-related 
risks  (High,  Moderate  or  Low)  based  on  available  information  about  historic  climate  hazard 
occurrences,  current  climate  trends  and  future  climate  change  scenarios,  as  well  as  to  assess  the 
likelihood  of  the  project  increasing  the  vulnerability  of  the  expected  target  populations  to  climate 
hazards.  It  provides  an  opportunity  to  integrate  climate  issues  into  project  design  and  therefore 
increase project resilience and hence sustainability.   
119 
Chapter 8 provides an analysis of climate risk for KIIWP, and the risk classification indicates that the 
Project is high risk.  It is therefore recommended that an in-depth climate risk analsyis be undertaken 
prior to the full design of the Project in order to inform the design and decision-making processes for 
the various subrprojects. 
The detailed climate risk assessment will be done by the SPIU ECC Specialist with support from IFAD.  
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) 
Where involuntary physical displacement (relocation or loss of shelter) and economic displacement 
(loss of assets or access to assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of livelihood) 
occur as a result of subproject-related land acquisition and/or restrictions on land use or access to 
resources, a resettlement action plan must be prepared.  The approach should first be to do no harm, 
and adhere to the principle of free, prior and informed consent – that is to first avoid, then minimise 
displacement.  But this may not always be possible.  Therefore, the RAP aims to ensure that all persons 
affected by the subproject are treated equitably, and are compensated fully and fairly for lost assets, 
and that the mitigation of adverse effects as well as the benefits of resettlement are appropriate and 
sustainable. The RAP must identify the full range of people affected by the subproject and justify their 
displacement after consideration of alternatives that would minimize or avoid displacement. All people 
affected by involuntary resettlement should be consulted and involved in resettlement planning. The 
RAP establishes eligibility criteria for affected parties, and rates of compensation for lost assets, as well 
as levels and types of assistance for relocation and reconstruction of affected households. The RAP 
includes a grievance mechanism through which affected people can raise concerns, and it provides 
guidance for the implementation of the RAP, and on mechanisms for monitoring the performance of 
the resettlement and compensation program. 
Depending on the number of persons or households affected, a full RAP or a simpler RAP (for less than 
20  people  being  displaced)  should  be  prepared  by  a  consultant.    SECAP  Guidance  Statement  #13 
stipulates that economic or physical displacement (ie. land, potable water and water for other uses), 
or  physical  resettlement  of  more  than  20  people,  or  impacting  more  than  10  per  cent  of  any  one 
community’s or individual farmer’s or household’s assets requires a full RAP.  
Chapter 9 presents an outline for the preparation of a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) in the event 
schemes  and  land  husbandry  activities  under  KIIWP  cause  physical  resettlement  or  economic 
displacement.  
RAPs will be prepared by consultants, and then submitted to KIIWP Social Safeguards Officer (SSO) and 
IFAD’s  SECAP  Team  for  review  and  approval,  after  which  it  will  be  submitted  to  the  Rwanda  Land 
Management and Use Authority (RLMUA) for approval.  
Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) 
Agrochemicals (mainly fertilizers and pesticides) may be necessary to achieve higher yields, but they 
must be carefully applied as they have various adverse environmental and social impacts related to 
contamination of water bodies and soil and thereby threatening biodiversity, risks to farm workers and 
community  health  from  exposure  to  agrochemicals,  and  releases  of  GHGs.      In  order  to  properly 
manage the use of pesticides, Integrated Pest Management Plans (IPMPs) must be prepared.   
FAO defines integrated pest management as: “the careful consideration of all available pest control 
techniques and subsequent integration of appropriate measures that discourage the development of 
pest populations and keep pesticides and other interventions to levels that are economically justified 
120 
and reduce or minimize risks to human health and the environment. IPM emphasizes the growth of a 
healthy crop with the least possible disruption to agro-ecosystems and encourages natural pest control 
mechanisms”. 
The following main steps can be considered as typical for an IPM approach50: 
•  Prevention  and/or  suppression  of  harmful  organisms.    This  is  often  best  achieved  by  a 
combination of the following options: 
o  crop rotation;  
o 
inter-cropping  use  of  adequate  cultivation  techniques  (e.g.,  seedbed  sanitation, 
sowing  dates  and  densities,  under-sowing,  conservation  tillage,  pruning  and  direct 
sowing); 
o  where appropriate, use of pest resistant/tolerant cultivars and standard/certified seed 
and planting material; 
o  balanced soil fertility and water management, making optimum use of organic matter; 
o  prevent  spreading  of  harmful  organisms  by  field  sanitation  and  hygiene  measures 
(e.g., by removal of affected plants or plant parts, regular cleansing of machinery and 
equipment); 
o  protection and enhancement of important beneficial organisms, e.g. by the utilisation 
of ecological infrastructures inside and outside production sites. 
•  Harmful organisms must be monitored with adequate methods and tools, where  available. 
Such  adequate  tools  should  include  observations  in  the  field  and  where  feasible  warning, 
forecasting and early diagnosis systems (e.g. traps). 
•  Based  on  the  results  of  the  monitoring  it  is  decided  whether  and  when  to  use  what  pest 
management inputs. Sustainable biological, physical and other non-chemical methods must 
be given priority over chemical methods if they provide satisfactory pest control. 
•  Pesticides should only be applied as a last resort when there are no adequate non-chemical 
alternatives and use of pesticides is economically justified. 
•  The pesticides applied shall be as specific as possible for the target and shall have the least 
side  effects  on  human  health,  non-target  organisms  and  the  environment,  while  their  use 
should be kept at minimum levels, e.g. by partial applications. 
•  Monitor the success of the applied pest management measures. 
The IPMP should evaluate the impact of potential pests prior to programme implementation, identify 
the type of pests and assess the magnitude of impacts likely to be caused by those pests.  In assessing 
the  hazards  of  pesticide  use,  the  toxicity  of  the  pesticide  and  exposure  to  it  are  key  elements. 
Therefore, as a minimum, the IPMP should: 
•  Screen the types of pesticides  for toxicity by ensuring: they are effective against  the target 
species,  have  negligible  adverse  impacts  on  human  health  and  non-target  species,  will  not 
precipitate resistance in pests, and do not fall into WHO class 1A or 1B; 
•  Aim to reduce exposure time or degree of exposure. 
•  Propose  alternative  non-pesticide  management  options 
(physical,  mechanical  and 
biochemical), as well as any available less toxic varieties of the pesticides. 
The  KIIWP  ECC  Officer,  and  in  collaboration  with  the  District  Environment  Officer  and  District 
Agriculture  Officer  should  prepare  the  IPMP  as  applicable  to  the  crops  being  grown  in  the  KIIWP 
schemes.  The IPMP may be also developed as part of the ESIA or ESMP or it can be a stand-alone 
document.    The  IPMP  must  also  stipulate  national  requirements  and  approved  and  appropriate 
agrochemicals used in the schemes.  In developing the IPMP, reference should be made to REMA’s 
50 http://www.fao.org/agriculture/crops/thematic-sitemap/theme/pests/ipm/more-ipm/en/ 
121 
Practical  Notes  on  Soil  Productivity  and  Crop  Production,  SECAP’s  Guidance  Statement  #2  on 
Agrochemicals, and IFC’s EHS Guidelines on Crop Production (revised 2015). 
Dam Safety Plan 
The overarching dam safety objective is to protect people, property and the environment from the 
harmful effects of mis-operation or failure of dams and reservoirs. To ensure that dams and reservoirs 
are operated and that activities are conducted so as to achieve the highest standards of safety that 
can reasonably be achieved, measures have to be taken to achieve the following three fundamental 
safety objectives: 
• 
• 
• 
to control the release of damaging discharges downstream of the small dam; 
to restrict the likelihood of events that might lead to a loss of control over the stored volume 
and the spillway and other discharges; 
to  mitigate  through  onsite  accident  management  and/or  emergency  planning  the 
consequences of such events if they were to occur. 
The three major factors that trigger small dams to fail: 
•  Sedimentation behind dam (sediments deposited clog outlet and intake structures); 
•  Seepage loss through foundation and embankment; and 
• 
Low catchment yield and low volume of stored water in dams. 
These situations come about as a result of inadequate design (hydrological, geotechnical, hydraulic); 
very limited site investigations and consequently poor understanding of site conditions; substandard 
embankment  placement  methods  (eg.  soil  compaction  methods);  lack  of  watershed  management 
practices; and inadequate maintenance or inspection frequencies.  
To avoid or minimize the occurrence of dam failure, MINAGRI in collaboration with MININFRA have 
the  responsibility  to  inspect  dam  safety  aspects  periodically  during  all  phases  of  the  dam  design, 
construction, and operation and maintenance.  Key considerations are: 
•  Dam hazard classification – which is assessed depending on the probable loss of human life 
and economic and environmental losses.  
•  Dam site investigations: 
o  Selection of dam site so that in the event of failure there will be minimal impact;  
o 
technical considerations such as catchment, topography, embankment conditions and 
foundation, spillway locations, and watershed activities;  
o  environmental  considerations  including  reservoir  slope  stability,  seismic  activity, 
groundwater changes, sediment trapping, impacts on flora and fauna upstream and 
downstream,  the  need  to  maintain  an  environmental  flow,  and  social  demands 
downstream; 
•  Dam design – taking into account potential for overtopping of the embankment; potential for 
extreme events such as earthquakes or unprecedented high flows; sedimentation rates. 
•  Dam  construction  –  the  need  for  qualified  and  experience  contractors  and  supervisors; 
meticulous design review; 
•  Safety  surveillance  –  surveillance  programme  specifying  regular  and  frequent  inspections, 
checklists of factors to be inspected; special inspections; problem solving; and instrumentation 
and monitoring. 
•  Operation and maintenance - effective and ongoing operation, maintenance and surveillance 
procedures; maintenance systems. 
122 
The KIIWP Project Management Team will be responsible to ensure that all the necessary dam safety 
requirements are adhered to during the planning and construction of proposed dams for irrigation.  
An abbreviated version of SECAP’s Guidelines for Dam Safety are presented in Annex 7. 
Standard Operating Procedures 
Depending on the scale and complexity of the proposed scheme/project and issues that arise, other 
operating  procedures  or  plans  may  need  to  be  developed  to  ensure  environmental  protection, 
community and occupational health and safety and other risks and hazards.  If necessary, these may 
include: 
Livelihood Restoration Plan; 
•  RAP Implementation Plan; 
• 
•  Traffic Management Plan; 
•  Waste Management Plan; 
•  Health and Safety Management Plan; 
•  Pollution Contingency Plan; 
•  Erosion Management Plan; 
•  Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan; 
•  Cultural Heritage Management Plan. 
These plans may be developed by the ESIA consultants or the Technical Assistants. 
10.2.4  Review and Approval of ESIA, ESMP, IPMP, RAP, Dam Safety Plan 
The  ESIAs  will  be  first  be  reviewed  by  the  SPIU  ECC  Specialist  and  IFAD’s  SECAP  Team.      ESIAs  for 
subprojects with issues of concern will be reviewed and given clearance by the Rwanda Development 
Board (RDB).  ESMPs will be reviewed by the SPIU ECC Specialist, and then submitted for review and 
approval/clearance to RDB. 
IPMPs will be reviewed by the SPIU ECC Specialist and IFAD, and approved by RAB.  RAPs will be first 
reviewed by the KIIWP Social Safeguards Officer and IFAD’s SECAP Team, and then proceed for review 
and  approval  by  the  Kayonza  District  Lands  Office  and  the  Rwanda  Land  Management  and  Use 
Authority (RLMUA).   
The Dam Safety Plans will be reviewed by specialists at IFAD and approved by MININFRA, and will be 
disclosed on IFAD’s website. 
10.2.5  Disclosure of the ESIAs and ESMPs 
In developing ESIAs and ESMPs, consultations must be held with all levels: at community, village, cell, 
sector and district levels.  During these consultations, the processes for disclosure of the documents 
should  be  communicated.  IFAD’s  SECAP  procedures  also  require  that  sufficient  consultations  have 
been carried out with key stakeholders (ie. the communities) in order to satisfy its requirements for 
Free Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC).    
Prior to approval of the subprojects, the ESIAs and ESMPs, Integrated Pest Management Plans (IPMPs) 
and RAPs where these are required, will be disclosed nationally, at district level and at cell level at a 
location accessible to the general public, and in a form and language that the communities are able to 
understand, so that they may comment on any aspects/issues contained in the reports prior to their 
approval. IFAD requires that ESIAs are disclosed for a period of 120 days prior to approval.  The ESIAs, 
123 
ESMPs, IPMPs and RAPs may therefore have to be updated to reflect these comments and indicate 
how the comments have been accommodated into the relevant subproject design and implementation 
procedures.  If the comments have not been taken on board, the reason for doing so must be provided.   
It  is  also  important  that  the  scheme  designs  are  discussed  and  approved by  the  target  beneficiary 
groups.   
10.2.6  Grievance Redress Mechanisms 
A grievance redress mechanism (GRM) is a process for receiving, evaluating and addressing project-
related concerns of, and complaints by, project affected communities or persons.  
IFAD’s Grievance Redress Mechanism allows affected complainants to have their concerns resolved in 
a fair and timely manner through an independent process. IFAD’s GRM requires:  working proactively 
with the affected parties to resolve complaints; ensuring that the complaints procedure is responsive 
and operates effectively; and maintaining records of all complaints and their resolutions. 
The principles of a good GRM are51: 
•  A mechanism scaled to risk and adverse impact on affected communities 
•  Designed to take into account culturally appropriate ways of handling community concerns 
•  A  clear  and  understandable  mechanism  that  is  accessible  to  all  segments  of  the  affected 
communities at no cost 
•  Transparency and accountability to all stakeholders  
•  A mechanism that prevents retribution and does not impede access to other remedies 
The key steps for grievance management are52: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Publicising  grievance  management  procedures  so  that  the  mechanism  is  accessible  to 
everyone; 
Receiving (ie. collecting, recording and registering) and keeping track of grievances; 
Reviewing and investigating grievances to assess the nature of the grievance, its severity and 
legitimacy; 
Developing resolution options commensurate with the nature of grievances and preparing and 
communicating  a  clear  response,  and  closing  out  cases  when  agreement  with  the 
complainants is reached 
v.  Monitoring grievances through tracking to ascertain effectiveness, adapting the mechanism 
to correct inefficiencies, using the results of monitoring for feedback and lessons learned. 
Grievance Redress Mechanism for KIIWP  
In  Rwanda  disputes  and  disagreements  may  arise  in  the  initial  stages  of  project  development 
commonly  related  to  land  property  boundaries,  destruction  of  land  resources  following  valuation 
processes including standing crops, amount of monies to be compensated and delay in disbursement 
of agreed compensation. 
KIIWP  Project  interventions  will  be  delivered  to  community  beneficiaries  through  cooperatives. 
Cooperatives  manage  grievances  and  conflicts  through  internal  committees.  During  stakeholder 
consultations it was understood that communities have confidence in cooperative grievance redress 
51 IFC (2009); Good Practice Note – Addressing Grievances from Project-Affected Communities, Guidance for 
Projects and Companies on Designing Grievance Mechanisms 
52 ibid 
124 
mechanisms. It is advised therefore that the KIIWP Project facilitate the constitution of intervention 
delivery  cooperative  or  adopt  existing  ones  to  be  involved  in  Project  design,  development  and 
implementation. 
Consultations  also  brought  an  understanding  that  escalation  avenues  are  available  for  grievance 
redress are available within the local governance structures within the hierarchical cell, sector, district 
administration arrangement.  Failure to resolve a grievance will normally allow an escalation of the 
local administration. 
Figure 10.2 Grievance Redress Mechanism for KIIWP 
The  KIIWP  Project 
is 
expected to be managed 
by GoR through the SPIU 
framework  with  due 
district representation. A 
grievance 
redress 
mechanism  (GRM)  will 
be  prepared  by 
the 
Scheme 
Grievance 
Committees as proposed 
in  Figure  10.2,  and  will 
follow either the  Abunzi 
system  if  the  aggrieved 
party is not a member of 
the 
cooperative 
concerned,  or  it  would 
resolution 
follow 
the 
typically 
mechanism 
used by the cooperatives 
as  stipulated 
the 
provisions  of  Law  N° 
48/2013  of  28/06/2013  establishing  Rwanda  Cooperative  Agency  (RCA).  The  RCA  requires  that 
cooperatives request arbitration on unresolved grievances registered by their members. RCA evokes 
its  grievance  redress  mechanism,  failure  at  which  the  grievance  is  escalated  to  the  national  court 
system.  Aggrieved parties who are not members of a cooperative would register grievances in the 
Abunzi system or directly in the national courts, depending on the gravity of the grievance as defined 
by the law.  This mechanism is also proposed at Project operation level as the GRM for resettlement 
requirements before Project commencement is provided for by law. 
in 
IFAD’s Complaints Procedure 
IFAD has established a complaints procedure entitled: “IFAD Complaints Procedure for Alleged Non-
Compliance  with  its  Social  and  Environmental  Policies  and  Mandatory  Aspects  of  its  Social, 
Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures” (PB/2014/06).  The procedure came into effect in 
January  2015,  and  provides  a  means  for  any  person  who  is  not  satisfied  that  an  IFAD  supported 
development is complying with IFAD’s social and environmental policies to lodge a complaint. This can 
be done by email on: SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org.  
125 
10.2.7  Monitoring 
Performance Monitoring 
Performance monitoring requires that: 
•  The  various  safeguards  instruments  (ESIA,  ESMP,  IPMP,  RAP,  dam  safety  plan)  have  been 
prepared to the required standard, within the required timelines; 
•  The safeguards instruments have been reviewed and approved by the responsible entities; 
•  Environmental,  social  and  climate  mitigation  measures,  have  been/are  being  implemented 
and that mitigation measures are effective. This includes monitoring the implementation of 
the ESMPs, RAP and IPMP, and also the grievance redress mechanism(s); 
•  The community is participating in all stages of the environmental and social management and 
monitoring processes; 
•  KIIWP Project Management Team and KIIWP District Team, and relevant District and cell level 
officers have been trained in accordance with the capacity building proposals; 
•  Reports are prepared and delivered as required. 
In addition, monitoring needs to be undertaken at the intervention level to assess the performance of 
the irrigation schemes, catchment protection and rehabilitation activities, and facilities provided for 
livestock watering.  
Performance  monitoring  will  be  done  by  the  IWUOs,  cell  SEDOs  and  LWUOs  and  overseen  by  the 
District Environmental Professional and the SPIU ECC Specialist.   
Examples of typical monitoring parameters and indicators are shown in Table 10.3 below: 
Table 10.3 Typical Performance Monitoring Indicators 
Monitoring Parameter 
Monitoring Activity/Indicators 
Target 
Responsibility for 
Monitoring 
Safeguards Instruments 
Approvals and Implementation  % of ESIAs/ESMPs approved 
100% ESIAs/ESMPs approved 
SPIU ECC Specialist 
Safeguards training 
%. of RAPs where RAP 
implementation completed 
100% RAPs completely 
implementation 
No. of KIIWP Project 
Management Team, District and 
cell officers trained 
All KIIWP Project Management 
Team, and all relevant District 
and cell officers trained 
SPIU ECC Specialist 
SPIU ECC Specialist 
Reporting 
No. of quarterly reports 
received 
4 quarterly reports received 
SPIU ECC Specialist 
No. of annual reports received 
1 annual report received 
SPIU ECC Specialist 
Intervention Level Monitoring 
Water availability 
Soil quality 
Zero days water not available 
IWUOs 
As stipulated in Scheme Water 
Abstraction Permit 
IWUOs 
No salinization evident 
IWUOs 
No. of days water not available 
for irrigation 
Abstraction rates 
Area of scheme where 
salinization is present and 
evident 
126 
Monitoring Parameter 
Monitoring Activity/Indicators 
Target 
Responsibility for 
Monitoring 
Compensation and 
resettlement 
Catchment rehabilitation 
Functioning of valley tanks 
No. of PAPs compensated 
All eligible PAPs compensated 
Cell SEDO 
No. of PAPs relocated 
No. of 
compensation/resettlement- 
related grievances received 
No. of hectares of degraded 
catchment rehabilitated 
All PAPs eligible for relocation 
are relocated 
Cell SEDO 
Zero complaints received 
Cell SEDO 
Total targeted land identified 
for rehabilitation is 
rehabilitated 
Sub-catchment 
committee 
No. of hectares of land terraced 
Total targeted land identified 
for terracing is terraced 
Sub-catchment 
committee 
% of valley tanks (rehabilitated 
and new) being used 
No. of valley tanks silted 3 years 
after construction 
Area around valley tank where 
degradation due to livestock 
concentrations is present and 
evident 
100% valley tanks being used 
LWUOs 
Zero valley tanks silted 
LWUOs 
No degradation evident 
LWUOs 
Results Monitoring 
Results monitoring involves monitoring compliance and effectiveness of the safeguards instruments, 
and  also  assesses  the  overall  environmental,  socio-economic  and  climate-related  impacts  of  the 
Project’s interventions in relation to its development objectives.  Results monitoring will be done on 
an annual basis by the SPIU ECC Specialist with support from KIIWP’s ECC Officer and Social Safeguards 
Officer, in collaboration with the District Environmental Officer.  This will also contribute to the KIIWP 
Mid-Term Review.  Results monitoring will be critical in providing feedback and lessons learned for any 
future  phases of KIIWP.    Typical parameters for results monitoring are  shown in  Table 10.4  below.  
Social  and  socio-economic  indicators  should  be  measured  specifically  for  the  cells  in  which  the 
subproject interventions are taking place.  However, environmental indicators (such as those relevant 
to water quality and aquatic ecology) may go beyond cell boundaries. 
127 
Table 10.4  Typical Results Monitoring Parameters 
Monitoring Parameter 
Monitoring Activity/Indicators 
Water quality in rivers 
Water  quality  at  given  sites  downstream  of 
abstraction points 
Agrochemical releases into irrigation 
drains/rivers 
Water  quality at given  sample sites along drainage 
network, and point of discharge to river 
Agrochemical concentrations in aquatic 
fauna 
Noticeable number of dead fish observed in rivers, 
marshlands and lakes  
Soil quality 
Nutrient depletion and loss in structure 
Economic activity in Project area 
Changes in agricultural production and marketing 
Socio-economic status 
Changes in poverty levels 
Agrochemical contamination 
Health 
Food security 
Livestock 
Changes in nutrition status 
Changes in employment levels for women, men and 
youth 
Changes in morbidity rates due to malaria 
Impacts of crop production on food security in the 
cells 
Number of livestock using valley tanks in dry years 
10.2.8  Quarterly and Annual Reviews 
Quarterly  and  annual  reviews  will  be  undertaken  by  the  KIIWP  ECC  Officer  and  Social  Safeguards 
Officer.   These reviews are necessary to: 
•  Ensure that subprojects are complying with the processes established in the ESMF; 
•  Ensure  that  subprojects  are  compliant  with  the  conditions  and  requirements  stipulated  in 
• 
ESMPs, IPMPs and RAPs,  
Identify  challenges  and  opportunities  in  order  to  learn  lessons  and  thereby  improve 
Programme performance; and  
•  Be able to determine the cumulative impacts of the Programme to establish attainment of the 
Programme Development Objectives.  
The reviews will produce a Quarterly and Annual Review Reports for each sector.  It is recommended 
that each year, the workshops are held where environmental, climate change and social performance 
of the Project will be reviewed and discussed, and recommendations made for improved Programme 
performance.  
The Quarterly and Annual Review reports will be presented to PSC on a quarterly and annual basis in 
order  to  ensure  that  the  Programme  activities  are  achieving  Programme  objectives.    IFAD  will 
participate in these presentations.   
10.2.9  Environmental and Social and Auditing 
The  purpose  of  auditing  is  to  establish  the  level of  compliance  with  national  policy objectives  and 
regulatory  requirements  and  whether  the  conditions  of  approval  attached  to  the  environmental 
impact assessment report are being implemented satisfactorily.  The KIIWP Project Management Team 
will be responsible for ensuring that environmental and social audits are carried out once a year during 
128 
implementation for Category A subprojects and once in two years for Category B  subprojects.  The 
audits will be carried out by independent consultants. 
Audit reports will be sent to the PSC and IFAD, as well as to REMA and the District.   
10.2.10  Reporting 
The  KIIWP  Management  Team  will  submit  quarterly  and  annual  environmental,  social  and  climate 
resilience performance reports to the PSC and IFAD.   
10.3 
Summary of Processes and Responsibilities 
Table 10.5 below summarises the procedures and responsibilities described in this ESMF. 
Table 10.5  ESMF Procedures and Responsibilities 
ESMF Procedures 
Screening 
Activity 
Eligibility 
Categorisation 
Responsibility 
KIIWP Project Team 
SPIU ECC Specialist / KIIWP ECCO / 
KIIWP SSO 
ESIA 
ESMP 
Preparation of ESIAs (IL3/Category A 
subprojects) 
ESIA Consultant 
Disclosure of ESIA 
RAB, MINAGRI, IFAD 
Review and approval of ESIA 
Implementation of ESMP  
RDB, IFAD 
KIIWP ECCO 
Supervision and monitoring of the 
ESMP 
Preparation of ESMP (IL2/Category B 
subprojects) 
SPIU ECC Specialist 
Consultant or KIIWP ECCO and SSO 
Disclosure of ESMP 
RAB, MINAGRI, IFAD 
Review and approval of ESMP 
Implementation of ESMP 
RDB, IFAD 
KIIWP ECCO 
Supervision and monitoring of the 
ESMP 
SPIU ECC Specialist 
Climate Risk Analysis 
Preparation of Climate risk analysis 
SPIU ECC Specialist, IFAD 
RAP 
Climate risk monitoring 
Preparation of RAP 
Disclosure of RAP 
Review and approval of RAP 
SPIU ECC Specialist 
RAP Consultant 
RAB, MINAGRI, IFAD 
Kayonza District Land Office, RLMUA, 
IFAD 
Implementation of RAP 
RAP Implementation Committee 
Supervision and monitoring of the 
RAP 
KIIWP SSO 
IPMP 
Preparation of IPMP 
KIIWP ECCO, DEO, DAO 
Review and approval of IPMP 
MINAGRI, IFAD 
Supervision and monitoring of 
implementation of IPMP 
KIIWP ECCO 
Dam Safety Plan 
Preparation of Dam Safety Plan 
Dam design consultant 
129 
ESMF Procedures 
Activity 
Review and approval of Dam Safety 
Plan 
Supervision and monitoring of 
implementation of Dam Safety Plan 
during dam construction  
Supervision and monitoring of 
implementation of Dam Safety Plan 
during dam operation 
Responsibility 
IFAD, MININFRA, MINIRENA 
RAB, MININFRA, MINIRENA, KIIWP 
Irrigation Engineer 
RAB, MININFRA, MINIRENA, KIIWP 
Irrigation Engineer 
Other Plans/SOPs 
Preparation of management plans / 
SOPs 
ESIA Consultant or Technical 
Assistants 
Implementation of SOPs 
KIIWP ECCO, SSO 
Grievance Redress 
Mechanism 
Grievance receipt, verification, 
investigation, resolution, 
communication with complainant 
and referral to higher levels if 
necessary 
Scheme Grievance Committees 
Performance monitoring  
Safeguards instruments 
SPIU ECC Specialist 
Monitoring of effectiveness of GRM 
KIIWP SSO 
Intervention level activities 
IWUOs, Cell SEDOs, Sub-catchment 
committees, LWUOs 
Results Monitoring 
Project level environmental and 
social indicators 
SPIU ECC Specialist, KIIWP ECCO, SSO, 
DEO.   
Reviews 
Submission of quarterly review 
reports to PSC and IFAD 
KIIWP ECCO, SSO 
Submission of annual review reports 
to PSC and IFAD 
KIIWP ECCO, SSO 
Environmental and Social 
Audits 
Annual audits of IL3/Category A 
subprojects 
Reporting 
Audits of IL2/Category B subprojects 
once every 2 years 
Submission of quarterly and annual 
environmental, social and climate 
resilience performance reports to 
the PSC and IFAD 
Independent consultants 
Independent consultants 
KIIWP Project Management Team 
130 
11 
Capacity Building 
11.1 
Existing Capacity 
11.1.1  KIIWP Lead Agency 
MINAGRI  is  the  lead  agency  under  whose  auspices  KIIWP  will  be  implemented.    MINAGRI  has  an 
Environment and Climate Change (ECC) Specialist whose primary focus is on regulation and strategic 
planning.  This officer is the only person in MINAGRI responsible for environmental and climate change 
issues, and covers the entire country.  As such, the ECC Specialist will not be directly involved in KIIWP 
oversight. 
RAB has a number of research programmes on crop development, climate change, soils, etc, which 
have relevance to environmental issues.  At zonal level, RAB has a Department of Natural Resources 
Management.  In the Eastern Zone, RAB has a station at Rwamagana Station which is well-staffed with 
researchers. 
However, while RAB personnel have a high level of specialised expertise, the RAB personnel who will 
be   responsible for overseeing KIIWP may not be fully aware of the various environmental, social and 
climate interactions that may occur from the KIIWP Project activities and how environmental, social 
and  climate  risk  mitigation  are  to  be  mainstreamed  into  Project  activities.    It  is  important  that 
environmental, social and climate considerations are incorporated during Project implementation and 
there is therefore a need to build the capacity of RAB personnel who will oversee KIIWP, in order for 
them to have a holistic understanding of the various Project activities to ensure that the Project can 
be sustainable environmentally, socially and climatically.  
11.1.2  KIIWP Project Management Team 
As mentioned in Section 2.4, the SPIU-IFAD staff who will be involved in overseeing KIIWP will include 
Coordinator,  Finance  Officer,  M&E  Officer,  Procurement  Officer,  Administration  Officer,  the 
Environmental and Climate Change Specialist and the agro-meteorologist.  Staff specifically dedicated 
to KIIWP within the SPIU will include the KIIWP Programme Manager, an accountant, an M&E officer 
in charge also of gender and youth, an irrigation engineer, a WUO Specialist, a Land Husbandry/Soil 
and Water Conservation (SWC) Engineer, and a Cooperative Development Officer.   
At  the District level, KIIWP staff will consist of an accountant,  a WUO Specialist, a Land Husbandry 
(SWC) Engineer, a Cooperative Development Officer, a horticulture specialist, an irrigation technician, 
an Environmental and Climate Change Officer (ECCO), and a Social Safeguards Officer (SSO). 
With regard to the Project Management Team, capacity building will focus on environmental, climate 
and social risks and implications, compliance, and also on mechanisms and modalities for addressing 
these risks. 
11.1.3  KIIWP Implementation Partners 
There will be a number of implementation partners for KIIWP.  At national level these would include 
the Rwanda Cooperative Development Agency (RCA), Business Development Fund (BDF), and RWFA.   
District level implementation partners will be the local administrative entities, namely district, sector, 
cell and village authorities.   In Kayonza District, there is one District Environmental Officer (DEO) who 
131 
is  responsible  for  inspection  of  all  activities  in  regard  to  environmental  management,  including 
ensuring wetland/marshland buffer zones are maintained, mining, brick making near lakes, terraces, 
biogas, improved cooking stoves.  He reports directly to the Mayor.  He collaborates occasionally with 
REMA,  but  there  is  no  formal  link  with  REMA.      Although  this  officer  works  with  the  sector  level 
specialists  (such  as  the  agronomist),  the  latter  do  not  have  any  training  in  environmental  issues.  
Generally, therefore capacity for monitoring environmental, social and climate-related issues is lacking 
at the district level.   
The  District  Environment  Committee  is  chaired  by  the  Mayor,  and  the  DEO  is  the  secretary. 
Representative from the various district subject offices are members of this committed, for example 
the  Agricultural  Officer,  Forest  Officer,  Mineral  Field  Officer,  Socio-Economic  Development  Officer 
(SEDO).  This is the main forum in which cross-sectoral environmental issues are discussed.    
At sector level there is no institutional provision for environmental management.  There are supposed 
to be sector environmental committees, but these are not functional. 
However, at cell level Socio-economic Development Officers (SEDOs) are in charge of environmental 
management, but again have very little understanding of environmental issues. Most cells have SEDOs, 
so  social  compliance  is  easier  to  monitor  than  environmental  compliance.    The  cells  also  have 
environmental committees. 
MINAGRI  has  recently  advertised  positions  for  District  agricultural  inspectors  (DAIs)  who  will  be  in 
charge  of  inspecting  all  agricultural  activities  in  their  respective  districts,  including  regulatory  and 
compliance  requirements  governing  agricultural  activities.      Once  instated,  the  Kayonza  District 
Agricultural Inspector may support KIIWP district personnel in monitoring environmental, social and 
climate related issues for KIIWP. 
Capacity building requirements for national, district, sector and cell level implementation partners will 
focus on environmental, climate and social risks and implications and addressing risks.  District, sector 
and cell level implementation partners would also be  involved in supervision and/or monitoring of 
implementation  of  the  ESMMPs  and  climate  mitigation  measures,  and  therefore  will  need  to  be 
capacitated to undertake these responsibilities.  
Technical  service  providers  (TSPs)  will  be  taken  on  by  the  Project  to  provide  capacity  building  and 
implementation  assistance  on  irrigation  techniques,  financial  management  of  schemes,  crop 
production, business development/entrepreneurship, etc.  However, there will be  a need for these 
service providers to support mainstreaming of environmental, social and climate change issues into 
the service packages that they are providing. 
11.1.4  Project Beneficiaries 
The  WUOs  (ie.  IWUOs  and  LWUO)  and  catchment/watershed  farmers  will  be  key  in  ensuring  that 
ESMMPs are implemented.  They will therefore need a good understanding of how the activities they 
will carry out under KIIWP will affect - or be affected by - environmental, social and climate change 
aspects, what measures are required to address these issues, and how they need to be incorporated 
into Project infrastructure and management practices.   
The surrounding communities, including farmers who are not members of IWUOs/LWUOs and others 
who  rely  on  agricultural  value  chains  and  commodities  (such  as  agricultural  produce  traders, 
transporters, agricultural input and equipment traders, agrivets, etc) will also require sensitisation and 
awareness raising, as well as training in erosion prevention and climate smart agricultural practices.  
132 
As  mentioned  in  Section  2.3.2,  youth  and  the  physically  challenged  members  of  the  Project 
communities will be encouraged to participate in farming, as well as value chain development.  
11.2 
Capacity Building 
Training on environmental, social and climate-related aspects will be delivered according to the level 
at which implementation of specific activities and actions is required. This will cover, among others: 
•  Requirements  of  the  national  environmental,  social  and  climate  policies,  legislation  and 
administrative frameworks; 
•  Requirements of IFAD’s SECAP and ERNM, Climate, Land and Disclosure Policies; 
•  ESMF  processes,  procedures  and  institutional  arrangements  to  develop  and  implement 
required safeguards documents; 
•  Screening as prescribed in the ESMF; 
•  Environmental,  social  and  climate  impact  assessment,  IPMP,  RAP,  PCR  approaches  and 
requirements; 
•  Preparation, implementation and monitoring of ESMPs, ESIAs, IPMPs and RAPs; 
•  ESMPs  and  monitoring  key  environmental  and  social  performance  indicators  for  each 
subproject site; 
•  Reporting and monitoring implementation of ESMPs, IPMPs and RAPs; 
•  Environmental and social best practices – including proper application of chemical inputs, pest 
management, water efficiency/water saving agronomic practices, soil fertility management, 
dam safety, labour-saving techniques, gender empowerment; 
•  The use of climate and weather information in agriculture; 
•  Climate smart agriculture; 
•  Participatory mapping; 
•  Watershed management; 
•  Conservation agriculture techniques. 
Table 11.1 below summarise capacity building topics, and methods for training.  
Table 11.1  Capacity Building Topics 
Topic 
No. 
1 
2 
3 
Capacity Building Topics 
Target Audience 
Training Methods 
National environmental, social and 
climate policies, legislation and 
administrative frameworks 
requirement 
RAB, KIIWP Project Management 
Team at SPIU and District level 
DEO, District SEDO, DAI  
Sector specialists, cell SEDO 
Training workshops at national 
and district, sector and cell level, 
and hydrographic basin 
committees. 
IFAD’s SECAP and ERNM, Climate, Land 
and Disclosure Policies 
RAB, KIIWP Project Management 
Team at SPIU and District level 
DEO, District SEDO, DAI  
Sector specialists, cell SEDO 
Training workshops at national 
and district, sector and cell level, 
and hydrographic basin 
committees. 
KIIWP environmental and social 
management processes, procedures 
and institutional arrangements to 
develop and implement required 
safeguards documents 
RAB, KIIWP Project Management 
Team at SPIU and District level 
DEO, District SEDO, DAI  
Sector specialists, cell SEDO 
Training workshops at national 
and district, sector and cell level, 
and hydrographic basin 
committees. 
133 
Topic 
No. 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
Capacity Building Topics 
Target Audience 
Training Methods 
Environmental, social and climate 
impact assessment, IPMP, RAP, PCR 
assessment, approaches and 
requirements 
KIIWP ECCO and SSO 
DEO, District SEDO, DAI  
Cell SEDO 
TSPs 
Training workshops at national 
and district, sector and cell level. 
Preparation, implementation and 
monitoring of ESMPs, ESIAs, IPMPs 
and RAPs 
KIIWP ECCO and SSO 
DEO, District SEDO, DAI  
Training workshops at national 
and district, sector and cell level. 
Cell SEDO 
WUOs 
ESMPs and monitoring of key 
environmental performance indicators 
KIIWP ECCO and SSO 
DEO, District SEDO, DAI  
Training workshops at national 
and district, sector and cell level, 
and hydrographic basin level. 
Cell SEDO, hydrographic basin 
committees 
WUOs 
Reporting and monitoring the 
implementation of ESMPs, IPMPs and 
RAPs 
KIIWP ECCO and SSO 
DEO, District SEDO, DAI  
Training workshops at national 
and district, sector and cell level. 
Environmental and social best 
practices – including dam safety, 
proper application of chemical inputs, 
pest management, water saving 
agronomic practices, soil fertility 
management, labour saving 
techniques 
Cell SEDO 
RAB 
KIIWP ECCO and SSO 
DEO, District SEDO, DAI  
Cell SEDO 
WUOs, watershed farmers 
TSPs 
9 
Participatory mapping 
KIIWP ECCO and SSO 
DEO, District SEDO 
Cell SEDO 
WUOs, watershed farmers 
Training workshops 
Training sessions at district level – 
classroom and field (FFS) 
Roll-out training for by district 
PMT sector and cell levels, WUOs, 
farmers and TSPs 
Training sessions at district level – 
classroom and field (FFS) 
Roll-out training for by district 
PMT sector and cell levels, WUOs, 
farmers  
10 
The use of climate & weather 
information for agriculture 
Watershed farmers, scheme farmers, 
water users organizations, etc 
Training sessions at district level – 
classroom and field (FFS) 
Roll-out training for by district 
PMT sector and cell levels, WUOs, 
farmers  
Training sessions at district level – 
classroom and field (FSS) 
Roll-out training for by district 
PMT sector and cell levels, WUOs, 
farmers, communities 
Training sessions at district level – 
classroom and field (FSS) 
11 
Watershed management 
KIIWP ECCO and SSO 
12 
Training on the use of APSIM (a 
software which has been calibrated 
under PASP project) that is being use 
to forecast yields based on weather 
forecasts and farm inputs 
DEO, District SEDO 
Cell SEDO 
WUOs, watershed farmers 
Project communities 
KIIWP ECCO and SSO 
DEO, District SEDO 
134 
Capacity Building Topics 
Target Audience 
Training Methods 
Topic 
No. 
13 
Conservation agriculture techniques 
KIIWP ECCO and SSO 
DEO, District SEDO 
Cell SEDO 
WUOs, watershed farmers 
Project communities 
Training sessions at district level – 
classroom and field (FSS) 
Roll-out training for by district 
PMT sector and cell levels, WUOs, 
farmers 
11.3 
Technical Assistance 
At the start of the Project, a capacity needs assessment will be carried out in order to:  
• 
Identify the existing knowledge, skills and gaps in the area related to environmental and social 
compliance among the Project Implementation Team and key Project implementation actors; 
•  Make  recommendations  for  detailed  capacity  development  required  in  order  to  ensure 
environmental and social compliance of  KWIIP Project at all stages of its development and 
implementation; 
•  Make  recommendations  for  detailed  capacity  building  required  by  Project  Implementation 
Team and key Project implementation actors in order to ensure climate risk mitigation and 
emission reductions at all stages of the Project development and implementation;  
•  Prepare  a  detailed  capacity  building  plan,  training manuals  (modules,  visual  aids,  leaflets), 
training schedule, and provide costs for these activities based on the identified capacity needs 
•  Carry out the initial training programme by using the manuals developed.  
In addition, Technical Assistance will be hired on temporary basis, as and when necessary, to support 
the Project Management Team and other key Project implementers at both National and District level 
to mainstream environmental, social and climate issues.  
Valley  dam, Murundi Sector 
135 
12 
ESMF Implementation Budget 
The  cost  estimate  for  the  implementation of  activities  proposed  in  this  ESMF  is  USD 2,987,500,  as 
presented in Table 12.1 below.  This covers costs for preparation of safeguards documentation, hiring 
of  dedicated  staff  to  oversee  environmental,  social  and  climate-related  aspects  of  KIIWP  activities, 
capacity  building,  Project  compliance  monitoring,  annual  audits,  technical  assistance  and  annual 
reviews.  
Table 12.1  ESMF Implementation Budget 
Unit 
No. 
Unit cost 
USD 
Year 1 
USD 
Year 2 
USD 
Year 3 
USD 
Year 4 
USD 
Year 5 
USD 
Total cost 
USD 
Preparation of Safeguards Documents 
Category A ESIA Studies 
Category B ESMPs 
studies 
studies 
Resettlement Action Plans 
studies 
3 
42 
7 
200,000 
10,000 
40,000 
50,000 
80,000 
600,000 
200,000 
200,000 
170,000 
600,000 
420,000 
280,000 
 Subtotal 
130,000 
1,000,000 
170,000 
0 
0 
1,300,000 
RAP Implementation 
Compensation of affected 
assets, resettlement 
assistance, etc. 
KIIWP Staff Salaries 
1 Environmental and 
Climate Change Officer, 1 
Social Safeguards Officer 
Capacity building 
Training workshops at 
national, district, sector 
and cell levels 
Practical training  
Roll out training 
Project Monitoring 
SPIU 
District 
sessions 
sessions 
persons 
persons 
 Annual Independent Audits 
Irrigation Schemes 
Catchment conservation 
sites 
sites 
Livestock watering 
clusters 
Technical Assistance 
Consultants 
Training manual, visual 
aids, etc 
months 
lumpsum 
RAPs 
7 
45,000 
90,000 
225,000 
315,000 
 Subtotal 
0 
90,000 
225,000 
0 
0 
315,000 
persons 
2 
15,500 
15,500 
31,000 
31,000 
31,000 
31,000 
139,500 
 Subtotal 
15,500 
31,000 
31,000 
31,000 
31,000 
139,500 
workshops 
2 
lumpsum 
15,000 
25,000 
40,000 
150,000 
6 
25,000 
125,000 
25,000 
lumpsum 
 Subtotal 
140,000 
lumpsum 
lumpsum 
 Subtotal 
11,000 
1,000 
12,000 
50,000 
75,000 
22,000 
2,000 
24,000 
5,000 
5,000 
5,000 
200,000 
200,000 
50,000 
500,000 
225,000 
200,000 
50,000 
690,000 
22,000 
2,000 
24,000 
30,000 
30,000 
40,000 
22,000 
22,000 
2,000 
2,000 
99,000 
9,000 
24,000 
24,000 
108,000 
30,000 
30,000 
24,000 
32,000 
90,000 
54,000 
72,000 
Subtotal   
0 
0 
100,000 
30,000 
86,000 
216,000 
12,500 
50,000 
25,000 
lumpsum 
75,000 
75,000 
75,000 
 Subtotal 
125,000 
25,000 
0 
0 
0 
150,000 
3 
2 
6 
6 
8 
6 
1 
 Annual Environmental, Social and Climate Change Performance Workshops 
 Workshops 
number of 
workshops 
4 
25,000 
15,000 
15,000 
15,000 
15,000 
60,000 
 Subtotal 
0 
15,000 
15,000 
15,000 
15,000 
60,000 
 GRAND TOTAL (USD) 
422,500 
1,260,000 
790,000 
300,000 
206,000 
2,978,500 
136 
The basis of the estimate is as follows: 
Preparation of safeguards documents 
•  Category A ESIA Studies will all be conducted in Year 2. 
•  Category B ESMPs:  5 studies to be carried out in Year 1, 20 studies in Year 2, and 17 studies in 
Year 3.  
•  RAP:  3 full RAPS will be required for Kabare, Rwinkwavu and Kaborondo schemes.  At this 
stage we assume that RAPs will also be required for 2 valley dams and 2 boreholes 
RAP Implementation 
•  This  is  estimated  based  on  comparable  projects  under  Rural  Green  Climate  and  Climate 
Resilient Development Project  funded by the Ministry of Environment (MINIRENA) and the 
Green Climate Fund in Gicumbi District53. 
KIIWP Safeguards Staff Salaries 
•  KIIWP  will  be  staffed  with two  safeguards officers: one  Environmental  and  Climate  Change 
Officer, and one Salary Social Safeguards Officer.  The salaries for these staff based on current 
salaries  for  field  officers  on  IFAD-supported  projects  is  USD  1291  per  month.    Project 
implementation is expected to begin in July 2019, so salaries for the first year cover 6 months.  
Capacity Building 
•  Training workshops at national, district, sector and cell levels will take place in Year 1 and cover   
Topics 1 and 2 (as shown in Table 11.1).  These will be conducted by SPIU personnel, an IFAD 
SECAP specialist, and resource people from MINAGRI RAB, REMA, RWFA.  In Year 2, training 
will be done for Topics 4,5,6,7 by a consultant (possibly the same consultant carrying out the 
full ESIAs).  The costing is based on 50 participants attending.  
•  Practical training covering Topics 8, 9,10, 11, 13 will be done in Year 1, and in Year 3 Topic 12 
will be covered. 
•  Roll out training is based on 80% of an estimated 28000 direct target beneficiaries who will 
receive a stipend of RwF 2000, for sessions for 2 days on 5 separate topics.  
Project Monitoring  
•  SPIU:  This covers field allowances for 2 SPIU officers and a driver. It is based on 2 days per 
week assuming 24 weeks in Year 1, and 48 weeks in Years 2,3, 4 and 5 as follows: 2 officers for 
2  nights  @RwF  37,500  +  1  day@RwF7,200,  and  1  driver  for  2  nights  @  RwF  17,800  +  1 
day@RwF4,800.    
•  District  field allowances: This covers field allowances for 2 KIIWP Safeguards staff for 3 days 
per week for 24 weeks in Year 1, and 48 weeks in Years 2, 3, 4 and 5 @ RwF 6000 per day. 
Annual Independent Audits 
•  Each audit will be undertaken by one consultant for 5 days @USD500 + expenses, estimated 
at USD 5000 per audit.  The audits will cover the six proposed irrigation schemes.  At this stage 
the number of catchments to be rehabilitated is not clear, so it is estimated that in all 6 audits 
(covering 1 or more sites) will take place twice over the 5-year project period.  For the livestock 
watering  points,  the  interventions  will  be  clustered  for  audit  purposes,  and  8  clusters  of 
roughly 5 sites each will be audited twice over the 5-year project period.  
53 FONERWA (2017). Resettlement Policy Framework for the Strengthening Climate Resilience of Rural 
Communities in Northern Rwanda. 
137 
Technical Assistance 
• 
It is proposed that 2 consultants will be taken on for 3 months each, totalling 4 months in Year 
1, and 2 months in Year 2.  
•  As part of the TA, it has been proposed that training manual, visual aids, etc will be produced. 
This  figure  is  a  ballpark  figure  based  on  an  estimate  on  monies  spent  on  RDDF  training 
materials 
Annual Environmental, Social and Climate Change Performance Workshops 
•  The annual performance review workshops will take place once a year beginning in Year 2.   
For this workshop on daily stipends will be provided, based on 50 participants. 
138 
13 
Summary of Key Issues Arising and Recommendations for 
KIIWP Design 
13.1 
Hydrology 
One of the major concerns that emerged during the study is the availability of surface water resources 
for the proposed schemes and the command areas proposed for irrigation.   As mentioned in Section 
5.2.4, based on information gathered from the Lower Akagera Master Plan as well as discussions with 
the RWFA, the hydrology of the Akagera River and its lakes are complex.  There is a  “reverse flow” 
when the  Akagera River  is  in flood  as a result  of  rainfall in the upstream  catchments  (Akagera and 
Ruvubu) filling up the lakes.  The lakes are reportedly shallow (5 – 10 m in depth), and the width and 
depth  of  the  channels  between  Akagera  River  and  lakes  are  a  crucial  factor  for  maintaining  the 
hydrological functionality.  Alterations to these channels may have serious consequences, particularly 
for the lakes. If substantial water is abstracted from the lakes for irrigation, the deficit will be filled 
from  the  river.    Thus,  the  Lower  Akagera  Master  Plan  recommended  that  abstraction  of  water  for 
agricultural use between the Akagera River and its lakes should be avoided.  On the other hand, the 
Plan also indicates that  at  catchment  level the renewable  surface  water  resources  are  sufficient  to 
cater for irrigation use and other demand until 2030, after which resources will be stressed during the 
1 in 20 dry year.  By 2040, the Plan states that water resources during the dry season will be stressed 
for most years, except when exceptionally wet years are experienced.   
Recommendation:  Based  on  the  above,  in  order  to  accurately  ascertain  the  availability  of  water 
resources for the Project, it is crucially important that a detailed hydrological study be carried out for 
the proposed Project area in order to substantiate or otherwise, the recommendations of the Lower 
Akagera Master Plan.   This will then inform the number of hectares that can be sustainably irrigated. 
13.2 
Environmental Flow  
The proposed irrigation schemes at Rwinkwavu and Kabarondo will involve the construction of dams 
for water storage, which will have to be filled with water.  The Ndego and Kabare Irrigation schemes 
will draw water from river sources.  There is a need for maintaining an environmental flow to sustain 
aquatic ecosystems and to support human, agricultural, livestock and industrial demand downstream.  
Thus, while the dams are being filled, and when the irrigation schemes are drawing water from the 
river  sources,  a  prescribed  environmental  flow  will  have  to  be  released  downstream.    The  Lower 
Akagera Master Plan proposes an environmental flow of 33% of the average monthly flow.  This means 
that the amount of water released downstream will have to be adjusted according to monthly flow 
patterns.  However, ultimately RWFA will propose a suitable environmental flow for each site, which 
will be stipulated in the Water Abstraction Permit for that site.   
Recommendation:  Environmental flow as permitted by RWFA must be maintained at all times in order 
to do no harm to downstream ecosystems and so as not to compromise downstream demand.  The 
scheme  and  dam  designs  will  therefore  have  to  take  the  recommended  environmental  flows  into 
consideration as this will influence on the intake works as well as the potential area to be irrigated. 
13.3  Wetlands 
REMA  has  categorised  various  wetlands  as  totally  protected,  conditionally  protected  and 
unconditional (see Section 5.2.5).   A key concern for the proposed scheme at Humure in Ndego Sector 
139 
is that the spur of Lake Ihema which protrudes outside the Akagera National Park is classified as totally 
protected.  This is reasonable, since the rest of the lake lies within the ANP and any disturbance (for 
example in terms of water abstraction, sedimentation from erosion or pollution from agrochemicals) 
will affect the lake’s water quality and possibly quantity, and therefore its biodiversity.  Although the 
Bramin Scheme - which is located next to the proposed Humure site – draws its water from Lake Ihema, 
from a small section of the lake shore that lies between the totally protected wetland and the National 
Park boundary, it must be stated here that IFAD will not support projects in areas of critical habitats or 
which result in conversion or degradation of such habitats.    
For interventions that will draw water from conditional wetlands (namely Kibare, Byimana, Gakoma, 
and the dams on the Gishanda and Kanyeganyege Rivers), RDB will issue an EIA Certificate of Approval 
that  will  list  a  number  of  conditions  for  the  respective  developments.      However,  a  review  of  the 
conditions issued for similar schemes in the country revealed that these conditions were generic and 
did not specifically mention any measures to be taken to protect the wetlands.   
Recommendations: i) An alternative source of water, or method of supplying water, will have to be 
identified for the Humure scheme, or the scheme location shifted to enable water to be drawn from 
the conditional wetlands of Lake Kibare; ii) IFAD will specify explicit conditions for wetland protection 
in the loan agreement which will need to be adhered to during subproject implementation.  
13.4 
Biodiversity  
Based on an inventory of biodiversity of the wetlands south of the Akagera National Park (see Sections 
5.2.6  and  5.2.8),  the  wetlands  within  the Project  area  are  likely  to  be  rich  in  biodiversity,  and may 
harbour some endemic faunal and floral species.  Any disturbance to these wetlands, for example due 
to changes in water flow regimes as a result of abstraction for the proposed irrigation schemes, and 
due to dam construction, may affect these species.  
Recommendation:  i) An ecological risk assessment should be conducted to identify and assess the 
significance  of  risks  to  wetland  ecology  in  the  subproject  areas  that  are  located  upstream  and 
downstream of the proposed irrigation sites, as well as any potential risks to biodiversity in the Akagera 
National Park; ii) If species of national or global importance are identified, scenario planning and an 
adaptive biodiversity management strategy will have to be prepared (see SECAP’s Guidance Statement 
#1 Biodiversity), or the sites may have to be relocated, or alternative water sources sought, so as not 
to affect these species. 
13.5 
Buffer Zones  
National requirements stipulate the need to maintain buffer zones for all water bodies.  These vary 
from 20m to 50m, depending on the type of water body.    
Recommendations:  i) During the design of schemes and valley tanks, the recommended buffer zones 
must  be  accommodated.    In  some  cases,  this  may  result  in  the  acquisition  of  land  or  assets,  and 
therefore will necessitate a resettlement action plan (see SECAP’s Guidance Statement #13 Physical 
and Economic Displacement); ii) If the schemes are close to the ANP, wetlands, woodland/ forest, a 
buffer zone should be established, the width of which should be based on discussions with ANP and 
on REMA regulations, and applying precautionary principle for maximum buffer width for ANP and 
wetlands. 
140 
13.6 
Dams 
As  mentioned  above,  the  two  schemes  in  Rwinkwavu  and  Kabarondo  Sectors  will  involve  the 
construction of dams.  At present the location and specifications of these dams is not known.  However, 
it  is  expected  that  these  will  be  medium  sized  dams,  having  wall  heights  between  5  and  15  m.  
According to SECAP’s Guidance Statement #8 on Dams and their Safety, these are considered as large 
dams. The valley tanks may have shorter walls.  Nevertheless, IFAD places the utmost importance on 
the safety of new dams that it finances, as well as on the safety of existing dams upon which an IFAD-
assisted  project  is  directly dependent.  IFAD  will  therefore  require  the  loan  agreement  to  contain  a 
covenant  to  ensure  that  dams  and  reservoirs  are  designed,  constructed,  operated,  maintained, 
superintended and eventually decommissioned to the highest possible standards.  
Recommendations:  i)  MINAGRI  will  need  to  engage  a  suitably  qualified  consultant  with  extensive 
experience  and  a  proven  record  in  dam  design;  ii)  in  addition,  MINAGRI  will  have  to  adopt  and 
implement  dam  safety  measures  for  the  design,  bid  tendering,  construction,  operation  and 
maintenance of the dam and associated works. 
13.7 
Climate Risk Analysis 
According to SECAP’s climate risk classification guidelines, KIIWP is classified as high risk because it 
promotes agricultural activity on areas subject to extreme climatic events, such as flooding, drought, 
tropical storms or heat waves;  climate scenarios for the Project area foresee changes in temperature, 
rainfall or extreme weather that will adversely affect the Project’s impact, sustainability or cost over 
its lifetime;  the Project that promotes agricultural activity on marginal and/or highly degraded areas 
(such as on hillsides, deforested slopes or floodplains);  and the Project lies in an area which regularly 
experiences weather-related losses and damages.   
Recommendation: 
  Although  the  Project  interventions  themselves  are  intended  to  reduce 
vulnerability to the effects of climate change, an in-depth climate risk analysis must be undertaken 
prior to the full design of the Project in order to inform the design and decision-making processes, as 
required by SECAP.  The analysis should be carried out by the SPIU ECC Specialist with support from 
IFAD. 
13.8 
Community Expectations 
Consultations with the communities revealed that the communities’ expectations are high in regard 
to  the  propose  irrigation  interventions.    However,  until  the  hydrological  and  ecological  studies 
mentioned above are undertaken, the sizes and indeed the sustainability, of the proposed schemes 
cannot be confirmed.  The studies are expected to be completed by 2020, which for the communities 
is a long way away.   
Recommendations:  i)  The  Kayonza  District  administration  –  particularly  at  cell  level  –  will  need  to 
manage these expectations; ii) the ESIA studies to be prepared for the various schemes should include 
a Stakeholder Engagement Plan which should include a Stakeholder Communication Strategy detailing 
how community expectations can be managed, and the roles that the authorities and KIIWP Project 
Teams in implementing the Communication Strategy.  
141 
13.9 
Physical and Economic Displacement 
Physical  and  economic  displacement  may  occur  due  to  land  acquired  for  scheme  infrastructure, 
catchment protection and to create and maintain buffer zones.  The eligibility criteria proposed in this 
ESMF recommends that subprojects that may physically or economically displace more than 20 people 
should not be considered under KIIWP, due to the capacity of the Project and District, and logistics 
required, to implement the necessary RAP and other safeguards requirements, as well as to carry out 
monitoring of displaced persons.   
Recommendation:    Where  physical  and  economic  displacement  of  20  or  less  people  may  occur,  a 
simple RAP is required, following the guidelines provided in Annex 4 of this ESMF. 
13.10  Access to Water Sources and/or Grazing 
The irrigation schemes may hinder access paths used by livestock to reach water sources or pasture, 
as observed at the Humure and Byimana sites in Ndego Sector and Gakoma site in Kabare Sector.  This, 
together with competition between land for grazing and land for agriculture and catchment protection 
was also raised as a potential source of conflict during consultations with the Livestock Owners Opinion 
Leaders. 
Recommendations:  i)  At  the  pumped  irrigation  sites,  the  design  should  consider  the  possibility  of 
providing  alternative  watering  points  (eg.  troughs)  for  livestock  at  locations  as  agreed  with  the 
communities  and  livestock  owners;  ii)  Village  level  land  use  plans  need  to  be  developed  which 
demarcate land use for different purposes, and more specifically for KIIWP purposes for agriculture, 
catchment protection and livestock keeping. 
13.11  Health 
The  District  Health  Director  indicated  that  malaria  is  responsible  for  46.3%  of  morbidity  cases  in 
Kayonza District.  The proposed irrigation schemes will result in large or small pools of stagnant water 
which provide breeding habitats for mosquitoes.  Since May 2018 the District Health Office has begun 
a campaign to plant mosquito repelling plants/trees such as Artemisia, Geranium and Neem around 
homesteads and fields.  
Recommendation:  The Project should work with the District Health Office to acquire these plants and 
plant them around the proposed schemes and dams. 
13.12  Human/Wildlife Conflict 
During consultations with the communities, farmers reported that their farms are frequently raided 
by hippos which reside in the dams and valley tanks, and also by baboons.  This has led to substantial 
loss of crops, and poses a danger to farmers as well.  The Project aims to enhance crop yields, but this 
may also encourage increased raiding by wildlife.   
Recommendation:    The  ESIA  studies  should  study  this  issue  in  detail,  and  propose  measures  for 
reducing  or  eliminating  human-wildlife  conflict.  Usually  fencing  is  proposed  to  keep  wildlife  out. 
Because  of  the  size  of  the  command  areas,  this  would  be  a  costly  measure,  but  may  have  to  be 
considered if no other alternatives prove effective.   
142 
13.13  Community Involvement in Subproject Development 
Consistently during the consultations, the communities expressed their desire to be involved in the 
subproject  preparation,  design  and  implementation.    They  also  requested  that  they  be  consulted 
beforehand on how they would be expected to invest in the scheme development.  Local involvement 
is key to sustainability, and local knowledge is very important in terms of siting infrastructure.  
Recommendations:    It  is  recommended  that  the  community  are  involved  in  all  stages  of  the 
development of subprojects, including siting of infrastructure.  They must also be extensively consulted 
on their ability to contribute, and the modalities of how they can or are able to contribute, since all 
members of the communities do not have access to cash or loans at any given time. In addition, the 
Project design needs to be more specific in regard to the involvement of youth as well as the physically 
challenged members of the Project communities. 
143 
Annexes   
Annex 1: 
Annex 2: 
Annex 3: 
Annex 4: 
Annex 5: 
Annex 6: 
Annex 7: 
Annex 8: 
Annex 9: 
Annex 10: 
Annex 11: 
Annex 12: 
References 
List of Persons Consulted 
Sample TORs for ESIA Studies 
Resettlement Action Framework 
FPIC Implementation Plan 
Guidelines for an Integrated Pest Management Plan 
Guidelines for Dam Safety 
Sample Contract Clauses for Environmental and Social Management 
Notes on Community Consultations 
List of Potential Beneficiary Consultation Participants 
Proceedings of the ESMF Validation Workshop 
Study Team, Sites Visited and ESMF Timelines 
144 
Annex 1:  References 
Documents 
Fischer, E (2011). Biodiversity Inventory of Key Wetlands in Rwanda. Final Report. REMA. 
FONERWA (2017). Resettlement Policy Framework for the Strengthening Climate Resilience of Rural 
Communities in Northern Rwanda. 
Green and Clean Solution Ltd (2010).  Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for Kayonza 15 
Subproject.  MINAGRI, Land Husbandry, Water Harvesting and Hillside Irrigation Project. 
IFAD (2009). Indigenous Peoples Policy 
IFAD (2010). Climate Change Strategy 
IFAD (2010). Policy on Disclosure of Documents  
IFAD (2012). Environment and Natural Resources Management Policy  
IFAD (2015). How to Do:  Seeking Free, Prior and Informed Consent in IFAD Investment Projects. 
IFAD (2015). PRICE Mid Term Review 
IFAD (2017). Kirehe Community-based Watershed Management Project (KWAMP), Project 
Completion IFAD (2017). PASP Mid Term Review, April 2017 
IFAD (2017). Social, Environment and Climate Assessment Procedures  
IFAD  (2018).  Kayonza  Integrated  Irrigation  and  Watershed  Protection  Project.  Draft  Project  Design 
Report 
IFC (2009); Good Practice Note – Addressing Grievances from Project-Affected Communities, 
Guidance for Projects and Companies on Designing Grievance Mechanisms  
IFC (2012); IFC Performance Standards: Performance Standard 5 – Land Acquisition and Involuntary 
Resettlement. 
IFC (2013).  Cumulative Impact Assessment and Management: Guidance for the Private Sector in 
Emerging Markets – Good Practice Handbook. 
MacPherson, Derek (2013). Report on an Aerial Census of Akagera National Park, Rwanda – August 
2013. 
MINAGRI (2010). Rwanda Irrigation Master Plan (RIMP).  Ebony Enterprises Ltd and the World 
Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF). 
MININFRA (2010).  The Study of Improvement of Rural Water Supply in Eastern Province. Prepared 
by Japan Techno Co Ltd and Nippon Koei Co Ltd with support from JICA. 
National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (2012).  Fourth Population and Housing Census, Rwanda. 
Kayonza District Profile. 
Nile Basin Initiative (2016). Strategy for Management of Environmental Flows in the Nile Basin. 
REMA (2006). General Guideline and Procedure for Environmental Impact Assessment. 
REMA (2009). State of the Environment Report 2009. 
REMA (2011). Atlas of Rwanda’s Changing Environment. 
REMA (2015). Baseline Climate Change Vulnerability Index. 
REMA (2015). State of the Environment and Outlook Report.   
145 
REMA (2017). State of the Environment and Outlook Report: Achieving Sustainable Urbanisation.   
Report: Main report and appendices. 
Republic of Rwanda (2003). Rwanda Environment Policy. 
Republic of Rwanda (2004). National Land Policy. 
Republic of Rwanda (2005). Organic Law determining the use and management of land in Rwanda. 
Republic  of  Rwanda  (2006).  Law  N°  08/2006  of  24/02/2006  Determining  the  Organisation  and 
Functioning of the District. 
Republic of Rwanda (2008). Law N°62/2008 of 10/09/2008 putting in place the use, conservation, 
Protection and management of Water resources regulations 
Republic of Rwanda (2008). Ministerial Order determining the list of chemicals and other prohibited 
pollutants. 
Republic  of  Rwanda  (2008).  Ministerial  Order  establishing  the  list  of  protected  animal  and  plant 
species. 
Republic of Rwanda (2008). Ministerial Order establishing the list of works, activities and projects that 
have to undertake an EIA. 
Republic of Rwanda (2008). Ministerial Order Relating to the requirements and Procedures for EIA. 
Republic of Rwanda (2010). Ministerial Order determining the length of land on shores of lakes and 
rivers transferred to public property. 
Republic of Rwanda (2010). Ministerial Order determining the list of prohibited plains to construction. 
Republic of Rwanda (2010). Ministerial Order determining the modalities of environment conservation 
in mining and quarry extraction. 
Republic of Rwanda (2010). Ministerial Order determining the models of land consolidation and its 
productivity. 
Republic  of  Rwanda  (2010).  Prime  Minister's  order  determining  the  organization,  functioning  and 
responsibilities of committees in charge of the Environment conservation and protection. 
Republic of Rwanda (2011). Freehold land titles Order Official Gazette no 36 of 05.09.2011. 
Republic of Rwanda (2011). Ministerial order N°001/11.30 of 23/11/2011 establishing irrigation 
water users associations in irrigation schemes 
Republic of Rwanda (2011). National Policy for Water Resources Management. 
Republic of Rwanda (2011). National Strategy on Climate Change and Low-Carbon Development 
(NSCCLCD) 
Republic of Rwanda (2012). Small Dams Safety Guidelines. 
Republic of Rwanda (2013). District Potentialities Assessment for the Integrated and Self-Centred Local 
Economic Development). Kayonza District. 
Republic of Rwanda (2013). Kayonza District Development Plan 2013-2018. 
Republic of Rwanda (2013). Kayonza District: District Potentialities Assessment for the Integrated and 
Self-Centred Local Economic Development. 
Republic of Rwanda (2013). Law No 46/2013 Of 16/06/2013 Establishing Rwanda Development Board 
(RDB) and Determining its Mission, Organisation and Functioning. 
Republic of Rwanda (2013). Ministerial Order determining the list of water pollutants. 
146 
Republic  of  Rwanda  (2013).  Ministerial  Order  determining  the  organization  and  functioning  of 
hydrographic basin committee. 
Republic of Rwanda (2013). Ministerial Order determining the organization of water resources data 
collection-treatment-management-exploitation and communication. 
Republic of Rwanda (2013). Ministerial Order determining the procedure for declaration, authorization 
and concession for the utilization of water. 
Republic of Rwanda (2013). Rwanda Irrigation Policy and Action Plan. 
Republic of Rwanda (2013). Second Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy 
(EDPRS2). 
Republic of Rwanda (2014). Sector Specific Environmental Audit Guideline for Agriculture Projects. 
Republic of Rwanda (2015). Fourth Population and Housing Census  (Rwanda,  2012). District Profile 
Kayonza. 
Republic of Rwanda (2015). Health Sector Policy. 
Republic  of  Rwanda  (2015).  Law  N°  32-2015  of  11-06-2015  Relating  to  Expropriation  in  the  Public 
Interest. 
Republic of Rwanda (2015). National Contingency Plan for Drought. 
Republic of Rwanda (2015). Rwanda's Constitution of 2003 with Amendments through 2015. 
Republic of Rwanda (2016). Environmental and Social Management Guideline for Agriculture Projects. 
Republic of Rwanda (2016). Ministerial Order determining regulations governing agrochemicals. 
Republic of Rwanda (2016). National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP). 
Republic  of  Rwanda  (2016).  Organic  Law  repealing  Organic  Law  n°  02/2010/OL  of  09/06/2010  on 
organization (jurisdiction (competence and functioning of the mediation committee as modified and 
complemented to date (ABUNZI). 
Republic of Rwanda (2016). Resettlement Policy Framework. 
Republic of Rwanda (2018). Law N°48/2018 of 13/08/2018 on Environment. 
Republic of Rwanda (2018). National Agriculture Policy. 
Republic of Rwanda (2018). Strategic Plan Agriculture Transformation (PSTA 4). 
Rwanda Mines, Petroleum and Gas Board (??).  Kayonza District MFO’s Annual Report 2017-2018. 
Rwanda Mines, Petroleum and Gas Board (??).  Kayonza District MFO’s Monthly Report May 2018. 
Rwanda Mines, Petroleum and Gas Board (May 2018?); Mineral Field Officer’s Annual Report 2017-
2018, Kayonza District. 
Sher Ingenieurs-Conseils s.a. (February 2014).  Rwanda National Water Resources Master Plan; 
Master Plan Report – Appendix 08NAKL. Catchment Master Plan – NAKL; Final Version. Rwanda 
Natural Resources Authority. 
Sher Ingenieurs-Conseils s.a. (May 2014).  Rwanda National Water Resources Master Plan; Master 
Plan Report, Main Volume; Final Version. Rwanda Natural Resources Authority. 
147 
Websites 
http://horecorwanda.com/background/ 
http://projects.worldbank.org/p126440/third-rural-sector-support-project?lang=en&tab=overview  
http://rdb.rw/one-stop-centre/#environmental-impact-assessment 
 http://riversymposium.com/about/brisbane-declaration/ 
http://scalingupnutrition.org 
http://www.fao.org/agriculture/crops/thematic-sitemap/theme/pests/ipm/more-ipm/en/ 
http://www.ifc.org/exclusionlist 
http://www.ryaf.rw/spip.php?article1 
http://www.statistics.gov.rw/publication/size-resident-population 
 https://operations.ifad.org/documents/654016/052e9c5b-8048-446f-8863-0356d242571d 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/178141468307134222/pdf/LW0AF00P14754300PID0V
M0140 Oct02013.pdf 
https://operations.ifad.org/documents/654016/1bec6b12-b16d-4206-982c-640757fa7e7a 
https://www.akageranationalpark.org/ 
https://www.cbd.int/countries/profile/default.shtml?country=rw 
https://www.icco-cooperation.org/en/projects/stars 
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714182/39732735/Rwanda+PPA+Executive+Summary_2015.pdf
/0e39a6f9-49c1-4ed2-a2e2-6b12cf892c52?version=2.0 
https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/topics_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/ 
sustainability-at-ifc/policies-standards/performance-standards/ps5sustainability-at-ifc/policies-
standards/performance-standards/ps5 
https://www.un.org/zerohunger/ 
148 
Annex 2: 
List of Persons Consulted 
The following pages contain attendance lists of meetings and workshops held during the conduct of 
this ESMF. 
In Kigali, individual consultations were also held with: 
Name 
Innocent Bisangwa 
Rachel Tushabe 
Francios Tetero 
Davis Bugingo 
Robert Ndabavunnye 
Diduce Habamenshi 
Position / Organisation 
Director, Climate Change & 
Environment, MINAGRI 
Director of Education and 
Mainstreaming, REMA 
Directorate of Water Resources, Rwanda 
Water and Forest Authority 
Directorate of Water Resources, Rwanda 
Water and Forest Authority 
Irrigation Engineer, LWH 
Environmental Specialist, LWH 
Contact 
0788 466012 
francios.tetero@rwfa.rw 
0788 230018 
Davis.bugingo@rwfa.rw 
0788 546626 
0788 613065 
149 
Meeting with Kayonza District Officials on 27th September 2018 at Kayonza District Head Quarters 
150 
Debriefing Meeting held on 10th September 2018 at RAB Head Office 
151 
KIIWP ESMF Validation Workshop held on 22nd November 2018 at Umabano Hotel, Kigali 
152 
153 
Annex 3: 
Sample TORs for ESIA Studies for KIIWP Irrigation Projects 
Kayonza District Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project (KIIWP) 
Terms of Reference for an Environmental & Social Impact Assessment Study for 
[XXXX] Irrigation Scheme, [XXXX] Sector 
Introduction and Background 
Rwanda  has  abundant  untapped  water  resources  in the  form of  natural  lakes, rivers,  groundwater, 
marshlands and runoff.  The  United Nations’  Food and Agricultural Organisation’s (FAO)  AQUASTAT 
estimates  Rwanda’s  internal  renewable  water  resources  at  31.9  x  109  m3/year  and  the  National 
Irrigation Master Plan (2010) identifies potential irrigable area of 589,711 ha. Buoyed by support from 
government  resources  and  development  partners,  Rwanda  has  sharply  increased  the  area  under 
irrigation from 8,000 ha in 2010 to the current 48,000 ha, but the country has an ambitious target of 
100,000 ha to achieve by 2020. 
In 2016, Rwanda’s Eastern Province was seriously affected by a severe drought which led to the death 
of 2,417 heads of cattle as well as poor crop yields during Season A (October to December). As a result, 
more than 47,000 households in the districts of Kayonza, Nyagatare, Gatsibo, Ngoma and Kirehe were 
affected and became food insecure. The Government of Rwanda (GoR) had to provide food relief and 
water for livestock to support the affected districts. Although these districts have since come up with 
measures to mitigate drought-induced calamities, in order for these initiatives to achieve long-term 
impacts  and  deliver  increased  resilience,  the  Government  requested  IFAD  to  formulate  a  new 
integrated irrigation and watershed development project focusing on Kayonza District, which was most 
seriously affected.   
The Kayonza District Irrigation and Integrated Watershed Management Project (KIIWP) therefore aims 
to improve the resilience of smallholder farmers to droughts and effects of climate change through 
increased  levels  of  production  and  productivity  of  selected  food  and  cash  crops,  livestock  and 
improved market access and business development.  The Project is expected to improve household 
food and nutrition security, income and asset ownership for smallholder farmers, particularly amongst 
vulnerable  groups  including  women-headed  households  and  youth.      KIIWP  comprises  three 
components.  The first component, Component 1, will focus on strengthening resilience to drought. 
This will involve catchment rehabilitation and protection, irrigation development and infrastructure 
management institutions.  Component 2 will provide support to farm business development.  A third 
component will support institutional development and project coordination.    
Against  this  background,  the  Rwanda  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Animal  Resources  (MINAGRI),  in 
collaboration  with  the  Rwanda  Agriculture  and  Animal  Resources  Development  Board  (RAB),  now 
seeks to invite proposals to carry out an environmental and social impact assessment study on [XXXX] 
irrigation scheme in [XXXX] Sector.  
These terms of Reference (ToRs) set out the scope of work for preparation of an Environmental Social 
Impact Assessment (ESIA) for the [XXXX] Irrigation Project to be implemented in an environmentally 
and  socially  sustainable  manner,  and  in  full  compliance  with  the  Law  on  Environment  of  2018, 
Ministerial  Order  of  2008  relating  to  the  requirements  and  procedures  for  Environmental  Impact 
Assessment,  the  Rwanda  Environmental  Management  Authority’s  (REMA)  General  Guidelines  and 
Procedures for Environmental Impact Assessment (2006) and IFAD’s Social Environmental and Climate 
Assessment Procedures (SECAP, 2017).    
In line with REMA’s EIA Guidelines, the proposed scheme will have significant adverse environmental 
and social impacts and therefore are categorized as Impact Level 3 (IL3) requiring full environmental 
154 
impact assessments. Moreover, according to SECAP’s screening procedures, the proposed irrigation 
project  is  categorized  as  Category  A  because  it  will  have  command  areas  over  100ha,  and  will  be 
located near the wetlands which are considered ecologically sensitive areas.   
Scope of Work 
Geographic Coverage 
This Consultancy will focus on the  [XXXX]  irrigation scheme  proposed in  [XXXX]  Sector with a total 
command area of [XXXX] ha.  The proposed infrastructure will include:  
• 
Irrigation 
 [[XXXX] 
infrastructure:  Diversion  weirs/intakes;  headworks;  dams,  dam 
walls/embankments;  conveyance  canals,  secondary,  tertiary  and  field  canals;  pumps  and 
pump houses; water storage facilities; distribution pipes; and drainage lines; 
•  Ancillary facilities: depending on the scheme size, this could include workshops, sheds, offices 
and fuel storage; 
•  Access  infrastructure:  access  roads,  bridges  and  footpaths.    However,  these  will  not  be 
implemented through KIIWP [XXXX]] 
Map 1: Proposed [XXXX] Site, Kayonza district, Eastern Province  
INSERT MAP OF PROJECT SITE 
Technical Scope 
Based  on  information  provided  by  the  Feasibility  Consultant  and  from  other  relevant  studies 
conducted for the scheme and greater project area, the Consultant will prepare a full description of 
the scheme and its existing setting including a biophysical and socio-economic description, using maps 
where  appropriate.  The  description  will  include  the  general  layout  of  the  scheme,  scheme  size, 
location,  site  characteristics  (topography,  physical  and  chemical  conditions),  water  source,  intake 
works,  canals,  crops  to  be  grown  according  to  land  suitability,  water  availability,  crop  water 
requirements,  irrigation  systems  and  technologies  considered,  and  supplementary  works,  such  as 
power  supply,  access  roads,  workshops,  construction  methodologies, 
labour  requirements, 
construction materials and sources, access routes, and logistical arrangements for delivery of any plant 
and equipment, etc. The consultant will then analyse and assess the potential adverse environmental, 
social  and  climate-related  impacts  that  may  arise  from  project  construction  and  implementation, 
evaluate alternative options, and proposed mitigation and management measures to be presented in 
an Environmental and Social Management Plan.  
The ESIA will be conducted in tandem with the Feasibility Study, which will include studies covering 
hydrology, soils, agronomy, irrigation technology, and irrigation engineering covering a total potential 
area of [XXXX] ha.  It is therefore expected that the ESIA Consultant will work very closely with the 
Consultant conducting the Feasibility Study. 
155 
Purpose and Objectives of the Consultancy 
The  purpose  of  this  consultancy,  therefore,  is  to  prepare  ESIA  report  to  meet  both  national  and 
international best practices and standards.  
The specific objectives of this consultancy are to:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
Contribute to the environmental and social design for the scheme; 
Prepare a Project Brief for submission to the RDB; 
Prepare a Scoping Report for submission to the RDB; 
To establish a baseline for biophysical, climatic conditions and socio-economic data  
Prepare a Stakeholder Engagement Plan which can be used during the ESIA process as well as 
during the construction and operation phases of the scheme;   
Identify all potential adverse environmental and social impacts of the scheme and recommend 
measures for mitigation; 
Establish the need for physical and/or economic displacement resulting from scheme 
activities and proposed infrastructure, and if necessary, develop Terms of Reference and cost 
estimates for a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP); 
Develop a comprehensive Environmental and Social Management and Monitoring Plan 
(ESMMP), which will include cost estimates for mitigation and monitoring; 
Prepare an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Report for submission to the 
Rwanda Development Board and to IFAD’s Executive Board. 
Tasks and Responsibilities 
Project Brief 
The Project Brief will information on: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
x. 
The name, title and address of developer;  
The name, purpose, objectives and nature of the project, including attributes such as size of 
project, design, activities that shall be undertaken during and after the establishment of the 
project; 
Products and inputs, sources of inputs, etc; 
Description of the proposed project site and its surroundings and alternative sites, if any, 
where the project is to be located; 
Description of how the proposed project and its location conform to existing laws; 
Regulations and policies governing such project and the use of the site/area proposed for its 
location; 
Any likely environmental impacts that may arise due to implementing various phases/stages 
of the project and proposed mitigation measures; 
Description of any other alternatives, which are being considered (e.g. siting, technology, 
construction and operation procedures, sources of raw materials, handling of wastes etc); 
Decommissioning/closure and site restoration; 
Any other information that may be useful in determining the level of EIA required. 
156 
Scoping 
The consultant will conduct a scoping exercise to identify and prioritize the main environmental, social 
and climate issues to be studied, and to ensure that the spatial and temporal scopes and extent of the 
environmental assessment is compatible with the size of the project.  As part of scoping the consultant 
will determine appropriate approach and methods necessary to assess the potential environmental 
and socio-economic impacts of the scheme during the ESIA study. At this stage, the consultant will 
specify, and provide costs for, any additional and specialized studies that may be required in order to 
produce comprehensive ESIA report.   
Scoping will identify, and provide information to key stakeholders to be engaged during the ESIA study, 
in  order  to  identify  and  assess  the  scheme’s  environmental,  climate  and  socio-economic  impacts.  
Based  on  environmental,  social  and  climate-related  issues  of  significance  that  may  affect,  or  be 
affected by, the scheme development, this ESIA will address these critical issues. 
The Consultant will be required to give a description of the pertinent Rwandan regulations, standards 
and  regulatory  bodies  governing  environmental  and  social  quality,  health  and  safety,  protection  of 
species, agriculture, and land use, etc. In addition, IFAD’s SECAP and relevant Guidance Statements, 
and WB EHS Guidelines will be described.  The consultant will also describe international conventions 
and  multi-lateral  environmental  agreements  (MEAs)  that  Rwanda  is  party  to.    For  all  the 
aforementioned,  the  particular  relevance  to  the  scheme  and  its  activities  will  be  described.    The 
Consultant will prepare a legal register which will list all legislation, legal instruments relevant to the 
scheme, indicating applicability to the site. In addition, the consultant will indicate permits and licences 
that are required to be obtained for the scheme development during construction and operation. 
Stakeholder Engagement  
As part of scoping, the Consultant will identify all the relevant stakeholders who will be affected by, or 
will affect, directly or indirectly, the scheme development. This should include Rwanda Agriculture and 
Animal Resources Development Board (RAB), MINAGRI, Ministry of Environment, Ministry of Land and 
Forestry  (MINILAF),  Ministry  of  Infrastructure  (MININFRA)  and  affiliated  agencies,  REMA,  Rwanda 
Water  and  Forest  Authority  (RWFA),  scheme  communities,  mining  companies  and  large  farming 
schemes in the project area, and all other relevant stakeholders. It will be important to engage closely 
with  the  local  administrative  authorities  at  district,  sector  cell  and  village  level.  In  this  regard,  the 
Consultant will: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Develop a stakeholder engagement plan that provides an opportunity for potentially affected 
persons, relevant authorities, entities that may affect the development and interested parties 
to  raise  issues  and  concerns  pertaining  to  the  proposed  scheme.  This  will  require  the 
identification, analysis and categorization of stakeholders, determining their possible interests 
in  the  development  and  risks  associated  with  any  of  these  interests;  recommendations  for 
mitigation  measures  to  such  risks;  establishing  the  level  of  knowledge  and  support  for  the 
scheme from the identified key stakeholders; 
Develop a communication strategy to engage with stakeholders; 
Keep  records  of  public  meetings  (including  number  of  public  consultations  and  lists  of 
attendance  during  those  consultations)  organized  to  enable  stakeholders  to  present  their 
concerns and opinions regarding the proposed scheme; 
Ensure that stakeholder concerns are incorporated into the ESIA report recommendations and 
propose means for these to be incorporated into the scheme design or scheme activities as 
appropriate. 
157 
Environmental, Climate and Socio-Economic Baselines  
The  consultant  is  expected  to  collect,  analyze  and  present  qualitative  and  quantitative  baseline 
information specific to the scheme site(s) and its area of influence. Baseline information will describe 
the  existing  social,  economic,  demographic  and  environmental  and  climatic  conditions,  and  will 
include, but not be limited to:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Physical environment: including hydrology and water resources, topography, geology, chemical 
and physical soil characteristics, land cover, climate and weather information, (rainfall pattern, 
onset  and  cessation,  amount,  distribution,  minimum,  maximum  and  average  temperatures, 
wind direction and intensity), chemical and physical parameters for water quality, air quality, 
noise, etc.   
Biological environment: ie. flora and fauna types and diversity, populations endangered species, 
and sensitive habitats. Particular attention will be given to flora and fauna that may be affected 
in the Akagera National Park, the Akagera Wetland Complex and other wetlands in the Project 
Area, as a basis for establishing the ecological impact.  
Socio-economic and cultural environment:  
a.  Carrying  out  a  household  survey  to  capture  the  existing  socio-economic  baseline 
conditions  including:  a  description  of  production  systems,  labour,  and  household 
organization; land ownership, size, and baseline information on livelihoods (including, as 
relevant, production levels and income derived from both formal and informal economic 
activities) and standards of living (including health status) of the displaced population; 
b.  Analysing current agriculture (livestock, cropping etc.), land and water practices and their 
viewpoints on irrigated agriculture; and 
c.  Analysing  current  resource  use  (land,  water,  labor,  inputs,  markets  etc.)  in  the  area 
intended for intervention; 
d.  Providing details on any vulnerable groups; 
e.  Describing  land  tenure  and  transfer  systems,  including  common  property  natural 
resources  from  which  people  derive  their  livelihoods  and  sustenance,  non-title-based 
systems (including fishing, grazing, or use of forest areas) governed by local recognized 
land  allocation  mechanisms,  and  any  issues  raised  by  different  tenure  systems  in  the 
project area; 
f.  Describing  patterns  of  social  interaction  in  the  affected  communities,  including  social 
networks and social support systems, and how they will be affected by the project; 
g.  Providing  details  on  public  infrastructure  and  social  services  that  will  be  affected,  for 
facilities,  post-harvest 
example,  administrative  centres,  health, 
infrastructure, agro-processing facilities, education; and access to telecommunications;  
h.  Social  and  cultural  characteristics  of  displaced  communities,  including  a  description  of 
institutions  (e.g.,  community  organizations,  ritual  groups, 
formal  and 
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs)) that may be relevant to the consultation strategy 
and to designing and implementing the resettlement activities. 
rural  market 
informal 
The baselines are expected to provide benchmarks against which scheme progress and compliance can 
be measured during both construction and operation.  
Analysis and Assessment of Impacts and Recommendations for Mitigation 
The consultant will be required to: 
i. 
Identify  potential  positive  and  adverse  impacts  of  the  scheme  and  its  supplementary 
infrastructure  on  the  hydrology/water  resources,  soils,  fauna  and  flora  (particularly  on  the 
ecology  of  the  wetlands  and  Akagera  National  Park),  climate,  the  economy  and  social 
environment of the scheme areas; 
158 
ii. 
iii. 
Establish whether physical and/or economic resettlement will take place, the scale, magnitude 
and nature of displacement; 
Describe,  analyze,  assess,  categorize  and  prioritize  all  concerns  that  may  arise  during 
construction, operation and decommissioning of the scheme (including those of occupational 
health and safety and community health and safety), that will have short-, medium- and long-
term, and cumulative impacts, as well as residual impacts after mitigation and/or management 
measures have been incorporated; 
iv.  Make recommendations on how to address any adverse impacts to be implemented under the 
environmental and social management and monitoring plan. 
v.  Make  recommendations  on  how  to  enhance  any  opportunities  that  the  scheme  may  bring 
vi. 
about. 
Assess  all  possible  climate  risks  to  the  project  implementation  and  propose  risk  mitigation 
options, prioritizing those measures that have multiple benefits (no-regret measures). 
Assessment of Alternatives 
The consultant should assess alternatives to the proposed scheme including the ‘no project’ scenario. 
The  environmental  and  social  impacts  of  any  alternatives  are  to  be  compared  to  the  impact  of  the 
proposed scheme. If analysis of alternatives reveals one that has considerably less significant impacts 
than the proposed scheme design, then the consultant must either recommend a redesign the scheme 
to favour a design with less impacts, or explain why the proposed scheme design was selected instead 
of one with less impacts. 
The assessment will consider, among others, alternatives for: 
•  Scheme location; 
•  Water sources; 
•  Access routes; 
•  Power supply; 
• 
•  Choice of crops based on soil conditions crop water requirements and climate; 
•  Construction materials and methodologies. 
Irrigation technologies; 
Resettlement Action Plan 
In the event that the consultant determines that there will be physical or economic displacement due 
to the scheme, a Terms of Reference for a RAP will be prepared in line with National compensation and 
relocation requirements, the approach to a RAP provided in the KIIWP ESMF (2018), as well as IFAD’s 
Guidance  Statement  #13  on  Physical  and  Economic  Resettlement,  taking  into  account  the  following 
considerations:  
Identification of affected persons; 
• 
•  Physical assets to be affected by the scheme and the supplementary infrastructure 
(land, crops, trees, etc);  
• 
Loss of income; 
•  Cut-off date(s); 
•  Valuation of assets and properties; 
•  Eligibility criteria for compensation; 
•  Women,  youth  and  vulnerable  persons  (recommending  how  issues  of  concern 
specific to these groups can be addressed); 
159 
• 
•  Where 
Implementation schedules, costs, and monitoring indicators; 
impact 
is  adverse,  recommend  appropriate 
livelihood  restoration 
• 
mechanisms; 
In  consultation  with  all  stakeholders,  recommend  a  grievance  resolution 
mechanism. 
A full RAP will be commissioned as a separate study, should this be necessary. 
Environmental and Social Monitoring and Management  
The  consultant  will  prepare  a  series  of  environmental  and  social  mitigation,  monitoring  and 
management plans which will contain all the recommended mitigation measures and management 
actions  during  construction  and operation  phases,  including  specific  management  plans  for  labour, 
emergency  response,  occupational  health  and  safety,  community  safety  and  security,  traffic 
management,  grievance  resolution,  stakeholder  engagement  and  any  other  activity-  or  operation-
specific plans that will assist in ensuring environmental and social compliance through all phases of 
the  development.    The  ESMMP  will  recommend  key  indicators  in  order  to  monitor,  measure  and 
manage  environmental  and  social  performance,  as  well  as  propose  mitigation  and  adaptation 
indicators for climate change.  
Costs for Mitigation and Monitoring 
The consultant will provide costs for mitigation and monitoring as proposed in the ESMMP and 
activity-specific management plans.  
Preparation of the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Reports 
The consultant will follow the REMA EIA Guidelines. The main text of the ESIA Report should focus on 
findings, conclusions and recommended actions and be supported by summaries of data collected and 
citations for any references used in interpreting those data. The report will be organised according to, 
but not necessarily be limited by the following outline: 
•  Executive summary;  
•  Description of the proposed project;  
•  Policy, legal and administrative framework 
•  A detailed description of the biophysical and socio-economic and cultural environment, and 
climatic conditions of the project area; 
•  Significant  environmental  and  social  impacts,  cumulative  impacts  and  proposed  mitigation 
measures; 
•  Analysis of alternatives; 
•  Stakeholder consultations and outcomes; 
•  TORs for RAP (if applicable); 
•  Environmental, social and climate risk mitigation, management and monitoring plans; 
•  Cost estimates for implementing and monitoring the environmental, social and climate risk 
mitigation, management and monitoring plans; 
•  Conclusions and key recommendations; 
• 
•  Photographs, maps and plans as appropriate. 
List of references;  
The consultant should present comprehensive environmental and social impact assessment reports to 
the  RAB  and  IFAD  for,  comment,  and,  after  which  the  reports  will  be  revised  to  incorporate  these 
160 
comments.  The reports will then be subject to public review and disclosure, prior to finalization.  The 
consultant should also note that IFAD requires a disclosure period of a minimum of 120 days. After the 
report is finalized, the consultant will submit the report to RDB for approval, and will follow up on the 
approval process until the EIA Certificate of Approval is issued.  
Qualifications and Experience 
The  Consultant’s  company  will  have  extensive  experience  in  conducting  Environmental 
and  Social  Impact  Assessments  in  East  Africa.  In  addition,  the  Consultant’s  company  is 
required to illustrate knowledge and experience in assignments requiring compliance with 
IFAD’s SECAP requirements, the IFC Performance Standards and the World Bank Group’s 
Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines.  
The Consultant’s Team is expected to have the following but not limited to the following 
key staff: 
Team Leader/Environmentalist: The Team Leader will be expected to be an environmental 
specialist  with  not  less  than  10  years’  proven  working  experience  in  environmental 
assessments matters with a reputable international firm and must hold at least a Masters 
Degree in Environmental Science or related sciences. 
Hydrologist/Water Resources  Specialist: The  hydrologist/water  resources  specialist  will 
be expected to have not less than 10 years’ proven working experience in hydrological/ 
water  resources  matters  with  a  reputable  international  firm  and  must  hold  at  least  a 
Masters Degree in Hydrology or Water Resources Management or related sciences. 
Socio-Economist:  The  socio-economist  should  have  a  minimum  of  10  years’  proven 
working  experience in the socio-economy matters and a holder a Masters Degree in Socio-
Economics,  Social  Sciences/Sociology  or  related  field.  He/She  must  demonstrate 
knowledge of the Rwandan social and cultural environment.  
Ecologist:  The ecologist will have at least 10 years’ proven working  experience in ecology 
or  biological  sciences  matters,  and  particular  experience  and  knowledge  of  wetland 
ecology.   The ecologist will hold at least a Masters Degree in biological sciences, ecology 
or biodiversity conservation. 
Agronomist:  The agronomist will have  at least 10 years’  proven working experience in 
crop  production  matters, and  particular  experience  and  knowledge  in  crop  production, 
agriculture best practices, crop water requirement and management, and crop irrigation, 
and soil water retention and fertility management.  He/She must have at least a Masters 
Degree in Crop Production or related fields. 
The consultant may include other experts to enhance the team’s competency, for example, 
climate/agro-meteorology specialist, irrigation engineer and an occupational health and 
safety expert.  
It is recommended that the consultant liaises very closely with the feasibility and design 
consultants, in particular with the irrigation engineer, hydrologist and agronomist.  
161 
Deliverables and Schedule 
The Consultant shall prepare and submit the following reports to the Client: 
a.  Project Brief. The Project Brief will be submitted to RDB two weeks after signature of contract. 
b.  Preparation of a Scoping Report.  Within a month after receiving approval for the conduct of the 
study from RDB, the Consultant will submit a Scoping Report to the RAB comprising initial findings 
and recommendations for review and comment, following which the consultant will submit the 
Scoping Report to RDB and along with the TOR for the ESIA study for approval.   
c.  Draft  ESIA  report:    This  report  will  be  submitted  to  the  RAB  and  IFAD  three  (3)  months  after 
approval  of  the  ESIA  TOR  by  RDB.    It  will  contain  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  process,  findings, 
conclusions, recommendations and appendices of the study, as per the requirements of this TOR.  
d.  Final ESIA Report: This report shall incorporate all comments from RAB, SPIU and IFAD and will 
then be submitted to RDB for review and approval.  
The schedule for deliverables is presented below. 
3.  Deliverable 
6.  Project Brief 
4.  Timeline 
7.  2 weeks after signature of contract 
5.  Reporting Requirements  
8.  2 hard copies  + soft copy of the Project 
Brief to be submitted in English in pdf 
9. 
Scoping Report 
12.  Draft ESIA Report 
15.  Draft Final ESIA Report 
by RDB to proceed with the ESIA 
10.  1 month after acceptance of Project Brief 
11.  2 hard copies + soft copy of the Scoping 
Report to be submitted in English in pdf 
13.  3 months after approval of TOR by RDB 14.  5  hard  copies  +  soft  copy  of  the  Draft 
ESIA Report to be submitted in English in 
Microsoft Word 
16.  0.5 months after receiving comments on 
the Draft ESIA in preparation for 120 day 
disclosure period 
17.  5  hard  copies  +  soft  copy  of  the  Draft 
Final  ESIA  Report  to  be  submitted  in 
English in pdf 
18.  Final ESIA Report 
19.  5 months after disclosure date 
20.  5 hard copies + soft copy of the Final ESIA 
Report to be submitted in English in pdf 
Expected Duration of the Assignment  
The  assignment  is  expected  to  be  completed  within  a  period  of  not  more  than  11  months,  from 
inception to submission of the final report.  The effective date of commencement will be the date on 
which the consultancy agreement is signed by MINAGRI and the consultant. 
Proposal Evaluation Criteria 
The consultants will be evaluated based on the following criteria: 
•  Company profile including experience in conducting ESIA for irrigation projects 
•  Experience in IFAD or WB/IFC funded Projects 
•  Adequacy of work plan and methodology 
•  Team  Composition  (Team  leader/Environmentalist,  Hydrologist/Water  Resources  Specialist, 
Socio-Economist, Ecologist/Wetland ecologist, Senior Agronomist, and other experts). 
Coordination of this Assignment and Submission of Reports 
This consultancy assignment shall be coordinated by the MINAGRI, RAB, SPIU for IFAD-funded projects.  
The  contact  persons  to  whom  all  issues  and  correspondence  concerning  this  assignment  shall  be 
directed, including submission of reports are: 
•  RAB:  [XXXX]  
• 
IFAD: [XXXX] 
162 
Annex 4: 
Resettlement Action Framework 
1.  RATIONAL AND OBJECTIVES OF THE RESETTLEMENT ACTION PLAN 
The purpose of this Resettlement Action Framework (RAF) is to provide RAB and the Kayonza District 
project steering committee with a framework that sets out policies and legal framework, principles, 
institutional arrangements, schedules and indicative budgets that will guide compliance with national 
and  IFAD  possible  involuntary  resettlement  and  displacement.  The  framework  provides  standard 
procedures agreeable for all affected parties for project activities that may include construction works. 
KIIWP  will  be  integrated  within  the  SPIU  of  IFAD  projects  that  are  under  RAB.  KIIWP  has  been 
categorised as Category A, having considered that project activities may involve the following: 
•  Development of wetlands; 
• 
Loss of natural habitat and loss of biodiversity or environmental services provided by a natural 
ecosystem  in  sensitive  areas  considering  that  some  sites  are  in  close  proximity  of  the 
protected Akagera National Park; 
•  Construction of large-scale irrigation schemes (above 100 hectares per scheme); 
•  Significant abstraction or diversion/containment of surface water leaving the river flow below 
20 per cent environmental flow plus downstream user requirements; and  
•  Economic  or  physical  displacement  (ie.  land,  potable  water  and  water  for  other  uses),  or 
physical resettlement of more than 20 people, or impacting more than 10 per cent of any one 
community’s or individual farmer’s or household’s assets. 
Category A projects fall under the SECAP’s mandatory elements that stipulate one or combination of 
a  formal  Environmental  and  Social  Impact  Assessment  (ESIA)  or  Environmental  and  Social 
Management Framework (ESMF), Resettlement Action Framework (RAF)/ Resettlement Action Plan 
(RAP), free, prior and informed consent (FPIC)/FPIC implementation plan and Indigenous People Plan. 
In case of Rwanda however, there is no part of the population designated as “Indigenous People” - 
Rwandans are considered homogeneous by the country’s Constitution. 
SECAP’s  Guidance  Statement  #13  provides  guidance  to  Country  Management  Teams  (CPMs)  and 
Country Programme Management Teams (CPMTs) who that may have to deal with physical relocation 
or  any  change  in  land  use  and  livelihoods  options  resulting  from  IFAD  supported  interventions. 
Specifically, physical displacement refers to relocation, loss of residential land, or loss of shelter, while 
economic displacement implies the loss of land, assets, access to assets, income sources, or means of 
livelihoods.  Physical and economic resettlement could be either agreed/negotiated or involuntary - 
the two settings have very different implications for IFAD, as explained below: 
• 
Involuntary  Resettlement:  Resettlement  is  considered  involuntary  when  affected  people  or 
communities  do  not  have  the  capacity  to  refuse  it  –  because  the  free,  prior  and  informed 
consent (FPIC) principle is not properly implemented and they do not have power of choice – 
or their rights to refuse it are over-ridden by national law or are simply denied. 
•  Agreed/Negotiated  Resettlement:  There  is  agreed/negotiated  resettlement  when,  in  the 
respect  of  the  do-no-harm  principle  and  after  having  properly  informed  people  and  gone 
through  the  FPIC  process,  people  potentially  involved  in  the  resettlement  agree  on  being 
relocated  and/or  selling  or  relinquishing  access  to  assets,  against  fair  and  timely 
compensations for their losses. 
The  preparation  of  a  Resettlement  Action  Plan  (RAP)  that  may  be  required  for  any  KIIWP  scheme 
should take direction from the principles of free prior and informed consent and “do no harm”.  IFAD’s 
Land Policy requires involuntary resettlement to be avoided wherever possible.  The policy specifies 
that “while working on ‘doing good’, IFAD will adhere to a ‘do no harm’ principle at all times, so as to 
163 
minimize physical and potential economic impacts”.  The policy requires all viable alternative project 
designs to be explored in order to address risks of physical and economic displacement, and it also 
stipulates the need to restore livelihoods to improve the standards of living of affected persons. The 
approach and level of measures taken should be proportional to the range of IFAD’s operations. Hence 
IFAD’s principles with regard to physical and economic displacement are: 
• 
IFAD  will  avoid  or  minimize  wherever  possible  any  physical  or  economic  resettlement  that 
could negatively impact the affected people; in any case this should be only for a common 
interest (such as in an irrigation scheme benefitting IFAD’s target groups) and based on positive 
outcomes of FPIC.  
•  All land and natural resource users with a legitimate claim will be recognized–including people 
having informal/customary rights. 
•  No affected person will be left worse off, and preferably should be left in a better position than 
before, through proper  and timely compensation or any  other mitigation measures  agreed 
upon. 
The  RAP  should  also  be  guided  by  the  IFC’s  Performance  Standard  5  on  Land  Acquisition  and 
Involuntary Resettlement54, which describe the principles of Involuntary Resettlement as:  
• 
Involuntary resettlement should be avoided where feasible, or minimized, exploring all viable 
alternative project designs; 
•  Where it is not feasible to avoid resettlement, resettlement activities should be conceived and 
executed as sustainable development programs, providing sufficient investment resources to 
enable the persons displaced by the project to share in project benefits.  
•  Displaced  persons  should  be  meaningfully  consulted  and  should  have  opportunities  to 
participate in planning and implementing resettlement programs. 
•  Displaced persons should be assisted in their efforts to improve their livelihoods and standards 
of  living  or  at  least  to  restore  them,  in  real  terms,  to  pre-displacement  levels  or  to  levels 
prevailing prior to the beginning of project implementation, whichever is higher. 
The main objective of this RAF is to enable the avoidance or minimization of the effects of 
involuntary resettlement and displacement. The following principles will be adopted for the KIIWP 
project: 
• 
Involuntary resettlement and land acquisition will be avoided where feasible, or minimized, 
where it cannot be eliminated; 
•  Where involuntary resettlement and land acquisition are unavoidable, resettlement and fair 
compensation will be provided to the Project Affected Persons (PAPs); 
•  PAPs will be meaningfully consulted according to the Free, Prior and Informed Consent, (FPIC) 
and will participate in planning and implementing both the resettlement and project activities; 
•  PAPs will be assisted to improve their livelihoods and standards of living the best possible or 
at least to restore them to levels before displacement. 
The specific objectives of the RAF are to: 
•  Establish resettlement and compensation principles as well as implementation arrangements 
for the KIIWP project interventions sites in the sectors of Ndego, Kabare, Murama, Rwinkwavu, 
Kabarondo, Mwiri, Gahini and Murundi; 
•  Describe  the 
legal  and  institutional  framework  underlying  Rwandan  approaches  for 
resettlement, compensation and rehabilitation; 
54 IFC (2012); IFC Performance Standards: Performance Standard 5 – Land Acquisition and Involuntary 
Resettlement. https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/topics_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/ 
sustainability-at-ifc/policies-standards/performance-standards/ps5sustainability-at-ifc/policies-
standards/performance-standards/ps5 
164 
•  Compare and discuss gaps if any between the Rwanda laws, regulations and policies, and the 
policies of IFAD regarding resettlement, compensation and rehabilitation; 
•  Define  the  eligibility  criteria  for  identification  of  Project  Affected  Persons  (PAPs)  and 
entitlements; 
•  Describe  stakeholder  engagement  processes  and  procedures  and  participatory  approaches 
involving PAPs and other key stakeholders; and 
•  Provide  detailed  procedures  for  filing  grievances  and  resolving  disputes  raised  during 
stakeholder engagements and subsequent stages of the KIIWP project. 
2.  ANTICIPATED SOCIAL IMPACTS OF KIIWP 
The KIIWP project intends to provide improved food security and incomes of 50,000 rural households 
on a sustainable basis in the  8 administrative  sectors of  Kayonza District  that are most  affected by 
drought  comprising  Ndego,  Kabare,  Murama,  Rwinkwavu,  Kabarondo,  Mwiri,  Murama,  Gahini  and 
Murundi. The following interventions are proposed under Sub-components 1.1 and 1.2: 
•  4 sites for pumped irrigation in Ndego and Kabare Sectors totalling 2000 ha; 
•  275  ha  of  land  will  be  developed  for  marshland  irrigation  in  Rwinkwavu,  Kabare  and 
Kabarondo Sectors; 
•  Farm  ponds  will  be  constructed  for  rainwater  irrigation  on  some  10ha  of  land  in  Muruma 
Sector; 
•  Catchment rehabilitation and protection interventions will include terracing and agroforestry 
and will cover an estimated 1300ha; 
•  Other  planned  interventions  in  Ndego,  Gahini,  Murundi  and  Mwiri  sectors  include 
construction  of  7  new  valley  tanks,  rehabilitation  of  15  non-functional  valley  tanks,  and 
installation of 20 boreholes to provide water for livestock. 
Table A4.1  Physical and Economic Displacement Implications of KIIWP Activities 
Component/Sub-
component 
Catchment  Rehabilitation 
and Protection 
Construction  of  check  dams,  gabions, 
side drains, catchwater drains 
Terracing and contour bunds on farms 
Activities 
None 
Resettlement and compensation Implications 
Irrigation Development 
Pumped irrigation systems  
Ancillary  infrastructure  for  marshland 
and hillside irrigation pumped systems 
Farm-level 
structures 
Livestock 
infrastructure 
rainwater 
harvesting 
and 
domestic  water 
Livestock  and  domestic 
water supply 
Rehabilitation  of  100km  of 
feeder roads 
Temporary loss of use of land; permanent loss of 
land,  crops,  structures  or  assets  for  protection 
structures. 
Temporary loss of use of land; permanent loss of 
land, crops, structures or assets for dams, canals, 
and scheme infrastructure. 
Temporary loss of use of land; permanent loss of 
land, crops, structures or assets for installation of 
ancillary infrastructure (workshops, pumphouses, 
power supply lines, access ways, etc). 
Permanent loss of land, drops, structures or assets 
Temporary loss of use of land; permanent loss of 
land, crops, structures or assets for valley dams. 
Temporary loss of use of land; permanent loss of 
land, crops, structures or assets for access roads, 
road widening, etc. 
Source: Adapted from FONERWA, 2017. 
Much  as  the  first  principle  is  avoidance  of  any  disruption,  there  are  possibilities  that  the 
abovementioned project interventions may result in temporary loss of use of land, permanent loss of 
land, crops, structures and/or assets to waterways and other pumped irrigation systems and rain water 
harvesting infrastructures. The same losses may be experienced in feeder road construction and in 
livestock  water  infrastructure  installations  that  may  include  small  dams  and  boreholes.  A  RAP  will 
165 
therefore  have  to  be  developed  to  guide  KIIWP  and  ensure  compliance  to  the  IFAD  safeguards  as 
articulated  in  the  SECAP  Statement  13  and  Rwanda’s  national  resettlement  and/or  displacement 
requirements. 
3.  METHODOLOGY FOR THE PREPARATION OF THE RAF 
This RAF has been prepared as an integral part of the KIIWP ESMF using an approach and methodology 
that included desktop research, field visits to the proposed intervention sites in the respective sectors 
of Kayonza District and stakeholder consultations. 
Desktop research 
The desktop research involves mainly the review of key documents that provided baseline information 
as well as deeper insights of the KIIWP project. Key documents included Rwanda’s Constitution, Vision 
2020,  the  medium-term  development  framework  documents  of  the  concluding  the  second  phase 
Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy (EDPRS-2, 2013-2018) and its successor, the 
first  phase  of  the  National  Strategy  for  Transformation  (NST-1).  The  literature  review  also  included 
policies, strategies, legislation, regulations and guidelines relevant to resettlement and displacement, 
the IFAD SECAP version 2017 as well as RAF documents for similar project in Rwanda. 
Stakeholder consultations and field visits: 
During EMSF preparation activities for KIIWP in August 2018, preliminary stakeholder consultations 
were conducted in Kigali and in the beneficiary district of Kayonza. Consultations process started with 
stakeholder  identification  for  the  KIIWP  project through  briefings  with  relevant  IFAD  and  MINAGRI 
officials including RAB, SPIU staff involved in similar projects. Office visits involving discussions and 
interviews were carried out with officials of REMA, Water Resources Department, MINIAGRI and the 
Kayonza District Mayor with the heads of respective district service units. 
Consultative  discussions  in  Kigali  were  held  in  with  the  relevant  national  agencies  on  issues  as 
summarised below: 
•  Rwanda  Environmental  Management  Authority  (REMA)  officials  of  the  Environmental 
Education  and  Mainstreaming  unit  regarding  the  beneficiary  districts  capacity  to  monitor 
KIIWP activities; and separately with Environmental Management and Pollution Control unit 
regarding the special regulations for the land use management of wetlands. 
•  Department  of  Integrated  Water  Resource  Management  regarding  irrigation  water  use 
regulations and their application and relevance to KIIWP. 
•  The Single Project Implementation Unit of the Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources 
responsible for projects similar to KIIWP. 
•  The climate resilience coordination office in the Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources 
regarding potential complementarity of climate resilience strategic actions with KIIWP. 
•  Officials of the Agriculture Technical Assistance Facility - AgriTAF Programme regarding lessons 
that can be learned and potential synergies with KIIWP. 
•  The Rwanda Agricultural Board as the operational partner of IFAD in the design, development 
and implementation of KIIWP 
Identified  potential  beneficiary  stakeholders  were  consulted  at  proposed  project  sites  within  the 
targeted  drought  prone  intervention  sectors  of  Ndego,  Kabare,  Murama,  Kabarondo,  Rwinkwavu, 
Mwiri, Gahini and Murundi. These consultations involved mainly focus group discussions individuals, 
members and leaders of crop and livestock producer cooperatives and sector-level opinion leaders. 
166 
The selected schemes visited for sector-level discussions and consultations with potential beneficiary 
community members conducted during the mission are summarised in Table A4.2 below.  
Table A4.2  Schemes Visited for Community Consultation Purposes 
Date 
Sector 
Site 
Site Name 
Village/Cell 
27/08/2018  Kayonza District Mayor and Staff 
28/08/2018  Ndego 
Milk Collection Centre staff 
28/08/2018  Ndego 
Ndego Sector Opinion Leaders 
28/08/2018 
Site 1 
Kibare 
Isangano 
28/08/2018 
Ndego 
Site 2  Humure 
Kiyovu 
29/08/2018 
Site 3 
Byimana 
Byimana 
29/08/2018  Kabare 
Site 1  Gakoma 
Rubumba 
29/08/2018 
Kabare 
Rwinkwavu 
30/08/2018  Kabarondo 
Site 2  Gishanda 
Cyambare 
Mukoyoyo 
Site 1 
Rwakigeri 
Rwakigeri 
Site 2 
Kayeganyege 
Kanyeganyege 
30/08/2018  Murama 
Site 1  Ngoma 
Muko 
30/08/2018  Gahini 
Site 1  Nyabombe 
Site 2 
Rukore 
Juru 
Kahi 
No. of persons 
consulted 
8 
5 
 20 
28 
20 
38 
6 
Site appraisal only 
10 
11 
04/09/2018  Rwinkwavu 
Site 1 
Rwinkwavu 
Muko 
Site appraisal only 
05/09/2018 
Murundi 
05/09/2018  Mwiri 
05/09/2018  Kayonza CBD 
Site 1  Gakoma 
Buhabwa 
Site 2 
Rwakabanda 
Ryamanyoni 
Site 1 
Kageyo 
Kageyo 
Livestock farmers meeting 
Source: ESMF Study Consultations, August 2018. 
Total 
29 
37 
212 
Planned Area (ha) 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
1,400 
600 
150 
125 
Farm level ponds 
7 new valley dams; 
15 valley dams for 
rehabilitation; 20 
boreholes; 
Agroforestry (fruit 
trees; coffee) 
A range of issues were discussed during community consultations, the main topics covered being: 
•  Cooperative Approach for Delivery 
•  Target Beneficiary Crop Priorities 
•  Target Beneficiary Willingness to Invest 
• 
Land Use Competition and Conflicts 
•  Target beneficiary grievance resolution views 
Key outcomes from preliminary consultations as discussed earlier in the document include the 
following: 
Cooperative Approach for Delivery of KIIWP 
Target  beneficiary  stakeholders  and  opinion  leaders  generally  demonstrated  awareness  of  and 
experience  in  cooperative  frameworks  and  expressed  support  for  the  plans  to  deliver  KIIWP 
interventions in this modality. Most of the residents of the proposed Kibare pumped irrigation site 
indicated that they had not worked in cooperative arrangements and sought clarifications during the 
focus group discussion. The Kibare residents expressed support after the clarifications were provided 
by the local agronomist and the RAB official that were present at the forum. 
167 
Target Beneficiary Crop Priorities for KIIWP 
Focus  group  discussions  with  target  beneficiaries  and  opinion  leaders  in  the  proposed  pumped 
irrigation sites of Kibare, Humure and Byimana in the Ndego sector and of Gakoma in Kabare sector 
were unanimous in indicating maize, beans and soya as priority crops. Rice, banana, sugarcane as well 
as  vegetable  crops  including  tomato  and  beetroot  were  indicated  as  priority  crops.    In  the  land 
husbandry support intervention areas coffee was indicated as the highest priority for reasons including 
drought resistance. Other priority crops indicated included pineapple, avocado and other fruit trees 
that  include  mango,  orange,  lemon,  tree-tomato  and  passion  fruit.  Banana  and  cassava  were  also 
indicated  as  priority  crops  but  the  stakeholders  lamented  the  widespread  problem  of  disease 
infestations that destroyed most both crops. 
Target Beneficiary Willingness to Invest in KIIWP 
Focus group discussions indicated a willingness to invest in the necessary maintenance infrastructure 
for  irrigation  including  pumping  systems,  dams  and  boreholes.  Target  beneficiary  stakeholders 
indicated that they already invest resources and cash in growing crops every season for the required 
inputs, although the crops fail in most seasons due to drought. Willingness to invest more and to seek 
commercial credit with the assurance of irrigation. Some focus group discussions indicated a need for 
capacity development in business skills and financial management.  
Land Use Competition and Conflicts 
Potential conflicts were flagged in some focus group discussions and discussions with individuals. In 
Kageyo, it was indicated that farmers compete among themselves to irrigate rice and with watering 
cattle in the dry season when the flow is reduced. Stakeholders indicated a need to rehabilitated valley 
dams that were silted and the need for the construction of others as well as boreholes for livestock 
water requirements. Similar potential for conflict was observed in Humure and Kibare where cattle 
graze and drink in the pump irrigation target sites. Other conflicts flagged included wildlife, especially 
hippo  and  baboons.  Hippos  were  flagged  as  a  problem  in  most  of the  intervention  sites  and  were 
observed by the field team.  There was a general air of frustration and despair among the stakeholders 
as they talked about the need for help to mitigate effects of persistent droughts. The community of 
Humure gave an account of crop failures season after season while they see the neighbouring Bramin 
farm prospering with bumper harvests from irrigation. They expressed frustration that government 
often provides food relief purchased from neighbouring Tanzania whereas they are capable of feeding 
themselves by irrigating their crops from the same water source that Bramin draws from. The same 
frustration was expressed by residents of Byimana and Gakoma in reference to the Buffet irrigation 
scheme within a few kilometres from their fields. 
Target beneficiary grievance resolution views for KIIWP 
Stakeholders  indicated  confidence  for  the  resolution  of  conflicts  that  could  emerge  during  the 
development  and implementation of KIIWP interventions. Focus group discussions demonstrated a 
good understanding of conflict resolution mechanisms within cooperative rules as laid out in corporate 
constitutions as well as national laws and regulations on cooperatives. It was explained that conflict 
that  develop  within  a  cooperative  are  resolved  by  a  grievance/conflict  resolution  committee. 
Complaints are escalated to local governance structures when settlement is not reached within the 
cooperative starting with sector level and district level if still not resolved. Unresolved grievances in 
cooperatives must be escalated to the Rwanda Cooperative Agency (RCA), the statutory body in change 
of cooperative regulation and management. RCA will attempt to redress cooperative-born grievances 
through its mediation and arbitration system before forwarding them to the country’s court system if 
unable to resolve them. Court systems are available to complainants if conflicts remain unresolved 
through the resolution mechanisms and local governance structures.  
168 
4. 
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK 
The Lead Project Agency for KIIWP will be the Rwanda Agriculture and Animal Resources Development 
Board (RAB), a technical agency of the Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) which 
will have the overall responsibility for Project coordination and execution.  Thus, the key institutions 
responsible for resettlement and compensation policy, legislation and regulations relevant to KIIWP 
include the following: 
•  Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI); 
•  Rwanda Agriculture and Animal Resources Development Board (RAB); 
•  Kayonza District; 
•  Ministry of Environment (MoE); 
•  Rwanda Environmental Management Authority (REMA); 
•  Rwanda Development Board (RDB); 
•  Rwanda Land Management and Use Authority (RLMUA); 
•  Department of Water Resources. 
Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) 
MINAGRI is responsible for developing the policies, laws and regulations as well as coordination of all 
activities  related  to  agricultural  development  and  food  security  as  well  as  their  follow  up  and 
evaluation.  The  ministry’s  mission  is  to  ensure  food  and  nutrition  security  of  Rwandans  by  using 
modern  agribusiness 
terms  of  production, 
commercialisation of the outputs, and the creation of a competitive agricultural sector. The Ministry 
will provide oversight for the implementation of KIIWP while the RAB will be the lead implementation 
agency.  A  Project  Steering  Committee  (PSC)  will  be  set  up  chaired  by  Permanent  Secretary  (PS)  of 
MINAGRI.  The membership of the PSC will be determined by MINAGRI and shared with IFAD. 
technologies,  professionalizing 
farmers 
in 
Rwanda Agriculture and Animal Resources Development Board (RAB) 
RAB is responsible for developing agriculture and animal husbandry through their reform, and using 
modern  methods  in  crop  and  animal  production,  research,  agricultural  extension,  education  and 
training of farmers in new technologies. 
Kayonza District 
A District Steering Committee chaired by the Kayonza Mayor and made up of members of the District 
Council, members representing the farmers, farmers organisations (FOs), and local institutions from 
the public and private sectors’ participating in the Project will be put in place. The management of 
infrastructure  and  optimal  use  of  developed  land  at  district  level  is  ensured  by  a  Scheme  Steering 
Committee for irrigation and soil conservation activities at district level. The Kayonza District Executive 
Committee will administer expropriation requirements for KIIWP as provided for in Article 7 of Law N° 
32-2015 of 11-06-2015 Relating to Expropriation in the Public Interest. 
Ministry of Environment (MINIRENA) 
The MINIRENA is responsible for developing the policies, laws and regulations as well as relating to 
environment and climate change as well as the coordination and evaluation of all RAP implementation 
activities. 
Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA) 
REMA  is  responsible  of  national  environmental  protection,  conservation,  promotion  and  overall 
management, including advisory to the government on all matters pertinent to the environment and 
climate change.  For any major resettlement, an ESIA will be required for which REMA will provide 
guidance. 
169 
Rwanda Development Board (RDB) 
RDB will be responsible for reviewing and approving any ESIAs conducted for resettlement. 
Rwanda Land Management and Use Authority (RLMUA) 
RLMUA  is  responsible  for  putting  in  place  and  operationalizing  an  efficient  system  of  land 
administration, use and land management that secures land ownership in the country. 
Department of Water Resources 
The  Department  of Water  Resources  is  responsible  for  the  implement  Integrated  Water  Resources 
Management  (IWRM)  agenda  of  the  National  Policy  on  Water  Resources.  It  coordinates  various 
stakeholders involved in the water sector including those working in domestic water supply, irrigation, 
ecosystems, financing, transboundary water level and infrastructures development. 
5.  LEGAL FRAMEWORK 
Rwanda’s  legal  framework  that  is  applied  to  projects  involving  resettlement  and  displacement 
compensation and other redress requirements is anchored on the Constitution of 2003 as amended in 
2015, the land policy and pieces of legislation that give it effect, as follows:  
The Constitution of the Republic of Rwanda 
The Rwandan Constitution, promulgated in 2003 and revised in December 2015, recognizes ownership 
of property and every person’s right to private property (Article 34). Consequently, private property, 
whether individually or collectively owned, is inviolable.  Exceptionally, the right to property may be 
overruled in the case of public interest. In these cases, circumstances and procedures are determined 
by the law and subject to fair and prior compensation (Article 34).  Article 35 stipulates that private 
ownership of land and other rights related to land are granted by the State. The constitution provides 
that a law should be in place to specify modalities of acquisition, transfer and use of land.  
The Constitution of the Republic of Rwanda also articulates the rights and responsibilities of all citizens 
and the role of the  state regarding the  environment by providing that every citizen is entitled to a 
healthy  and  satisfying  environment  and  that  very  person  has  the  duty  to  protect,  safeguard  and 
promote  the  environment  under  Articles  22  and  53  respectively.  Guidance  of  the  Constitution  on 
environmental preservation and management as a cross cutting issue is reflected in the national Vision 
2020 and the national policy on environment of 2003. 
The Constitutional rights as articulated in Vision 2020 and environmental policy are given effect by 
Organic Law No. 4/2005 of 8 April 2005 as amended in 2018. Principle 1 of Article 7 in the Organic Law 
stipulates precautionary measures that are informed by the results of both environmental assessment 
of  policies,  plans,  projects,  and  development  activities  and  the  assessment  of  social  well-being. 
Chapter  IV,  Articles  67-70,  Organic  Law  sets  out  specific  guidelines  for  Environmental  Impact 
Assessment (EIA) and stipulates that every project, and those programmes and policies that may affect 
the environment, shall be subjected to EIA before obtaining authorization for implementation. 
Land Policy (2004) 
The land policy of 2004 introduces the consideration of master plans for use and sound management 
of land resources. The policy also provides development of land use plans based on suitability of the 
areas/lands thus distinguishing the different categories of land and their purpose. The policy promotes 
irrigating  areas  that  are  more  or  less  flat  and  semi-arid  to  support  agricultural  production  while 
discouraging  overgrazing  and  pasture  burning.  On  the  use  and  management  of  hillsides  and 
marshlands,  the  policy  stipulates  that  marshlands  meant  for  agriculture  should  be  cultivated  after 
adequate planning and Environmental Impact Assessment.  
170 
Law No. 43/2013 Governing Land in Rwanda (2013)  
The Land Law has been developed to determine the modalities of allocating, acquiring, transferring, 
using  and  managing  land  in  Rwanda.  Article  3  of  the  law  reaffirms  the  States  supreme  power  in 
management of land and the right to expropriate in the public interest. Under Article 6, any citizen can 
be granted freehold title, and as per Article 7, for an area up to 5 hectares. The Minister may allow for 
freehold titles in excess of 5 hectares.  
Article 10 notes that private individual land shall comprise land acquired either through customary or 
written law. Article 17 notes that in addition to freehold title, the right to land may be granted by the 
State  in the form of emphyteutic lease (specifying that  the lessee must improve  the property with 
construction), for between 3 and 99 years, which can be renewed. Article 18 states that allocated or 
leased land shall be evidenced by a certificate of land registration issued by the registrar of land titles. 
Article 20 notes that registration of land is obligatory. 
In terms of land use consolidation, Article 30 notes that it is prohibited to subdivide agricultural land 
plots if this would result in a plot of less than 1 hectare. Owners of lands which are prohibited from 
subdivision should co-own and use the land. Article 34 notes that landowners have the right to exploit 
their land in accordance with the law, and freely own land, except in the case of expropriation in the 
public interest. 
Law No. 32/2015 Relating to Expropriation in the Public Interest  
Article 2 defines expropriation in the public interest as, ‘an act based on power of Government, public 
institutions and local administrative entities with legal personality to remove a person from his/her 
property in the public interest after fair compensation’. Further, fair compensation is defined as, ‘an 
indemnity equivalent to the value of land and the activities performed thereon given to the person to 
be  expropriated  and  calculated  in  consideration  of  market  prices  as  well  as  compensation  for 
disturbance due to expropriation’.  
Article 3 notes that, ‘No person shall hinder the implementation of the program of expropriation in 
the public interest on pretext of self-centred interests.’  Article 17 states that after the publication of 
a decision on expropriation in the public interest, complete with a list of holders of rights registered 
on  land  titles  and  property  incorporated  on  land,  land  owners  shall  not  develop  any  long-term 
activities on the land, otherwise such activities shall not be compensable during expropriation.  
In terms of valuation, Article 22 states that land values and prices for property consistent with the 
prevailing market rates shall be established by the Institute of Real Property Valuers in Rwanda.  Article 
23 states that independent valuers certified by the Institute of Real Property Valuers in Rwanda should 
conduct  valuation  of  land  and  property.  In  accordance  with  Article  25,  the  valuation  of  land  and 
property  should  be  conducted  in  the  presence  of  the  landowner/property  owner  or  their  lawful 
representatives, and in the presence of representatives of local administrative entities.  
According to Article 26 land titles must be produced as evidence of ownership, and evidence of marital 
status  as  applicable.  Any  persons  dispossessed  of  land,  or  unlawfully  occupying  land,  or  having 
developed activities prohibited after the enactment of relevant laws shall receive no compensation.   
Article  27  reaffirms  that  compensation  for  land  must  include  any  improvements  on  the  land  and 
compensation for disruption associated with expropriation.  
Article 28 notes that the value of land and property should be calculated on the basis of size, nature 
and location and the prevailing market rates. The compensation for disruption caused by expropriation 
to be paid to the expropriated person shall be equivalent to five percent (5%) of the total value of 
his/her property expropriated.  
Article 32 refers to sign-off by the owner once he/she is satisfied with the valuation.  Article 33 allows 
for any person not  satisfied with the valuation to contest  in writing within seven days. Any person 
171 
contesting the assessed value must engage the services of a valuer or a valuation firm recognized by 
the  Institute  of  Real  Property  Valuers  in  Rwanda,  at  their  own  expense,  to  carry  out  a  counter-
assessment  of  the  value. Under  Article  34  if  unsatisfied  the  matter  may  be  referred  to  the  courts. 
However, the compensation will be paid pending the court decision so as not to delay expropriation.  
In  terms  of  payment  of  compensation,  Article  35  notes  that,  ‘fair  compensation  can  be  paid  in 
monetary  form  in  the  Rwandan  currency  or  in  any  other  form  mutually  agreed  upon  by  the 
expropriator  and  the  person  to  be  expropriated’.  The  fair  compensation  must  be  paid  to  the 
expropriated person before he/she relocates. Article 36 notes that compensation must be paid within 
120 days of approval by the  Ministry, or otherwise becomes  null and void, unless mutually  agreed 
otherwise. After payment, the affected person has a further 120 days to relocate. In this time they 
should not plant any crops that would take more than 120 days of growth before harvesting.  
Article  38  stipulates  that  compensation  shall  be  deposited  into  a  bank  account  with  a  recognized 
locally-based bank or financial institution. When, in case of joint ownership, compensation must be 
paid  to  more  than  one  person,  such  as  family  or  a  legally  married  spouse,  compensation  will  be 
deposited into an account which requires co-authorization to withdraw money.  
Article 39 allows for payment of compensation in-kind as opposed to cash. During public consultation 
with PAPs, they confirmed that they need compensation in cash not in kind. KIIWP will trigger this law 
in case of loss of property of economic benefit resulting project activities. 
Ministerial Order No. 001/2006 Determining the Structure of Lands (2006)  
This ministerial order determines the structure of Land Registers, and the responsibilities and functions 
of the District Land Bureau. The responsibilities of the land bureau include among others to implement 
land registration, keep land registers, monitor and approve activities pertaining to valuation of land 
and property, and demarcate and approve land cadastral maps. Rural populations with customary land 
rights are being encouraged to register their land through these institutions. 
Presidential Order No. 54/01 (2006)  
This  presidential  order  determines  the  structure,  the  responsibilities,  the  functioning  and  the 
composition  of  Land  Committees.  Article  9  of  the  order  gives  the  office  of  the  land  committee 
independence in the discharge of its daily technical duties. Therefore, it receives no instructions from 
any other organ.  
Ministerial Order No. 002/2008 Determining Modalities of Land Registration (2008)  
The Ministerial Order includes dispute resolution procedures in relation to land registration, including 
the  use  of  a  Cell  Land  Adjudication  Committee  (LAC).  The  LACs  are  comprised  of  five  members, 
supplemented  by  five  members  of  the  particular  village  (imidugudu)  where  demarcation  and 
adjudication is taking place. The cell executive secretary acts as the LAC secretary, although he or she 
has no voting rights.  
Article 17 grants parties to a dispute the right to  take that dispute to the LAC. Where disputes are 
resolved with the assistance of the LAC, the parties are bound by that agreement, and may not later 
raise the issue. Article 20 provides procedures for the LAC when hearing disputes, including that the 
hearing is open to the public and announced eight days in advance. 
6. 
IFAD’S PRINCIPLES, POLICIES AND TOOLS 
IFAD’s core mandate is to support the social and economic empowerment of poor rural women and 
men. As such, it is opposed to any investment that will have a negative impact on its target groups. 
KIIWP  project  interventions  are  likely  to  require  resettlement  or  economic  displacement  due  to 
temporary, loss of use of land, permanent loss of land, crops, structures and/or assets to waterways 
172 
and other pumped irrigation systems and rain water harvesting infrastructures. The same losses may 
be experienced in feeder road construction and in livestock water infrastructure installations that may 
include small dams and boreholes. 
FPIC and the do- no-harm principles will therefore be followed as stipulated in Statement 13 of IFAD’s 
SECAP. Specifically, Guidance Statement #13 requires: 
•  Adherence  to  the  “do-no-harm  principle”  at  all  times.  A  broad  range  of  development 
interventions, particularly those concerned with agricultural intensification, such as irrigation 
or technology-based agricultural production, and those focused on afforestation or rangeland 
management, effectively add value to land. Under such circumstances, there may be the risk 
that the rural poor, especially women, may lose out to more powerful groups. Projects in these 
areas must be designed, therefore, in such a way they ‘do no harm’ to the land tenure interests 
of  the  rural  poor,  especially  those  of  women,  indigenous  and  tribal  peoples  and  other 
vulnerable  groups.  Careful  measures  must  always  be  considered  to  avoid  elite  capture  or 
forced displacement of people, and to address conflicting claims.  
•  Adherence  to  the  principle  of  free,  prior  and  informed  consent.  Before  supporting  any 
development intervention that might affect the land access and use rights of communities, 
IFAD  will  ensure  that  their  free,  prior  and  informed  consent  has  been  solicited  through 
inclusive consultations based on full disclosure of the intent and scope of the activities planned 
and their implications.  
FPIC for KIIWP is provided in Annex 5 of this ESMF.   
SECAP  Guidance  Statement  #13  draws  on  IFAD  policies  and  on  international  guidelines  and  best 
practices referring to safeguards against involuntary resettlement, including the International Finance 
Corporation (IFC) Policy on Environmental and Social Sustainability and its Performance Standard 5. A 
comparison  has  been  made  in  Table  A4.3  below  between  the  IFAD’s  requirements  and  Rwanda’s 
legislation governing involuntary resettlement as discussed above. The comparison55 is adapted from 
FONERWA (2017). 
55 FONERWA (2017). Resettlement Policy Framework for the Strengthening Climate Resilience of Rural 
Communities in Northern Rwanda 
173 
Table A4.3  Comparison between IFAD’s SECAP Requirements and Rwanda’s National Legislations  
Principles 
Applicable SECAP Requirements 
Applicable Rwandan Legislation 
Recommendations 
Valuation 
Valuation of assets to be done at replacement cost method to 
help determine the amount sufficient to replace lost assets and 
cover transaction costs. In applying this method of valuation, 
depreciation of structures and assets should not be taken into 
account.  
If the residual of the asset being taken is not economically viable, 
compensation and other resettlement assistance are provided as 
if the entire asset had been taken.  
Valuation is covered by the Expropriation Law and the Land 
Valuation Law and stipulates that the affected person 
receive fair and just compensation. 
KIIWP to adopt replacement cost method of 
valuation. 
Land Squatters (i.e. those 
who have no recognizable 
legal right of claim to the 
land they are occupying) 
Persons without legal land ownership and occupancy, or 
possession, will not be entitled for compensation for the lands 
that they occupy, but will be compensated for the permanent 
improvements or structures they may have introduced or built in 
the affected lands before the cut-off date. 
Article 26 of the expropriation law No 35/2015 provides 
that the person to be expropriated shall provide land titles 
and documentary evidence that he/she is the owner of 
property incorporated on land. Those unlawfully occupying 
land (including squatters) shall receive no compensation. 
Compensation will be done for the crops, permanent 
improvements or structures squatters may have 
introduced or built in the affected lands before the 
cut-off date. 
Compensation 
Preference  to  be  given  to  land  based  resettlement  strategies  for 
displaced persons whose livelihoods are land-based as compared 
to monetary compensation 
Article 22 of the expropriation law No 35/2015 entitles the 
landholder  to  compensation  for  the  value  of  the  land  and 
activities on the basis of size, nature location considering the 
prevailing market value. 
Adopt mode of compensation by giving preference to 
land-based  resettlement  as  opposed  to  monetary 
compensation. 
Livelihoods Restoration 
Measures 
Displaced persons should be assisted in their efforts to improve 
their livelihoods and standards of living or at least to restore 
them, in real terms, to pre-displacement levels or to levels 
prevailing prior to the beginning of project implementation, 
whichever is higher. 
Participation and 
Consultation 
Persons to be displaced should actively be consulted and should 
have opportunity to participate in planning and design of 
resettlement programs 
Expropriation law does not provide for alternative land and 
resettlement for those with the pre-displaced status 
Assistance to be provided for livelihood restoration 
to ensure affected persons are not worse off than 
before the project. 
The Rwandan law on Expropriation simply stipulates that 
affected peoples be fully informed of expropriation issues. 
The law also conflicts the very purpose of consultation and 
involvement by prohibiting any opposition to the 
expropriation program if considered to be under the 
pretext of self-centred justification which might not be the 
case 
Ensure full participation by persons to be displaced in 
design of resettlement and compensation modalities.  
174 
Principles 
Applicable SECAP Requirements 
Applicable Rwandan Legislation 
Recommendations 
Timeframe 
Displacement  must  not  occur  before  necessary  measures  for 
resettlement  are  in  place,  i.e.,  measures  over  and  above  simple 
compensation.  These  include  compensation  and  other  measures 
required for relocation and preparation and provision of facilities of 
resettlement sites, where required. In particular, taking of land and 
related  assets  may  only  take  place  after  compensation  has  been 
paid  and  where  applicable  resettlement  sites  and  moving 
allowances have been provided. Furthermore, measures pertaining 
to provision of economic rehabilitation however can and often do 
occur post displacement.  A cut-off date must be agreed upon and 
dccumented;  people  who  encroach  on  the  area  after  the  cut-off 
date are not entitled to compensation or resettlement assistance. 
Rwanda  expropriation  law  stipulates  a  timeframe  upon 
when the property to be expropriated must be handed over 
which is 120 days after compensation has been paid. 
A  cut-  off  date  should  be  applied.  Where 
compensation is to  be  paid  to  an  affected person in 
accordance with an approved resettlement plan, but 
the  offer  has  been  rejected,  the  taking  of  land  and 
related assets may only proceed if funds equal to the 
offered amount plus 10 percent have been deposited 
in a secure form of escrow or  other  interest-bearing 
deposit,  and  a  satisfactory  means  for  resolving  the 
dispute  concerning  said  offer  of  compensation  in  a 
timely and equitable manner has been provided for. 
Overall Strategy 
There  is no  requirement  to  prove  that  the  project  fits within the 
overall land master plan 
Section 2 of the expropriation law on procedures, provides 
for the process to show how the subprojects fits into the land 
master plan of the area in question 
Demonstrate how resettlement processes fit into land 
master plan as per Rwanda Expropriation Law 
Eligibility 
Land Compensation 
Eligibility criteria include even those who do not have formal legal 
rights to land at the time the census begins but have a claim to such 
land or assets provided that such claims are recognized under the 
laws  of  the  country  or  become  recognized  through  a  process 
identified  in  the  resettlement  plan  and  also  those  who  have  no 
recognizable legal right or claim to the land they are occupying 
Article  18  of  the  law  requires  the  person  who  owns  land 
intended for expropriation to provide evidence of ownership 
or rights on that land and presents a certificate to that effect 
Recognise  claims  by  persons  with  no  formal  legal 
rights to land at the time of census.  This will be more 
appropriate for determining eligibility due to the fact 
that many of those who farm the lands don’t own it, 
although they may have depended on farming on such 
lands  for  their  livelihood,  and  as  such,  should  be 
assisted to at least maintain their pre-project level of 
welfare. (especially for assets) 
Resettlement of displaced persons to be done through provision of 
land  for  land  instead  of  cash  compensation  for  land,  when 
livelihoods are land based. Displaced persons should be assisted in 
their efforts to improve their livelihoods and standards of living or 
at least to restore them, in real terms, to pre-displacement levels 
or  to 
levels  prevailing  prior  to  the  beginning  of  project 
implementation, whichever is higher. 
Expropriation  law  is  silent  on  provision  of  alternative  land 
and resettlement of those to the pre-displaced status 
Land  for  land  compensation  to  be  given preference.  
land 
insufficient  for 
Where 
compensation,  then  can  cash  compensation  may  be 
applied.  
land  for 
land 
is 
Required Measures 
Displaced  persons  to  be  consulted  on  offered  choices  for 
compensation,  and  provided  with  technically  and  economically 
feasible resettlement alternatives. 
Expropriation  law  does  not  provide  for  alternatives  when 
undertaking compensation 
Provide project affected persons with alternatives for 
compensation and resettlement (as necessary) 
175 
Principles 
Applicable SECAP Requirements 
Applicable Rwandan Legislation 
Recommendations 
Grievance redress 
mechanisms 
PAPs should be informed of the compensation processes and must 
participate in the establishment of Grievance Redress Mechanisms 
The new Expropriation Law of 2015 creates the committee 
in charge of  supervision of projects of expropriation in the 
interest  which  shall  also  handle  complaints 
public 
procedures  for  individuals  dissatisfied  with  the  proposed 
project or the value of their compensation 
Adopt  Rwanda  Expropriation  Law  which  establishes 
the committees in charge of GRM in conjunction with 
the proposed GRM in this RAF. 
Displacement 
Displacement must not occur until all necessary measures for 
resettlement are in place. 
The notification period under national legislation requires 
that property must be handed over 120 days after financial 
compensation has been paid 
Ensure all SECAP and national requirements are met 
within the 120 days after financial compensation has 
been paid. 
Consultation and disclosure 
Consult project-affected persons, host communities and local 
NGOs, as appropriate. Provide them opportunities to participate 
in the planning, implementation, and monitoring of the 
resettlement program, especially in the process of developing and 
implementing the procedures for determining eligibility for 
compensation benefits and development assistance (as 
documented in a resettlement plan), and for establishing 
appropriate and accessible grievance mechanisms. 
Consultations and disclosure processes to be 
conducted as per SECAP requirements. 
The Expropriation Law governs the specifics of land 
acquisition. The law provides for public dissemination on 
the importance of the project to be established and the 
need for expropriation. In addition to dissemination, the 
Expropriation Law requires prior consultative meetings and 
examination of the project proposal involving expropriation, 
with a view to avoid eventual prejudice on the person or 
entity subject to expropriation. Normally, a consultative 
meeting is held within 15 days after receipt of the 
application for expropriation. Based on these consultations, 
the relevant Land Commission or Committee (from the Cell 
level to the National level) takes a decision to approve the 
project within a period of 15 days. 
Source:  Adapted from FONERWA (2017) 
176 
7.  RAP PREPARATION 
SECAP’s Guidance Statement #13 stipulates that Project Affected Persons (PAPs) are duly compensated 
before any KIIWP project works, in according with this Resettlement Action Framework and according 
to a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) that will subsequently prepared for the implementation.  
RAP preparation Process 
The Kayonza District with the assistance of IFAD, will hire a qualified individual consultant to prepare 
a  detailed  RAP  to  guide  resettlement  for  those  interventions  that  will  cause  physical  or  economic 
relocation. The  consultant will  need  the  services  of  a  certified valuer  to  support  land  and/or  asset 
valuation process. The RAP will be submitted and approved by RAB and IFAD. 
Identifying need for RAP 
There  will  be  need  to  confirm  that  a  RAP  is  needed  by  carrying  out  a  screening  exercise  at  the 
subproject  stage.  The  need  for  resettlement  will  be  described  in  terms  of  geographical  scope, 
processes for identification of PAPs, estimated of numbers of households and assets affected, a general 
description  of  the  total  areas  of  land  affected  and  types  of  assets  and  structures  affected;  general 
description of PCR or sites of personal value (such as graves and graveyards) and public services that 
may need to be relocated.  Transparent stakeholder consultations including PAPs and public disclosure 
will be conducted during the PAP identification process. PAPs will be informed of their right to have 
access to a grievance mechanism thought the resettlement action processes. 
Screening 
The  screening  process  will  involve  the  identification  of  the  lands  that  may  result  in  physical  or 
economic resettlement. The screening will be carried out by the Kayonza District as early as possible 
in the KIIWP implementation planning process.  A screening checklist will be developed with the aim 
of establishing whether the Project will: 
•  Reduce access to economic and natural resources, such as land, pasture, water, public services; 
•  Result in resettlement of individuals or families; 
•  Require  the  acquisition  of  land  (public,  usufruct,  temporary  or  permanent)  for  its 
development; 
•  Result in the temporary or permanent loss of perennial or annual crops or fruit trees; 
•  Affect  household  infrastructure  such  as  the  main  residence,  outside  toilets,  cowsheds, 
granaries, kitchens; 
•  Affect commercial premises such as shops, coffee houses; 
•  Affect institutional premises such as churches, mosques or schools; 
•  Affect physical cultural resources; 
•  Affect  vulnerable  people  (elderly,  poor,  orphans,  women  headed  households,  widows  or 
people with disabilities).  
Project Affected Persons Census 
Following confirmation, the RAP will involve the identification of Project Affected Persons (PAPs), a 
socio-economic  survey  of  the  PAPs  and  census  and  asset  inventory  of  each  intervention  site.  A 
population census of PAPs should be carried for the following reasons: 
•  Determining legitimate beneficiaries that discourages opportunistic local migrants; 
•  Determining the scale of the required physical and economic resettlement; 
•  Provide indicators for monitoring and evaluation; and 
177 
•  Providing a sampling frame for subsequent socio-economic research needed to establish fair 
compensation  rates  according  to  the  law  and  to  design,  monitor  and  evaluate  sustainable 
income restoration or development interventions. 
Socio-economic Survey 
The  socio-economic  survey  should  be  aimed  at  establishing  of  the  numbers  and  socio-economic 
impact of PAPs that includes a baseline description of pertinent demographic and social characteristics 
of households affected by KIIWP. In order that the context of the programme is understood, the RAP 
should present a brief description of the environmental and social baselines of the KIIWP subproject 
area and surroundings.  The bio-physical baseline could include topics such as topography, climate, 
soils and geology, water resources and hydrology, forests, wetlands, National Park, flora and fauna.  
The  social  baseline  should  describe,  among  other things,  household  characteristics,  poverty  levels, 
health status/nutrition levels and economic activities. 
Preparation of Asset Inventories 
Asset inventories by intervention sites will be carried by teams established by the Kayonza District in 
consultation with RAB and IFAD. The inventories should result in asset registers that are verified by 
PAPs. The asset registers will be signed and copies given on the spot to the PAP. At the same time a 
copy of the grievance redress procedure will also be given to the PAS as stated in the Grievance Redress 
Mechanism. 
Land donation protocol and procedures 
Some  PAPs  may  decide  to  donate  land  or  assets  voluntarily  and  chose  not  to  be  compensated  in 
appreciation of  the  greater  value  of  the  infrastructure  installations.  In  such  cases,  valuation  of  the 
relevant asset will proceed normally as provided by this RAF and the PAP will sign on the valuation 
report confirming that they prefer not to be compensated. The land donation shall be documented 
and reported. 
Preparation of RAP Report 
A RAP report will be prepared by the Consultant under the supervision of the Kayonza District and in 
consultation with affected parties. Box A4.1 shows the format for a RAP Report as recommended by 
SECAP’s Guidance Statement #13. 
178 
Box A4.1  RAP Report Outline 
Outline of the Resettlement Action Plan 
Terms and definitions 
Executive summary 
1. Description of the project 
2. Potential impacts of the resettlement and minimization mechanisms 
3. Objectives of the resettlement plan 
4. Census and socio-economic studies 
5.  Legal  and  institutional  frameworks  -  including  mechanisms  for 
conflicts resolution and appeals 
6. Eligibility determination 
7. Implementation of the FPIC process 
8. Valuation of and compensation for losses for livelihoods restoration 
and improvements 
9. Resettlement measures 
a. Site selection, site preparation and relocation 
b. Housing, infrastructure and social services 
c. Integration with host population 
d. Community participation 
10. Environmental protection and management 
11. Organizational responsibilities 
12. Implementation schedule 
13. Costs and budget 
14. Monitoring, evaluation and reporting 
Source:  SECAP (2017) 
Submission, review and implementation of RAP 
The Kayonza District will provide political and administrative support for the implementation of RAP. 
RAB and IFAD will ensure that there is compliance against the RAF and national legislation and ensure 
that  baseline  information  is  available  in  appropriate  format  for  overall  Project  monitoring  and 
evaluation. The different Government institutions will play a role in the implementation of the RAP for 
the different intervention sites. 
Public Consultation and Participation of the RAP 
Informed participation of all stakeholders, particularly PAPs is essential for the effective compliance 
with  the  safeguards  articulated  in  the  RAP.  Stakeholder  consultations  in  the  Project  preparation, 
planning and RAP development processes will be recorded for attendance and participation. Records 
will include views and concerns put forward by community members, opinion leaders, NGOs and CBOs 
as well as responses received from local authorities, consultants or technical managers and political 
leaders. Camera photo may be captured and follow up of any issues that are not resolved at anyone 
particular meeting recorded. 
Stakeholder consultation ensuring informed participation and consent should focus on the following: 
•  Alternative Project design 
•  Assessment of Project impacts 
•  Resettlement strategy 
•  Compensation rates and eligibility for entitlements 
•  Choice of resettlement sites and timing of relocation 
•  Development of opportunities and initiatives 
•  Development of procedures for redressing grievances and resolving disputes 
179 
•  Mechanisms for monitoring and evaluation and for implementing corrective actions 
Data Collecting Phase  
Consultations are essential for completion of the preparation of the subprojects and will be a basis for 
monitoring of the performance and outcome of the interventions. The levels of consultation will vary 
from households to community groups, based on the particular context of the subprojects. The RAP 
team  will  validate  the  information  from  the  households,  organizations,  and  institutions  its 
effectiveness  through  feedback  mechanisms  including  focus  group  meetings with  women,  farmers’ 
associations,  individuals  who  own  farms,  etc.  as  well  as  primary  and/or  secondary  schools,  health 
centres, and agricultural cooperatives. 
Monitoring and Evaluation Phase  
PAPs representatives will participate in the subproject workshops at the launch, mid-term and at the 
end of RAP implementation. The RAP will include social accountability tools such as the citizen cards 
to assess the quality of the RAP, its implementation, and in some cases, assist the RAP team in tracking 
expenditures. The latter will be significant in helping PAPs with money management and restoring their 
livelihoods.  PAPs  will  be  able  to  suggest  corrective  measures,  as  needed,  to  improve  RAP 
implementation in the subproject(s). Prior to closing the RAP, PAPs will participate in a feedback survey 
as part of the RAP’s independent impact evaluation exercise. 
8.  GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM FOR RESETTLEMENT PURPOSES 
Rwandan law on expropriation provides for grievance resolution that will be applied to KIIWP physical 
and  economic  resettlement  requirements.  For  the  purposes  of  the  RAP,  the  grievance  redress 
provisions of Rwandan law as adapted from FONERWA (2017) and MININFRA (2016)56 will be applied. 
Grievance Redress Procedure 
The grievance procedure for the RAP will follow the following steps based on Rwandan law: 
•  During the initial stages of the valuation process, the affected persons will be given copies of 
grievance procedures as a guide on how to handle the grievances. 
•  The process of grievance redress will start with registration of the grievances to be addressed 
for reference, and to enable progress updates of the cases. 
•  The Project will use a local mechanism, which includes resettlement committees, peers and 
local leaders of the affected people. These will ensure equity across cases, eliminate nuisance 
claims and satisfy legitimate claimants at low cost. 
•  The response time will depend on the issue to be addressed but it should be addressed with 
efficiency. 
•  Compensation will be paid to individual PAPs only after a written consent of the PAPs, including 
both spouses. 
A grievance can be made by an individual, a household, or a group/community - anyone can lodge a 
grievance it is their choice whether to make a formal or informal approach. Grievances may be raised 
informally or formally. 
56 MININFRA (2016), Resettlement Policy Framework. Development of Urban Infrastructure in six Secondary 
Cities of Rubavu, Rusizi, Musanze, Muhanga, Huye and Nyagatare of Rwanda, and the City of Kigali. 
180 
An informal grievance is one raised verbally, mostly requesting for clarification of facts or process, it 
can  be  entered  through  a  community  coordination  structure  for  KIIWP  that  will  be  set  up  by  the 
Kayonza District. A formal grievance is a written complaint raised through the Cell or Sector offices, 
mostly on issues of misinformation, exclusion from Project opportunities, discrimination, inadequate 
communication or inadequate response to previously raised issues. A grievance form will be prepared 
as part of the RAP. 
Informal grievances shall be raised verbally with a community coordination committee during common 
public  meetings  that  may  be  held  weekly  and  verbal  responses  given  to  the  satisfaction  of  the 
complainant. Failure to redress the grievance results in an escalation to a formal grievance that is put 
in writing and submitted to the cell or sector office. All accepted informal grievance in such meetings 
shall be referred to the KIIWP Project for action, while the formalised grievance shall follow procedure 
elaborated hereafter. Actions taken by the KIIWP Project to redress the accepted informal grievance 
shall be documented and considered at the Project Steering Committee (PSC) that will still at a year to 
be agreed regular time of the Project cycle. 
Formal grievances shall be raised at cell or sector offices by recording them on grievance forms. Forms 
shall be consolidated into a report and sent weekly to the Kayonza District Good Governance Unit that 
is  normally  responsible  for  grievance  resolution  at  district  level.  The  Good  Governance  unit  keeps 
record  of  all  grievances  lodged.  Grievances  shall  then  be  considered  by  the  Good  Governance 
committee chaired by the District Executive Secretary to redress the grievance. A written response to 
the complainant prepared by the District Good governance office and circulated through sector and 
cell  offices.  Unresolved  grievances  escalated  for  redress  to  the  District  Joint  Action  Development 
Forum (JADF) and then to PSC and to the district office of Ombudsman. At each level, the grievance 
and  redress  response,  status  reports  of  all  grievances,  resolutions  and  actions  taken  shall  be 
documented. Records of such reports shall be kept at the District Good governance unit and the KIIWP 
Project Management Team. All responses to complaints at any level shall not exceed 14 days. 
Grievance Log 
The management of the Kayonza District Good Governance unit will ensure that each complaint has 
a unique reference number, and is appropriately tracked until the grievance is resolved. The log will 
contain records including the complaint and dates for the following events: 
•  Date the complaint was reported; 
•  Date the grievance log was added onto the Project database; 
•  Date and information on proposed corrective action sent to complainant; 
•  The date the complaint was closed; and 
•  Date when response was sent to complainant. 
Monitoring Complaints  
The District Project Coordination officer will be responsible for providing a weekly report detailing the 
number  and  status  of  grievances  to  KIIWP  and  monthly  reports,  including  analysis  of  the  type  of 
complaints, levels of complaints, actions to reduce complaints and initiator of such action. 
9.  SOCIO-ECONOMIC BACKGROUND 
Identifying Project Affected Persons 
Involuntary  utilization  of  land  results  in  physical  relocation  or  loss  of  shelter;  and  loss  of  assets  or 
access to assets or loss of income sources or means of livelihood, whether or not the PAPs must move 
to  another  location.  Meaningful  consultations  with  the  affected  persons,  local  authorities  and 
181 
community leaders will therefore allow for establishment of criteria by which displaced persons will 
be deemed eligible for compensation and other resettlement assistance. 
FONERWA (2017) suggests the following three criteria for eligibility: 
(a)  Those who have formal rights to land recognized under Rwandan Law. 
(b)  Those who do not have formal legal rights to land at the time the census begins but have a 
claim to such land or assets provided that such claims are recognized under the laws of Rwanda 
or become recognized through a process identified in the resettlement plan. 
(c)  Those who have no recognizable legal right or claim to the land they are occupying, using or 
getting  their  livelihood  from  before  the  cut  of  date,  but  are  recognized  under  SECAP’s 
Guidance Statement #13.  
Those covered under (a) and (b) above are to be provided compensation for the land they lose and 
will  also  receive  compensation  for  assets on  the  land  and other  assistance  in  accordance  with  this 
Project. Persons covered under (c) above are to be provided with resettlement assistance in lieu of 
compensation for the land they occupy, and other assistance, as necessary, to achieve the objectives 
set out in this RAF, if they occupy the Project area prior to a cut-off date established by the Project in 
close consultation with the potential PAPs, local community leaders and the respective local leader. 
Persons who encroach on the area after the cut-off date are not entitled to compensation or any other 
form of resettlement assistance. All persons included in (a), (b) or (c) above are to be provided with 
compensation for loss of assets. It is therefore clear that all Project affected persons irrespective of 
their status or whether they have formal titles, legal rights or not, squatters or otherwise encroaching 
illegally  on  land,  are  eligible  for  some  kind  of  assistance  if  they  occupied  the  land  before  the 
entitlement cut-off date. 
Baseline Information PAPs 
A  socio-economic  survey  should  be  conducted  identify  the  numbers  and  potential  socio-economic 
impact  on  PAPs.  The  survey  will  acquire  quantitative  household  survey  of  the  Project  PAPs  or 
households.  The  target  population  for  the  quantitative  household  survey  will  be  those  affected 
persons  within  the  KIIWP  intervention  sites  in  Kayonza  District.  The  socio-economic  survey  will  be 
commissioned by the Kayonza District designated office for managing KIIWP. PAPs considered to be 
eligible for resettlement and compensation include the following: 
Landowners losing part or all of their land; 
• 
•  Tenants leasing privately owned land; 
•  PAPs losing trees and crops located on required land for activities under the Project; such as 
terraces, construction of communal ponds, construction of new homes, etc; 
•  Traders that maybe affected by Project activities. 
10. METHODS FOR VALUING ASSETS 
Organization Procedures 
Land  and  assets  needed  for  implementing  the  KIIWP  Project  will  be  valued  and  compensated  for 
according to the following guidelines: 
•  The  Kayonza  District  administration  through  the  Project  will  compensate  for  assets  and 
investments (including crops, buildings, and other improvements) according to the provisions 
of the RAP. 
•  Eligibility for compensation will not be valid for new persons occupying/using the Project sites 
after the cut-off date, in accordance with this policy. 
182 
•  Compensation  cost  values  will  be  based  on  replacement  costs,  as  of  the  date  that  the 
replacement is to be provided or at the date of Project identification, whichever is higher. 
•  The market prices for cash crops will have to be determined based on the values as determined 
by independent valuers. 
However, since SECAP’s Guidance Statement #13 on Physical and Economic Displacement makes no 
distinction between statute and customary rights, a user of state owned land will be compensated for 
land, assets and investments including loss of access, at replacement costs. Compensation for all land 
use and assets in kind or cash will be required for buildings and structures, cultivated crops and trees; 
and loss of businesses or employment. 
Table A4.4  Types of Compensation in Rwanda 
Type of 
Compensation 
Description 
In-kind 
Compensation 
Compensation may include items such as land and buildings, of equal or better value. 
If building materials are provided, transport and labour costs must also be provided. 
Cash compensation for full replacement value will be considered only if the affected 
land is less than 20% of the total land. 
Cash Payments 
Compensation  will  be  calculated  at  new  replacement  value,  and  paid  in  Rwandan 
Francs 
Resettlement  and 
Economic 
Resettlement  assistance  may  include  moving  allowance,  transportation  and  labour 
associated with resettlement as well as financial assistance for the period when access 
to land, income/ subsistence crops is unavailable. 
Rehabilitation 
Assistance 
Economic rehabilitation Assistance may include training, capacity building as well as 
provision  of  assistance  to  facilitate  reestablishment  of  livelihood  activities  such  as 
provision of seedlings, agricultural inputs and financial credits for equipment. 
Source: FONERWA (2017) 
The Kayonza District Land Bureau and the designated KIIWP Project will determine rates as part of the 
preparation of each subproject, using rates prevailing for other government land acquisition schemes 
in  the  district  as  a  benchmark.  In-kind  compensation  is  preferred  as  cash  payments  raise  issues 
regarding inflation and security. In addition, provision of cash does not ensure that the PAP’s income 
will be restored. Alternative locations will have to be decided during the RAP process for payment of 
in-kind compensation. 
Entitlement Matrix 
Resettlement and economic rehabilitation assistance will be provided as outlined in the Entitlement 
Matrix displayed in Table A4.5 below.  This provides an indication of resettlement and compensation 
measures  to  restore  livelihoods  impacted  by  the  loss  of  land  and  guides  resettlement  and 
compensation packages to be developed for each KIIWP subproject. 
183 
Table A4.5  Entitlement Matrix 
Categories of PAPs 
Type of Loss 
Eligibility Criteria 
Entitlement 
PAPs losing temporarily or 
permanently their land, those losing 
crops, properties (houses or cattle 
sheds for example) 
Loss of Land (Urban or Rural) 
Owners of land affected by 
Project works 
Loss of Structure 
Owners  and  users  (tenants)  of 
land affected by Project works 
Business Losses 
Businesses  that  operate  in  areas 
to be affected by Project works 
Loss of trees and crops 
Various rights and interest holders 
– 
Licensees, 
Lessees 
Sharecroppers, 
Vulnerable 
including  women  and 
child  headed  households,  physically 
disabled people and elderly people 
Source:  Adapted from FONERWA (2017) 
For PAPs who are losing the land, first option is a land replacement. Full 
monetary market value compensation for strips of land lost, should be the 
last option. If PAPs receive monetary compensation, they should receive 
some guidance/training on managing the funds. PAPs losing temporarily their 
land would be compensated only for their affected assets as described below. 
Resettlement and Compensation. Resettle and compensate full market value 
for the structures to be demolished 
Provide  development  assistance  in  addition  to  compensation  measures 
described (water and energy supply for example) 
Compensation for structures and assets that cannot be moved 
Provide  assistance  with  relocation,  and  cover  all  the  costs  of  moving  any 
salvageable parts of existing structures and reinstallation and start ups 
Provide assistance to restore business including training and capacity building 
if required. 
Resettle and compensate full market value for assessed crops/plants/trees 
In  addition  to  the  above  compensation  measures  according  to  the  different 
types  of  loss;  vulnerable  will  be  given  special  consideration  by  providing  to 
them  any  assistance  they  may  need  to  get  back  or  above  their  previous 
livelihoods status. Assistance would be continuously be continuously rendered 
to them until such status is attained. 
184 
Compensation, Project Schedule and Cut-Off -Date 
Compensation shall always be  done  before any  Project  activities,  and hence, before  any assets  are 
affected. In order to prepare and implement a RAP, a census will be conducted to identify all the PAPs 
and the related levels of impact. The date that the census begins is the cut-off date for eligibility for 
resettlement and compensation. It is important that this date is fully communicated to all potential 
PAPs in the Project affected area with sufficient time for these people to ensure their availability for 
the Census.  
To ensure all the stakeholders and PAPs are informed, communication relevant to each subproject will 
be done through existing community consultation frameworks and will be in line with the consultation 
procedures.  Community  leaders  and representatives will  also  be  charged  with  the  responsibility  to 
notify their members about the established cut-off date and its significance. The potential PAPs will be 
informed through both formal notification in writing or by verbal notification delivered in the presence 
of the community leaders or their representatives. After the census has been undertaken, the lists will 
be verified and validated by the District. The list will also be verified and approved by IFAD through 
KIIWP (through prepared subproject RAPs). Once these lists have been approved, no new cases of PAPs 
will be considered. Once land users have been identified, their details and eligibility will be submitted 
to the KIIWP Project. Once PAPs have been verified and validated by the District and IFAD, they will be 
considered  eligible  for  compensation.  The  establishment  of  a  cut-off  date  is  required  to  prevent 
opportunistic local migration into intervention sites. Persons who encroach on the area after the cut-
off date are not entitled to compensation or any other form of resettlement assistance. It should be 
noted that the cut-off date should be determined before the census is conducted and agreed by all the 
stakeholders, especially the PAPs. 
Estimates of Affected Population and Inventory of Assets 
At this stage of the Project preparation, the study will not able determine the number of trees and 
crops  and  numbers of  affected  people  to  be  displaced.  Feasibility studies  will  give  more  details on 
required land and assets that are likely to be affected. 
Categories of affected population 
PAPs will include those losing temporarily or permanently their land, those losing crops, properties 
(houses  or  cattle  sheds  for  example),  vulnerable  including  women  and  child  headed  households, 
physically disabled people and elderly people as described in the entitlement matric table below. 
In  addition  to  the  above  entitlements,  affected  households  (PAPs)  will  be  prioritized  for  job 
opportunities during Project works implementation and provided with health insurance if they happen 
to be Ubudehe category 1 and other government support. Capacity building of severely affected PAPs 
and vulnerable groups will be provided to maintain and/or improve their income generation potential. 
Valuation of Assets and National Law 
According to Rwandan Expropriation Law, any expropriated assets are to be fairly compensated with 
valuation undertaken by an independent valuer. This RAF provides the basic principles for the valuation 
of  affected  assets.  During  consultation  with  the  PAPs,  the  Social  Safeguard  Officer  will  guide  the 
Districts to provide available options and their advantages to PAPs, to assist them to make informed 
decisions. 
185 
Valuation methods (adopted from FONERWA, 2017) 
Replacement Cost Approach 
The replacement cost approach is based on the premise that the costs of replacing productive assets 
is based on damages caused by subproject operations. These costs are taken as a minimum estimate 
of the value of measures that will reduce the damage or improve on on-site management practices 
and  thereby  prevent  damage.  In  applying  this  method  of valuation,  depreciation  of  structures  and 
assets should not be taken into account. For losses that cannot easily be valued or compensated for in 
monetary  terms  such  as  access  to  water  sources,  public  services,  customers,  and  suppliers;  or  to 
fishing, grazing, or forest areas), attempts will be made to establish access to equivalent and culturally 
acceptable resources and earning opportunities. Where domestic law does not meet the standard of 
compensation  at  full  replacement  cost,  compensation  under  domestic  law  is  supplemented  by 
additional  measures  necessary  to  meet  the  replacement  cost  standard.  The  approach  will  involve 
direct  replacement  of  expropriated  assets  and  covers  an  amount  that  is  sufficient  for  asset 
replacement, moving expenses and other transaction costs. 
Gross Current Replacement Cost 
Gross Current Replacement Cost (GCRC) is defined as the estimated cost of erecting a new building 
having the same gross external area as that of the existing one, with the same site works and services 
and on a similar piece of land. 
Other methods 
Rates from Contractors: When rate schedules do not exist, or are out of date, recent quotations by 
contractors for similar types of construction in the vicinity of the Project can be used for calculating 
replacement  costs.  In  calculating  cash  compensation  payable,  the  construction  cost  estimates  for 
alternative accommodation could be used. 
Calculating compensation for assets 
The following methods of calculation should be adopted for the preparation of the aforementioned 
standardized asset valuation tables and/or the application of specific case by case valuations in the 
case of projects that have significant impacts. 
Compensation for Land 
Land for land is the first compensation option and compensation in cash at full replacement value will 
be considered only if the affected land is less than 20% of the total land. Replacement land should be 
of equivalent productive value and size, and located in the community or at a nearby resettlement 
area,  with  similar  social  and  physical  infrastructure  systems  as  well  as  secured  tenure  status.  Cash 
compensation should be valued based on the prevailing market value in the locality as calculated by 
an independent valuer. In addition, any associated costs of purchasing the land including land rates, 
registration fees will need to be included in the compensation calculation. Where land lost is only a 
small  proportion  of  total  land  owned  by  the  PAP,  but  renders the  remaining  land  as  unusable,  the 
compensation provided should be calculated based on the total land affected (the actual land lost plus 
the remaining unusable land). 
Compensation for houses and other Structures 
There are two options for compensating structures in lands that will be expropriated. The preferred 
option  for  structural  compensation  will  be  to  provide  alternate  structures  (huts,  houses,  farm 
outbuildings, latrines, storage facilities and fences among others) of improved quality where possible. 
In case of residential structures, the replacement should provide better standards of living. Alternative 
method of structure compensation will be to provide cash compensation at full replacement value. 
Replacement costs will be based on: 
186 
•  Sizes of structures and materials used 
•  Average replacement costs of different types of structures based on information on the 
numbers and types of materials used to construct different types of structures 
o  Prices of materials used in the structure based on local market rates 
o  Transportation  costs  for  delivery  of  these  materials  acquired  for  replacing  the 
structure 
o  Estimates of construction of new buildings including labour required 
o  Any associated costs including rates, taxes, and registration fees among others. 
Furthermore, resettlement assistance will be provided in the form of a moving allowance (at full costs 
of transport expenses). Affected people may be offered plots in selected sites in organized villages for 
house construction. 
Compensation for Crops and Trees 
PAPs will be encouraged to harvest their produce before loss of asset. In order to ensure that this is 
possible,  and  that  appropriate  market  prices  are  received  for  yields,  there  needs  to  be  sufficient 
consultation beforehand so that harvesting can be properly planned. In the event that crops cannot 
be harvested, compensation for loss of crops and trees including value of fruit trees will be provided 
as follows. 
•  Provision of cash compensation for value of crops lost, as per the Rwandan expropriation law; 
•  Provision  of  good  quality  seed  or  seedlings  appropriate  for  the  resettled  areas,  fruit  tree 
materials inclusive; 
In addition to compensation for tree and shrub losses, the planting of tree species will be done along 
the improved roads for the road protection and replacement of tree species lost. 
Compensation for Community Assets 
Compensation will be provided for community assets identified through the socio-economic survey. In 
all cases, these will be provided in kind and new facilities will be provided even if there are existing 
facilities at the new location. 
Compensation for Sacred Sites 
This  policy  does  not  permit  the  use  of  land  that  is  defined  to  be  cultural  property  by  the  IFC’s 
Performance  Standard  5.  Sacred  and  genocide  memorial  sites  and  other  cultural  or  historical  sites 
including  but  not  restricted  only  to;  museums,  altars,  initiation  centres,  ritual  sites,  tombs  and 
cemeteries. It includes other such sites or places/features that are accepted by local laws (including 
customary),  practice,  tradition  and  culture  as  sacred.  To  avoid  any  possible  conflicts  between 
individuals and/or communities/homesteads, the use of sacred/religious sites or any other site with 
cultural interests under Project is not permitted. 
11. BUDGET AND SOURCES OF FUNDING 
The  cost  of  implementing  the  RAF  has  been  kept  to  a  minimal  through  using  of  already  existing 
institutions and structures, plans and programs as well as manpower within and without the Project. 
The  estimated  total  cost  of  the  resettlement  program  for  the  Project  requiring  land  acquisition,  is 
estimated  at  US$  350,000  is  based  on  that  estimated  for  the  FONERWA  supported  “Resettlement 
Policy Framework for the Strengthening Climate Resilience of Rural Communities in Northern Rwanda”. 
The cost breakdown is presented below. Because the exact unit prices, the number of people to be 
affected, and the scope of land acquisition are estimates, the exact figures will not be known until the 
RAPs  are  prepared.  The  District  will  provide  funds  for  RAP  preparation  and  compensation  using 
government budget. 
187 
The costs outlined include those relating to preparation and implementation of each individual RAP, 
capacity building and technical assistance required to ensure that implementers of each RAP are fully 
able to do so. 
Table A4.6  Estimated Cost for the Implementation of the RAF 
Activity 
Total Cost (USD) 
Basis of Estimates 
RAP preparation for 7 subprojects 
RAP Implementation, including 
compensation of affected assets and 
resettlement 
Capacity building for Resettlement 
committees 
280,000  This estimation includes cost for census, public 
consultations and RAP report preparation by a 
hired consultant 
300,000  Based on comparable projects 
15,000  Based on comparable projects 
Provision of technical assistance 
  Assumes assistance will be provided by Project 
at no additional cost. 
Total 
595,000 
Source: Based on FONERWA (2017) and ESMF Study estimates 
12. MONITORING AND EVALUATION 
In  order  to  assess  whether  the  goals of the resettlement  and  compensation  plan  are  being met, a 
monitoring plan should be developed. This M&E component of this RAF is adapted from FONERWA 
(2017). The monitoring plan defines and identifies monitoring activities that will take place, when and 
by whom and identifies the indicators and data collection methods, and training and capacity building 
needs of the institutions and persons to implement the plan. 
The objective of the monitoring and evaluation process will be to determine whether PAPs have been 
paid  in  full  and  before  implementation  of  the  subproject,  and  people  who  were  affected  by  the 
subproject have been affected in such a way that they are now living a higher standard than before, 
living at the same standard as before, or they are actually poorer than before. The arrangements for 
monitoring the resettlement and compensation activities will fit into the overall monitoring program 
of  KIIWP,  which  will  fall  under  the  overall  responsibility  of  Kayonza  District  under  guidance  and 
oversight by RAB/MINAGRI and IFAD. 
Monitoring  will  be  done  on  behalf  of  the  District  committee  responsible  for  resettlement 
compensation.  The  committee  will  be  mandated  to  carry  out  independent  monitoring  of  the 
implementation  of  the  resettlement  and  compensation  plans  at  periodic  intervals  of  monthly, 
quarterly or half yearly (as circumstances dictate) during the KIIWP Project life cycle. 
Monitoring Indicators 
Verifiable indicators are  needed for measuring the impact  of physical relocation on the  health and 
welfare  of  affected  population  and  the  effectiveness  of  impact  mitigation  measures,  including 
livelihood restoration and development initiatives. These verifiable indicators shall be used to monitor 
188 
the impacts of the compensation and resettlement activities. Monitoring indicators to be used for the 
RAP will have to be developed to respond to specific site conditions. 
Indicators to Determine Status of Affected People 
A number of indicators would be used in order to determine the status of affected people (land being 
used  compared  to  before,  standard  of  house  compared  to  before,  level  of  participation  in  Project 
activities  compared to before, how many children in  school compared to before,  health standards, 
etc). Therefore, the resettlement and compensation plans will set two major socio-economic goals by 
which to evaluate its success: Affected individuals, households, and communities are able to maintain 
their  pre-Project  standard  of  living,  and  even  improve  on  it;  and  the  local  communities  remain 
supportive of the Project. 
Indicators to Measure RAP Performance 
In order to access whether these goals are met, the resettlement and compensation plans will indicate 
parameters to be monitored, institute monitoring milestones and provide resources necessary to carry 
out the monitoring activities. The following provides a list of potential indicators for monitoring, which 
assess the change in the following for those who have been resettled. 
In terms of the resettlement process, the following indicators could be used to understand the success 
of the measures identified and the working of the relevant parties in implementation the RAP: 
•  Percentage of individuals selecting cash or a combination of cash and in-kind compensation; 
•  The number of contentious cases as a percentage of the total cases; 
•  The number of grievances and time and quality of resolution; 
•  The ability of individuals and families to re-establish their pre-displacement activities, crops or 
other alternative incomes; 
•  Number of impacted locals employed by the civil works contractors; 
•  General relations between the Project and the local communities. 
These will be determined through the following activities: 
•  Questionnaire data will be entered into a database for comparative analysis at all levels of local 
government; 
•  Each  individual  will  have  a  compensation  dossier  recording  his  or  her  initial  situation,  all 
subsequent  Project  use  of  assets/improvements,  and  compensation  agreed  upon  and 
received. 
The  District  authorities  will  maintain  a  complete  database  on  every  individual  impacted  by  the 
subproject land use requirements including relocation/resettlement and compensation, land impacts 
or damages; and should prepare Resettlement Completion Reports for each RAP, in addition to other 
regular monitoring reports. 
It  is  the  responsibility  of  the  District  authorities  to  document  information  ideally  integrated  into 
existing  databases.  The  District  authorities  will  need  to  design  a  robust  reporting  system  at  the 
beginning of the Project to ensure that these data are collated at appropriate intervals and in sufficient 
quantity and quality. 
The KIIWP designated Project staff will facilitate coordination of information collation activities (such 
as surveys, supervising documentation) in accordance with procedures put in place. KIIWP will provide 
training, technical support and funding to ensure that this happens. In order to assess whether these 
goals are met, the resettlement and compensation plans will indicate parameters to be monitored, 
institute monitoring milestones and provide resources necessary to carry out the monitoring activities. 
189 
Monitoring of RAF Implementation 
The District will compile basic information on all physical or economic displacement arising from the 
Project,  and  convey  this  information  to  KIIWP, on  a monthly  basis.  They  will  compile  the  following 
statistics: 
•  Number of subprojects requiring preparation of a RAP; 
•  Number  of  households  and  individuals  physically  or  economically  displaced  by  each 
subproject; 
Length of time from subproject identification to payment of compensation to PAPs; 
• 
•  Timing of compensation in relation to commencement of physical works; 
•  Amount of compensation paid to each PAP household (if in cash), or 
•  Nature of compensation (if in kind); 
•  Number of people raising grievances in relation to each subproject; 
•  Number of unresolved grievances. 
KIIWP  will  scrutinize  these  statistics  in  order  to  determine  whether  the  resettlement  planning 
arrangements as set out in this RAF are being adhered to. KIIWP will monitor compensation and loss 
of wages. Financial records will be maintained by the District and KIIWP, to permit calculation of the 
final cost of resettlement and compensation per individual or household. The indicators will be used 
to monitor implementation of the RAF will include: 
•  Outstanding compensation not completed; 
•  Project activities unable to settle compensation after one year; 
•  Grievances recognized as legitimate out of all complaints lodged. 
Financial records will be maintained by KIIWP and the District to permit calculation of the final cost of 
resettlement and compensation per individual or household. 
Storage of PAPs Details 
Each  PAP  household  will  be  provided  with  a  signed  report  recording  his  or  her  initial  situation,  all 
subsequent  Project  use  of  assets  and  compensation  agreed  upon  and  received.  At  the  same  time, 
before compensation all household heads representing the PAPs will be required to provide passport 
size  photographs  to  the  District,  and  KIIWP  will  maintain  a  complete  database  on  every  individual 
impacted by the Project land use requirements including relocation, resettlement and compensation, 
land impacts or damages. 
Each recipient of compensation will have a record containing individual bio-data, number of household 
dependents and amount of land available to the individual or household when the report is opened. 
Additional information to be acquired for individuals eligible for resettlement and/or compensation 
include the level of income and of production, inventory of material assets and improvements in land 
and debts. 
Annual Audit 
The  annual  audit  of  RAP  implementation  will  include  (i)  a  summary  of  the  performance  of  each 
subproject vis-àvis its RAP, (ii) a summary of compliance and progress in implementation of the process 
s and (iii) a presentation of compliance and progress in the implementation of the RAP. 
The audit will verify results of internal monitoring and assess whether resettlement objectives have 
been met irrespective of whether livelihood and living standards have been restored or enhanced. The 
audit  will  also  assess  the  resettlement  efficiency,  effectiveness,  impact  and  sustainability,  drawing 
190 
lessons  for  future  resettlement  activities  and  recommending  corrections  in  the  implementation. 
Finally, the audit will ascertain whether the resettlement entitlements were appropriate to meeting 
the objectives and whether the objectives were suited to PAPs conditions. Annual audit reports will be 
submitted for scrutiny to RAB/MINAGRI and IFAD. 
Socio-economic monitoring 
The purpose of socio-economic monitoring is to ensure that PAPs are compensated and recovering on 
time. During implementation of each subproject RAP, an assessment will be undertaken on payment 
of  compensation,  restoration  of  income  delivery  of  resettlement  objectives.  Monitoring  of  living 
standards will continue following resettlement. 
A  number  of  indicators  will  be  used  to  determine  the  status  of  affected  people  and  appropriate 
parameters and verifiable indicators will be used to measure the resettlement and compensation plans 
performance. For each subproject with adverse social impacts, a monitoring and evaluation plan of 
the mitigation measures will be established. As part of the preparation of each RAP, a household survey 
will be conducted of all PAPs, prior to physical or economic displacement, and this will provide baseline 
data against which to monitor the performance of the RAP. 
Capacity assessment and capacity building need 
The Project will require KIIWP to hire within its structure, a team of staff that will form the Project 
Management Team to manage exclusively the Project implementation. At the local level, the Project 
activities will be implemented through the Kayonza District level under MoUs with RAB/MINAGRI and 
IFAD,  in  accordance  with  the  national  decentralization  policies.  The  District  already  has  land 
administration unit within its one-stop-centre (OSC) and a staff in charge of social affairs, on which the 
Project may add a Social Safeguards Specialist. 
Early in the Project implementation, KIIWP will organize training for its safeguards responsible staff, 
and those from District, on social safeguards implementation according to Government guidelines and 
IFAD’s SECAP. Capacity building will also be conducted for compensation committees after their set up. 
This capacity building will be done periodically throughout the Project period. 
Disclosure of Social Safeguards Instruments 
IFAD will disclose this RAF as part of the ESMF. The RAF will be disclosed at RAB/MINAGRI and Kayonza 
District websites. Likewise, all RAPs to be prepared under KIIWP will be disclosed by IFAD at national 
level, and Kayonza District at district level. 
191 
Annex 5: 
FPIC Implementation Plan for KIIWP 
BACKGROUND 
The  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD)  intends  to  support  the  Government  of 
Rwanda (GoR) to design and implement interventions with the goal to contribute to poverty reduction 
in  the  drought  prone  Eastern  Province  of  Rwanda  through  the  Irrigation  &  Integrated  Watershed 
Management Project (KIIWP). The Project will provide improved food security and incomes of 50,000 
rural households on a sustainable basis in the 8 administrative sectors of Kayonza District that are most 
affected  by  drought  comprising  Ndego,  Kabare.  Murama,  Rwinkwavu,  Kabarondo,  Mwiri,  Murama, 
Gahini and Murundi. 
As described in the main document under Sub-components 1.1 and 1.2, four sites have been selected 
for pumped irrigation in Ndego and Kabare Sectors totalling 2000 ha, about 275 ha of land will be 
developed  for  marshland  irrigation  in  Rwinkwavu,  Kabare  and  Kabarondo  Sectors;  and  in  Muruma 
Sector,  farm  ponds  will  be  constructed  for  rainwater  irrigation  of  some  10ha  of  land.  Catchment 
rehabilitation and protection interventions will include terracing and agroforestry and  will cover an 
estimated 1300ha. Other planned interventions in Ndego, Gahini, Murundi and Mwiri sectors include 
construction of 7 new valley tanks, rehabilitation of 15 dysfunctional valley tanks, and installation of 
20 boreholes to provide water for livestock as well as human needs. 
Consultation with the public and stakeholders is considered important as it provides valuable input to 
develop  acceptable  and  sustainable  project  design  and  implementation  plans.  Most  importantly,  it 
allows the concerned communities opportunities to voice their aspirations, concerns and preferences 
regarding the intended development project, including their stance to give or withhold their consent 
to  the  proposed  interventions,  entirely  or  partly.  This  operational  principle  of  empowering  local 
communities to give or withhold their consent to proposed investment and development programmes 
that  might  affect  their  land  access  and  use  rights,  territories,  natural  resources,  livelihoods  etc.  is 
ensured through seeking Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) of concerned communities prior to 
planning a development intervention. Consultations with the concerned communities in good faith are 
believed to constitute soliciting FPIC, which ensures that they participate in decision-making processes 
concerning the development project, in line with IFAD Policies.  
There are many advantages to seeking FPIC: 
•  FPIC improves the relevance and quality of investments; 
•  Community ownership of the investment and its results and sustainability are enhanced; 
•  Partnership between local communities, government institutions and financing organizations 
is strengthened; 
•  The  recognition  and  support  of  local  communities'  aspirations  for  their  own  development 
minimizes or prevents conflicts with other resource users; and, 
•  FPIC minimizes reputational, operational and fiduciary risks for the government, company or 
donor carrying out activities that may affect the land, resources and rights, and livelihood of 
the local communities. 
At  this  stage  of  the  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Framework  (ESMF)  in  the  programme 
development  of  KIIWP,  Terms  of  Reference  for  comprehensive  site-specific  ESIA  studies  have  been 
prepared for proposed KIIWP activities together with those for a comprehensive hydrological study 
that  will  inform  feasibility  and  detailed  design  studies.  This  FPIC  Implementation  Plan  has  been 
prepared for the planned interventions. Preliminary consultations were undertaken to establish that 
the proposed interventions were indeed initiated and proposed by the communities themselves. In 
192 
other  words,  that  they  were  community-driven  from  the  start  and  to  gain  an  idea  of  the  level  of 
consent from the target communities. The process and findings are documented here below.  For all 
planned interventions, the feasibility studies and ESIAs (and RAPs where  required) will be  updated 
during project implementation consultations leading to FPIC and Consent Agreements formalized with 
the concerned communities before any investment is made at community level.   
The FPIC Implementation Plan for KIIWP is presented here to guide on the consultations leading to 
FPIC  for  the  planned  interventions  and  for  which  feasibility,  design  and  ESIA  studies  are  yet  to  be 
undertaken.  
GUIDANCE AND LEGAL FRAMEWORKS FOR FPIC 
IFAD is among the first international financial institutions to adopt FPIC as an operational principle in 
its policy documents, including its policies on Improving Access to Land and Tenure Security (2008); 
Engagement with Indigenous Peoples (2009), Environment and Natural Resource Management (2011), 
and  Social,  Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment  Procedures  (2014).  IFAD-funded  projects  are 
people-centred, and, for IFAD, FPIC is not only a safeguard principle, rather a proactive approach to 
identify development pathways with local communities and build ownership on project initiatives57.   
It should be noted here that the FPIC concept is not clearly recognised in the working procedures of 
the local governments. Yet, people's right to full consultation, participation and expression of views 
with  respect  to  policies  and  projects  affecting  their  community,  individual  citizens  etc.  are  clearly 
stipulated  in  the  Constitution of  the  Republic of Rwanda  of 2003  as  amended  in  2015  (RoR, 2015) 
(Articles  22,  38,  53).  The  Constitutional  rights  are  elaborated  in  Rwanda’s  Vision  2020  and 
Environmental  Policy  of  2003  and  are  given  effect  by  Organic  Law  No.  4/2005  of  8  April  2005  as 
amended  in  2018.  The  major  Constitutional  provisions  of  relevance  to  the  FPIC  process  are 
summarised in Table A5.1 below. 
Table A5.1  Provisions of the Constitution of Republic of Rwanda Relevant to the FPIC Process 
Article/Title 
Paragraph 
Statement 
16 
22 
Right to a clean 
environment 
34 
Right to Private Property 
35 
Right to private 
ownership of land 
37 
Right to activities 
promoting National 
Culture 
2 
1 
1 
2 
3 
1 
2 
1 
Discrimination of any kind or its propaganda based on, inter alia, ethnic origin, family or ancestry, clan, skin 
colour or race, sex, region, economic categories,  religion or faith, opinion, fortune, cultural differences, 
language, economic status, physical or mental disability or any other form of discrimination are prohibited 
and punishable by law. 
Everyone has the right to live in a clean and healthy environment. 
Everyone has the right to private property, whether individually or collectively owned. 
Private property, whether owned individually or collectively, is inviolable. 
The right to property shall not be encroached upon except in public interest and in accordance with the 
provisions of the law. 
Private ownership of land and other rights related to land are granted by the State. 
A law determines modalities of concession, transfer and use of land. 
Every Rwandan has the right to activities that promote National Culture and the duty to promote it. 
57 See IFAD ( 2015). How To Do: Seeking free, prior and informed consent in IFAD investment projects. 
193 
Article/Title 
Paragraph 
Statement 
38 
Freedom of press, of 
expression and of access 
to 
information 
47 
Safeguard and 
promotion of national 
culture 
48 
Participation in the 
development of the 
country 
53 
Protection of the 
environment 
141 
Abunzi Committee 
1 
2 
3 
1 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
3 
1 
2 
3 
Freedom of press, of expression and of access to information are recognized and guaranteed by the State. 
Freedom of expression and freedom of access to information shall not prejudice public order, good morals, 
the protection of the youth and children, the right of every citizen to honour and dignity and protection of 
personal and family privacy. 
Conditions for exercising and respect for these freedoms are determined by law. 
The State has the duty to safeguard and promote national values based on cultural traditions and practices 
so long as they do not conflict with human rights, public order and good morals. 
The State also has the duty to preserve the national cultural heritage. 
The State has the duty to put in place development strategies for its citizens. 
All Rwandans have the duty to participate in the development of the country through their dedication to 
work, safeguarding peace, democracy, equality and social justice as well as to participate in the defense of 
their country. 
Everyone has the duty to protect, safeguard and promote the environment. 
The State ensures the protection of the environment. 
A law determines modalities for protecting, conserving and promoting the environment. 
The  Abunzi  Committee  is  responsible  for  conciliating  parties  in  conflict  with  the  aim  of  consolidating 
national unity and peaceful coexistence among Rwandans. 
The Abunzi Committee is comprised of persons of integrity who are recognized for their conciliation skills. 
A  law  determines  the  organization,  territorial  jurisdiction,  competence  and  functioning  of  the  Abunzi 
Committee. 
NB:    Abunzi  Committee  has  been  integrated  into  the  KIIWP  Grievance  Redress  Mechanism  for  KIIWP  under 
Section 10.1.6 of Chapter 10 in this report. 
PRELIMINARY CONSULTATIONS 
During EMSF site visites for KIIWP in Aug 2018 preliminary stakeholder consultations were conducted 
in Kayonza District. Consultations process started with stakeholder identification for the KIIWP Project 
through briefings with relevant IFAD and MINAGRI officials including RAB, SPIU staff involved in similar 
projects.  Office  visits  involving  discussions  and  interviews  were  carried  out  with  officials  of  REMA, 
Water Resources Department, MINIAGRI and the Kayonza District Mayor with the heads of respective 
district service units. Identified potential beneficiary stakeholders were consulted at proposed Project 
sites within the targeted drought prone intervention sectors of Ndego, Kabare, Murama, Kabarondo, 
Rwinkwavu, Mwiri, Gahini and Murundi. These consultations involved mainly focus group discussions 
individuals, members and leaders of crop and livestock producer cooperatives and sector-level opinion 
leaders. 
The selected schemes visited for sector-level discussions and consultations with potential beneficiary 
community members conducted during the mission are summarised in Table A5.2 below.  
194 
Table A5.2  Sector-Level Discussions and Consultations with Potential Beneficiary Farmers 
Date 
Sector 
Site 
Site Name 
Village/Cell 
27/08/2018 
Kayonza District Mayor and Staff 
28/08/2018  Ndego 
Milk Collection Centre staff 
28/08/2018  Ndego 
Ndego Sector Opinion Leaders 
28/08/2018 
28/08/2018 
Ndego 
29/08/2018 
Site 1 
Kibare 
Isangano 
Site 2  Humure 
Kiyovu 
Site 3 
Byimana 
Byimana 
29/08/2018  Kabare 
Site 1  Gakoma 
Rubumba 
29/08/2018 
Kabare 
Rwinkwavu 
30/08/2018 
Kabarondo 
30/08/2018  Murama 
30/08/2018  Gahini 
Site 2  Gishanda 
Cyambare 
Mukoyoyo 
Site 1 
Rwakigeri 
Rwakigeri 
Site 2 
Kayeganyege 
Kanyeganyege 
Site 1  Ngoma 
Muko 
Site 1  Nyabombe 
Site 2 
Rukore 
Juru 
Kahi 
No. of persons 
consulted 
8 
5 
 20 
28 
20 
38 
6 
Site appraisal only 
10 
11 
04/09/2018  Rwinkwavu 
Site 1 
Rwinkwavu 
Muko 
Site appraisal only 
05/09/2018  Murundi 
05/09/2018  Mwiri 
05/09/2018  Kayonza CBD 
Site 1  Gakoma 
Buhabwa 
Site 2 
Rwakabanda 
Ryamanyoni 
Site 1 
Kageyo 
Kageyo 
Livestock farmers meeting 
Total 
29 
37 
212 
Planned Area (ha) 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
1,400 
600 
150 
125 
Farm level ponds 
7 new valley dams; 
15 valley dams for 
rehabilitation; 20 
boreholes; 
Agroforestry (fruit 
trees; coffee) 
A range of issues were discussed during community consultations, the main topics covered being: 
•  Cooperative Approach for Delivery 
•  Target Beneficiary Crop Priorities 
•  Target Beneficiary Willingness to Invest 
• 
Land Use Competition and Conflicts 
•  Target beneficiary grievance resolution views 
Consultative discussions were also held in with the relevant national agencies on issues summarised 
below: 
•  Rwanda  Environmental  Management  Authority  (REMA)  officials  of  the  Environmental 
Education  and  Mainstreaming  unit  regarding  the  beneficiary  districts  capacity  to  monitor 
KIIWP activities; and separately with Environmental Management and Pollution Control unit 
regarding the special regulations for the land use management of wetlands. 
•  Department  of  Integrated  Water  Resource  Management  regarding  irrigation  water  use 
regulations and their application and relevance to KIIWP. 
•  The Single Project Implementation Unit of the Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources 
responsible for projects similar to KIIWP. 
•  The climate resilience coordination office in the Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources 
regarding potential complementarity of climate resilience strategic actions with KIIWP. 
•  Officials of the Agriculture Technical Assistance Facility - AgriTAF programme regarding lessons 
that can be learned and potential synergies with KIIWP. 
•  The Rwanda Agricultural Board as the operational partner of IFAD in the design, development 
and implementation of KIIWP 
195 
The key outcomes from these preliminary consultations as featured in the main report were as 
follows: 
Cooperative Approach for Delivery of KIIWP 
Target  beneficiary  stakeholders  and  opinion  leaders  generally  demonstrated  awareness  of  and 
experience  in  cooperative  frameworks  and  expressed  support  for  the  plans  to  deliver  KIIWP 
interventions in this modality. Most of the residents  of the proposed Kibare pumped irrigation site 
indicated that they had not worked in cooperative arrangements and sought clarifications during the 
focus group discussion. The Kibare residents expressed support after the clarifications were provided 
by the local agronomist and the RAB official that were present at the forum. 
Target Beneficiary Crop Priorities for KIIWP 
Focus  group  discussions  with  target  beneficiaries  and  opinion  leaders  in  the  proposed  pumped 
irrigation sites of Kibare, Humure and Byimana in the Ndego sector and of Gakoma in Kabare sector 
were unanimous in indicating maize, beans and soya as priority crops. Rice, banana, sugarcane as well 
as  vegetable  crops  including  tomato  and  beetroot  were  indicated  as  priority  crops.    In  the  land 
husbandry support intervention areas coffee was indicated as the highest priority for reasons including 
drought resistance. Other priority crops indicated included pineapple, avocado and other fruit trees 
that  include  mango,  orange,  lemon,  tree-tomato  and  passion  fruit.  Banana  and  cassava  were  also 
indicated  as  priority  crops  but  the  stakeholders  lamented  the  widespread  problem  of  disease 
infestations that destroyed most both crops. 
Target Beneficiary Willingness to Invest in KIIWP 
Focus group discussions indicated a willingness to invest in the necessary maintenance infrastructure 
for  irrigation  including  pumping  systems,  dams  and  boreholes.  Target  beneficiary  stakeholders 
indicated that they already invest resources and cash in growing crops every season for the required 
inputs, although the crops fail in most seasons due to drought. Willingness to invest more and to seek 
commercial credit with the assurance of irrigation. Some focus group discussions indicated a need for 
capacity development in business skills and financial management.  
Land Use Competition and Conflicts 
Potential conflicts were flagged in some focus group discussions and discussions with individuals. In 
Kageyo, it was indicated that farmers compete among themselves to irrigate rice and with watering 
cattle in the dry season when the flow is reduced. Stakeholders indicated a need to rehabilitated valley 
dams  that  were  silted  and  for  the  construction  of  others  as  well  as  boreholes  for  livestock  water 
requirements. Similar potential for conflict was observed in Humure and Kibare where cattle graze and 
drink in the pump irrigation target sites. Other conflicts flagged included wildlife, especially hippo and 
baboons. Hippos were flagged as a problem in most of the intervention site and were observed by the 
field team.  There was a general aura of frustration and despair among the stakeholders as they talked 
about the need for help to mitigate effects of persistent droughts. The community of Humure gave an 
account of crop failures season after season while they see the neighbouring Bramin farm prospering 
with bumper harvests from irrigation. The expressed frustration that government often provides food 
relief  purchased  from  neighbouring  Tanzania  whereas  they  are  capable  of  feeding  themselves  by 
irrigating their crops from the same water source that Bramin draws from. The same frustration was 
expressed by residents of Byimana and Gakoma in reference to the Buffet irrigation scheme within a 
few kilometres from their fields. 
Target beneficiary grievance resolution views for KIIWP 
Stakeholders  indicated  confidence  for  the  resolution  of  conflicts  that  could  emerge  during  the 
development  and implementation of KIIWP interventions. Focus group discussions demonstrated a 
196 
good understanding of conflict resolution mechanisms within cooperative rules as laid out in corporate 
constitutions as well as national laws and regulations on cooperatives. It was explained that conflict 
that  develop  within  a  cooperative  are  resolved  by  a  grievance/conflict  resolution  committee. 
Complaints are escalated to local governance structures when settlement is not reached within the 
cooperative starting with sector level and district level if still not resolved. Unresolved grievances in 
cooperatives must be escalated to the Rwanda Cooperative Agency (RCA), the statutory body in change 
of cooperative regulation and management. RCA will attempt to redress cooperative-born grievances 
through its mediation and arbitration system before forwarding them to the country’s court system if 
unable to resolve them. Court systems are available to complainants if conflicts remain unresolved 
thought the resolution mechanisms and local governance structures. 
FPIC IMPLEMENTATION PLAN 
The FPIC process requires the following steps: 
i)  Socio-Cultural and Land Assessments 
Decisions and follow up actions regarding KIIWP would be impeded in the absence of adequate 
information on the sociocultural and land tenure aspects of the proposed interventions. Therefore, it 
would be essential to carry out assessments on the sociocultural and land tenure conditions of the 
proposed schemes in the Project area as a priority activity by the beginning of KIIWP implementation 
and before any investment is made at community level.  The socio-cultural and land tenure 
assessments will establish: 
•  The community stakeholders, landowners and users in the Project area (including transient 
resident populations such as pastoralists, as well as neighbours) who might be affected and 
who can gain more rights through careful scheme design based on FPIC process, and who have 
the right to give or withhold consent; 
•  Organizing practices, and claims on land ownership, occupation and use; 
•  Types of livelihoods and resources communities depend upon; 
• 
Land use mapping indicating existing land use and land use as proposed by the communities 
to accommodate the Project, and as agreed with the Kayonza District administrations; 
Institutions, governance systems and decision-making roles; 
• 
•  Existing dimensions of traditional leadership (roles and status) and traditional mutual support 
and solidarity/reciprocity mechanisms etc.; 
•  Social, economic, cultural and spiritual relations with lands; and, 
•  Possible consequences for local communities resulting from the change on the status of land, 
and resources emerging from the proposed schemes. 
Participatory mapping can be a useful tool in the preparation of the socio-cultural and land tenure 
assessment. A critical dimension will be rights of watering rights for livestock especially cattle. 
ii)  Identification of Decision-Making Institutions and Representatives 
In line with the Government of Rwanda's decentralization policy, the key institutional actors involved 
with issues of resettlement, property and land rights, access to resources etc. are the local 
governments at the district and sector levels according to Law n° 08/2006 of 24/02/2006 
determining the organisation and functioning of the District and Ministerial Order No. 001/2006 of 
26/09/2006 determining structure of land registers, the responsibilities and the functioning of land 
bureaus in each district and in close collaboration with national level land use and land management 
authorities. Expropriation is implemented under Law No. 32-2015 of Relating to Expropriation in the 
Public Interest. Rwandan laws provide for fair compensation only for legal land property owners and 
197 
land tenants in recognition of existing written and unwritten rights and civil and original customary 
rights. However, registration of these ownership rights is now mandatory under Section 4 of Article 
29 of the Organic Land Law. 
The practical timing for identifying decision-making institutions and representatives at community 
level would be at the beginning of KIIWP implementation, during preliminary consultations with the 
communities undertaken for the ESIAs for newly proposed schemes can be done in tandem with the 
socio-cultural and land tenure assessment.  
iii)  Consultations leading to FPIC 
Subsequent to the socio-cultural and land tenure assessments and the identification of key decision 
making  institutions,  consultations  will  be  held  with  the  scheme  communities  during  programme 
implementation – when individual scheme ESIAs and designs are being updated or prepared, as the 
case  may be.  Consultations will be conducted by the Kayonza District office or by an independent 
facilitator/advisor hired by these offices58. 
The use of participatory mapping will be instrumental for the consultation process leading to FPIC. This 
is  because  of  the  advantages  of  participatory  mapping  and  accompanying  participatory  enquiry 
techniques allow the assessment of ownership, occupation and use of land and resources as well as 
the social dynamics and right holders.  
Given that the schemes are initiated by the community requests to government, the consultations will:  
•  Confirm  that  the  schemes  and  other  proposed  interventions  are  a  community-driven 
initiatives; 
•  Share  the  objective  and  scope  of  proposed  scheme  with  the  communities  directly,  farmer 
organizations such as cooperatives or communities' representatives (existing or elected by the 
communities in the process); 
•  Clearly inform the communities' representatives on the actors financing and implementing the 
Project and their respective responsibilities; 
•  Provide clear and transparent information on the benefits and risks of the Project; 
•  Share the findings of the socio-cultural, land tenure and environmental assessment and reality 
check/confirmation of findings; 
•  Engage selected community members or communities' representatives in the resources and 
social  mapping  activities,  in  order  to  assess  ownership,  occupation  and  use  of  land  and 
resources; 
•  Share the objective and scope of the mapping exercise with the communities; 
•  Ensure  inclusive  participation  -  men,  women,  young people,  the  elderly,  representatives  of 
different communities present on the same land, and neighbouring villages - and provide for 
multiple maps by the different communities; 
•  Share the maps with all stakeholders and actors; and, 
•  Formalise ownership of the land use maps by the communities that have developed them. 
It is important that: 
•  Where there is universal consent to the proposed scheme, communities’ consent is formalized 
through  a  consent  agreement  between  the  communities  and  the  KIIWP  district  office.  The 
consent agreement will be the outcome of the collective decision-making process by the local 
communities. The process will be adequately documented; 
58 For a sample of terms of reference for facilitators supporting the FPIC process in IFAD-funded projects, see 
Annex 3 of IFAD’s How to do Note on Seeking  Free Prior and Informed Consent in IFAD Investment Projects 
https://www.ifad.org/topic/consent/overview  
198 
•  Where there are doubts on consent, or where concerns are raised during consultations, these 
doubts  and  concerns  are  documented,  and  the  communities  are  requested  to  propose 
means/solutions to overcome concerns; 
•  Feedback is provided to the scheme design engineers and Project staff on concerns/doubts 
raised by the communities; 
•  Feedback is provided to the communities on how their concerns have been accommodated in 
the scheme design. 
The usual practice for IFAD-funded projects is to use independent, qualified59 facilitators supporting 
the FPIC process. The selection of suitable facilitators for the FPIC process is critical to the success of 
the  process.  In  the  selection  process,  consideration  should  be  given  to  the  cultural  context  the 
facilitator will work in, to language skills, ethnicity, gender, experience in consultation and participatory 
processes, age (e.g. elders prefer to speak to older facilitators), technical knowledge of the Project and 
knowledge of IFAD policies and FPIC requirements.  Where the district coordinators and their teams 
are not are not familiar with consultations leading to FPIC, the facilitator will have a double role, in 
facilitating the process and building capacity, while applying relevant provisions, hence supporting the 
local and national governments to fulfil the requirements of internal and external policies. If the right 
people to facilitate these exercises are selected, they can play a role as facilitators and at the same 
time build the capacities of Project staff, as well as of communities.  Communities’ representatives 
who participate in the mapping should be identified by the communities as their representatives in 
the FPIC process. 
iv)  Formalise the Consent Agreement 
Once Project activities and Project sites requiring FPCI agreement are identified, this will be formalised 
in a written form in Kinyarwanda.  The effective time the consent agreement would be formalised will 
be agreed upon during the consultation process and needs to be formalised before any investment is 
made. 
The  consent  agreement  will  be  prepared  by  the  Kayonza  District  office.  The  format  for  a  consent 
agreement would, among others, include: 
•  KIIWP Project activities on which consent is provided; 
•  Respective expectations; 
•  Proposed Project duration, expected results and activities; 
•  Participatory monitoring and verification plan and procedures; 
• 
Identification of grievances procedures and mechanisms; 
•  Terms of withdrawal of consent; 
•  Record  of  process  through  means  and  languages  accessible  to  all  stakeholders  and  parties 
involved. 
The FPIC Agreement and record of process will be made available through means and languages that 
are accessible to all stakeholders and parties involved.  The FPIC Implementation Plan will be included 
in  the  Annex  to  the  PDR  and  will  be  confirmed  and/or  revised  at  the  beginning  of  Project 
implementation  phase  (during  start-up  workshop,  beginning  of  consultations  leading  to  FPCI, 
beginning of participatory mapping exercise). 
59 Minimum requirement for the facilitator is rights sensitivity and knowledge of the cultural context they will 
operate, together with technical knowledge of the issues under consideration. The facilitator must be neutral, 
trustworthy and mutually accountable to IFAD, the borrower government and the community (HTDN-IFAD, 
2015). 
199 
v)  Assess FPIC Implementation 
In order to assess FPIC implementation, the appropriate indicators for measuring progress towards 
and/or attainment of agreed terms will be defined and linked with a timeframe in the FPIC agreement. 
Subsequent  workshops  and  stakeholders  reviews  of  the  FPIC  plan  may  also  amend  the  various 
indicators  to  be  established  in  the  FPIC  agreement.  Joint  supervision  missions  assessing  Project 
progress will also assess implementation of FPIC agreements on regular basis.60 Whenever possible, 
supervision and evaluation missions would include experts of relevance. 
Table A5.3:  Summarised KIIWP FPIC Implementation Plan  
Description/Activity 
Responsible 
Timeframe 
Conduct sociocultural and land tenure assessment: 
Identify:  
• 
• 
• 
•  Mutual support and solidarity mechanisms  
• 
Rwanda’s laws on land ownership 
Institutions and governance systems 
Types of livelihoods 
Community  stakeholders,  land  users  and  assess 
who has the right to give or withhold the consent 
Assess:  
• 
Consequences from the Project that may result in 
the change of the status of the lands and resources 
• 
• 
Identify decision-making institutions and representatives  
Conduct  preliminary  consultations  with 
the 
community and explain the nature of the Project  
Allow time for communities to discuss and decide 
on  their  representatives  for  the  consultation 
process leading to FPIC 
Clarify responsibilities of representatives  
Agree on the process leading to FPIC 
Identify  signatory  parties 
agreement 
the  consent 
• 
• 
• 
for 
Conduct consultation leading to FPIC on the 
Project/specific component/activities 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Share objective and scope of the Project with the 
representatives identified by the communities and 
identify Project component(s) requiring FPIC 
Inform  them  on  the  actors 
financing  and 
implementing  the  Project  and  their  respective 
responsibilities  
Provide clear and transparent information on the 
benefits and risks of the Project 
Share the findings of the sociocultural, land tenure 
and environmental assessment 
Formalize consent agreement 
Formalize the consent agreement 
• 
Formalize the consent agreement (written or 
in  other  form 
if  so  requested  by  the 
community) 
The  format  for  a  consent  agreement  would 
include: 
21.  Respective expectations  
22.  Proposed  Project  duration,  expected  results  and 
• 
activities 
23.  Participatory monitoring and verification plan and 
procedures  
Kayonza District authorities 
(who may hire consultants to 
carry out the scheme specific 
socio-cultural/land tenure 
assessments) 
At the beginning of 
programme 
implementation phase. 
This could be part of the 
participatory mapping 
exercise 
Kayonza District authorities, 
possibly through an 
independent facilitator, 
supported by IFAD as part of 
Project implementation 
support, as required. 
At the beginning of 
programme 
implementation phase (this 
could  be done in tandem 
with the socio-cultural  and 
land tenure assessment 
and mapping exercise)  
Kayonza District authorities 
possibly through an 
independent facilitator, 
supported by IFAD as part of 
Project implementation 
support, as required. 
At the beginning of 
programme 
implementation phase and 
before individual scheme 
construction 
Kayonza District authorities 
possibly through an 
independent facilitator, 
supported by IFAD as part of 
Project implementation 
support, as required. 
Programme 
implementation 
phase. 
Timing  agreed  upon  the 
during consultation process 
and 
individual 
scheme construction begins 
before 
60IFAD Policy on Engagement with Indigenous Peoples, 2009:16 
200 
Description/Activity 
Responsible 
Timeframe 
24.  Identification  of  grievances  procedures  and 
mechanisms  
25.  Terms of withdrawal of consent  
26.  Record  process  through  means  and  languages 
accessible to all stakeholders and parties involved 
27.  Annex  the  FPIC  agreement  and  documented 
process to the PDR 
Assess FPIC implementation 
28.  Assess  FPIC  implementation  as  part  of  the  M&E 
exercise during the Project life.  
29.  Appropriate  indicators  for  measuring  progress 
towards and/or attainment of agreed terms will be 
defined  and  linked  with  a  timeframe  in  the  FPIC 
agreement 
Rwanda Agricultural Board 
(RAB), Kayonza District 
Administration and IFAD 
implementation support and 
joint supervision missions 
Programme 
- 
implementation  phase 
before 
individual  scheme 
construction  begins  and 
throughout 
the  Project 
cycle 
LOAN AGREEMENT 
FPIC  requirements  will  be  included  in  the  Loan  Agreement  as  a  condition  to  disbursement  for 
programme implementation.  
DISCLOSURE 
IFAD’s Policy on the Disclosure of Documents enables Project design documents to be disclosed prior 
to the Executive Board session at which the Project is to be considered.  Thus, this FPIC Implementation 
Plan will be disclosed together with the Programme Design Report (PDR), Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF), and other documents to be submitted to the Executive Board (and 
Evaluation Committee). 
DOCUMENTING THE FPIC PROCESS 
FPIC process will be documented through minutes of consultations, mapping documents prepared by 
the communities, videos where feasible, and FPIC agreements/formalisation documents.    
201 
Annex 6: 
Guidelines for an Integrated Pest Management Plan 
This guideline is adapted from the Rwanda Environment Management Authority’s Practical Tools on 
Soil Productivity and Crop Protection (2010) and IFAD’s Social Environmental and Climate Assessment 
Procedures (SECAP 2017) Guidance Statement #2 on Agrochemicals. 
Introduction 
The use of agrochemicals has been critical to raising crops for food.Agrochemicals include fertilizers, 
liming and acidifying agents, soil conditioners, pesticides, and chemicals used in animal husbandry 
such as antibiotics and hormones. “Pesticides” are chemicals that are used to kill or control pests. In 
agriculture, this includes herbicides (weeds), insecticides (insects), fungicides (fungi), nematocides 
(nematodes), and rodenticides (vertebrate poisons).    Different categories of pesticides have 
different types of effects on living organisms.  In agriculture, pesticides are used to kill pests that 
damage crops. By their nature, pesticides are potentially toxic to other organisms, including humans, 
and need to be used safely and disposed of properly. Absence of safety precautions can result in 
accidents, sometimes with serious consequences. Those at greatest risk are those who experience 
the greatest exposure — these typically being smallholder farmers, farm workers and their families. 
These groups are also often poor since bigger farms are more likely to provide training on pesticide 
risk avoidance to their workers.  The unsafe use of agrochemicals also poses serious negative risk on 
the environment (soil, water, plant, wildlife, microorganisms, etc).  In the Rwandan context, the 
proximity of agricultural activities using agrochemicals to sensitive ecological receptors such as 
national parks (in the case of KIIWP, the Akagera National Park) and wetlands raises concern in regard 
to the impacts these chemicals may have on those receptors.   
Where there is a significant increase in the use of agrochemicals, IFAD requires a pest management or 
mitigation plan to be prepared.  While IFAD projects promote the use of agrochemicals directly, as a 
project component for increased crop productivity, or – more commonly – indirectly, by increasing the 
availability of short-term credit for farm inputs or water for irrigation, which encourages increased use 
of agrochemicals.  IFAD emphasises the need for careful selection of the type of agrochemicals and 
management of their use (timing, dosage, mode of application, etc.) can reduce to acceptable levels 
the environmental risks they pose while providing the needed benefits for increased production with 
lower financial and health risk costs.   
Policy and Regulatory Frameworks in Rwanda Related to Pest Management 
National Legislation 
Major pieces of legislation governing and regulating the use of agrochemicals in Rwanda are: 
•  Organic Law N° 04/2005 Of 08/04/2005 Determining the Modalities of Protection, 
•  Conservation  and  Promotion  of  Environment  in  Rwanda  which  aims  to:  conserve  the 
environment, people and their habitats; set up fundamental principles related to protection 
of  environment,  any  means  that  may  degrade  the  environment  with  the  intention  of 
promoting  the  natural  resources,  to  discourage    any  hazardous  and  destructive  means; 
promote  the  social  welfare  of  the  population  considering  equal  distribution of  the existing 
wealth; consider the durability of the resources with an emphasis especially on equal rights 
on present and future generations;  guarantee to all Rwandans sustainable development which 
does not harm the environment and the social welfare of the population; set up strategies of 
protecting  and  reducing  negative  effects  on  the  environment  and  replacing  the  degraded 
environment. 
202 
• 
Law No. 30/2012 of 01/08/2012 governing Agrochemicals which governs the manufacturing, 
importing,  distribution,  use,  storage,  sale  and  disposal  and  burial  of  agrochemicals  for  the 
protection  of  human  and  animal  health  and  the  environment,  to  avoid  injury  and 
contamination which may result from their use.  
•  Prime Minister’s Order N° 26/03 of 23/10/2008 determining the list of chemicals and other 
prohibited  pollutants,  gives  list  of  chemicals  and  other  pollutants  that  are  prohibited  to 
purchase,    sell,  import,  export,  transit,  store  and  pile  chemicals,  diversity  of  chemicals  and 
other pollutants. 
•  Ministerial Order No. 006/2008 of 15/08/2008 on the Regulation of Ozone Layer Depleting 
Substances  which  regulates  imports,  exports  and  reexports  of  substances  that  deplete  the 
Ozone Layer (ODS) products and equipment containing such substances.   
•  Ministerial  Order  No.  005/2008  of  15/08/2008  establishing  Modalities  of  Inspecting 
Companies  or  Activities  that  Pollute  the  Environment  provides  for  officers  competent  to 
investigate  environmental  crimes  shall  conduct  an  inspection  aimed  at  protecting  the 
environment.  
International Conventions and Regional Agreements 
Rwanda is also party to the following international conventions which have a bearing on the use and 
impacts of agrochemicals, including pesticides:  
•  Convention  on  the  Conservation  of  Migratory  Species  of  Wild  Animals  (CMS),  which  is  a 
framework convention which provides a global platform for the conservation and sustainable 
use of migratory animals and their habitats. 
•  UN  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change  (UNFCCC)  provides  a  framework  for 
international cooperation to combat climate change by limiting average global temperature 
increases and the resulting climate change, and coping with its impacts. 
•  Kyoto Protocol  to the UNFCCC   (1997)  legally  binds  developed  country  Parties  to  emission 
reduction targets. 
•  The  Rotterdam  Convention  (formally,  the  Rotterdam  Convention  on  the  Prior  Informed 
Consent  Procedure  for  Certain  Hazardous  Chemicals  and  Pesticides  in  International  Trade) 
promotes  shared  responsibilities  in  relation  to  importation  of  hazardous  chemicals.  The 
convention  promotes  open  exchange  of  information  and  calls  on  exporters  of  hazardous 
chemicals to use proper labeling, include directions on safe handling, and inform purchasers 
of any known restrictions or bans.   
•  The Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and 
and is designed to reduce the movements of 
Their Disposal (the Basel Convention, 1989),  
hazardous  waste  between  nations,  and  specifically  to  prevent  transfer  of  hazardous  waste 
from developed to less developed countries (LDCs). It is also intended to minimize the amount 
and  toxicity  of  wastes  generated,  to  ensure  their  environmentally  sound  management  as 
closely as possible to the source of generation, and to assist LDCs in environmentally sound 
management of the hazardous and other wastes they generate. 
•  Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants (1992) aims to eliminate or restrict the 
production and use of persistent organic pollutants (POPs).  
•  The  Montreal  Conventional  on  Substances  that  Deplete  the  Ozone  Layer,  The  Montreal 
Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer (a protocol to the Vienna Convention for 
the Protection of the Ozone Layer) is designed to protect the ozone layer by phasing out the 
production of numerous substances that are responsible for ozone depletion.  
203 
Regional regulation on pesticide use and control include the Pesticide Control Act of the East African 
Community,  East  Africa  Pesticide  Regulation.    The  Inter-Africa  Phytosanitary  Council  (IAPSC)  was 
established in 1954 to secure a common and effective action to prevent the spread and introduction 
of pests of plants and plant products as well as the need to promote appropriate measures. 
Impacts of Agrochemicals 
Several  potential  environmental  and  social  consequences  are  associated  with  the  use  of 
agrochemicals: 
•  Air pollution: Pesticides can contribute to air pollution as pesticide drift occurs when pesticides 
suspended in the air as particles are carried by wind to other areas, potentially contaminating 
them. Ground spraying produces less pesticide drift. 
•  Water pollution from the use of agrochemicals may affect both groundwater and surface water 
through  leaching  and  run-off.  High  concentrations  of  nitrates  and  phosphates  can  lead  to 
eutrophication  in  rivers,  lakes  and  coastal  waters.  High  levels  of  nitrogen  and  phosphorus 
cause the depletion of oxygen in lakes and reservoirs by excessive algal and bacterial growth 
(eutrophication),  eventually  reducing  aquatic  life.  The  problem  is  aggravated  by  organic 
effluents, especially human sewage, and eutrophication in drinking water reservoirs is a public 
health concern. In addition, the toxic compounds contained in some pesticides and herbicides 
may pollute groundwater and surface water, posing threats to both human and animal health, 
including marine and freshwater fish. 
•  Hazards to humans and animals: Improper application of pesticides, overuse and neglect of 
safety periods between application and harvest often result in high residues in harvested crops 
and processed food and unnecessary exposure of farmers and their families to toxic material. 
Contact can be direct (skin or eye) or through inhalation or ingestion. Agrochemical residues 
are also known to persist in contaminated clothing. Pesticides may move off target and poison 
fish, cattle, beneficial insects, pollinators, soil organisms and nearby communities. Pesticides 
may have acute or chronic toxic effects. While people are aware of their acute effects, which 
vary from mild irritation to death, their chronic toxicity results from the accumulation of small 
amounts of residue in consumed food – of both plant and animal origin – in the human body 
over a long period, leading to various toxicity symptoms and diseases. 
•  Bioaccumulation implies that toxic levels increase over time and along the food chain (e.g. in 
carnivorous  mammals  or  predatory  fish).  The  bioaccumulation  of  toxins  resulting  from 
agrochemical use is a very serious issue, causing biodiversity loss and disease in both animals 
and humans, especially in poor rural communities that rely on wild food. Bioaccumulation is 
also very serious for the marine and freshwater life that is critical to a large proportion of the 
poor. 
•  Pest  resurgence:  Misuse  of  pesticides  can  cause  elimination  or  suppression  of  the  natural 
enemies  that  keep  insect  pest  populations  under  control  and  at  economically  acceptable 
levels.  This  suppression  leads  to  outbreaks  of  secondary  pests  previously  not  considered 
important. This not only affects crops, but can also affect livestock and community health. 
•  Pest resistance: The misuse of pesticides can lead to the build-up of resistance in insect pests, 
pathogens  and  weeds.  This  resistance  has  great  economic  and  ecological  consequences 
because increasing amounts of more expensive and toxic pesticide formulations are required 
to achieve pest control. In some areas of the world, pesticide overuse has created a population 
of resistant pests, which threaten subsistence and cash crops, livestock and human health. 
Loss of bees and other beneficial insects: Pesticides can kill bees and other beneficial insects 
that are essential for the pollination of indigenous plants, honey production, etc., thus causing 
negative impacts on the food production, livelihoods and incomes of poor rural communities. 
• 
204 
•  Soil fertility loss may be related to excessive or inappropriate application of chemical fertilizers, 
which could result in soil salinization, sodicity or acidification, depending on the inherent soil 
chemistry, the quality of irrigation water and other external factors (such as acid rain). Soils 
may also lose their fertility due  to the lack of, or insufficient  application of fertilizer, which 
causes  a  decline  in  natural  nutrient  availability.  Degraded  agricultural  land  that  has  lost  its 
fertility may retain its capacity to recover through fallowing. However, beyond a critical point, 
fertility loss may become an irreversible phenomenon. While inorganic fertilizers may improve 
soil fertility, various forms of organic inputs such as manure, also improve the soil structure, 
which enhances microbial activity, air and water infiltration and retention. 
•  Soil  loss  is  caused  by  wind  and  water  erosion  on  lands  that  have  been  overgrazed  or 
overutilized for crops. Marginal and poor soils are particularly vulnerable to erosion, especially 
if soil fertility is depleted and natural vegetation fails to regenerate adequately. Loss of topsoil 
and valuable organic matter is usually irreversible.  
•  Greenhouse  Gases:  Agrochemicals  are  among  the  most  important  secondary  sources  of 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the agriculture sector. 
•  Climate  change  is  expected  to  affect  the  population  and  life  cycles  of  several  pests  and 
diseases,  mainly  through  the  influence  on  their  distribution  and  expansion  ranges.  More 
invasions by introduced or migrated alien species of pests  and diseases  are expected, with 
higher  intensities  of  infection.  However,  the  impact  of  climate  change  will  be  most  clear 
through its effect on crops, as crops growing under various types of climate stress will be more 
susceptible  and  vulnerable  to  pests  and  diseases.  Anticipated  effects  include  reduced 
tolerance  and  resistance  levels  in  crops,  and  losses  in  biodiversity,  especially  of  wild  crop 
species needed for resistance breeding. Because of higher pest and disease pressure, more 
pesticides  will  be  applied,  which  might  lead  to  increased  misuse  and  overuse  if  not  well 
managed (World Bank, 2009). Environmental instability and increased incidence of extreme 
weather may  also  reduce  the  effectiveness of  pesticides  on  target  pests,  or  result  in  more 
injury  to  non-target  organisms.  However,  climate  change  may  affect  biological  control 
negatively or positively. 
Potential Mitigation Measures 
The  use  of  agrochemicals  can  also  be  reduced  or  eliminated  by  promoting  indigenous  farming 
practices, such as the cultivation of locally adapted crops and varieties, which are often resistant to 
local pests  and diseases; the  use of locally available natural biopesticides  and pest-repellent  crops, 
with adapted cultivation strategies (seeding periods and methods, etc.); the use of natural on-farm 
animal and green manure; and organic farming techniques. Ensuring diversity in the crops and varieties 
cultivated on a farm, especially indigenous crops, reduces the risk of high-level pest infestations and 
disease  epidemics  and  facilitates  enhanced  ecosystem  services,  including  through  pollinators  and 
active soil fauna and flora. 
Some measures for management of agrochemicals are described here: 
Fertilizer management: 
•  Ensure that dressings do not exceed recommended doses. 
•  Reduce leaching through appropriate choice of fertilizer to suit soil conditions, split 
applications and fertilizer placement. 
•  Reduce run-off through incorporation of fertilizer into soil, timing of applications to avoid 
erosive rains, and soil and water conservation measures. 
Limit nitrate use in sensitive watersheds serving urban areas. 
• 
•  Select non-ammonium sources of nitrogen such as urea. 
•  Carry out liming (usually to pH 5.5 for tropical crops). 
205 
•  Explore the potential for increasing production without the use of chemical fertilizers, 
especially using indigenous technologies, including organic fertilizers, and supporting 
integrated soil fertility systems. 
•  Promote community education on improving indigenous practices to maximize production, 
avoiding chemical fertilizers in favour of local options that are available on farm. 
•  Support crop management practices that increase the nutrients available to crops, including 
by: (i) using more organic and less inorganic fertilizer; (ii) increasing the efficiency of fertilizer 
use through appropriate fertilizer selection, timing and split applications; (iii) increasing 
nutrient recycling using crop residues and livestock grazing after crop4 harvest (mixed 
farming); use of nitrogen fixing trees, where feasible (agroforestry); and (iv) improving 
rotations (e.g. inclusion of legumes, multicropping). 
•  Monitor receiving water courses and soil for fertility to avoid overapplication of 
agrochemicals. 
Pesticide management: 
•  The project should be explicit about the pesticides it proposes, including those that farmers 
are expected to use when credit for input purchases is made available. For projects that entail 
significant pesticide use or have the potential to result in increased pesticide use, a pesticide 
management  plan  is  prepared,  either  as  a  stand-alone  document  or  as  part  of  the 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or ESMP. The most important criteria for 
assessing  the  environmental  impact  of  a  pesticide  are  its  toxicity  level  and  the  degree  of 
biodegradability. Consideration should also be given to residue-level guidance for countries 
that  intend  to  export  crops.  Unregistered,  restricted-use  or  experimental-use  pesticides 
should be avoided, unless their use in the project has been reviewed and approved by the 
Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  of  the  United  Nations  (FAO)/World  Health  Organization 
(WHO) Joint Meeting on Pesticide Residues. 
•  Pesticides in WHO Class la and Class lb5 should generally be avoided. 
•  For general use, the formulated product should be at a low enough concentration to be in at 
most a WHO Class II. Low-toxicity formulations should be favoured: from least toxic to most 
toxic,  the  options  are  granule,  dust,  wettable  powder,  flowable,  emulsifiable  concentrate, 
ultra-low volume and fumigant.  
Low-concentration  granulars,  seed  dressings,  bait  formulations  and  pheromone  traps 
generally present the least hazard to users and are especially suitable for small-scale farmers 
unfamiliar with pesticide use; they cause minimal environmental contamination and minimal 
adverse effects on non-target organisms. 
• 
•  Aircraft  application  should  be  avoided  whenever  possible,  and  used  only  when  speed  in 
covering large areas is essential, such as in the emergency control of migratory pests. 
•  Safe  application  equipment  and  servicing  facilities  should  be  promoted,  along with  correct 
calibration of equipment. Training should be provided for personnel and farmers applying the 
pesticides. 
•  Protective  clothing,  including  masks,  gloves  and  boots,  should  be  provided  or  promoted, 
especially  for  pesticides  that  are  absorbed  through  the  skin.  However,  improper  use  of 
protective clothing may be even more hazardous than doing without protection: unless it is 
washed, protective clothing can become saturated with pesticides – such as in the lining of 
boots and gloves – and can greatly increase pesticide absorption. Training should be provided. 
•  Training is crucial to the safety, use and cost-effectiveness of pesticides, and is recommended 
for inclusion in any project that increases the availability or accessibility of pesticides. A range 
of actors will require education: users, operators, extension officers, retailers, health workers 
treating cases of poisoning, and legislators in pesticides law. 
•  Application guidelines for pesticide use should be made clear to the borrowing country, and a 
legal document should be drawn up providing assurance that the guidelines will be followed. 
206 
•  All the pesticides used in the project should be properly labelled, and all labels and application 
guidelines should be provided in the local language. 
•  Monitor water courses, soil and community health on a regular basis to ensure that pesticide 
concentrations are within legal environmental and health limits. 
Integrated Pest Management Approach 
An  Integrated  Pest  Management  Plan  (IPMP)  is  a  tool  to  prevent,  evaluate  and  mitigate  the 
occurrences of pesticides or pesticide breakdown products. The IPMP includes components promoting 
prevention  and  developing  appropriate  responses  to  the  detection  of  pesticides  or  pesticide 
breakdown products, and provides responses to reduce or eliminate continued pesticide movement 
to  groundwater  and  surface  water.  It  encourages  the  use  of  a  combination  of  pest  management 
techniques,  such  as  integrated  pest  management  to  suppress  pest  populations  in  an  effective, 
economical and environmentally sound way, and minimize adverse  effects on beneficial organisms, 
humans and the environment. 
Whenever an IFAD project includes the purchase, promotion or use of agrochemicals, the following 
should be addressed:  
• 
• 
• 
Identification  of  specific  crops  and  their  existing  or  potential  pests  requiring  pest 
management: 
Investigate the options for using available safe pesticides and non-pesticide alternatives such 
as natural deterrents. 
Identification  of  nationally  approved  and  available  pesticides,  and  management  and 
application techniques for their judicial and effective use to protect human and environment 
health. 
•  Assessment  of  local and  national  capacity  for the  safe  handling,  use,  storage,  disposal  and 
monitoring of agrochemicals: Identify training needs for regulatory institutions, agro-dealers, 
extension agents and farmers, and assess the needs for building community environmental 
awareness. 
•  Development of an IPM programme for minimizing/optimizing pesticide application, including 
–  if  possible  –  provisions  for  monitoring  residues  on  crops  and  in  the  environment.  The 
programme  should  include  IPM  strategies  for  enhancing  the  resilience  of  vulnerable 
agroecosystems to climate variability and changes, and the adaption of IPM practices to deal 
with pests in different climatic conditions (World Bank, 2009). 
•  Reduction of environmental impact: As fertilizers have a high carbon footprint, it is prudent to 
enhance the efficiency of nitrogen use (by minimizing losses caused by erosion, leaching and 
volatilization)  and  to  identify  alternative  sources  using  integrated  nutrient  management 
strategies, such as biological nitrogen fixation, animal manure and the recycling of nutrients in 
crop residues (Lal, 2004). 
Thus the key steps in developing an integrated pest management plan are: 
i. 
Evaluate pests’ impact before control programs are implemented, to identify pests, size of 
problems and possible natural controls. This includes describing: 
a.  Common pest problems and estimated economic impact, current and proposed 
practices, including non-chemical preventative techniques, biological and chemical 
control. Is optimum use being made of agro-ecosystem management techniques to 
reduce pest pressure and of available non-chemical methods to control pests? Do 
farmers and extension staffs get sufficient information about IPM approaches that 
reduce reliance on chemical control? 
207 
b.  Relevant IPM experience within the project area, district or country, existing IPM 
practices, projects/programs, research 
c.  Discrepancies where the current or proposed practices are not consistent with the 
principles of an IPM 
d.  approach, to be able to propose a strategy to bring pest management activities into 
line with IPM. 
ii. 
iii. 
Evaluate non-pesticide management options, including a range of preventive measures and 
alternative pest control methods (physical, mechanical, and biochemical) 
Evaluate whether synthetic pesticides are necessary or not, whether less toxic varieties are 
available for the purpose, and how to minimize exposure for users and the environment 
Note that risk is a function of both toxicity and exposure. Reducing risk means (1) selecting less toxic 
pesticides and (2) selecting pesticides that will lead to the least human exposure before, during and 
after use. 
Pesticide Management 
1. Screening Pesticides 
The use of any pesticide should be based on an assessment of the nature and degree of associated 
risks, taking into account the intended users. With respect to the classification of pesticides and their 
specific  formulations,  reference  is  made  to  the  World  Health  Organization's  Recommended 
Classification of Pesticides by Hazard and Guidelines to Classification. The following criteria apply to 
the selection and use of pesticides: 
a)  They must have negligible adverse human health effects. 
b)  They must be shown to be effective against the target species. 
c)  They  must  have  minimal  effect  on  non-target  species  and  the  natural  environment.  The 
methods, timing, and frequency of pesticide application are aimed at minimizing damage to 
natural  enemies.  Pesticides  used  in  public  health  programs  must  be  demonstrably  safe  for 
inhabitants and domestic animals in the treated areas, as well as for personnel applying them. 
d)  Their use must take into account the need to prevent the development of resistance in pests. 
e)  They do not fall in WHO classes IA and IB, or formulations of products in Class II if (a) country 
lacks restrictions on their distribution and use; or (b) they are likely be used by, or be accessible 
to,  lay  personnel,  farmers,  or  others  without  training,  equipment,  and  facilities  to  handle, 
store, and apply these products properly. 
2. Reduce exposure time or the degree of exposure 
Before use 
Transporting 
•  Separate pesticides from other materials being transported 
•  Avoid private distribution 
•  Never transport leaking or badly deteriorated containers 
•  Do not transport food, beverages or animal feed together with pesticides.  
• 
Load and unload pesticides very carefully to minimize the chance of dropping containers. 
Packaging 
•  Follow international and national norms and guidelines 
•  Use packaging adapted to needs eliminate re-use of packaging materials (even when 
cleaned, pesticide containers are too dangerous to re-use 
208 
•  The container for the product shall be of sufficient strength and shall provide all the 
necessary 
30. Protection against compaction, atmospheric moisture, oxidation, loss by evaporation and 
31. Contamination to ensure that the product suffers no deterioration under normal conditions of 
transit and storage, etc. 
Storing 
•  develop strict guidelines for farm level storage 
•  ensure permanent, well-marked labeling 
• 
follow and respect national norms 
•  use appropriate language and approved pictograms 
•  use and respect appropriate toxicology colour codes 
• 
• 
should be located far from human dwellings, and personal use items 
should be sited far from rivers and bodies of water, to prevent chemical contamination from 
entering and poisoning the water 
should not be sited in an area subject to flooding, especially during seasonal rains  
• 
•  be secured from public access 
•  have a warning sign affixed to the exterior door, entrance or gate of the storage facility 
•  have a floor or base that is protected from pesticide absorption 
Labeling 
The purpose of a labeling is to convey a message about what the product is, who makes it and how it 
may be used safely and effectively. Label should specifically indicate: 
•  Hazard symbol 
•  Trade and chemical name 
• 
Ingredient statement 
•  Type of formulation 
•  Net content of the package 
•  Purpose for which it is to be used 
•  Name and address of manufacturer, distributor 
•  Registration or license number 
•  Directions for use 
•  Safety precautions 
•  Warnings and statements of good practice 
•  Hazards to humans and domestic animals 
•  Environmental hazards 
•  Physical and chemical hazards 
•  First-aid instructions and advice to health personnel 
•  Storage and disposal directions 
•  Warranty statement 
During use  
•  Continuous training for farmers on transporation, storage, application, protective equipment 
and clothing, mixing of chemicals, disposal of containers, disposal of  expired agrochemicals, 
etc 
Pre-application 
•  Read and understand labeled instructions and any other information provided with either the 
agrochemical, the application equipment or the protective clothing 
209 
•  Assess the risks of application to people, animals and the environment and decide what action 
is necessary to reduce or eliminate them 
•  Ensure  that  the  user  is  competent  and  that  he  or  she  has  received  effective  training  in 
application techniques and the precautions to be observed 
•  Arrange health monitoring as may be necessary for certain hazardous agrochemicals based on 
their frequency of use  
•  Check application equipment to ensure that it operates satisfactorily without leaking or spilling 
and is calibrated for the necessary application rates  
•  Check that protective clothing and other safety equipment including breathing apparatus, 
32. if required, is complete, is of the correct quality and is in good condition.  Replace any items 
that are worn or missing. And is in good condition. Replace any items that are worn or missing 
•  Decide how the work is going to be done and set up an action plan to cover its implementation, 
together with any emergencies that may arise.  
•  Check that weather conditions are satisfactory, particularly to avoid excessive wind speeds and 
consequent spray drift 
•  Ensure the safe disposal of empty containers, tank washings and surplus pesticides 
During application 
•  Do not apply agrochemicals without adequate training 
•  Wear  appropriate  protective  clothing  as  prescribed  on  the  label  or  information  sheet  for 
handling concentrated products 
•  Avoid blow-back from granule or powdered materials when transferring container contents 
into the application unit. A slow, steady release causes least disturbance of air and reduces the 
risk of particles becoming airborne and being inhaled 
•  Mix only the correct amount of agrochemical required for a particular task so as to avoid the 
need to dispose of any surplus. 
•  Handle containers carefully to prevent gurgling or spillage during pouring into an applicator.  
•  Pour correctly from large containers with the spout uppermost so as to allow air to flow into 
• 
the container at the same rate as the contents flow out 
If two or more agrochemicals have to be mixed, ensure that they are compatible and without 
risk of a chemical reaction that would cause a "tank mix" operator hazard Do not eat, drink or 
smoke while applying agrochemicals 
•  Ensure that dangerous practices such as putting a blocked nozzle to the mouth to blow it clear 
are prohibited. Clean the nozzle with water or a soft probe, such as a grass stem 
•  Do not allow other workers in the field, particularly when pesticides are being applied. 
•  Take particular care to observe that children are neither allowed to spray nor are exposed to 
pesticides 
•  Take notice of changing weather conditions, such as an increase  in wind speed. This would 
cause drift and could blow the spray towards sensitive areas such as a drinking water supply, 
resulting  in  health  hazards.  It  may  also  blow  the  spray  towards  the  operator,  causing  an 
inhalation hazard. 
After use  
Know, respect and enforce any exclusion period after application during which humans, livestock, etc., 
must  be  kept  away  from  the  treated  area;  assure  proper  cleaning  and  rinsing  off;  and  develop  a 
workable  monitoring  and  evaluation  system).  The  following  precautions  have  to  be  followed  after 
applying the pesticide: 
•  Thoroughly wash hands, face and neck as well as other parts of the body which may have 
become contaminated. If gloves have been worn, wash them before removal 
•  Return unused pesticide to safe storage and safely dispose of empty containers and any 
surplus in the application equipment 
210 
•  Decontaminate application equipment by washing it thoroughly. The washings should be 
drained into a soak-away or similar chamber to be safely confined and without risk to the 
environment. 
•  Decontaminate protective clothing by thoroughly washing items such as apron, boots and 
face shield. Launder the work clothing each day after spraying. Gloves should be washed 
inside and out and allowed to dry. Respiratory protection equipment should be wiped clean 
•  Bathe or wash thoroughly again after completing the above four actions. 
Disposal of unused and obsolete pesticide, and empty pesticide containers 
The  safe  management  and  disposal  of  pesticide-related  waste  (unused  and  obsolete  pesticide,  and 
empty pesticide container) should be provided and coordinated by regulatory authorities, pesticide 
distributors  and  suppliers.  Other  organizations  that  support  and  advise  pesticide  users,  such  as 
extension  and  health  promotion  services,  non-governmental  organizations  (NGOs),  agricultural 
colleges and schools, also have important roles to play. 
MINAGRI  is  responsible  for  regulating  the  manufacture,  import,  distribution  and  use  of  pesticides. 
These  responsibilities  should  be  extended  to  include  the  management  of  pesticide  related  waste 
products, including empty containers, which are often overlooked. 
A  mechanism  has  to  be  designed  to  collect  all empty  pesticide  containers  from  farmers  and  safely 
disposed  and  never  reused.  It  is  extremely  dangerous  to  use  them  for  anything  else.  Consult  the 
pesticide label, the manufacturer, or the manufacturer’s representative for specific recommendations 
regarding container clean-up and disposal. 
The management plan has to be prepared when there is the plan to use pesticide to mitigate all the 
impacts associated with the pesticide using the above-mentioned measures. The implementation of 
the plan has to be supervised, monitored and audited, and a monitoring plan has to be prepared. 
In Summary 
The IPMP should include: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
A description of present, proposed and/or envisaged pesticide use and assess whether such 
use  is in line  with IPM principles. Provide  purpose of pesticide  use,  type  of products used, 
frequency of applications, and application methods. Is pesticide use part of an IPM approach 
and is it justified? Justification of pesticide use under the project should (a) explain the IPM 
approach and the reason why pesticide use is considered, (b) provide an economic assessment 
demonstrating  that  the  proposed  pesticide  use  would  increase  farmers’  net  profits,  or  for 
public health projects, provide evidence that the proposed pesticide use is justified from the 
best available (probably WHO supported evidence) public health evidence. 
An indication of type and quantity of pesticides envisaged to be financed by the project (in 
volume and monetary value) and/or assessment of increase in pesticide use resulting from the 
project. 
Circumstances  of  pesticide  use  and  the  capability  and  competence  of  end-users  to  handle 
products within acceptable risk margins (e.g. user access to, and use of, protective gears and 
appropriate application equipment; users’ product knowledge and understanding of hazards 
and risks; appropriateness of on-farm storage facilities for pesticide).  
211 
iv. 
vi. 
v. 
An  assessment  of  environmental,  occupational  and  public  health  risks  associated  with  the 
transport, storage, handling and use of the proposed products under local circumstances, and 
the disposal of empty containers. 
Pre-requisites  and/or  measures  required  to  reduce  specific  risks  associated  with  envisaged 
pesticide use under the project (e.g.: protective gear, training, upgrading of storage facilities, 
etc.). 
A  selection  of  pesticides  authorized  for  use,  taking  into  consideration:  (a)  criteria  set  at 
national (if there is any) or international, (b) the hazards and risks and; (c) the availability of 
newer or less hazardous products and techniques (e.g. bio-pesticides, traps).  
A description of activities that require local monitoring during implementation. 
A  description  of  activities  that  require  monitoring  during  supervision  visits  (e.g.  regarding 
effectiveness of measures to mitigate risks; progress in strengthening regulatory framework 
and institutional capacity; identification of new issues or risks arising during implementation). 
ix.  Monitoring  and  supervision  plan,  implementation  responsibilities,  required  expertise  and 
vii. 
viii. 
budget. 
212 
Annex 7: 
Guidelines for Dam Safety 
This annex is sourced from IFAD’s Guidance Note #8 on Dams, their safety and SECAP. 
INTRODUCTION 
Dams provide a variety of benefits, including water for irrigation, livestock and domestic supplies and 
fisheries, as well as flood mitigation – and all these activities have had significant impacts on poverty 
reduction. However, they also may have significant adverse social and environmental impacts. Dams 
are prone to various forces which may exist throughout their life, which can cause failure, sometimes 
resulting in loss of life.  Thus, dams present a serious safety hazard. 
CLASSIFICATION OF DAMS 
Dam classification is used to determine the level of engineering design skills required to build a dam, 
establish the types of contingency plans to be put in place appropriate to the hazard risk presented, 
and the significance of environmental and social impacts that may be caused by the dam.  
Classification by Size 
IFAD  distinguishes  between  three  sizes  of  dam,  namely  “small”,  “medium”  and  “large”,  defined  as 
follows: 
•  Small: any dam of 5 m or less in height. 
•  Medium: any dam of between 5 m and 15 m in height. 
• 
Large: any dam of more than 15 m in height. 
In addition, any medium dam should be treated as a large dam if it meets at least one of the following 
conditions: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Its crest length is 500 m or greater; 
Its reservoir capacity is 3 million m3
Its maximum incoming flood is 2 000 m3/s or greater; or  
It is located in a zone of high seismicity. 
 or greater; 
Classification by Hazard Potential 
A hazard is anything that has the potential to cause harm, while a risk is the likelihood that a hazard 
will cause harm.  For example, a large dam may be rated a high hazard structure because its location 
is such that its failure or misoperation could cause catastrophic loss of life and property downstream. 
However, the same dam also could be at a low risk of failure because it is well engineered, receives 
regular inspections, and is exceptionally well maintained. In contrast, a smaller sized dam located miles 
from human habitation may be rated a low hazard structure by virtue of its location, yet be at a high 
risk of failure or misoperation because it was poorly designed, has never been inspected and is poorly 
maintained.  IFAD defines three hazard classes as shown in Table 1 below: 
213 
Table 1: Hazard Potential Classification of Dams 
Classification 
Loss of human life 
High 
Significant 
Low 
Probable (one or more expected) 
None expected 
None expected 
Economic loss, environmental loss 
and/or disruption of livelihoods 
Yes (but not necessary for this class) 
Yes 
Low and generally limited to the 
owner 
A  high  hazard  rating  for  a  new  or  existing  dam  indicates  a  need  to  adopt  more  stringent  design 
standards than might be applied to a lower hazard rating dam. For example, while the design engineer 
for a low hazard dam might select a spillway design flood return period of say 1 in 500 years, the same 
engineer might select a flood return period of 1 in 10,000 years for a high hazard dam. For the same 
reason, a high hazard structure indicates a need for a higher standard of instrumentation and more 
frequent  inspections  than  might  otherwise  be  the  case  because  of  the  potential  consequences  of 
failure or misoperation. 
Environmental and Social Classification 
In line with IFAD’s screening categories as presented in SECAP  (2017), any project that supports or 
induces the construction or use of a large or medium dam would be considered category A, and would 
require  a  full  Environmental  and  Social  Impact  Assessment  (ESIA)  to  be  carried  out  for  the  whole 
programme/  project  together  with  elaboration  of  an  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plan 
(ESMP)  for  implementation.  Where  a  Programme  involves  a  number  of  dam  subprojects,  an 
Environmental  and  Social  Management  Framework  (ESMF)  for  the  overall  programme  will  suffice, 
provided that an ESIA is prepared during programme implementation, and an ESMP implemented, for 
each subproject that includes a large dam. 
A project that includes only small dams would be considered category B, requiring no formal ESIA. In 
some cases, medium-size dams may only require an environmental analysis be carried out to confirm 
that there will not be any displacement and/or resettlement. Where displacement or resettlement is 
expected,  the  project  design  report  should  specify  the  required  process  for  obtaining  FPIC2  and  a 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) should be developed and implemented. In the case of a programme 
containing a number of dam subprojects, a Resettlement Action Framework will suffice, provided that 
a RAP is prepared and implemented for each subproject. 
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL & CLIMATE-RELATED IMPACTS OF DAMS 
Benefits of dams have been mentioned above.  However, dams can have a number of environmental 
and social impacts, including: 
•  Hydrological changes affecting availability for downstream users, including human and 
ecological/ecosystem needs; 
•  Barrier effect the upstream and downstream movement of migratory river animals such as 
fish; 
•  Barriers for sediment transport, affecting water quality and nutrient replenishment 
• 
downstream; 
Impacts on cropping and/or dry season grazing that depend on seasonal flooding of the river 
floodplain  
Loss of natural ecosystems due to inundation of land; 
Involuntary displacement of people from their lands; 
• 
• 
•  Upsurge in diseases such as malaria and, in many cases, and HIV/AIDS transmitted by migrant 
construction workers; 
214 
•  Damage to property or loss of life due to dam failure due to overtopping during floods 
because of an undersized or obstructed spillway, inadequate provision for energy dissipation 
at the downstream end of a spillway, erosion of the embankment or foundations due to 
continuous and concentrated leakage, or earthquakes/landslides; 
•  Slope instability as a result of inadequate internal drainage 
•  Functional failure of dam due to sedimentation. 
Climatic  events  present  three  potentially  adverse  impacts  on  dams,  i.e.  increased  floods,  reduced 
inflows and increased evaporation.  Increased floods has the most significant impact in terms of dam 
safety since the magnitude of floods and their return periods determine the validity of the spillway 
design flood.  However, the estimation of probable maximum flood for any given location in the world 
remains  an  imprecise  science,  and  therefore  it  is  difficult  to  calculate  the  additional  allowance  for 
climate-related events in dam design.  The spillway width and freeboard is usually designed using a 
flood return period selected on the basis of the hazard rating of the dam. The spillway of a major dam 
such as Kariba (in Zambia and Zimbabwe), for example, would normally be designed on the basis of an 
estimated probable maximum flood (equivalent to a 1:10,000 year flood). But the spillways of many 
lower hazard rating dams, including large dams, are often designed for much smaller floods of, say 
1:500 years or 1:1,000 years return period. Given the problem of estimation referred to above, the 
best approach for the time being would be to initially ignore the impact of climate change, adopt the 
same design parameters as before, but then carry out a  “what if” check to see how an increase in 
return period affects the required freeboard or spillway width. A value judgement by a qualified and 
experienced engineer can then be made on whether to increase the dimensions.   
In addition to the above impacts, climate change may also impact negatively on the average amount 
of rainfall that would have contributed to the moisture available to a crop. The effect of this would be 
an increase in the average net irrigation requirement per unit area of crop and, possibly a reduction in 
the  average  area  that  could  be  irrigated  from  the  dam.  This  needs  to  be  taken  into  account  when 
estimating net benefits. 
DAM SAFETY 
The serious consequences if a dam malfunctions or fails – including loss of life or injury, property losses 
and environmental damage – requires stringent safety measures to be put in place, whether for new 
or existing dams that IFAD is considering financing.   IFAD requires the loan agreement to contain a 
covenant  to  ensure  that  dams  and  reservoirs  are  designed,  constructed,  operated,  maintained, 
superintended and eventually decommissioned to the highest possible 
Responsibility of the Owner 
In the case of KIIWP, the owner of the proposed dams will be the Rwanda Agriculture Board in the 
Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Animal  Resources  Development.    In  general,  a  “community”  is  not  the 
owner of a dam – even if it is known as a “community dam” and even if the community has constructed 
the  dam  on  its  own  initiative/at  its  own  cost.    RAB  will  be  responsible  for  the  safety  of  the  dam 
throughout its life.   RAB has a duty of care to take appropriate measures to ensure the safety of the 
dam,  from  investigation  and  design  through  construction,  operation,  maintenance,  periodic 
inspections,  emergency  preparedness  and  eventual  decommissioning.  This  duty  of  care  includes 
ensuring  that,  as  a  workplace,  the  dam  is  safe  for  those  engaged  in  its  construction  and  those 
employed in subsequent operation and maintenance, as well as other persons who may enter the site, 
such as livestock herders, fishers and recreational users. It also includes making sure, if necessary by 
insistence on appropriate wording of construction contracts, that working conditions for all personnel 
215 
employed  in  construction,  operation  and  maintenance  comply  with  the  norms  of  good  practice 
established for the construction industry and set out in the national labour laws. 
RAB must ensure that the dam wall should be fenced, and signs should be provided to warn the public 
of the particular depth of water there and possibly elsewhere in the reservoir. While the reservoir may 
seem  to  be  a  convenient  point  for  drawing  livestock  and  domestic  water  supplies,  this  should  be 
discouraged on health grounds. Instead, if supplies are required, the project should include drinking 
troughs for livestock, just downstream from the dam and supplied by gravity.  
MINAGRI  and  RAB  will  be  expected  to  comply  with  the  national  legal  system  of  such  legislation, 
regulations, directives, and other standards and measures as may be necessary to effectively fulfil all 
of its national responsibilities and, where relevant, its international obligations regarding dams. These 
include  the  enforcement  of  environmental 
including  enforcement  of  environmental 
management/mitigation plans, as well as health and safety regulations. 
laws, 
IFAD’s Role 
IFAD’s role is to finance the project in accordance with its own policies and operational procedures. It 
is  responsible  to  its  Governing  Council  to  ensure,  in  close  collaboration  with  RAB,  that  dam  safety 
procedures  and  SECAP  are  complied  with  throughout  programme  implementation  and  that  it  will 
provide  support  to  national  implementation  teams  to  achieve  this.  IFAD’s  role  is  not,  however,  to 
direct, adjudicate on or take responsibility for technical decisions relating to the design, construction, 
commissioning, operation, maintenance or inspection of dams.  
While  responsibility  for  the  technical  adequacy  and  safety  of  IFAD-financed  dams  rests  with 
RAB/MINAGRI and its technical staff/consultants, and while ”no objection” does not imply approval or 
any  sharing  of  the  RAB  or  MINAGRI’s  responsibilities,  IFAD  will  need  regular  and  ready  access  to 
consistent, qualified engineering advice on all matters that it is not objecting to. Continuity will be key. 
This may require the engagement, on an as-required basis, of a dam engineer, either by the country 
programme manager or, depending on the anticipated demand, by the policy and Technical Advisory 
Division. 
Design and Construction of Dams 
For the construction of a new dam, RAB must ensure that the dam is designed, and its construction is 
supervised, by suitably qualified and experienced engineers. RAB must also adopt and implement dam 
safety measures for the design, bid tendering, construction, operation and maintenance of the dam 
and associated works.  
For small dams, generic dam safety measures (such as ensuring adequate spillway capacity, freeboard 
and protection of the downstream outfall, an adequate foundation key/cut off, protection of the outlet 
works from differential settlement and leakage, upstream and downstream slopes appropriate to the 
properties of the material used for construction, adequate drainage, avoidance of unsuitable materials 
and adequate compaction under competent supervision) are usually all that is required, and the FAO 
irrigation  and  drainage  paper  may  be  used  as  a  reference61.  Nevertheless,  RAB  will  be  required  to 
provide  IFAD  with  details  of  the  qualifications  and  experience  of  the  civil  engineer  responsible  for 
supervision for review. 
61 FAO. 2010. Manual on Small Earth Dams: A Guide to Siting, Design and Construction. FAO Irrigation and 
Drainage Paper No. 64. Rome. Available at: www.fao.org/docrep/012/i1531e/i1531e00.pdf. 
216 
The requirements for a medium-sized dam are more stringent. For such dams, IFAD requires that a 
suitably qualified and experienced independent consulting engineer, acceptable to IFAD, be engaged 
by to provide recommendations directly on all aspects of the quality assurance stage at the key stages 
of the dam development, including: 
•  The specification for, and completion of, site investigations; 
•  Detailed design of the dam and appurtenant works; 
•  Preparation of the works specifications and bidding documents; 
•  Excavation of the cut-off trench and outlet works; and 
•  Construction of the dam wall, through to commissioning, filling and start up of the dam. 
The consulting engineer will also review and comment on the operation and maintenance plan and 
emergency  preparedness  plan,  as  well  the  arrangements  for  periodic  inspections.  The  consulting 
engineer’s  reports  will  be  made  available  to  IFAD  during  supervision  missions  for  review  and  “no 
objection”. 
If the proposed dams are classified as large dams, IFAD will require: 
• 
reviews  by  an  independent  panel  of  experts  (the  Panel)  of  the  investigation,  design  and 
construction of the dam and the start of operations; 
•  preparation  and  implementation  of  detailed  plans  for  construction  supervision  and  quality 
assurance, instrumentation, operation and maintenance and emergency preparedness; and 
•  periodic safety inspections of the dam after completion. 
The Panel will consist of three or more experts, appointed RAB and acceptable to IFAD, with expertise 
in the various technical fields relevant to the safety aspects of the particular dam. The primary purpose 
of the Panel should be to review and advise RAB on matters relative to dam safety and other  critical 
aspects of the dam, its appurtenant structures, the catchment area, the area surrounding the reservoir 
and downstream areas. 
RAB  must  contract  the  services  of  the  Panel  and  provide  administrative  support  for  its  activities.  
Beginning as early in project preparation as possible, RAB should arrange for periodic Panel meetings 
and reviews, which should continue through the investigation, design, preparation of the specifications 
for the works, construction, and initial filling and start-up phases of the dam. RAB should inform IFAD 
in advance of the Panel meetings, to which IFAD should normally send an observer. After each meeting, 
the Panel should provide RAB with a written report of its conclusions and recommendations, signed 
by each participating member, copied to IFAD for review and “no objection”.  Following the filling of 
the reservoir and start-up of the dam, IFAD would review the Panel’s findings and recommendations 
on the event. If no significant difficulties are encountered in the filling and start-up of the dam, RAB 
would then disband the Panel. 
For existing dams, or dams under construction, IFAD requires, depending on the size and hazard 
rating of the dam, that RAB arrange for one or more independent dam specialists to:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Inspect and evaluate its safety status, its appurtenances and its performance history;  
Review  and  evaluate  the  operation  and  maintenance  procedures,  including  its  emergency 
preparedness plan; and  
Provide a written report of the findings and recommendations for any remedial work or safety-
related  measures  necessary  to  upgrade  the  existing  dam  or  dam  under  construction  to  an 
acceptable standard of safety. 
All necessary additional dam safety measures or remedial work should be financed under the 
proposed project. When substantial remedial work is needed, IFAD requires that:  
217 
i. 
ii. 
The work be designed and supervised by appropriately qualified and experienced engineers; 
and  
The same reports and plans as for a new IFAD-financed dam be prepared and implemented.  
For high-hazard cases involving significant and complex remedial work, IFAD would also require that 
an independent consulting engineer or panel of independent experts be employed to inspect the work 
on the same basis as for an IFAD-financed new medium or large dam. 
Selection of Engineers and Other Professionals 
It is absolutely essential to ensure that the design, construction operation, maintenance, surveillance 
and eventual decommissioning of a dam are carried out only by appropriately qualified and 
experienced 
engineers and other professionals, such as hydrologists, geotechnical engineers and geologists. The 
key is to employ engineers and others with the qualifications and experience appropriate to the 
height and hazard potential of the dam concerned.  The table below summarises the level of 
engineering and design expertise required for the construction of small, medium and large dams.  
Small 
Classification of dam 
Table 2:  Level of Engineering Expertise Required in Relation to Dam Classification 
Expertise required 
Site investigation/design/ 
construction supervision 
Junior engineer/technician having 
undergone a short course in dams as 
part of the training 
Civil engineer with > 5 years’ 
experience of design and construction 
supervision of similar or larger dams 
 Full-time senior civil engineer with > 
10 years’ experience, with most of 
that experience in the design and 
construction of similar or larger dams 
Civil engineer with > 5 years’ 
experience of design and construction 
of dams 
Senior civil engineer with > 10 years’ 
experience in design and supervision 
of dams 
Senior civil engineer with > 15 years’ 
experience, with most of that 
experience in the design and 
supervision of dams 
Overall technical guidance/direction 
Medium 
Large 
The independent panel of experts required for all large dams should be composed of a dam engineer 
specialized in the type of dam to be constructed (e.g. an arch dam specialist for an arch dam and so 
on), hydrologist, geotechnical engineer, engineering geologist, and any others with expertise in the 
various technical fields relevant to the safety aspects of the particular dam. Each member of the panel 
should be an internationally recognized high-level specialist in his/her respective field. 
Operation and Maintenance 
IFAD requires that, for any dam that it finances – whether large, medium or small or high or low hazard 
– an Operation and Maintenance Manual is prepared during the construction stage, to be ready for 
immediate use upon completion of the work and first filling of the dam. The O&M Manual should:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Define practices that will ensure safe operation;  
Specify  a  maintenance  programme  appropriate  to  the  hazard  rating  of  the  dam  to  ensure 
timely repair of the facilities; and 
Identify who is responsible for operation and maintenance of the dam on behalf of RAB, from 
day to day and in terms of engineering. 
The O&M Manual must be submitted to IFAD (and, in the case of a large dam, also to the independent 
panel of experts) for review  prior  to the completion of construction. The manual should cover the 
functions of the dam and reservoir and describe the procedures to be followed to ensure dam safety 
during flood conditions. Operational procedures should be specified that ensure: 
218 
Inflows do not endanger the dam structure (eg. by overtopping); 
• 
•  Outflows achieve the required environmental (compensation) flow rate where this is 
applicable; and  
•  Outflows are delivered in such a way as not to endanger the dam or to cause damage 
downstream. 
RAB must ensure that there is extra vigilance during the first filling of the dam, as this process may 
expose weaknesses that require the dam to be drained. In some cases, security measures may have to 
be taken to protect structures from damage by vandals or saboteurs, as well as from unauthorized 
operation of outlet or spillway gates. For dams with a significant or high hazard potential, an effective 
communications system must be maintained between the site and relevant government departments 
(such as MININRA, MINIRENA), as well as with the emergency services. 
A maintenance schedule must be prepared, with instructions and checklists indicating the  required 
procedures for each component of the dam. Protective measures for an embankment dam are likely 
to include: 
•  Generally  minimizing  erosion  by:  (a)  establishing  and  maintaining  grass  cover  on  the 
embankment  and  spillway;  and  (b)  fencing  the  embankment,  spillway  and  other  sensitive 
areas to keep livestock and people from establishing paths; 
•  Preventing the growth of bushes and trees on the embankment; and 
•  Making ongoing minor repairs of erosion damage. 
Special  attention  should  be  given  to  known  problem  areas,  and  incident-specific  maintenance 
instructions should be issued following floods, earthquakes and other natural phenomena. 
Operation and maintenance personnel should be selected on the basis of their capability to acquire 
the  knowledge  needed  to  perform  the  many  functions  of  operation  and  maintenance,  should  be 
trained  for  their  duties  at  each  specific  project,  and  should  enjoy  similar,  if  not  better,  working 
conditions to those employed earlier on the construction of the subproject.  Maintenance staff must 
possess  the requisite  skills  to ensure  that  any repair works  are  carried out  to  the  same,  or  higher, 
standard as the original works and provide adequate supervision to ensure that this is achieved. 
Periodic Inspection Programme 
A  Periodic  Inspection  Programme  is  necessary  to  check  the  structural  integrity  of  a  dam  and 
appurtenant structures on an ongoing basis throughout their operating life, and to ensure protection 
of human life and property. Periodic inspections are intended to detect conditions that might disrupt 
operation or threaten dam safety in time for them to be corrected.  Three levels of periodic inspections 
will be required: “informal”, “intermediate” and “formal/special”. Generally, the required frequency of 
each type of inspection will depend on the rated hazard potential of the dam. However, the proposed 
schedule should be specified in the O&M Manual, listing each feature to be inspected.  While  IFAD 
would not be involved in inspections (since these would mostly take place after the project has closed), 
it requires assurances at loan negotiations that MINAGRI will ensure that the requirement for regular 
periodic  inspections  would  be  subsequently  respected.    The  table  below  summarises  the  types  of 
inspection and respective expertise required.   
219 
Table 3:  Levels of Inspection and their Requirements 
Level of inspection 
Informal inspections 
Intermediate 
inspections 
Purpose 
To have, as far as 
practicable, 
continuous 
surveillance of dam, 
to identify and report 
abnormal conditions 
in accordance with 
instructions prepared 
by owner’s engineer 
Thorough inspection 
of the dam and 
appurtenant 
structures, as well as 
review of the last 
formal inspection 
Formal and special 
inspections 
To determine if the 
structure meets 
current accepted 
design norms and 
practices 
Reporting to 
Owner/owner’s 
engineer 
Owner/owner’s 
engineer 
Owner/owner’s panel 
of experts 
Carried out by 
Operating personnel 
at dam, such as dam 
superintendent, 
extension officer, 
water user 
association officers or 
the like, as integral 
part of operation and 
maintenance 
activities.  
Qualified engineers 
experienced in 
design, construction, 
operation and 
maintenance of 
dams, and trained to 
recognize abnormal 
conditions. Dam 
operator should 
participate. 
Formal and special 
inspections should be 
conducted under the 
direction of a high-
level specialist dam 
engineer and other 
specialists, selected 
on a site-specific 
basis considering the 
nature and type of 
the dam. 
Frequency 
Frequent 
observations of dam 
and appurtenances 
scheduled according 
to hazard potential of 
the dam. Schedule 
modified if necessary 
by owner’s engineer 
to respond to any 
changing conditions. 
Annually for dams 
rated as having a 
significant or high 
hazard potential; at 
most biennially. 
Frequency may be 
reduced by the 
owner’s engineer to 
once every five years 
for lower hazard 
dams. 
Interval of five years 
or less for dams rated 
as significant or high 
hazard potential, 
although depending 
on their history, 
some dams may 
require more 
frequent inspection. 
Special inspections 
must be carried out 
immediately after the 
dam has passed a 
large flood or after 
the  occurrence of a 
significant 
earthquake, sabotage 
or other unusual 
event. 
Emergency Preparedness Plan 
IFAD requires that an Emergency Preparedness Plan be prepared for all dams with a “significant” or 
“high” hazard potential. This plan should specify the roles of parties responsible for the safety of a dam 
if and when failure is considered imminent, or when the expected operational flow release threatens 
downstream life, property or economic operations. The plan will include the following items: 
•  Clear  statements  on  the  responsibility  for  dam  operations  decision-making  and  for  related 
emergency communications; 
•  Maps outlining inundation levels for various emergency conditions; 
•  Flood warning system characteristics; and 
•  Procedures for evacuating threatened areas and mobilizing emergency forces and equipment. 
The broad framework of the plan and an estimate of the cost of preparing the plan in detail should be 
provided  to  IFAD  prior  to  project  design  completion.  The  plan  itself  should  be  prepared  during 
220 
implementation and given to the panel of experts (in the case of a large dam) and IFAD for review not 
later than one year before the projected date of initial filling of the reservoir.  
Emergency action planning is likely to be of less importance for small dams with a low hazard 
rating. 
Decommissioning 
Decommissioning of a dam would eventually be required when it has reached the end of its economic 
life. In such cases, the dam must be entirely removed or at least made incapable of storing any water  
temporarily or permanently. Decommissioning other than by removal is normally done by breaching 
one or more sections of the dam wall or embankment. MINAGRI would remain responsible for the 
safety of the dam while it is in the process of removal/decommissioning – and indefinitely thereafter 
if it is not removed. Even though removal/decommissioning may not be carried out until two or three 
decades after construction, IFAD requires assurance that when the time comes the owner of the dam 
would  exercise due diligence and comply with national regulations for safeguarding: (i) any affected 
persons; and (ii) the environment. This should include a Removal/Decommissioning Plan based on 
professional engineering advice to ensure that, to the satisfaction of the environmental authority: 
•  The breaching process would be carried out safely, both in terms of the dam itself and in terms 
of potential damage or loss of life downstream; 
•  The unbreached section would be left in a permanently stable condition; 
•  The proposed breach would be wide enough not to impound significant quantities of water 
under flood conditions; and 
•  Stability  of  the  sediment  deposits  within  the  reservoir  area  would  be  assured  before 
commencement of the breaching operation. 
The plan should also include proposals for reinstatement and/or regeneration of the inundated 
area. 
221 
Annex 8: 
Management 
Sample Contract Clauses for Environmental and Social 
SAMPLE GENERAL CONDITIONS OF CONTRACT 
Sub-Clause XX: Rights of Way and Facilities 
The Contractor shall bear all costs and charges for special and/or temporary rights-of-way which he 
may require, including those for access to the Site. The Contractor shall also obtain, at his risk and cost, 
any additional facilities outside the Site which he may require for the purposes of the Works. 
Sub-Clause XX: Avoidance of Interference 
The Contractor shall not interfere unnecessarily or improperly with: 
a)  The convenience of the public, or 
b)  The access to and use and occupation of all roads and footpaths or other property, irrespective 
of whether they are public or in the possession of the employer or of others. 
c)  The contractor shall indemnify and hold the employer harmless against and from all damages, 
losses and expenses (including legal fees and expenses) resulting from any such unnecessary 
or improper interference. 
Sub-Clause XX: Access Route 
The Contractor shall be deemed to have been satisfied as to the suitability and availability of access 
routes to the Site and other areas where the Works are to be performed under the Contract (if any). 
The Contractor shall use all reasonable efforts to prevent any road or bridge or docking facilities from 
being damaged by the Contractor’s traffic or by the Contractor’s Personnel. These efforts shall include 
the proper use of appropriate vehicles and routes. 
Except as otherwise stated in the Contract: 
a)  The Contractor shall be responsible for any maintenance which may be required for his use of 
access routes; 
b)  The Contractor shall provide all necessary signs or directions along access routes, and shall 
obtain  any  permission  which  may  be  required  from  the  relevant  authorities  for  his  use  of 
routes, signs and directions; 
c)  The  Employer  shall  not  be  responsible  for  any  claims  which  may  arise  from  the  use  or 
otherwise of any access route, 
d)  The Employer does not guarantee the suitability or availability of particular access routes, and 
e)  Costs incurred to non-suitability or non-availability, for the use required by the Contractor, of 
access routes shall be borne by the Contractor. 
Clause XX: Staff and Labour 
Sub-Clause XX: Engagement of Staff and Labour 
222 
Except as otherwise stated in the Employer’s Requirements, the Contractor shall make arrangements 
for the engagement of all staff and labour, local or otherwise, and for their payment, housing, feeding 
and transport. 
The  Contractor  shall,  to  the  extent  practicable  and  reasonable,  employ  staff  and  labour  with 
appropriate qualifications and experience from sources within the Country. 
For  non-skilled  labour,  the  Contractor  must  demonstrate  its  best  efforts  to  ensure  that  the 
communities in the immediate area of influence of the project are given priority in the recruitment 
process and will demonstrate this through a local recruitment plan to be provided and approved by 
the Employer. 
The Contractor shall develop and implement a human resource policy (the "Human Resources Policy"), 
which  shall  include  a  labour  and  employment  plan  and  a  worker  grievance  mechanism  where 
employment  and  health  and  safety  issues  can  be  voiced  without  fear of  repercussion.  The  Human 
Resources  Policy  shall  be  passed  on  to  any  Subcontractors  appointed  by  the  Contractor  and  each 
Subcontract with any such Subcontractor shall include an obligation for the Human Resources Policy 
to  be  passed  down  to  any  further  Subcontract  entered  into  by  such  Subcontractor  with  any  other 
Subcontractor.  
Sub-Clause XX: Rates of Wages and Conditions of Labour 
The Contractor shall pay rates of wages, and observe conditions of labour, which are not lower than 
those established for the trade or industry where the work is carried out or prescribed by applicable 
Laws. If no established rates or conditions are applicable, the Contractor shall pay rates of wages and 
observe conditions which are not lower than the general level of wages and conditions observed locally 
by employers whose trade or industry is similar to that of the Contractor. 
Sub-Clause XX: Persons in Service of Employer 
The Contractor shall not recruit, or attempt to recruit, staff and labour from amongst the Employer’s 
Personnel. 
Sub-Clause XX: Labour Laws 
The Contractor shall comply with all the relevant labour legislation including Occupational Health and 
Safety Act 2007, and the International Labour Organization Labour Standards to which Rwanda is party, 
applicable to the Contractor’s Personnel, including Laws relating to their employment, health, safety, 
welfare, immigration and emigration, and shall allow them all their legal rights. 
The Contractor shall require  his employees to obey all applicable Laws, including those concerning 
safety at work. 
Sub-Clause XX:  Working Hours 
No  work  shall  be  carried  out  on  the  Site  on  locally  recognised  days  of  rest,  or  outside  the  normal 
working hours permitted by applicable Law and the Consents, unless: 
a)  otherwise stated in the Contract, 
b)  the Employer gives consent, or 
c)  the work is unavoidable, or necessary for the protection of life or property or for the safety of 
the Works, in which case the Contractor shall immediately advise the Employer. 
223 
Sub-Clause XX: Facilities for Staff and Labour 
Except as otherwise stated in the Employer’s Requirements, the Contractor shall provide and maintain 
all necessary accommodation and welfare facilities for the Contractor’s Personnel.  
The  Contractor  shall  not  permit  any  of  the  Contractor’s  Personnel  to  maintain  any  temporary  or 
permanent living quarters within the structures forming part of the Permanent Works. 
Sub-Clause XX: Health and Safety 
The Contractor shall: 
a)  Comply with all applicable safety regulations; 
b)  Take care for the safety of all persons entitled to be on the Site, 
c)  Use reasonable efforts to keep the Site and works clear of unnecessary obstruction so as to 
avoid danger to these persons; 
d)  Provide fencing, lighting, guarding and watching of the works until taking over of the whole of 
the works; and 
e)  Provide any temporary works (including roadways, footways, guards and fences) which may 
be necessary, because of the execution of the works, for the use and protection of the public 
and of employers and occupiers of adjacent land. 
The Contractor shall to the extent permitted by applicable Laws fully bear and discharge any health 
and safety-related obligations and liabilities arising under applicable laws and shall issue any notices 
to Governmental Authorities as may be required in order to give effect under applicable laws to the 
apportionment of responsibility made by this paragraph62.   
The Contractor shall develop and implement an occupational health and safety plan, which shall be 
subject to the Employer's final approval, not to be unreasonably withheld or delayed. 
The Contractor shall at all times take all reasonable precautions to maintain the health and safety of 
all  individuals  on  and  about  the  Site  and  any  areas  that  may  adjoin  those  areas  (including  the 
Contractor’s Personnel and members of the local communities) or otherwise affected or potentially 
endangered by the Works. In collaboration with local health authorities, the Contractor shall ensure: 
that first aid facilities are available at all times at the Site, that suitable welfare, hygiene and epidemic 
prevention arrangements are made to comply with the relevant laws of the Country relating to health 
and safety and/or the health and safety requirements specified in the Schedules to the Contract are 
complied with. 
The Contractor shall appoint an accident prevention officer at the Site, responsible for maintaining 
safety and protection against accidents. This person shall be qualified for this responsibility, and shall 
have  the  authority  to  issue  instructions  and  take  protective  measures  to  prevent  accidents. 
Throughout  the  execution  of  the  Works,  the  Contractor  shall  provide  whatever  is  required  by  this 
person to exercise this responsibility and authority. 
The  Contractor  shall  send  to  the  Employer  details  of  any  accident  as  soon  as  practicable  after  its 
occurrence.  The  Contractor  shall maintain  records  and  make  reports  concerning  health,  safety and 
welfare of persons, and damage to property, as the Employer may reasonably require. 
62 Subject to local law compliance check regarding the appointment of the Contractor as “principle contractor” 
(or the similar concept applicable in Rwanda). 
224 
The Contractor shall to the extent permitted by applicable Laws fully bear and discharge any health 
and safety-related obligations and liabilities arising under applicable Laws and shall issue any notices 
to Governmental Authorities as may be required in order to give effect under applicable Laws to the 
apportionment of responsibility made by this Sub-Clause. 
The Contractor shall, in carrying out and completing its activities under this Contract comply with (and 
ensure  the  Contractor’s  Personnel  comply  with),  the  detailed  health  and  safety  plan  for  the 
performance to be provided by the Contractor in accordance with the Employer’s Requirements. 
Clause XX: Protection of the Environment 
Sub-Clause XX:  Environmental Management Laws 
The Contractor shall abide by the Organic Law determining the modalities of protection, conservation 
and promotion of environment in Rwanda (2005), and all the conditions attached to the EIA License 
issued by the Rwanda Development Authority (RDA).  The Contractor shall be responsible for ensuring 
that he is compliant with all relevant national laws at all times.  
Sub-Clause XX: Environmental and Social Management Plan 
The Contractor shall develop a Contractor’s Environmental and Social Management Plan (CESMP) and 
a  Contractor’s  Environmental  and  Social Management  System  (CESMS)  applicable  to  his  works  and 
activities  associated  with  the  Project  within  one  month  of  award  of  contract,  for  approval  by  the 
Employer.  The Contractor shall carry out and complete the Works and its other relevant obligations 
under  this  Contract  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  the  Environmental  and  Social 
Management and Monitoring Plan prepared for the ESIA study [attached in Schedule XXX]  and the 
CESMP.  He will provide itemised costs for implementing the CESMP and CESMS to ensure they are 
fully implemented throughout the duration of the construction contract.    
Sub-Clause XX: Environmental Protection 
The Contractor shall take all necessary and reasonable steps to protect the environment (both on and 
off the Site) and to limit damage and nuisance to people and property resulting from pollution, noise 
and other results of his operations activities. 
The Contractor shall ensure that noise levels, air emissions, surface discharges and effluent from the 
Contractor’s  activities  shall  not  exceed  the  values  indicated  in  the  Employer’s  Requirements  and 
otherwise shall not exceed the values prescribed by applicable Laws, Permits and Licences. 
The Contractor shall carry out and complete the Works and its other relevant obligations under this 
Contract  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  the  Environmental  and  Social  Management  and 
Monitoring Plan and the Construction (Environmental) Management Plan. 
225 
SAMPLE SPECIAL SPECIFICATIONS OF CONTRACT 
REQUIRED REPORTS 
The Contractor shall submit to the Employer the following reports and records: 
•  The Contractor shall develop an environmental summary report that will form part of 
the monthly progress reporting that is issued to the Employer. The environment 
sections shall detail the following: 
o  Number of employees on Site. 
o  Any significant changes in the approved Contractor’s ESMP (significant 
changes include but are not limited to the number and type of Contractor’s 
equipment, changes in the construction programme and mitigation 
measures). 
o  The details of environmental incidents and issues. 
o  A summary of any grievances lodged against the project. 
o  A brief summary of the number and type of any medical conditions or 
treatments dispensed by the medical centre. 
o  The planned environmental and social works to be undertaken in the next two 
months.  
o  The results of any sampling or monitoring that occurred. 
•  A copy of the quarterly self-monitoring report should be provided to the Employer. 
Reports  required  by  the  Rwanda  Environmental  Management  Authority  (REMA)  and  the 
Rwanda Development Authority (RDA) are detailed in the licence conditions. These reports 
shall first be submitted to the Employer not less than 30 days prior to the required submission 
date to REMA and RDA, so that the Employer can review labour and working conditions and 
environmental and social management issues. 
LABOUR AND WORKING CONDITIONS 
The  Contractor  is  required  to protect  the fundamental rights  of  its  workers  in the  course of 
economic growth, employment creation, and income generation. The Contractor is expected 
to treat workers fairly and provide them with safe and healthy working conditions. 
International Labour Organisation (ILO) Requirements 
The Contractor shall familiarise himself with the  33 ILO Conventions ratified  by Rwanda as 
listed in the following table63.  The Contractor will determine which Conventions are applicable 
and  ensure  that  they  and  their  subcontractors  comply  with  the  requirements  of  these 
Conventions. 
No. 
C029 
C087 
C098 
Conventions in Force 
Forced Labour Convention, 1930 
Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise Convention, 1948 
Right to Organise and Collective Bargaining Convention, 1949 (No. 98) 
63 https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=1000:11200:0::NO:11200:P11200_COUNTRY_ID:103460 
226 
No. 
C100 
C105 
C111 
C138 
C182 
C081 
C122 
C144 
C011 
C012 
C014 
C017 
C018 
C019 
C026 
C042 
C062 
C089 
C094 
C118 
C123 
C132 
C135 
C154 
C155 
C181 
C187 
Conventions in Force 
Equal Remuneration Convention, 1951 (No. 100) 
Abolition of Forced Labour Convention, 1957 (No. 105) 
Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention, 1958 (No. 111) 
Minimum Age Convention, 1973 (No. 138) Minimum age specified: 14 years 
Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999 (No. 182) 
Labour Inspection Convention, 1947 (No. 81) 
Employment Policy Convention, 1964 (No. 122) 
Tripartite Consultation (International Labour Standards) Convention, 1976 (No. 144) 
(will enter into force on 29 June 2019) 
Right of Association (Agriculture) Convention, 1921 (No. 11) 
Workmen's Compensation (Agriculture) Convention, 1921 (No.12) 
Weekly Rest (Industry) Convention, 1921 (No.14) 
Workmen's Compensation (Accidents) Convention, 1925 (No. 17) 
Workmen’s Compensation (Occupational Diseases) Convention, 1925 (No. 18) 
Equality of Treatment (Accident Compensation) Convention, 1925 (No. 19) 
Minimum Wage-Fixing Machinery Convention, 1928 (No. 26) 
Workmen’s Compensation (Occupational Diseases) Convention Revised), 1934 (No. 42) 
Safety Provisions (Building) Convention, 1937 (No. 62) 
Night Work (Women) Convention (Revised), 1948 (No.89) 
Labour Clauses (Public Contracts) Convention, 1949 (No. 94) 
Equality of Treatment (Social Security) Convention, 1962 (No.118) 
Minimum Age (Underground Work) Convention, 1965 (No. 123) Minimum age specified: 
16 years 
Holidays with Pay Convention (Revised), 1970 (No. 132). Length of holiday specified: 18 
working days 
Workers’ Representatives Convention, 1971 (No. 135) 
Collective Bargaining Convention, 1981 (No. 154) (will enter into force on 29 June 2019) 
Occupational Safety and Health Convention, 1981 (No. 155) (will enter into force on 29 
June 2019) 
Private Employment Agencies Convention, 1997 (No. 181) (will enter into force on 29 
June 2019) 
Promotional Framework for Occupational Safety and Health Convention, 2006 (No. 187) 
(will enter into force on 29 June 2019) 
Employment of Labour 
The  Contractor  shall  make  arrangements  for  the  engagement  of  staff  and  labour,  local  or 
otherwise, and for their payment, feeding, transport and when appropriate accommodation. 
The  Contractor  shall  be  solely  responsible  for  recruiting  his  labour  force and  satisfying  the 
relevant  obligations  under  the  Contract  and  the  laws  and  regulations  in  force  in  Rwanda. 
Notice shall be posted in conspicuous places and work places to inform the workers of their 
rights and the conditions of work. 
The Contractor is encouraged to recognize that, in order to maintain good community relations 
as required under the Contract, to the extent that suitable options for recruiting labour locally 
exist and provided that other selection factors  are equal he should make every reasonable 
effort to recruit his workforce according to the priorities of the local population and in particular 
those affected directly by the Project. These recruitment priorities should follow the following 
order: 
227 
•  Project Affected People (PAPs); 
•  People from villages directly affected by land acquisition for the Project; 
•  Residents of the Project area. 
The  Contractor  shall  strictly  comply  with  the  agreed  prioritization  system  to  avoid  discord 
among the local communities. 
The  Contractor  shall  coordinate  with  the  local  /  national  /  government  administration(s)  to 
organize and set-up a prioritization scheme. The announcement for hiring can be done through 
the government offices and actual hiring done by the Contractor.  
The  contractor  shall  provide  the  Employer  with a copy  of the  agreed  system for  prioritizing 
hiring of the host communities. 
The cost of hiring shall be part of the construction costs. The Contractor shall indemnify the 
Employer in respect of all claims that may be made against the Employer of non-compliance 
thereof by the Contractor. 
The Contractor shall provide each member of staff or labour force with a letter of employment 
or contract. The Contractor is required to keep proper wages books and such other records 
as are required by the prevailing Laws of Rwanda governing the employment of labour.  
The Contractor shall pay rates of wages and observe conditions of labour as defined in the 
Labour  Code  of  the  Republic  of  Rwanda  (2001).  The  minimum  wages  are  defined  in  the 
Labour Code and the contractor will abide by any revisions at any given time by the Minister 
in charge of Labour. 
Health and Safety of Workers 
The Contractor shall ensure the health and safety of all its workers. Further requirements for 
health and safety are specified in Employer’s Requirements, Part 1 (Annex 1A). 
The Contractor shall be responsible for equipping the workers including unskilled labours with 
as  a  minimum  the  following  Personal  Protective  Equipment  (PPE)  of  acceptable  quality 
approved by the Employer: 
•  Safety Hard Hat equipped with a chin strap. 
•  Safety boots with steel toe caps or equivalent safety toe caps. 
•  Leather construction gloves. 
•  Safety glasses. 
The  Contractor  will  be  responsible  to  ensure  that  PPE  is  worn  by  all  workers  and 
subcontractors whilst undertaking construction activities and whilst on the construction Site. 
The Contractor is encouraged to provide all workers with a recognisable uniform of a colour 
that readily distinguishes workers as belonging to the project. 
The  Contractor  shall  not  employ  forced  labour,  which  consists  of  any  work  or  service  not 
voluntarily performed that is exacted from an individual under threat of force or penalty. 
The cost of ensuring the health and safety of the workers shall be part of the construction cost. 
228 
When using public roads, the Contractor shall take all necessary measures to minimise the 
risk of accidents, injuries to local people and damages to public and private properties.  No 
workers shall be allowed to travel in the back of flatbed trucks or pickup trucks. 
The Contractor shall liaise and coordinate with the Rwandan Police and local administration 
as it might be necessary. 
Medical Facilities 
The  Contractor  shall  provide  and  maintain  a  medical  facility  for  the  projects  construction 
workers  during  the  construction  phase.  The  facility  shall  be  operational  prior  to  the 
commencement  of  the  projects  construction.  It  shall  be  equipped  to  the  satisfaction  of  the 
Employer and as a minimum the following: 
•  hot and cold running water 
•  electrical power facilities 
•  a refrigerator for keeping medicines at a constant temperature 
•  a private examination room 
•  sufficient first aid equipment and supplies for the number of staff on Site 
•  a lockable cupboard for the storage of medicines. 
The medical facility shall be staffed and managed by a qualified and experienced nurse to 
the satisfaction of the Employer. 
Records shall be kept of every medical treatment and patient’s condition. The records will be 
classified as kept confidential by the medical staff. The Contractor and Employer shall be 
entitled to receive summarised and anonymous information from the records, not the actual 
workers record themselves. 
The medical facility shall have a designated four wheel drive operational vehicle that can be 
used as an ambulance in case of emergency. 
A fully stocked comprehensive first aid kit shall be available at each main construction area 
when construction works are in progress and at the main Site office. 
Working Hours 
The  contractor  shall  develop  policies  regarding  the  Projects  working  hours,  overtime  and 
holiday  pay  and  conditions.  These  shall  be  in  accordance  with  the  relevant  Rwandan 
Legalisation  and  the  ILO  conventions.  The  ILO  conventions  require  that  staff  must  have  a 
period of rest comprising at least twenty-four consecutive hours in every period of seven days 
worked.  It  also  states  that  the  period  of  rest  shall,  wherever  possible,  be  granted 
simultaneously to the whole of the staff. 
As a minimum the Contractor shall give workers a thirty-minute rest and/or refreshment period 
every five hours of work.  The normal working hours shall be 8 hours. Beyond that all work 
shall be considered as overtime. 
Minimum Wages 
The Government of Rwanda has a no mandated minimum wage. The Contractor shall pay 
reasonable wages as defined by the Ministry of Public Service and Labour (MINFOTRA) and 
as required in the Labour Code (2001). The Contractor shall pay overtime at a rate of 1.5 times 
of normal wages rates. 
229 
Grievance Mechanism 
The  Contractor  shall  develop  and  provide  a  grievance  mechanism  for  workers  (and  their 
organizations, where they exist) to raise workplace concerns. 
The Contractor will inform the workers of the grievance mechanism at the time of recruitment 
and make it easily accessible to them. The mechanism should involve an appropriate level of 
management  and  address  concerns  promptly,  using  an  understandable  and  transparent 
process  that  provides  timely  feedback  to  those  concerned,  without  any  retribution.  The 
mechanism  should  also  allow  for  anonymous  complaints  to  be  raised  and  addressed.  The 
mechanism should not impede access to other judicial or administrative remedies that might 
be  available  under  the  law  or  through  existing  arbitration  procedures,  or  substitute  for 
grievance mechanisms provided through collective agreements. 
Employment of Workers with HIV/AIDS 
Africa  continues  to  be  the  region  most  severely  impacted  by  the  HIV/AIDS  pandemic,  it  is 
therefore likely that the project will employ workers with HIV. The Contractor shall adopt and 
implement the recommendations detailed in the IFC’s ‘Good Practice Note - HIV/AIDS in the 
Workplace’ which shall include: 
•  Defining the nature of the problem and the company's level of risk with respect to 
HIV/AIDS. 
• 
Identifying on-going initiatives, resources and stakeholders in the wider area of 
operations. 
•  Adopting a collaborative approach to devising an HIV/AIDS strategy based on the 
building of partnerships and the integration of key action areas and stakeholder 
groups. 
The Contractor shall develop workplace policies and guidelines which adopt the following key 
principles: 
•  Recognition of HIV/AIDS is a workplace issue, not only because it affects the 
workforce, but also because the workplace can play a vital role in limiting the spread 
and effects of the epidemic. 
•  Non-discrimination - There should be no discrimination or stigmatization against 
workers on the basis of real or perceived HIV status. 
•  Gender equality - Equal gender relations and the empowerment of women are vital 
to preventing the spread of HIV infection and enabling women to cope with 
HIV/AIDS. 
•  Healthy work environment - The work environment should be healthy and safe, and 
adapted to the state of health and capabilities of workers. 
•  Social dialogue - A successful HIV/AIDS policy and program requires cooperation, 
trust and dialogue between employers, workers, and governments. 
•  Screening for purposes of employment - HIV/AIDS screening should not be 
required of job applicants or persons in employment, and testing for HIV should not 
be carried out at the workplace except as specified in the ILO code. 
•  Confidentiality - Access to personal data relating to a worker's HIV status should be 
bound by the rules of confidentiality consistent with existing ILO codes of practice. 
•  Continuing the employment relationship - HIV infection is not a cause for 
termination of employment. Persons with HIV-related illnesses should be able to 
work for as long as medically fit in appropriate conditions. 
230 
•  Prevention - The social partners are in a unique position to promote prevention 
efforts through information and education; and support changes in attitudes and 
behaviour. 
•  Care and Support - Solidarity, care and support should guide the response to AIDS 
in the workplace. All workers are entitled to affordable health services and to benefits 
from statutory and occupational schemes. 
Equal Opportunities Employment 
The  Contractor  shall  adopt  and  implement  Rwandan  Labour  Code  and  adopt  the 
recommendations  detailed  in  the  IFC’s  Good  Practice  Note;  Non-Discrimination  and  Equal 
Opportunity. 
The Contractor shall adopt the principle that all employment decisions have to be based on 
the ability of the individual to do the job in question without regard to personal characteristics 
that are unrelated to the inherent requirements of the work. 
The Contractor shall not discriminate with respect to: 
• 
recruitment and hiring 
•  compensation (including wages and benefits) 
•  working conditions and terms of employment 
•  access to training,  
• 
job assignment,  
•  promotion,  
• 
termination of employment or retirement, and  
•  disciplinary practices. 
The Contractor shall undertake the following to ensure it is an equal opportunity employer: 
• 
Identify need for non-discrimination strategy. 
•  Prepare baseline information. 
•  Review and change recruitment policies. 
•  Assess its payment practices. 
• 
Implement an anti-harassment policy. 
•  Develop family-friendly policies. 
•  Understand cultural and religious diversity. 
• 
Involve underrepresented groups in the workforce. 
•  Devise a strategy to deal with disability and health issues. 
•  Communicate its policies to all workers. 
Labour Organisations 
The Contractor and its subcontractors must allow workers to belong to worker’s organisation 
or unions as per the ILO convention. 
231 
The Contractor will not discourage workers from electing worker representatives, forming or 
joining workers’ organizations of their choosing, or from bargaining collectively, and will not 
discriminate  or  retaliate  against  workers  who  participate,  or  seek  to  participate,  in  such 
organizations  and  collective  bargaining.  The  Contractor  shall  not  discriminate  against 
unionized workers. 
The Contractor shall allow access for representatives of workers’ organizations to the workers 
they represent. Workers should be free to meet and discuss workplace issues on the premises 
during scheduled breaks, and before and after work. Furthermore, workers should be allowed 
to  choose  representatives  to  speak  with  management,  inspect  working  conditions  in  an 
appropriate  manner  and  in  a  way  that  does  not  disrupt  productivity,  and  carry  out  other 
organizing activities 
The Contractor shall provide workers information on worker’s rights to join worker’s unions. 
Child Labour 
The  Contractor  shall  comply  with  Rwandan  Labour  Code  and  the  ILO  Minimum  Age 
Convention, 1973 (No. 138) whereby the Minimum age specified is 16 years.  
The Contractor shall not employ children in any manner that is economically exploitative, or is 
likely to be hazardous or to interfere with the child’s education, or to be harmful to the child’s 
health or physical, mental, spiritual, moral, or social development.  
The  contractor  shall  use  a  minimum  work  age  of  18  and  shall  develop  a  corporate  policy 
against employing, using, or benefiting from child labour. The policy shall include procedures 
for  age  verification  in  hiring  that  also  includes  their  sub-contractors.  The  Contractor  shall 
review  and  retain  copies  of  verifiable  documentation  concerning  the  age  and  employment 
profile of all people under 18 working on the project, and retain copies of the documentation. 
The Contractor shall ensure children under the age of 18 are not employed in hazardous work. 
All work undertaken by persons under the age of 18 shall first be subject to an appropriate risk 
assessment  and  the  Contractor  shall  undertake  regular  monitoring  of  their  health,  working 
conditions, and hours of work. 
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT 
Resource Efficiency: Conservation of Water and Energy 
The Contractor will implement technically and financially feasible and cost effective measures 
for improving efficiency in its consumption of energy, water, as well as other resources and 
material inputs, with a focus on conserving raw materials, energy, and water. 
Pollution Prevention: General Requirements 
The Contractor shall not pollute any rivers, ponds, marshes, streams or waterways with fuels, 
oils,  bitumen,  acids,  concrete  residues  or  other harmful  materials. The Contractor  shall  not 
pollute any water bodies or waterways with sediments that have been disturbed as a result of 
the projects construction.  
The Contractor shall investigate and comply with all applicable Rwandan laws and regulations, 
applicable  international  standards  and  guidelines  and  the  projects  ESMP  that  concern  the 
pollution of water bodies and waterways. 
232 
Maintenance of Pollution Control Equipment and Facilities 
During the Contract Period, the Contractor shall maintain all erosion, sediment and pollution 
control facilities as long as the operations creating the particular pollutants are being carried 
out or until the materials concerned have become stabilized to the extent that the pollution is 
no longer being created. 
Spillages and Disposal of Pollutants 
Special measures, as approved by the Employer, shall be taken to prevent chemicals, fuels, 
oils, greases, bituminous materials, waste washings, herbicides, insecticides and cement from 
entering water bodies. Disposal of any materials in areas adjacent to streams shall require the 
prior written approval of the Employer. If any waste material is dumped in unauthorised areas, 
the Contractor shall remove the material and restore the area to the condition of the adjacent 
undisturbed area. 
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control 
The Contractor shall conduct his operations in conformance with his approved Soil Erosion 
and Sediment Control Plan. The area of bare soil exposed at any given time by construction 
shall be restricted to a minimum. Vegetated areas shall not be cleared until immediately prior 
to construction occurring in the area. Cuts, fills and cleared areas within the limits of work shall 
be graded and drainage installed to prevent and control erosion. 
Work areas,  construction roads, quarries,  and  borrow  and  spoil  areas shall  be  located  and 
constructed  in  a  manner  that  will  keep  sediment  from  entering  streams  or  other  bodies  of 
water. Construction roads and the excavations for the headrace channel that are located on 
the steep valley sides will be constructed in a manner that will keep excavated soil and blasted 
rock from falling on to down-gradient areas.  
Soil and rock excavated from these areas shall be loaded into trucks, covered and hauled to 
the  designated  spoil  disposal  area.  The  features  of  the  Work  areas,  construction  roads, 
quarries, and borrow and spoil areas shall be so controlled, both during and after completion 
of the work, so that erosion will be minimized and sediment  will not enter streams or other 
bodies of water. This may require segregating such areas by a dyke or other barrier, treating 
sediment  polluted  water  prior  to  discharge  by  the  use  of  a  settling  basin  or  other  means 
sufficient to reduce the sediment content to the adopted guideline. 
The Employer has the authority to limit the surface areas of erodible materials exposed by 
clearing  and  grubbing,  and  to  direct  immediate  permanent  or  temporary  sediment  control 
measures  to  prevent  the  transport  of  sediment.  This  includes,  but  is  not  limited  to,  the 
construction of berms, dykes, dams, drains, sediment, collection ponds or basins, and the use 
of temporary seeding, mulches, matting, stone, riprap or other control devices as necessary 
to control erosion and the transport of sediment. 
The Contractor shall install all necessary drainage and sediment control devices prior to the 
start of any land disturbance including the construction or upgrading of existing access roads. 
Soil  erosion  and  sediment  control  facilities  shall  be  adapted  or  expanded  as  construction 
proceeds  to  meet  the  requirements  specified.  Temporary  erosion  and  sediment  control 
measures shall be provided and maintained until the permanent drainage and erosion control 
facilities are completed and operative. The Contractor shall inspect and maintain all erosion 
and sediment control facilities on a daily basis. 
233 
Sediment-laden water shall not be pumped from trenches or excavations into surface waters 
drainage channels or either natural or man-made leading to any waterbodies. Sediment-laden 
water shall be discharged into settling basins located away from watercourses so that only 
clear water enters the watercourse after the silt has settled out in the settling basin. 
The flow line of any stream or watercourse shall not be disturbed or altered unless indicated, 
specified or directed by the Employer. The construction of a spillway or a structure to facilitate 
the  spilling  of  water for  the  project  into  a  natural  gully  or  stream  can  only  be  undertaken  if 
planned and if the stream or gully has been shown to be capable of taking the water. 
Excavated soil shall not be stockpiled adjacent to watercourses in a manner that will cause 
siltation of the watercourse. Fills and waste areas shall be constructed by selective placement 
of  materials  to  eliminate  silts  or  clays  on  the  surface  which  may  erode  and  contaminate 
adjacent waterways. 
All erosion and sediment control facilities shall be left in place until construction is completed 
or the area is stabilised, or as directed by the Employer. At the completion of the work, the 
Contractor shall remove any sediment deposited behind any sediment control facilities which 
are to remain, and shall repair or replace all damaged facilities as directed by the Employer. 
The Employer will direct the Contractor as to which facilities shall remain, and which shall be 
removed. 
Noise and Vibrations 
The Contractor shall ensure noise levels are kept within acceptable limits as stipulated in the Rwandan 
Environmental  Management  Noise  and  Excessive  Vibration  Pollution,  Control  rules.  The  Contractor 
shall  indemnify  the  Employer  from  any  liability  damages  due  to  noise,  vibrations  and/or  other 
disturbances caused by his construction operations and also from all claims relating to such liability.  
Night-time blasting, pile driving or other operations producing a high level of noise and/ or vibration 
shall  be  performed  only  at  times  and  places  approved  by  the  Employer  and  people  living  within 
potentially  impacted  areas  shall  be  notified  ahead  of  time  of  the  length and  noise  intensity  of  the 
proposed night-time construction. 
Location of Storage Facilities 
The  Contractor's  storage  and  other  construction  buildings,  which  are  required  for  the 
performance  of  the  work,  shall  be  located  upon  cleared  portions  of  his  Work  Areas.  The 
preservation of the landscape shall be an essential consideration in the selection of all such 
sites and in the construction of buildings. 
Location of Other Work Areas 
The Contractor shall receive written approval from the Employer prior to establishment of any 
lay down areas, stockpile or waste areas, and other work areas. Quarries, borrow and spoil 
disposal  areas  shall  be  so  excavated  that  water  will  not  collect  and  stand  therein.  During 
construction, excavated areas shall be maintained in such a condition that they will be well-
drained  or  pumped  dry  at  all  times.  Surface  water,  subsurface  and  groundwater  shall  be 
prevented from flowing into and accumulating in excavations. 
234 
Dust Control 
As necessary in the vicinity of populated areas, the Contractor shall maintain all excavations, 
embankments, stockpiles, haul roads, permanent access roads, waste areas, borrow areas, 
and all other work areas free from excessive dust which would cause a hazard or nuisance to 
others. Temporary methods of stabilization consisting of sprinkling, chemical treatment, light 
bituminous treatment or similar methods shall require the written approval by the Employer 
prior to their use. Sprinkling, to be approved, must be repeated at such intervals as to keep all 
parts of the disturbed area at least damp at all times, and the Contractor shall have sufficient 
competent equipment on the job to accomplish this if sprinkling is used. Dust control shall be 
performed as the work proceeds and whenever a dust nuisance or hazard occurs. 
The Contractor shall propose methods and actions to control dust resulting from construction related 
activities,  including  quarry  sites,  crushing  and  concrete  batching  plants,  earthworks  including  road 
construction, embankment and channel construction and haulage of materials. 
The Contractor shall spray water as needed on dirt roads, cut areas and soil stockpiles or fill material. 
The  frequency  of  spraying  near  local  communities  shall  be  done  as  directed  by  the  Employer.  The 
Contractor  shall ensure  the  exhaust  gases  from  construction machinery  and vehicles  are  accepted. 
However, the engines shall be inspected and serviced to manufacturer’s levels to minimize pollution 
levels. 
Disposal of Wastes 
Disposal in or adjacent to the Site of any debris, wastes, effluents, trash, oil grease, chemicals, 
etc.  will  not  be  permitted,  except  as  authorized  in  writing  by  the  Employer.  Unless  written 
authorization  or  burning  or  on-site  disposal  is  received  from  the  Employer,  all  wastes  and 
debris resulting from construction operations shall be removed and disposed of off the Site. 
The Contractor shall make all necessary arrangements with the appropriate local authorities 
for  obtaining  suitable  disposal  locations  and  the  cost  involved  shall  be  at  the  Contractor's 
expense. 
If  any  waste  material  is  dumped  in  unauthorized  areas,  the  Contractor  shall  remove  the 
material and restore the area to its original condition. If necessary, ground contaminated from 
such  unauthorized  disposal  operation  shall  be  excavated,  disposed  as  directed  by  the 
Employer, replaced with suitable fill material, compacted and finished with topsoil, and planted 
as required to re-establish vegetation, all at no additional cost to the Employer. 
Hazardous Materials  
Hazardous  Materials  (Hazmats)  can  be  classified  according  to  the  hazard  as:  explosives; 
compressed gases, including toxic or flammable gases; flammable liquids; flammable solids; 
oxidizing substances; toxic materials; radioactive material; and corrosive substances.  
The  project  may  use  and  store  explosives,  compressed  and  flammable  gases  (welding), 
flammable liquids (fuels) and toxic materials (waste oils batteries florescent light bulbs etc.). 
The Contractor shall record and report on a monthly basis the types and amounts of hazardous 
materials present on the project Site. The report shall include: 
•  Name and description of the Hazmat 
•  Classification (e.g. code, class or division) of the Hazmat; 
• 
Internationally accepted regulatory reporting threshold quantity or national equivalent 
of the Hazmat; 
•  Quantity of Hazmat used per month; 
•  Characteristic(s) that make(s) the Hazmat hazardous (e.g. flammability, toxicity). 
235 
The Contractor shall construct a storage area for the projects hazardous materials and fuel. 
The storage area shall have an impermeable surface and shall be walled or bunded to reduce 
potential surface and ground water pollution in the event of a spill.  The design of contained 
storage areas shall conform to national regulations and international best practices. 
The  Contractor  shall  regularly  collect  and  store  all  used  oil  and  lubricants,  which  will  be 
collected into drums/barrels or tanks. 
The  storage  of  liquid  hazardous  wastes  shall  be  in  a  roofed  and  bunded  well  ventilated 
enclosure or should have a lockable valve in the drainage system so that rainwater can be 
checked for contaminants prior to discharge. 
The Contractor shall develop a waste management plan, which will detail the use, storage and 
disposal of all solid waste materials. 
When pest management activities are required that include the use of chemical pesticides, 
the Contractor shall select chemical pesticides that are low in human toxicity, that are known 
to be effective against the target species, and that have minimal effects on non-target species 
and the environment.  
The Contractor shall only use pesticides that have been manufactured by an entity currently 
licensed by relevant regulatory agencies. The pesticides shall be packaged in safe containers 
and be clearly labelled for safe and proper use. 
The  Contractor  shall  not  use  material  or  products  containing  asbestos  or  polychlorinated 
biphenyl (PCBs). 
Hazardous Wastes  
The Contractor shall avoid the generation of hazardous and non-hazardous waste materials 
(e.g. waste oil filters, tyres, batteries, bulbs and chemical wastes). 
Where  waste  generation  cannot  be  avoided,  the  Contractor  shall  reduce  the  generation  of 
waste,  and  recover  and  reuse  waste  in  a  manner  that  is  safe  for  human  health  and  the 
environment. 
Where waste cannot be recovered or reused, the Contractor shall treat, destroy, or dispose of 
it in an environmentally sound manner that includes the appropriate control of emissions and 
residues resulting from the handling and processing of the waste material. 
If the generated waste is considered hazardous, the Contractor shall adopt Good International 
Industry practise alternatives for its environmentally sound disposal. 
When  hazardous  waste  disposal  is  conducted  by  subcontractors  or  third  parties,  the 
Contractor shall use subcontractors that are reputable and legitimate enterprises licensed by 
the relevant government regulatory agencies.  
The  Contractor  shall  obtain  chain  of  custody  documentation  to  track  the  waste  to  its  final 
disposal  destination.  The  Contractor  shall  conduct  an  assessment  to  ascertain  whether 
licensed  disposal  sites  are  being  operated  to  acceptable  standards  and  that  the  disposal 
site(s) deemed acceptable by the Employer will only be used by the Contractor. 
236 
If  the  disposal  site  is  not  acceptable  the  Contractor  and  Employer  together  shall  consider 
alternative  disposal  options,  including  the  possibility  of  developing  their  own  recovery  or 
disposal facilities at the project Site. 
Explosives  
The Contractor shall develop an explosives management plan and appoint a competent full 
time  employee  to  be  in  charge  of  storage,  transportation,  and  use  of  explosive  material 
(explosives  manager).  The  plan  shall  ensure  the  projects  compliance  with  Rwandan 
legislation. 
The explosives management plan and credentials of the manager shall be submitted to the 
Employer at the start of the construction phase for acceptance prior to any blasting occurring 
at the Site. 
The  nominated  employee  (explosives  manager)  shall  have  sufficient  knowledge  and 
experience in: 
•  Storage, transportation, and use of explosives. 
•  The handling and use of explosives  
•  Rwandan  laws  and  regulations  that  apply  to  the  importation,  handling,  storage, 
transport and use of explosives. 
•  The explosives manager shall be responsible for: 
•  The purchase of all explosives, 
•  The transportation of all explosives. 
•  Liaisons with the Rwanda police and officials of the mines and geological department 
regarding the transportation and storage of all explosives. 
•  Planning and conducting all blasting required for the construction of the project. 
•  Undertaking regular audits on stocks,  
•  Monitoring recording and the reporting of explosive handling and usage,  
•  Maintaining the permits issued by regulating agencies. 
The  Contractor  shall  provide  the  adequate  resources  shall  be  provided  to  the  explosives 
manager to carry out his work effectively. 
Stockpiling of Topsoil 
Excavated  material  suitable for  topsoil  shall  be  stockpiled  separate  from  other  materials  at 
such  places  that  the  topsoil  can  be  reused  for  landscaping  and  reclamation  purposes.  No 
topsoil shall be removed from the Site without prior written approval from the Employer. 
Location of Storage Facilities 
The  Contractor's  storage  and  other  construction  buildings,  which  are  required  for  the 
performance  of  the  work,  shall  be  located  upon  cleared  portions  of  his  Work  Areas.  The 
preservation of the landscape shall be an essential consideration in the selection of all such 
sites and in the construction of buildings.  
Reclamation of Quarries, Borrow and Spoil Disposal Areas 
Final  restoration  of  quarries,  borrow  and  spoil  disposal  areas  shall  include  grading, 
establishment  of  vegetative  cover,  or  other  necessary  treatments  that  will  blend  into  the 
surrounding area. Overburden shall be stripped from all quarries, borrow and spoil disposal 
areas and stockpiled for later use in reclamation of the Site. After an excavation has served 
its purpose, all waste material that may have been temporarily stored outside of the excavation 
237 
shall be moved back into the excavation. The excavation shall be neatly sloped and trimmed, 
and  side  slopes flattened  to the maximum  extent  possible,  consistent  with the slope of  the 
natural  ground  surface.  The  stockpiled  overburden  material  shall  then  be  spread  uniformly 
over the sides and bottom of the excavation area. No separate payment will be made for this 
work. 
Fire 
The Contractor shall not create, cause or allow to be caused by his activities or those of his 
employees or subcontractors the burning of waste or other materials as a method of disposal. 
The contractor and his employees or subcontractors must take all reasonable measures to 
ensure that any accidental bush fires are not started. The Contractor shall be responsible for 
any liability whatsoever arising from fires so caused. 
Post Construction Clean-Up 
The Contractor shall, as far as reasonably possible, remove all signs of temporary construction 
facilities  such  as  haul  roads,  work  areas,  structures,  foundations  of  temporary  structures, 
stockpiles of excess or waste materials, or any other vestiges of construction, to the approval 
of the Employer. The Site shall be restored as necessary to permit the growth of vegetation 
thereon.  Disturbed  areas  shall  be  graded  and  150  mm  of  topsoil  applied  to  the  extent  that 
topsoil is available from stockpile. 
BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION OF NATURAL RESOURCES 
Vegetation 
Limits of clearing shall be within the boundaries shown on the construction drawings or to the 
limits  staked  on  the  ground  by  the  Employer.  Except  in  areas  specified  to  be  cleared  as 
indicated on the Drawings the Contractor shall not deface, injure or destroy trees or shrubs, 
nor remove or cut them without the written approval of the Employer. Trees in construction 
zones that interfere with the movement of the Contractor's equipment shall not be removed 
until inspected and/or tagged by the Employer. 
All trees bordering any construction zone shall be protected by acceptable methods. Trees 
shall  be  felled  in  such  a  manner  as  to  avoid  damage  to  trees  left  standing.  Where,  in  the 
opinion of the Employer, trees that are to remain may be defaced, bruised, injured or otherwise 
damaged  by  the  Contractor's  equipment  or  operations,  the  Contractor,  shall  adequately 
protect such trees. When earthwork operations are liable, in the opinion of the Employer, to 
cause rock, earth or other materials to be displaced into uncleared areas, the Contractor shall 
protect the trees. Rock, earth or other material that is displaced into uncleared areas shall be 
removed and any resulting vegetation damage will be required to be rehabilitated. 
Ropes, cables or guys shall not be fastened to or attached to any nearby trees for anchorages 
unless  specifically  authorized  by  the  Employer.  Where  such  use  is  authorized,  it  shall  be 
performed  in  such  a  manner  as  to  avoid  damage  to  the  trees.  The  Contractor  shall  be 
responsible for any damage resulting from such use. 
Specific trees and groups of trees to be protected on the Site will be field-marked. 
The Contractor shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid damaging these trees. Protection 
of the marked trees does not relieve the Contractor of his responsibility for obtaining the written 
238 
approval of the Employer prior to defacing, injuring, destroying, removing or cutting any trees 
outside areas specified to be cleared. 
The Contractor shall unless otherwise agreed by the Employer, make a reasonable effort to 
utilize  materials  of  value  resulting  from  clearing  operations  into  beneficial  uses.  He  shall 
provide his labour camps with electricity or non-wood fuels (such as paraffin and or container 
gas) in sufficient quantity, frequency and cost to meet all domestic needs of his personnel and 
to preclude unauthorized cutting of trees and gathering of wood for fuel. 
All timber, logs, and branches 50 mm in diameter or larger removed or cut by the Contractor 
shall be stockpiled and utilized in construction or as fuel wood. Cleared and grubbed materials 
smaller than 50 mm in diameter, with the approval of the Employer, may be disposed of by 
removal from the Site. The location and procedures utilized to dispose of materials must be 
approved by the Employer. 
Wetlands 
The Contractor shall not at any time encroach on any wetlands deemed to be totally protected 
by the Rwanda Environmental Management Authority (REMA). Any Works permitted under 
the EIA licence in conditional wetlands will adhere to all the requirements in that licence, and 
national  regulations  on  the  protection  of  wetlands.    Limits  of  clearing  shall  be  within  the 
boundaries shown on the construction drawings or to the limits staked on the ground by the 
Employer, and will allow an appropriate buffer zone between the wetlands and Works areas, 
as  approved  by  the  District  Environmental  authorities  and  REMA.    Except  in  areas  clearly 
specified to be cleared as approved by the District Environmental authorities and REMA, and 
as  indicated  on  the  Drawings,  the  Contractor  shall  not  deface,  injure  or  destroy  wetland 
vegetation, nor remove or cut them without the written approval of the relevant Authority.  
All  wetlands  bordering  any  construction  zone  shall  be  protected  by  acceptable  methods. 
Wetland vegetation shall be removed in such a manner as to avoid damage to the wetland 
ecosystem. When earthwork operations are liable, in the opinion of the Employer, to cause 
rock, earth or other materials to be displaced into uncleared areas, the Contractor shall take 
appropriate measures to protect the wetlands that may be potentially damaged or otherwise 
affected by rock, earth or other material debris that is displaced. 
Protection of Wildlife 
The Contractor shall not be permitted to conduct his Works in nationally and locally protected 
areas.  He  will  ensure  that  all  contracts  with  his  workforce  prohibit  them  from  collecting  or 
harming  wildlife,  hunting,  poaching,  and will  impose  meaningful consequences for  violation 
such as employment termination and reporting them to the Wildlife authorities. 
In the event that Works are hampered by wildlife, the Contractor will immediately inform the 
Employer who will contact the relevant Wildlife authorities.  The Contractor will then work with 
the said authorities to address any such events.  
Restoration of Landscape 
Any  tree,  grassed  or  other  landscape  feature  which  has  been  scarred  or  damaged  by  the 
Contractor's  equipment  or  operations  shall  be  restored  as  nearly  as  possible  to  its  original 
conditions  and  to  a  condition  satisfactory  to  the  Employer.  Restoration  of  scarred  and 
damaged trees shall be performed in a manner approved by the Employer. When directed by 
the Employer, trees shall be trimmed to remove branches or roots which interfere with or were 
damaged by construction traffic. 
239 
All  scars  made on trees  by  equipment,  construction  operations,  or  by  the removal  of  limbs 
larger than 50 mm in diameter shall be coated as soon as possible with a tree wound dressing 
approved by the Employer. All trimming or pruning shall be performed in an approved manner 
by  experienced  workmen  with  saws  or  pruning shears. Tree trimming with axes will  not  be 
permitted. 
Trees determined by the Employer to be damaged beyond restoration shall be removed and 
utilized in construction or provided to the labour camps. Such trees shall be replaced at the 
Contractor's expense by nursery-grown trees of the same or alternative species, the species 
size  and  quality  being  approved  by  the  Employer.  Any  disturbed  grassed  areas  shall  be 
seeded and mulched as directed by the Employer. 
HISTORICAL, ARCHAEOLOGICAL AND CULTURAL RESOURCES 
In the event the Contractor discovers archaeological sites, historical sites, remains and objects, during 
excavation or construction, the Contractor shall: (a) Stop the construction activities in the area of the 
chance find; (b) Delineate the discovered site or area; (c) Secure the site to prevent any damage or loss 
of  removable  objects.  In  cases  of  removable  antiquities  or  sensitive  remains,  the  Contractor  shall 
immediately notify the Employer for his instruction. Where appropriate, by reason of chance find the 
Employer may order delays in the time of performance, or changes in the work, or both. If such delays, 
or  changes,  or  both, are  ordered,  the  time  of  performance  and  contract  price  shall  be  adjusted  in 
accordance with applicable sections of this contract. 
COMMUNITY HEALTH AND SAFETY 
General Requirements 
The Contractor will avoid or minimize risks and impacts on the health and safety of the local 
community during the project life cycle from both routine and non-routine circumstances. 
The Contractor will ensure that the safeguarding of Project personnel and property is carried 
out  in  a  legitimate  manner  that  avoids  or  minimizes  risks  to  the  community’s  safety  and 
security. 
Water Quality and Availability 
The Contractor shall ensure that all project activities involving wastewater discharges, water 
extraction,  diversion  or  impoundment  will  prevent  adverse  impacts  to  the  quality  and 
availability of groundwater and surface water resources. 
The Contractor shall ensure that the quality of water that may be used for drinking, cooking, 
washing, and bathing, should comply with national standards or in their absence the current 
edition of with WHO Drinking Water Guidelines. 
Structural Safety of Project Infrastructure 
The Contractor shall design and construct the structural elements or components of the project 
in accordance with good international industry practice. 
240 
All  buildings  shall  be  designed,  constructed,  and  made  ready  for  safe  operations  in  full 
compliance with local building codes, local fire department regulations, local legal/insurance 
requirements, and in accordance with an internationally accepted life and fire safety (L&FS) 
standards. 
Life and Fire Safety (L&FS) 
The  Contractor  shall  undertake  the  Works  in  full  compliance  with  the  requirements  of  any 
Rwandan Legislation applicable to the execution of the Works. 
The  Contractor  shall  comply  at  all  times  with  any  mandatory  requirements  of  Rwandan 
Legislation, local safety and security and other regulations in force and to which the works are 
subject. 
Traffic Safety 
The Contractor shall promote traffic safety by all project personnel during displacement to and 
from the workplace, and during operation of project equipment on private or public roads. The 
Contractor  shall  adopt  safety  measures  that  are  protective  of  project  workers  and  of  road 
users, including those who are most vulnerable to road traffic accidents. Road safety initiatives 
shall include: 
•  Adoption of best transport safety practices across all aspects of project operations with 
the  goal  of  preventing  traffic  accidents  and  minimizing  injuries  suffered  by  project 
personnel and the public 
o  Emphasizing safety aspects among drivers 
o 
o  Adopting  limits  for  trip  duration  and  arranging  driver  rosters  to  avoid 
Improving driving skills and requiring licensing of drivers 
overtiredness 
o  Avoiding dangerous routes and times of day to reduce the risk of accidents 
o  The use of speed control devices (governors) on trucks, and remote monitoring 
of driver actions 
o  Regular  maintenance  of  vehicles  to  minimize  potentially  serious  accidents 
caused by equipment malfunction. 
•  Where the project may contribute to a significant increase in traffic along existing roads 
the Contractor shall: 
•  Minimize pedestrian interaction with construction vehicles 
•  Collaborate  with  local  communities  and  responsible  authorities  to  improve  signage, 
visibility and overall safety of roads, particularly along stretches located near schools 
or other locations where children may be present. 
•  Collaborate with local  communities  on  education  about  traffic  and pedestrian  safety 
(e.g. school education campaigns) 
•  Coordinate with emergency responders to ensure that appropriate first aid is provided 
in the event of accidents 
•  Use locally sourced materials, whenever possible, to minimize transport distances.  
•  Locate associated facilities such as worker camps close to project Site and arrange 
worker bus transport to minimizing external traffic. 
•  Employ safe traffic control measures, including road signs and flag persons to warn of 
dangerous conditions. 
The Contractor shall implement driver and traffic safety programs for all staff that are required 
to drive for the project. 
241 
Security Personnel 
The Contractor shall, if it retains employees or contractors to provide security to safeguard its 
personnel and property, assess risks to those within and outside the project Site posed by its 
security  arrangements. In  making  such  arrangements, the  Contractor  will  be  guided  by  the 
principles of proportionality, good international practices in terms of hiring, rules of conduct, 
training, equipping and monitoring of such personnel, and applicable law. 
The Contractor shall: 
•  Satisfy itself that the provider of the security is not implicated in past abuses. 
•  Ensure the provider is adequately trained in: 
o 
o 
the use of appropriate force  
if applicable the use of firearms 
o  appropriate conduct toward workers 
o  appropriate conduct toward the local community 
o  applicable laws. 
•  Monitor the personnel or company providing the security services. 
• 
Investigate any credible allegations of unlawful or abusive acts by security personnel. 
•  Report unlawful and abusive acts to public authorities when appropriate. 
Hazardous Materials 
The Contractor shall prevent or minimize the potential for community exposure to hazardous 
materials that may be released by the project. 
Emergency Preparedness and Response 
The  Contractor  shall  establish  and  maintain  an  emergency  preparedness  and  response 
system  so  that  they  and  other  relevant  parties,  are  prepared  to  respond  to  accidental  and 
emergency situations associated with the project and prevent and mitigate any harm to people 
and/or the environment.  
This  preparation  will  include  the  identification  of  areas  where  accidents  and  emergency 
situations  may  occur,  communities  and  individuals  that  may  be  impacted,  response 
procedures,  provision  of  equipment  and  resources,  designation  of  responsibilities, 
communication, including that with potentially Affected Communities and periodic training to 
ensure effective response.  
The Contractor shall review its emergency preparedness and response plan at least annually 
and review and revise the plan necessary to reflect changing conditions. 
The Contractor shall collaborate with the affected communities, local government agencies, 
and other relevant parties, to prepare a plan to respond effectively to emergency situations, 
especially  when  their  participation  and  collaboration  are  necessary  to  respond  to  such 
emergency situations. 
Public Morality / Code of Conduct (Behaviour) 
The Contractor shall establish a Code of Conduct to outline the importance of appropriate behaviour, 
drug and alcohol abuse, and compliance with relevant laws and regulations. Each employee shall be 
242 
informed of the Code of Conduct and shall be bound by it while in the employment. The Code of 
Conduct shall be available to local communities at the project information centres or other place 
easily accessible to the communities. The Code of Conduct shall address the following measures (but 
not limited to them): 
•  Sneaking illegal substances, weapons and firearms to the construction areas/site; 
•  Bringing school children to the construction areas/site for the purposes of illicit sex; 
•  Sale of pornographic material to the local community; 
•  Fighting (physical or verbal) in public places; 
•  Hunting, fishing or trading in wild animals without permission from relevant 
Government Departments; 
•  Creating nuisances and disturbances in or near communities  
•  Maintenance of appropriate standards of dress and personal hygiene. 
Disease Prevention 
The Contractor shall prevent or minimize the potential for community exposure to water-borne, 
water-based,  water-related,  vector-borne  disease,  and  other  communicable  diseases  that 
could result from project activities.  
The Contractor shall explore opportunities during the project life cycle to reduce the impact of 
specific diseases that are endemic in the local communities in the project area environmental 
conditions that could help reduce their incidence. 
The Contractor shall implement strategies and measures to prevent or at least minimize the 
transmission of communicable diseases that may be associated with the influx of temporary 
or permanent project labour. 
HIV/AIDS Prevention 
The Contractor shall throughout the Contract period (including Defects Notification Period) conduct 
the HIV/AIDS Awareness and Prevention Campaign in accordance with the Rwandan Ministry of Health 
(MINISAN) and District prevention plans among the Contractor’s personnel and the local community, 
to promote awareness and prevention. 
The Contractor shall institute an HIV/AIDS Awareness and Prevention Campaign amongst the workers 
for the duration of the contract. As a part of the campaign the Contractor will be required to display 
AIDS awareness posters in all buildings frequented by workers employed on the contract, where such 
buildings  fall  under  the  control  of  the  Contractor.  In  addition,  at  least  two  (2)  of  the  Contractors 
vehicles, regularly used on Site shall display HIV/AIDS awareness posters. The posters shall be printed 
on the gloss paper and shall be at least A1 SIZE on buildings and A3 size, or other approved size on 
vehicles.    As  part  of  the  campaign  the  Contractor  shall  be  required  to  make  condoms  available  to 
workers.  The  condoms  shall  be  from  an  approved  manufacturer  and  comply  with  the  current  ISO 
Standards  or  WHO/UNAIDS  specifications  and  Guidelines  for  Condoms,  1998,  or  any  more  recent 
equivalent  publication.  The  Contractor  shall  distribute  available  adequate  condoms  every  month, 
through  dispensing  machines  or  other  approved  method  of  distribution  throughout  the  contract 
period. 
Malaria Prevention 
The Contractor shall throughout the Contract period (including Defects Notification Period) conduct a 
Malaria  Awareness  and  Prevention  Campaign  in  accordance  with  the  District  malaria  prevention 
strategy,  among  the  Contractor’s  personnel  and  the  local  community,  to  promote  awareness  and 
243 
prevention of malaria. The Campaign will include the planting of tree species as recommended by the 
District Health authorities that are known to repel mosquitoes. The Campaign will also focus on raising 
awareness on, and the elimination of, mosquito breeding sites. 
Damage of private property 
The Contractor shall avoid any damage to private property as much as possible, where this 
occurs the contractor is required to compensate the damaged property at agreed market rate 
with the property owner.  
244 
Annex 9:  Notes on Community Consultations 
Tuesday 28th August 2018: Ndego sector  
Key highlighted points by local communities met at Kibare Village (near Kibare  lake) 
•  Concerning the issue related to the priority crops to be cultivated; the community in this village 
proposed the followings crop commodities: maize, beans, soya beans and cassava and tomato 
•  On  the  issue  related  to  the  farmer’s  perception  on  idea  of  working  through  cooperative; 
farmers  indicated  that  it  is  not  a  new  approach  for  them,  since  most  of  them  are  already 
members  of  producer  cooperative  or  farmers  groups  such  as  such  as  ''Twigire  muhinzi'' 
farmers groups. Therefore, they indicated that they are ready to adopt this approach  
•  Few farmers were confused on the approach of working into cooperative due to the fact that 
they  own  different  size  of  farmlands  (some  own  1ha,  2ha,  3ha  or  less  than  1  ha).  So  they 
wondered how peoples with different size of farmlands will work together.  
•  Farmers highlighted that, presently, there are a big number of farmers who own farmlands 
closer to the shores of the lake who are not able to farm it due to the high cost of irrigation. 
Consequently,  those  farmers  have  either  abandoned  their  farmlands  or  rented  them. 
Therefore,  they  indicated  that  once  this  project  started,  they  will  return  back  to  their 
farmlands. 
•  The  community  in  this  site  appreciated  the  support  given  by  government  throughout  the 
acquisition of pumping machines for irrigation although the cost of fuel for feeding the pumps 
is expensive 
• 
•  Farmers claimed that there is a Government project (implemented by REMA) which  recently 
taken a big portion of their farmland for bamboo plantation as a buffer to Kibare lake. Briefly, 
farmers were not happy to the new boundaries of the lake shores set by REMA as part of lake 
protection 
In general farmers in this site were so aggressive since they are facing an issue of food shortage 
while they own big farmland and they are more energetic to cultivate it in order to produce 
food for HH consumption and extra for marketing. 
In this community, it is mentioned that there is also a big issue linked to wild animals especially 
hippos and baboons which come regularly and destroy their crops. 
• 
•  The community also recommended that should the project to support construction of water 
tanks on the hillside 
Key highlighted points by the opinion leaders met at Ndego sector office 
•  The  participants  indicated  that  they  excited  by  this  project  since  it  target  irrigation 
infrastructures since this is an area prone to drought.  Therefore, they mentioned that with 
this project , the community are confident that this region will become a national food basket, 
•  They indicated that some of the marshland in ndego sector has a kind of clay soils (ibumba), 
this is the case of humure marshland. 
• 
It is recommended that the project may expands it interventions up to the human settlements, 
•  They asked question if it is possible for this project to irrigate farmlands that are located within 
1 km ahead of the water source. 
•  Concerning the issue related to the proposed approached of working through cooperative, the  
participants expressed that they are ready to go even beyond cooperative level up to union 
once they have an irrigation infrastructures. they added that the only one limiting factor is the 
lack of reliable access of water for crop watering 
•  Participants  proposed  that  this  project  may  support  also  pumping  water  from  main  water 
source up to water tank/ponds for hillside crop irrigation and cattle watering 
245 
•  The participants wondered if a cooperative will be formed at the level of each project site or 
if one cooperative will be formed to cover all project sites 
•  Concerning the issue related to the priority crop, the participants proposed maize to be given 
high  priority  mainly  due  to  the  fact  that  it  is  a  stable  commodity  and  it  is  consumed  into 
different forms 
•  Some  participants  recommended  that  maize  cropping  should  be  rotated  with  horticulture 
crops such tomato 
•  Concerning the issue of beneficiary contribution, the participants agreed that they are ready 
to provide their own contribution, however, they want the project to consult them prior to 
determine/ fixe beneficiary contribution further to avoid the overestimation of their capacity. 
•  The participants also added that with this project, they will be even able to produce enough 
forage for cattle feeding.  
In conclusion , they recommended that this project should start as soon as possible. 
• 
Key highlighted points by local communities met at Humure village  
• 
Local communities indicated that  since the time  they settled in this region they have been 
facing consecutive crop failure due to drought events 
•  They indicated that a big number of local peoples have been moved to other village such as 
Kagese village with the purpose to look for food there. 
•  They raised their concerns on how they are going to work through cooperative while some of 
them  own  a  big  farmlands,  other  own  a  small  farmland,  while  other  do  not  own  any  land 
especially young peoples,    
•  Farmers expressed their enthusiasm to the irrigation project in this region and request that 
the project should start immediately so that women can be employed in their own farmland 
which are located closer to their homestead further to be able to take care of their children. 
On the other side men  indicated that they want this project to start in order to be able to 
generate money to cover all HH needs and generate extra income for saving further to improve 
the living condition of their family 
•  Concerning  the  issue  related  to  settlement  of  disputes/grievances  which  may  arise  from 
cooperative, they indicated that under the existing producers cooperatives there is always a 
special committee in charge of solving all issues arising from cooperative. Once an issue is not 
solved by  this committee , the local authority become the next level to handle issues within 
the cooperatives .   
Wednesday,29th August 2018: Ndego and Kabare sectors  
Key highlighted points by local communities met at Byimana village ( Byimana cell, Ndego sector, 
Kayonza District) 
•  Most of farmers in this site indicated that they are excited by the upcoming irrigation project 
in this region due to the fact that it is very well known  that this is a drought prone area, 
•  Some  farmers  indicated  that  it  is  obviously  that  all  farmers  in  this  region  need  irrigation 
infrastructures due to the fact that this is a drought prone area. However, the main  concern 
is that we will not be able to mobilize our own contribution at the beginning of the project due 
to the fact that we have been affected by drought events over a long time to the extent that 
we become the most poorest community, 
•  A woman from this village indicated that some of local peoples in this region has been forced 
to leave this village and went to their neighboring regions for looking for foods and generate 
money to cover HH needs. Therefore they indicated that they believe that once this project 
starts none will move to other area with the same purpose to find out foods. 
246 
•  Some farmers expressed that there is a project called ''Hinga weze'' which recently come here 
to mobilize farmers to form farmers groups composed by 30 farmers and then we planted our 
crops by promising us that they will come back here to irrigate our farmlands. so how are you 
going to be sure that once  we planted our crops the project will come  back to irrigate our 
farmlands?  
Key highlighted points by local communities met at Gakoma village, (Gakoma Village, Rubumba Cell, 
Kabare sector, Kayonza District) 
•  At this site local community participation to the consultation meeting were many, around 60  
peoples 
•  Most of farmers were excited by this project. Some of them indicated that they children have 
already left them in order to look for jobs somewhere else, other indicated that they are happy 
since they will able to produce enough food for HH consumption and extra for marketing in 
order to make money 
•  Concerning beneficiary contribution, the community indicated that they are ready to provide 
their own contribution due to the fact that the drought is a major threat in this region. They 
also added that they need to become self reliant. Furthermore, farmers indicated that they 
used to invest in their farmlands without knowing if it will rain or not, therefore it is obvious 
that once they got access to irrigation system, they will certainly invest a lot in their farmlands 
•  Concerning the issue related to how they plan to handle the disputes and grievances  that may 
arise from cooperative; the community indicated that, the cooperative leadership should be 
in charge of the handling them 
•  Concerning the priority crops to be cultivated in this site, the farmers proposed that the maize, 
soya beans and beans should be given priority 
Thursday 30th August 2018: Murama, Rwinkwavu and Kabarondo sectors  
General field observations at Murama in Ngoma site 
• 
Land husbandry practices such radical terraces are in place and there is a stream called Ngoma, 
that stream was used for Rwinkwavu Dam 
•  Some farmlands are planted with pineapples, others are planted with coffee, others are empty, 
•  There is a coffee washing station in place 
Key highlighted points by local communities met at Murama sector office ( Ngoma village, Muko cell, 
Murama sector) 
•  Some farmers raised their concerns in relation to the fact that their farmlands are located at 
high slope hillside to the extent that they are not sure that their farmlands will be irrigated. 
•  Concerning the issue related to cooperative approach, the participants firstly indicated that it 
is always good to work through cooperative. They added that most of them have a experience 
with cooperative farming  approach since they used to be member of a producer cooperative 
called ''Twidika'' which were created under the support  of RSSP project ( MINAGRI Project 
Funded by World bank), 
•  Concerning their priority crops, they indicated that maize would come as their first priority 
once the irrigation facilities are in place. However, a big number of local community proposed 
perennial  crops  such  as  coffee,  banana  and  cassava, mango,  avocado  orange,  passion  fruit 
trees, etc.. .This choice is mainly based on the facts that this area is too dry and most of their 
farmlands  are  located  on  hillside  where  there  not  quite  sure  that  their  farmlands  will  be 
247 
irrigated. Furthermore, community indicated that in the past the maize growers in this site 
faced consecutive crop failure while coffee growers were enjoying good harvest. 
•  Concerning sustainability issue in terms of providing their own contribution, farmers indicated 
that  they  are  aware  that  they  have  to  contribute  to  any  development  activities  benefiting 
them. They also added that, they  need to work with financing institutions as long as you want 
to go far in development.  
•  Concerning the issue of handling  disputes that may arise from cooperative: farmers indicated 
that under cooperative structure, there is always a special committee in charge of solving all 
disputes that may arise within cooperative 
•  Participants recommended that in case there is a planned land husbandry activity to be carried 
on in the project, the project team should communicate to the concerned the local peoples 
early prior to the commencement of the civil works in order to allow timely  preparation 
•  Key highlighted points by local communities met at Kabarondo sector office   
•  The  local  community  met  at  this  site  highlighted  that  the  biggest  challenges  that  they  are 
facing is drought  
•  The participants met  at this site were wondering if this project will support to address  the 
issue of Rift valley fever (RVF) disease which recently led to a big number of cattle losses in 
this area. 
•  Concerning the priority crop to be cultivated, they proposed maize, beans, cassava, banana, 
soya beans, tree tomato and vegetables such as carrot, 
•  Although cassava were proposed, they mentioned that they are now facing an issue of lack of 
cassava cuttings due to the facts that the existing cassava varieties were attacked by cassava 
diseases, 
•  Concerning  the  issue  of  project  sustainability  throughout  provision  of  beneficiaries' 
contribution to the project investments, farmers indicated that they are already working with 
financial institutions whereby they took credits for purchasing agricultural inputs. However, 
farmers  recommended  that  they  need  to  be  involved  at  early  stage  of  determining  the 
reasonable amount of beneficiary contribution to the project, 
Wednesday 5th September 2018:  Meetings with livestock farmers  
Key highlighted points by livestock farmers met at Midland Hotel on September 5th 2018 
•  The farmers indicated that they do appreciate the support given by the Rwandan Goverment 
whereby  they  have  been  supported  with  valley  dam’s  construction  although  they  are  not 
enough for all of them. 
•  Farmers met at this site were concerned with access to water for livestock and HH activities 
including water for consumption, 
•  Farmers wondered if there is a planned intervention targeting those who own one or two cows 
at their homestead. 
•  Farmers presented in issue related to soil erosion and marshland siltation whereby most of 
the existing valley dams are threatened by siltation. 
•  Concerning the issue of working through cooperative approach, most of farmers indicated that 
they have an experience since they are now members of farmers cooperative or farmer's group 
whereby, some activities are conducted throughout them. 
•  Some farmers indicated that Farmers indicated that the only one activity that they conducted 
as a cooperative is milk collection, the remaining one -  animal husbandry – is done individually. 
Therefore, farmers wanted to know if the project will support individual farmers to get access 
to water by creating a valley dam/ pond in its own  grazing land 
248 
•  Farmers  indicated  that  there  is  already  conflicts  between  Crop  growers  and  Cattle  keepers 
whereby there is one shared marshland and cattle keepers are located downstream of the rice 
growers which led to fighting among them   
•  Farmers indicated that tsetse fryer is also a big issue to the cattle keeper in this area and there 
is no solution. 
•  Farmers recommended the project to explore the possibilities to build the capacity of  local 
peoples  on  how  to  repairing/  maintain  machines  and  other  technologies  which  will  be 
supported  by  the  project  since  the  main  constraints  to  the  sustainability  of  the  project 
investments  is  the  lack  of  local  level  technical  capacity  to  repair/maintain  supported 
machines/technologies. 
•  Concerning  the  issue  of  disputes  settlements,  the  farmers  proposed  that  prior  to  receive 
support  from project, the cooperative  should be requested to elect a special committee  in 
charge of disputes settlement. 
Key highlighted points by livestock farmers met at Kageyo MCC Hotel on September 5th 2018 
•  Farmers indicated that the critical issue here is the water scarcity to the extent that they always 
use to fight among them, especially between cattle keepers and crop growers  
•  Concerning the issue of working through cooperative approach, farmers at this site indicated 
that  they  do  not  have  objection  about  this  approach  since  they  are  already  working  into 
cooperative. Most of them belong to a livestock farmer’s cooperative managing Kageyo Milk 
collection Center (MCC).  Farmers at this site indicated that they aware of all benefit associated 
with working into cooperative since those who are weaker get strengthened by the stronger 
one.  They also indicated that they have already started to mobilize other local peoples who 
are not yet member of cooperative to joint 
•  Concerning  the  issue  of  disputes  settlement:  they  indicated  that  within  cooperative  they 
should be a special committee in charge of disputes settlement 
249 
Annex 10:  List of Potential Beneficiary Consultation Participants 
Ndego Sector Office 28.08.18 
Ndego MCC 28.08.18 
250 
Kibare Village 28.08.18 
251 
Humure Village 28.08.18 
252 
Gakoma Village 29.08.18 
Byimana 29.08.18 
253 
Byimana 29.08.18 
254 
Murama Sector Office 30.08.18 
255 
Kabarondo Sector Office 30.08.18 
256 
Livestock Owners Associations 05.09.18
257 
258 
Mwiri MCC 05.09.18 
259 
Annex 11:  Proceedings of the ESMF Validation Workshop 
KAYONZA INTEGRATED IRRIGATION AND WATERSHED MANAGEMENT 
PROJECT 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK (ESMF) 
VALIDATION WORKSHOP 
Held at the Umubano Hotel, Kigali, on 22nd November 2018 
WORKSHOP PROCEEDINGS 
Workshop Purpose 
The purpose of the workshop was to validate the findings of the ESMF that has been prepared for 
KIIWP, and to receive comments to the ESMF for inclusion into the ESMF document and also as input 
to the Project Design. 
Participants 
In  all  24  participants  attended  the  workshop.    Participants  represented  a  number  of  institutions 
including  various  departments  in  MINAGRI,  RAB,  NAEB,  RWFA,  FAO,  RYAF,  CIAT,  REMA,  Rwanda 
Meteorological Authority, CNFA/USAID, as well as IFAD. The list of participants is presented at the end 
of this report.   
[The list of participants at the Validation Workshop is presented in Annex 2 of this ESMF]. 
Workshop Proceedings 
Dr Sirikare introduced Dr. Murekezi Charles Director General of Agriculture Development (MINAGRI), 
Dr. Charles Bucagu, Deputy Director General of Agriculture Research and Technology Transferand Mr. 
Aimable  Ntukanyagwe,  Country  Programme  Officer,  IFAD.  Dr.  Murekezi  asked  the  participants  to 
introduce themselves and then proceeded to give an opening speech to the workshop.  
Dr Sirikare gave an overview of KIIWP, describing the goals and objectives of the project, describing 
the  target  groups  and  selected  project  districts,  the  project  components  and  infrastructure 
interventions.  
Mrs Willetts explained the rationale and objectives of the ESMF, its purpose of providing assurance to 
the IFAD board that the necessary safeguard documents will be prepared, and what the ESMF covers. 
She  explained  the  criteria  behind  the  categorization  of  the  project  as  Category  A  based  on  IFAD’s 
SECAP, and that this category is in line with national (REMA) categorization of Impact Level 3 (IL3). She 
introduced the study team, and described the study methodology including the sites visited. 
Dr Rugege then took the participants through a series of photographs illustrating the location of the 
project sites, describing the environmental and social observations made and concerns raised during 
the visits to the proposed locations of the interventions.  He went on to discuss the outcomes of the 
consultations  with  the  communities  at  the  proposed  project  sites  in  regard  to  participation  in 
260 
cooperatives, priority crops, willingness to invest in KIIWP, land use conflicts, community sentiments 
towards the project and existing grievance resolution mechanisms.     
Mrs Willetts highlighted the key findings in terms of environmental issues, these relating to hydrology, 
environmental flow, dams, and climate risks.  Dr Rugege discussed key findings in the social context, 
including community expectations, physical and economic displacement, access to water sources and 
grazing, health, human-wildlife conflict and the communities’ desire to be involved in all stages of the 
project.    Mrs  Willetts  pointed  out  other  issues  emanating  from  the  irrigation  schemes,  catchment 
protection activities and livestock water supplies (valley tanks and boreholes).  
The  presentation  then  focused  on  the  procedures  for  environmental,  social  and  climate  change 
management  for KIIWP.    This  covered:  implementation  and  coordination arrangements;  subproject 
screening; types of safeguards documentation; processes and responsibilities for review, approvals and 
disclosure; grievance redress mechanisms for the project as well as for resettlement/compensation 
should  this  be  necessary;  monitoring;  reviews;  auditing;  and  reporting.    Thereafter  proposals  for 
capacity building were described, including the target groups and training topics, and the budget for 
implementing the ESMF.  
Dr Sirikare explained how the project would go forward.  Two phases are being proposed, the first 
focusing on the necessary studies and implementation of Category B projects, while the second being 
implementation of civil works for the irrigation schemes, catchment protection, ESMPs, CSA, support 
to farm business development and policy dialogue, among other activities.  
The presentation was followed by a question and answer session which is presented below. 
The closing remarks were made by DDG of Agriculture Research and Technology Transfer (RAB).   
Question and Answer Session 
FAO 
•  FAO is interested in discussing production systems in Kayonza.    
•  FAO is trying to develop integrated crop/livestock/fisheries production.   
•  They are  able  to provide  technical information and expertise to support integrated agricultural 
production.  
•  CSA activities need to be enhanced and the design should be aligned with the PST4. 
•  Water balance is very important.  Irrigated systems and existing marshland schemes all need water.  
The 4000 ha appears to be very ambitious.  
•  The ESMF should decipher between direct and indirect impacts, and suggest mitigation measures. 
Response:  The ESMF has listed potential impacts and generic mitigation measures. 
•  Accessibility has not been mentioned in the Executive Summary.  Response:  The ESMF includes a 
section on the status of accessibility in the district.  It will be included in the Executive Summary. 
•  Other interventions in the area also need to be assessed in terms of their impact on the proposed 
project. Response: The subproject specific ESIAs will address this. 
CIAT 
•  Asked  for  clarification  with  regard  to  at  what  stage  in  project  development  this  ESMF  is  being 
prepared.  Response:  The project is currently in its design stage 
•  Would like to see a research component embedded into the project design, particularly as RAB is 
the lead agency for this project and research is part of RAB’s mandate.  Response: This is noted. 
•  Research should be geared to inform future projects in terms of for example most suitable crops 
to be grown, most appropriate agricultural practices, etc. 
261 
REMA 
•  The complexity of the environment must be taken into account during project design. Hydrology, 
wetlands,  lakes,  all  of which  depend  on overflow  from  the  Akagera  River. Water  dynamics  and 
water  balance  has  to  be  considered  before  any  other  studies.  Response:    This  is  noted.    The 
importance of hydrology has been highlighted and a detailed hydrological study will be done prior 
to feasibility studies.  
•  Agroforestry  –  this  is  a  good  tool  for  catchment  protection,  and  adds  value  to  the  project. 
Therefore it is hoped that a good percentage of the project funds will go towards this.  Response:  
Agroforestry is a key part of the catchment protection subcomponent as it also serves to protect 
project infrastructure, but also aims to provide means for catchment communities to grow crops.  
•  Pollution from agrochemicals needs to be properly addressed given the sensitivity of the project 
area and its biodiversity.  Organic agricultural practices should therefore be given priority.  FAO is 
working  on  a  project  where  the  farmers  use  manure  from  their  own  livestock  for  fertilizer.  
Response: Point is noted.  This will be mentioned as a recommendation in the ESMF.  This is also 
recommended in the IPMP which will be contained in an annex to the ESMF. 
•  The IPMP needs to be comprehensive.  
•  Management  of  irrigation  infrastructure  has  always  been  a  challenge,  especially  for  pumped 
schemes.    There  needs  to  be  provision  for  capacity  building  to  ensure  sustainability  of  these 
schemes in terms of operation and maintenance.  Response:   This is noted and will be included in 
the section on capacity building. 
•  Project Management:  There is a Project Steering Committee and a Project Management Team.  It 
is not clear if the PSC will have technical people on it.  If not it should, or otherwise there must be 
a Technical Advisory Committee.  Response:  This is noted and will be communicated to the design 
team.  
MINAGRI ECC: 
•  Mitigation  for  the  impacts  were  not  discussed  in  the  presentation.    Response:    In  the  ESMF 
document  there  is  a  table  with  potential  impacts  and  generic  mitigation  measures  for  these 
impacts.  
•  Need to be clear which sites will have full ESIAs and which need only partial ESIAs so that those 
having not  significant  impacts will be  implemented first.  Response:  The subprojects  have been 
categorized as those requiring full ESIAs (IFAD Category A/REMA IL3) and those that need a partial 
ESIA (IFAD Category B/REMA IL2).  Category B projects will be implemented in Phase 1.  
•  The project design needs to consider water efficiency.  There also needs to be training in water 
efficiency.   Response:   There is a component in the project that deals with efficient use of water.  
RWFA: 
•  The directorate of water is now promoting multi-purpose dams – eg for water supply for humans 
as well as provision of water for agriculture and livestock.  Response:   Water for domestic use has 
to be treated for supply to humans and that is beyond the remit of this project.  Also there is some 
confusion as to whether MINAGRI has the mandate to supply water for domestic use.  
•  The project needs to look at groundwater as a potential source for irrigation.  A groundwater study 
is nearly complete which indicates that groundwater recharge in the area is 23000-40000 m3/hr. 
Response:  This will be conveyed to the project design team.  
•  MOE should also be more involved in this project (eg. approval of dam safety plans) since there 
are a number of environmental consequences.  Response:  This is noted and will be included in the 
ESMF.  
•  Capacity building should include capacity of RAB to inspect dams.  Response:  This will be included 
in capacity building section of the ESMF.  
262 
•  The project should look at other projects that link with the agriculture and livestock.  Response:  
This is noted and will be conveyed to the design team.  
•  RWFA has mapped out degraded areas as High, Medium and Low for the whole country. There is 
a  tool  called  CROP which will  be  useful  in  terms of design  and  implementation  of  this  project.  
Response: This will be communicated to the project design team. 
•  Engagement of the private sector needs to emphasized. Response:  The project design includes a 
“4P” (private public producer partnership) component activity. 
DDG, Deputy Director General of Agriculture Research and Technology Transfer, RAB 
•  PST4 goal is toe double the area under irrigation within 6-7 years. 
•  Agroforestry should be looked at not only from a catchment protection perspective, but also in 
terms  of  multiple  uses  such  as  food  production,  promoting  nutrition,  providing  firewood  and 
satisfying energy needs.  Response:  The project design takes this into consideration. 
•  Conflict  between  farmers  and  wildlife  will  have  to  be  addressed.    Buffer  zones  take  up  good 
potential  agricultural  land.    Response:    This  is  noted  and  the  ESIAs  will  have  to  come  up  with 
measures to address farmer/wildlife conflict.  
•  The objective of the project is to improve food security and income generation.  The food security 
aspect has to be enhanced. The project should look at collecting food security data through M&E.  
Village district plans allocate land for different uses, and there should be land for food security and 
land for cash crops.   Response:  The project design includes a food security component; that this 
needs more emphasis will be conveyed to the design team.  
•  Marketing  aspects  need  to  be  taken  into  consideration,  where  will  the  produce  go,  types  of 
commodities that are in demand.  Response:  The feasibility studies will be looking at this.  
•  There are a number of big agricultural projects that are ongoing or will be implemented soon, eg. 
ATI and NETAFIM.   The design team should be consulting with these projects so that experiences 
are shared and there is no duplication.  Response:  This is noted.  
USAID 
•  USAID if funding an irrigation project in the same project area. The design team should be aware 
of this so that there is no duplication.  Response: this is noted. 
•  Regarding social inclusion, there is no mention of people with disabilities. Response:  Inclusion of 
persons with disabilities will be mentioned in the ESMF. 
•  Soil analysis has to be done beforehand to determine the amount of agricultural inputs required. 
Response:    Feasibility  studies  will  include  agronomic  and  soil  studies  which  will  give  us  this 
information.   
It is not clear what type of pumps will be used – solar, diesel?  Depending on what is opted for, 
they may have impacts related to emissions and spills.  Response:  The design team is to confirm 
what types of pumps are to be used.  
• 
•  Capacity  building  –  communities  need  capacity  building  in  regard  to  safe  use  of  pesticides, 
particularly  for  pests  such as  Fall  Army  Worm.   Response:   The  capacity  building  topics  include 
environmental and social best practices which will cover pesticide application. 
•  Nutrition.  It is not clear how the project is addressing this issue.  Response:  This will be enhanced 
in the project design. 
RAB 
•  The design is working on the links between markets and crops to be produced. 
•  Groundwater  master  plan  indicates  that  there  is  plenty  of  water  available,  so  the  design  will 
consider boreholes for livestock watering.  
•  Regarding multi-purpose dams, the proposed dams are very small and besides require treatment 
for supplying domestic needs.  
263 
•  Climate  smart  agriculture  is  included  in  the  design  which  will  look  at  various  aspects  such  as 
application of pesticides, water efficiency, etc. 
DAO Kayonza District 
•  The  district  is  really  suffering  from  water  shortage.    Can  the  phasing  be  done  so  that  the 
interventions in the  most severely affected areas are implemented first?  Response:  There is a 
process for the phasing and a number of studies that have to be improved. So it may be difficult to 
implement the projects according to the most severely affected areas.  
RYAF 
•  How were youth involved in the ESMF, and how wil the be involved in further studies?  Response:  
Youth were involved in the discussions during the field visits.  They are also among the groups that 
are targeted for capacity building, especially for maintenance of scheme infrastructure.  
•  RYAF is prepared to help in project implementation where they can.  Response:  It will be up to 
RAB/MINAGRI to decide how they can involve RYAF. 
264 
Annex 12:  Study Team, Sites Visited and Study Timelines 
The study team is shown in the table below. 
Table A.10.1:  ESMF Study Team 
ESMF Study Team  
Ms Arundhati Inamdar Willetts 
IFAD Consultant 
Dr Denis Rugege 
IFAD Consultant 
Dr Sylvere Sirikare 
RAB 
Ms Madeleine Usabyembabazi 
SPIU - IFAD 
Eng Hussein Ngaboonziza 
Agricultural Officer, Kayonza District 
Site visits were conducted as follows:  
Team Leader 
Team Consultant 
MINAGRI Focal Person for KWIIMP 
MINAGRI Focal Person for KWIIMP ESMF 
Agronomist 
Table A.10.2:  Project Sites Visited 
Sector 
Site 
Site Name 
Village/Cell 
Date Visited 
Ndego 
Site 1 
Humure 
Kiyovu 
Site 2 
Kibare 
Isangano 
Site 3 
Byimana 
Byimana 
Kabare 
Site 1 
Gakoma 
Rubumba 
Site 2 
Gishanda 
Kabarondo 
Site 1 
Rwakigeri 
Cyambare (Kabare Sector) 
Mukoyoyo (Rwimkwavu Sector) 
Rwakigeri 
Site 2 
Kayeganyege 
Kanyeganyege 
Murama 
Site 1 
Ngoma 
Muko 
Gahini 
Site 1 
Nyabombe 
Site 2 
Rukore 
Juru 
Kahi 
Mwiri 
Site 1 
Kageyo 
Kageyo 
Rwimkwavu 
Site 1 
Murundi 
Site 1 
Rwinkwavu 
Watershed 
Gakoma 
Muko 
Buhabwa 
Site 2 
Rwakabanda 
Ryamanyoni 
The ESMF study timelines were as follows: 
265 
28/08/2018 
28/08/2018 
29/08/2018 
29/08/2018 
29/08/2018 
30/08/2018 
30/08/2018 
30/08/2018 
05/09/2018 
05/09/2018 
04-
05/09/2018 
04/09/2018 
05/09/2018 
05/09/2018 
Table A.10.3:  ESMF Study Timelines 
Dates  
19  August 2018 – 6 October 2018 
ESMF Study Activity  
Preparation, document reviews 
7 October 2018 
8 – 22 October 2018 
Latest submission date for draft ESMF to IFAD and MINAGRI-
RAB 
Review period and comments on ESMF  
22 – 27 October 2018 
Revision of the draft ESMF by the Consultant  
27 October – 7 November 2018 
9 November 2018 
Disclosure of the draft ESMF in-country in line with National 
requirements 
Stakeholder workshop for validating the ESMF 
10 - 14 November 2018 
Finalization of ESMF 
14 November 2018 
Final ESMF submitted to IFAD and RAB 
20 November 2018 
Disclosure of the ESMF 
266 
