South Sudan
South Sudan Livelihoods Resilience Programme
Project Design Report
Main report and annexes
Mission Dates:
20 August to 6 December 2020
Document Date:
01/03/2021
Project No.
2000002869
Report No.
5643-SS
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AfDB
African Development Bank
AMVAT
Agricultural Markets, Value Addition and Trade Development Project
AWPB
Annual Work Plan and Budget
BIA
Beneficiary Impact Assessment
CAMP
Comprehensive Agriculture Master Plan
CAP
Community Action Plan
CBM&E
Community-Based Monitoring and Evaluation
CDC
CDD
CoE
County Development Committee
Community-Driven Development
Council of Elders
COSOP
Country Strategic Opportunities Programme
COVID-
19
CoronaVirus Disease of 2019
CSN
CSO
DRC
EA
EIRR
ENRM
ESMF
FAO
FDI
FM
GAM
GAP
GBV
GDI
GDP
GNI
GoSS
GRM
HDI
IDMP
IDP
IFI
KM
Country Strategy Note
Civil Society Organisation
Democratic Republic of Congo
Environmental Assessment
Economic Internal Rate of Return
Environmental and Natural Resources Management
Environmental and Social Management Framework
Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations
Foreign Direct Investment
Financial Management
Global Acute Malnutrition
Good Agricultural Practices
Gender Based Violence
Gender Development Index
Gross Domestic Product
Gross National Income
Government of South Sudan
Grievance Redress Mechanism
Human Development Index
Irrigation Development Master Plan
Internally Displaced Person
International Financing Institution
Knowledge Management
LIPWs
Labour Intensive Public Works
MAD
MAFS
M&E
MFI
Minimum Acceptable Diet
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security
Monitoring and Evaluation
Micro-Finance Institution
MTR
NBS
Mid-Term Review
National Bureau of Statistics
NALEP
National Agriculture and Livestock Extension Policy
NGO
NPV
PCP
PCR
Non-Governmental Organisation
Net Present Value
Public Consultation Plan
Project Completion Review
PCRRDP
Post-Crisis Rural Recovery and Development Programme
PDO
PDR
PFM
PIM
PP
Project Development Objective
Project Design Report
Public Financial Management
Project Implementation Manual
Procurement Plan
RBAs
Rome-Based Agencies
SACCO
Savings and Credit Cooperative Organization
SDG
Sustainable Development Goal
SECAP
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures
SMS
SO
SSDI
SSDP
SSLDP
SSLRP
Subject Matter Specialists
Strategic Objective
South Sudan Development Initiative
South Sudan Development Plan
South Sudan Livelihood Development Project
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project
SSNBS
South Sudan National Bureau of Statistics
SSP
South Sudan Pound
STRERP
Short-Term Regional Emergence Response Project
SUN
SWC
TA
ToC
Scaling Up Nutrition
Soil and Water Conservation
Technical Assistance
Theory of Change
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UNICEF
United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund
USD
VDC
VSLA
WASH
WOP
WP
United States Dollar
Village Development Committees
Village Savings and Loan Association
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
Without Project
With Project
In line with IFAD11 mainstreaming commitments, the project has been validated as:
☐ Gender transformational ☑ Youth sensitive ☑ Nutrition sensitive ☑ Climate finance
1/31
IFAD Adaptation Finance
IFAD Mitigation Finance
Total IFAD Climate-focused Finance
Executive Summary
$4,061,000
$0
$4,061,000
Political and Economic Context – The Republic of South Sudan (hereafter referred to as South Sudan’) is a landlocked resource-rich
country in Eastern Africa, and the youngest nation in Africa. It remains the third most fragile state in the world, after Yemen and Somalia,
resulting from a long drawn conflict driven by historical, political, social and economic marginalization. Since independence in 2011,
South Sudan has relapsed into conflict on three occasions. Internal fighting led to massive cross-border displacements of about 4.3
million people, out of which 1.6 million are displaced in neighbouring countries, mainly Uganda and the Democratic Republic of Congo
(DRC). Oil has been a major factor in the economics and politics of South Sudan and its relations with Sudan. Conflict led to a breakdown
of governance structures, law and order, and disruption of community institutions that supported livelihoods. A new peace deal was
signed in September 2018 and a Unity Government formed in February 2020, which represent an important transition phase, from conflict
towards peace, stability and the initiation of economic recovery.
Rationale for IFAD Involvement – The Peace Agreement and the subsequent formation of the Government of National Unity have
ushered in a reform agenda geared towards establishing the building blocks for economic growth, peace and stability and strengthening
livelihoods of the rural communities. The Peace Agreement has motivated the return of the displaced population, with the bulk settling in
the Equatorias[1]. The returnees are faced with conditions of limited physical and financial assets and weak public and private service
coverage. Agriculture and rural infrastructure are dilapidated with seasonally impassable community access roads, and inefficient and
expensive transportation from farm to storage facilities and markets. Irrigation and water harvesting technologies are inadequate, with
poor post-harvest and value addition.
Despite the formation of the Government of National Unity, the context remains fragile with localised inter-community conflict driven by
competition for natural resources, adverse weather conditions and flooding, and a potential humanitarian crisis if the returnees and the
general population are not integrated into the economy.  The main risk is the resumption of national scale instability, if the peace deal
fails. It is therefore critical that efforts towards re-integration of the rural population into viable livelihood opportunities are given priority, as
an important strategy towards the sustenance of the peace agreement. There is strong evidence that sustainable human development
discourages people (including young people) from engaging in acts of violence.
In alignment with the GoSS Comprehensive Agriculture Master Plan (CAMP) and IFAD’s Country Strategy Note (2021-2022), SSLRP will
focus on re-establishing livelihoods for rural communities, focussing on returnee households, young people and women. It will strengthen
household resilience to emergency and crises, rebuild local agricultural production and stabilize incomes through micro-enterprises and
short-term employment. SSLRP will complement the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan (R-ARCSS), which commits to restore economic foundations by generating employment and improving livelihoods.
IFAD’s engagement in South Sudan is guided by the Special Programme for Countries with Fragile Situations: Operationalizing IFAD’s
Fragility Strategy, with a focus on bridging the gap from the humanitarian development nexus and supporting agriculture recovery and
income stabilization efforts. SSRLRP will employ the Community-Driven Development (CDD) approach that contributes towards
strengthening household and community institutions, strengthening social cohesion whilst contributing to the economic empowerment of
communities. The CDD approach positions communities at the forefront in the elaboration of Community Development Plans (CDPs) that
identify priority investments and critical infrastructure needed to address the key constraints to agriculture production and rural livelihood
development. The CDPs will be prepared through a facilitated approach, integrating mainstreaming themes of climate change adaptation,
nutrition, and social inclusion of women and youth, linked with appropriate conflict sensitivity. Considering the fragility context, SSLRP is
designed with provisions for ‘crisis modification’ to safeguard the development gains in the event of future crises.  
Project Goal and Objective – The SSLRP goal is to ‘contribute to improved and resilient livelihoods among the targeted rural
communities’. The Project Development Objective is to ‘empower communities to participate in decision-making processes that will
recover agriculture livelihoods, build household resilience and promote stability’[2].
Geographic Area of Intervention – SSLRP will be implemented in three States and five counties: Eastern Equatoria State (Magwi and
Torit); Central Equatoria State (KajoKeji and Terekeka) and Jonglei State (Bor). The target areas were jointly selected by GoSS and IFAD,
considering the homogenous nature of vulnerability across South Sudan in terms of poverty, food insecurity, education level and
malnutrition. The following criteria were therefore applied to select the project area: a) food production corridors (Greater Equatoria
accounts for 40 percent of the country’s cereal production, while Jonglei has the highest livestock numbers and high levels of fishing
activities); b) States that are hosting high numbers of returnees (the 3 selected States account for the highest  concentration of returnees);
c) potential to build on previous IFAD investments of SSLDP in Eastern and Central Equatoria and other development partners[3]; d)
stability and low risk of future conflict; and e) accessibility due to infrastructure gaps.
Target Group – The primary target group is poor, food insecure farmers, and agro-pastoral and pastoralist households engaged in
fishing, cropping, and livestock activities. The project will directly target 38,800 poor households, approximately 225,504 people. Within
these groups, there will be special emphasis on the inclusion of youth (70 percent), women (60 percent) and vulnerable groups, such as
returnees, women headed households and persons with disabilities who will receive specific activities to facilitate their social integration
in agricultural production and economic activities.
Targeting Strategy – SSLRP design focuses on empowering and enabling households and their communities to play a key decision-
making role in promoting their own sustainable socio-economic development. The targeting strategy will include: a) geographic targeting;
b) self-targeting; c) direct targeting; and d) community based targeting. Village Savings and Loan Associations (VSLAs) will be a strategic
entry point to identify Community Based Organisations (CBOs) and/or investment ready CDPs. Specific quotas will be applied to ensure
that women-led groups will be prioritised – at least, 30 percent of the CDPs supported will be derived from women-led organisations.
Youth will be targeted through Labour-Intensive Public Works (LIPW) where about 2,600 short term jobs will be created, skills for
enterprise development and various enterprises emanating from the CDPs. Gender Action Learning System (GALS) will be a key
instrument to address Gender Based Violence (GBV) and child labour. The targeting strategy will pay attention to drivers of conflict at the
local level – in order to do-no-harm. The overall targeting strategy will be guided by a conflict scan that identifies the key potential drivers
of conflict and proposes mitigation measures (see SECAP). Elite capture will be addressed by ensuring transparency and involving
communities in decision making.   
2/31
Components – SSLRP’s development objective will be achieved through the effective implementation of two technical components: a)
Community Driven Development Planning and b) Agriculture Production and Rural Livelihood Support. The third component, Project
Support and Capacity Building, will seek to ensure that SSLRP is effectively implemented, including the provision of capacity building to
selected GoSS institutions at the central and local levels and supporting the development of key policies (i.e. Cooperatives Policy
Framework and Rural Financial Policy Framework). Lastly, component 0 on Disaster Response and Risk Mitigation, will provide a timely
response to emergency events (e.g. weather extremes, pest attack, conflict, COVID-19, etc.).
Component 0: Disaster Response and Risk Mitigation: The objective of this component is to ensure that in the event of a disaster,
whether environmental or man-made, SSLRP can adequately respond to safeguard the developmental gains of the project. This
component can only be triggered after the declaration of an emergency situation by GoSS, and/or in agreement with GoSS, and will
facilitate ‘crisis modifiers’, to enable early action and rapid response to crises that manifest in project areas, to finance activities that may
not be foreseen but deemed critical to prevent the sustain resilience and strengthen the maturity of resilience outcomes attainable over
the lifecycle of SSLRP. Funds would be reallocated from other components to support crisis modifiers under this component.
Component 1: Community Driven Development Planning– the objectives are to: a) build strong and inclusive Community Based
Organizations (CBOs) that will serve as promoters and managers of socio-economic change; b)work with CBOs to develop climate and
gender responsive Community Development Plans (CDPs), that respond to the priorities identified by communities, women and the
youth; and c) identify strategic infrastructure investments that will complement and enhance the effectiveness of the CDPs. The CDD
process will be underpinned by County Profiles, which will assist in identifying key opportunities and constraints, including market
dynamics, infrastructure gaps, and context for IFAD’s mainstreaming themes (gender, youth, nutrition, environment), which will inform the
preparation of the CDP guidelines. SSLRP foresees a process of guided facilitation, by external specialists who will work with CBOs in
the elaboration of CDPS. The expected outcome would be ‘communities and local public governing bodies are empowered to plan and
implement investments that build household and community assets’.
Component 2: Agriculture Production and Rural Livelihood Support – the objectives are to: a) improve household’s food and
nutrition security through well facilitated investments in smallholder agriculture production and off-farm activities; b) stabilise food
consumption of households returning from refugee and displacement camps in the Project area, and to strengthen the resilience of
female-headed households and the youth by providing cash for Labour-Intensive Public Works (LIPW) that create supportive and
productive community assets for livelihood investments; and c) improve rural access and services through investments in climate resilient
community infrastructure that are strategic and aligned to households’ livelihoods support identified under Component 1. Strategic
investments could include water for production and ecological (green) infrastructure and improvements to community access roads.
SSLRP beneficiaries will access aggregation centres and markets under the AFDB (AMVAT) investment. The outcomes for Component 2
would be ‘improved access to productive assets, services and climate resilient infrastructure’.
Component 3: Project Support and Capacity Building– will support effective implementation of the CDD approach and addressing
systemic capacity gaps identified through a Systems and Capacity Needs Assessment. Component 3 will also strengthen capacities of
GoSS staff at the State and County levels, to facilitate participatory planning and development processes and support the development of
a Cooperative Development Policy and Rural agriculture Finance Policy. Capacity building activities will not only contribute to effective
project implementation but will also increase the likelihood of sustaining successful project interventions.
Theory of Change – In post-conflict situations, rural communities have very limited access to productive infrastructure, assets and public
and/or private services. In such situations a CDD approach is the most effective, as it empowers communities to prioritise investments
based on local needs, economic threats and opportunities, whilst promoting social cohesion and facilitating social inclusion. SSLRP will
therefore empower communities to inclusively identify their main constraints and prioritize solutions through development of CDPs that
promote private and public investments into productive agriculture-based livelihood opportunities.
The underlying assumption is that the target communities, including returnees, are not able to produce sufficient quantities to achieve
food security, produce a surplus to sell, or to consume a balanced and nutritious diet. Communities and households remain vulnerable to
climate change and have limited adaptive capacity to manage these shocks. Poor road infrastructure complicates the transportation of
farm inputs and produce; and limits farmers ability to diversify the household food basket with market-sourced foods. Given the post-
conflict context of the country, the bulk of the existing donor support to the rural population is mostly focussed on humanitarian
assistance, rather than long term sustainable development.
SSLRP therefore seeks to bridge the humanitarian-development gap, by supporting recovery opportunities anchored in the agriculture
sector that will promote livelihood development, peace and stabilization. SSLRP’s goal and development objective will be achieved
through a set of activities that will address constraints to agricultural productivity enhancement and livelihood improvement. Such
activities include: a) increasing access to productive inputs (improved seeds, extension and mechanisation services); b) improving
postharvest handling and storage; c) developing climate smart agricultural infrastructure; d) increasing market linkages; and e) creating
stability and stabilization through temporary jobs for the youth in infrastructure construction. Climate resilience, especially soil and water-
focused interventions, will be considered as strategic investments given the impacts of adverse weather conditions on livelihoods. Social
inclusion of women and youth will be mainstreamed across project interventions with specific quotas and interventions based on self-
targeting. The project will be implemented through a conflict sensitive approach that will facilitate adaptive programming and crisis
modification, if needed. Achievement of household nutrition and women’s empowerment are key outcomes tracked in the logframe.
These interventions will result in: a) diversified and increased volumes of crop and livestock products which will increase consumption of
more nutritious and healthy food; b) construction of climate-smart infrastructure that reduces the effects of heavy rainfall events and
floods on livelihoods and market access; c) diversified enterprise opportunities in processing, d) improved access to nutrient dense and
climate-resilient crop production and e) greater community cohesion and stability. By working to improve productivity, capacities and
livelihood opportunities, SSLRP will contribute to poverty reduction and local economic development in the project areas. Considering
that the African Development Bank (AfDB) will provide parallel financing to complement SSLRP (see project costs and financing), SSLRP
beneficiaries will access aggregation centres and markets under the AfDB investment.
3/31
Capacity building of central and de-centralised GoSS institutions will be critically important, not only to ensure effective and efficient
activity implementation, but also to increase the likelihood of sustaining successful interventions, and to strengthen the policy framework
for agriculture transformation in the country.
Project Implementation Arrangements – The two technical components will be implemented through a consortium of NGOs led by
VSF-Germany together with Action Africa Help International (AAH) and Save the Children, thereafter referred to as the Implementing
Agency (IA). A Framework will provide guidance on the roles and responsibilities of the Consortium partners, taking into account their
respective comparative advantage and collective strengths. VSF will lead overall implementation and enter into agreements with the
other two NGOs. Save the Children will focus on mainstreaming themes i.e. social inclusion, gender and nutrition, while AAH will work on
community development.  
SSLRP will be supported by: a) an oversight structure of two existing GoSS bodies, the National Technical Committee (NTC) which will
provide technical oversight and National Advisory Committee (NAC), whose responsibilities will be to provide overall policy and strategic
guidance and approve AWPBs and other critical reports; and b) a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) that will be responsible for overseeing
project coordination, monitoring, contracting and supervision of the IA and also implementation of Subcomponent 3.2 on capacity
development. The IA will work closely with the PCU and the target States and Counties during activity planning and implementation to
ensure consistency with State and County development agendas. The IA may work through local partners and service providers, as well
as government frontline extension agents, where they exist.  
Project Costs and Financing – Total project costs are estimated at US$17.9 million over a 6-year period. IFAD will fund 54 percent of
the project costs through an investment of US$ 9.8 million. This is split into a loan (20 percent) on highly concessionary terms and a
grant (80 percent).  The project total costs include the allocations for mainstreaming themes (such as 41 percent (USD 4 061 000) for
climate change adaptation-related activities).The African Development Bank (AfDB) will fund, on a parallel basis, through the Agricultural
Markets, Value Addition and Trade Development Project (AMVAT) in Kajo-Keji, Terekeka, Magwi, Torit and Bor Counties amounting to
US$ 5.6 million or 31.9 percent of the total costs. IFAD is also in dialogue with the Dutch for potential additional financing for SSLRP in
2021.
Project Costs by Component and Financier
Project Benefits – with the CDD approach, the exact number and type of subprojects that will be funded cannot be determined at the
design stage, as these will be decided by the beneficiary communities. The project has however identified a representative list of
enterprises which will be used by the beneficiaries as a menu, in line with the facilitation approach. From analysis and applying a prudent
adoption rate of 60% the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) is estimated at 24 percent with the Net Present Value (NPV) of USD 39.3
million, which confirms the economic viability of the investment. The main expected benefits include: a) increase in yields by 25 percent
for sorghum, maize and groundnuts; b) increase in income from sales for off-farm livelihoods and from added value in processing; c)
infrastructure efficiency gains - improved access to markets and improved access from feeder road construction and/or rehabilitation; and
d) short term job creation and increased incomes for the youth [4].
Summary of the Integrated Project Risk Management Matrix (IPRM) -  Overall the main risks for SSLRP relate to the country being in
the early stages of peace and state building, with critical policy, systems, institutional and capacity gaps, most of which have been
mitigated by implementation through Third Party Implementing Agencies. The risks factored in the sensitivity analysis of the EFA include
climate shocks, security and conflict, and the macroeconomic context. The project may also be impacted by exogenous factors such as
the overall macro-economic context, with market volatility and inflation, which may impact on the Government’s ability to mobilise
counterpart funds. Climate and weather factors present major risk, especially flooding, and the potential of localised conflict. IADP is
therefore designed to respond to these risks and presents mitigation measures embedded within the framework of the project.
Exit Strategy and Sustainability – By virtue of its CDD implementation approach, sustainability is inbuilt, as communities will be in full
control of the entire process, from identifying the factors constraining productivity and livelihood improvement, to prioritising interventions
and to overseeing the process of implementing the agreed activities meant to address the limitations. They will be capacitated to plan,
operate, maintain and monitor subprojects, and eventually assume total responsibility for these infrastructure. In addition, beneficiaries
will be expected to provide in-kind contribution towards CDPs financing income generating activities – about five percent. The level of
recovery/resilience, especially at the returnee households, through temporary employment opportunities will be critical for stabilizing food
consumption and enabling the beneficiaries to rebuild assets and economic activities, and participate in core SSLRP interventions.
SSLRP’s exit strategy is strengthened by the fact that government structures at the National, State and, especially, County (Payam and
Boma) levels will be involved from the onset in AWPB preparation activities, overseeing activities and monitoring progress. Capacities of
government institutions will be strengthened to ensure effectiveness, and the process of institutionalising SSLRP activities will be initiated
from the very beginning of project implementation. The integration of Government extension agents will also serve as part of the exit
strategy at project completion.
4/31
Environment and Social Category – SSLRP's Environmental and Social categorisation is B; this is based on the nature of expected
activities under each of the two technical components. Given the size of the project and the scale of the expected interventions,
significant and irreversible environmental and social impacts are not expected. But, any potential negative impacts will be addressed
through the Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and other mitigation measures. Based on the categorization,
Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is prepared and annexed with the PDR. Furthermore, ESMPs will be prepared
for the subprojects based on IFAD and GoSS’ screening criteria. Nonetheless, most of the impacts would be localized to the project sites,
short term in nature and, most importantly, manageable or reversible through the proposed mitigation measures.
Climate Risk Classification – SSLRP is classified as Moderate. Accordingly, the Climate Risk and Vulnerability Assessment Report is
annexed within the SECAP Review Note. The report is prepared, based on the GEONODE climate vulnerability assessment tool and
dashboard, specifically prepared for SSLRP.
Implementation Readiness Plans – To reduce implementation/start-up delays, a draft AWPB, and the associated Procurement Plan, as
well as the Project Implementation Manual (PIM) have been prepared as part of the design. The proposed lead IA by GoSS, VSF-
Germany, is an NGO previously vetted by IFAD for the receipt of RPSF funds. Both a Financial Management and a Procurement
assessment have been carried out and the IA was granted funds under the RPSF. Also provided is a due diligence for procurement
aspects.
The Terms of Reference for a number of critical start-up activities, including the County Profiles, have already been prepared and
included in the PIM, to expedite the recruitment of consultants during the first few months of implementation. IFAD will provide Technical
Assistance (TA) to the PCU to ensure adequate capacity to provide the coordination role and to meet IFAD’s reporting requirements in a
timely manner. During the start-up period, IFAD will work with GoSS PCU and the IA to ensure full compliance with IFAD’s Client Portal
(ICP). This will be critical to ensure effective implementation by the IA, and administration of the funds by IFAD considering that low
thresholds (US$20 000) will be applied for IFAD’s prior review of procurement activities, and direct payments to service providers are
expected. Implementation of the project will be guided by scenario based planning, underpinned by conflict scans, which will inform
mission plans, Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) and sequencing of project activities. Where conditions are not conducive for
physical IFAD missions, remote supervision guidelines will be deployed, and complemented by Third Party Monitoring for verification, and
a long term consultant to provide implementation support. Where IFAD missions are possible, strong engagement with FAO will be
established, to take advantage of FAO’s significant logistics capacity in South Sudan.  
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
1.
2.
3.
4.
Political and Economic Context – the Republic of South Sudan (hereafter referred to as ‘South Sudan’) is a landlocked resource-rich
country in Eastern Africa. South Sudan is the continents’ youngest nation and was created in July 2011 when it seceded from
Sudan. It is the third most fragile state in the world after Yemen and Somalia[5]. Its fragility is characterized by conflict, displacement
of people and resulting food insecurity. The prolonged civil war was driven by historical, political, social and economic
marginalization, resulting in tensions due to ethnic divisions, corruption and power struggles. With the formation of the new
government in February 2020, South Sudan has entered an important transition phase, from conflict towards peace and the initiation
of economic recovery. With the establishment of the revitalized peace agreement, the displaced population is returning, albeit with
limited physical and financial assets, poor public and private service coverage.
However, conflict remains one of the social challenges in South Sudan. The country has experienced armed conflicts, at different
times, since 2013. This has caused death and immigration and migration of South Sudanese as well as economic and social
destructions. But, regarding project-induced conflicts, efforts will be made to work towards conflict avoidance through the provision of
quality service and public participation. Close collaboration with the different partners operating in South Sudan will be critical in
anticipating, monitoring and mitigating conflicts. In addition, a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) has been prepared. The target
group engagement strategy, inclusive of the GRM, will ensure the participation of communities in planning, implementation as well
as Monitoring and Evaluation (see Section M of this report).
The country’s population is 12.3 million (50 percent male, 50 percent female) with 85 percent living in rural areas. In 2016, 83
percent of the population lived below the poverty line[6]. As of 2019, with an index of 0.433, the country ranked 185 out of 189
countries in the Human Development Index (HDI), [7]had a life expectancy of 57.9 years, average of 5.3 years of schooling and a
Gross National Income (GNI) per capita of US$963. With less than 13 people per square kilometre, the population density is one of
the lowest in Africa.
Economy –According to the World Bank’s Doing Business 2020, South Sudan ranks 185th out of 190 economies, due to insecurity,
poor road infrastructure, lack of crop storage, and lack of agricultural market infrastructure. Value addition is constrained by lack of
raw materials, lack of power, lack of skilled workers, and lack of finance.[8] Transparency International ranked the country 179 out of
180 in its corruption perception index[9]. The economy has had negative GDP growth for five of the past seven years[10] due to
conflict and economic shocks around oil prices and monetizing the debt. Despite moderate levels of external debt, South Sudan
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
remains in debt distress due to the combined impact of conflict, decline in global oil prices and high levels of fiscal spending. While
inflation has declined, food prices remain high; the cost of the minimum expenditure basket increased by 489 percent between May
2016 and May 2018[11]. Despite its natural resource endowment, Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) has been volatile in the face of
insecurity and was, in fact, negative in 2016 and 2017[12].
5/31
South Sudan’s economy has rebounded during 2018-19, with a growth rate of 3.2 percent after contracting for four consecutive
years since 2014/15[13]. The recovery is attributed to: a) improvement in the oil and mining sectors and b) economic dividends from
the peace agreement, leading to a recovery in non-oil sectors. This notwithstanding, the impact of COVID-19 is expected to have a
negative impact on the country’s economic outlook with growth projected to decline to -3.2 per cent in 2021[14]. The country’s
general inflation rate fell to 24.5 percent in 2019 from 83.5 percent in 2018. The central bank commitment to reduce monetization of
the fiscal deficit will continue, with resulting inflation predicted to decline further to 16.9 percent in 2020 and 9.7 percent in 2021[15].
The COVID-19 pandemic is a serious threat to livelihoods in an already fragile context in South Sudan. Specifically, concerns remain
on the direct impacts of COVID-19 on the food and nutrition security of at-risk households, who are likely to lose income for food
purchases due to containment measures or shift expenditures to health care costs if infected. The first case of COVID-19 was
confirmed on 5 April, 2020. In order to facilitate a structured response to the pandemic, the government formed a COVID-19 National
Task-Force in the country on the 20th of March 2020, under the leadership of the President of the Republic. Through the National
Task-Force, the government adopted containment measures that have since led to a total lockdown for 21 days, which was lifted in
early May 2020.
Following the lifting of the lockdown in May 2020, the Transitional Government of National Unity of South Sudan developed the
South Sudan National COVID-19 Response Plan, which proposes an integrated national preparedness and response plan with
special focus on vulnerable populations. The ongoing lockdown in neighbouring countries, as well as global lock-down measures are
already having a significant impact on food supply chains in the country due to the over-dependence on external markets for goods
and agricultural produce and the significant infrastructure gaps which deter the movement of food across the country.
Conflict situation: Conflicts in South Sudan are attributed to political insurgency with isolated inter-communal and inter-ethnic
clashes over cultural and dwindling resources exacerbated by climate variability and change. South Sudan was drawn into a
devastating conflict in 2013 following political disputes that overlapped with ethnic tensions. Social exclusion from political and
economic participation due to ethnicity has exacerbated conflict, promoted violent confrontations, resulting in loss of human life.
Poverty also plays in the vicious violent ethnic conflicts in South Sudan as amongst the marginalized ethnic groups, communities
clash over access to water and grazing lands. Additionally, disagreements over administrative boundaries is common in Kajo Keji
and Magwi, which share the border with Uganda. The high bride price encourages cattle raiding especially in Terekeka and Bor. Bor
has especially been host to some large cattle raids and intercommunal tensions. Also, tensions between neighbouring communities
of Bor and Pibor have been long-standing and is reflected in cattle raids and the abduction of children, with attacks being reported as
late as December 2019.
Widespread communal conflicts cause human and livestock displacement and disruption of crop production activities making
households to be perpetually food insecure with weak resilience. Severe challenges in protracted conflict areas include early
depletion of household food stocks, dysfunctional markets, loss of livelihoods, and displacement.
Food and nutrition insecurity– food availability and access remains a challenge due to the country’s prolonged conflict, disruption of
agricultural value chains and displacement of people. With the establishment of the revitalized peace agreement, the displaced
population is returning, albeit with limited physical and financial assets, poor public, and private service coverage. The situation is
affected by seasonal flooding, crop pests and diseases, including the invasion of Desert Locust, effects of COVID-19, livestock
diseases, and prolonged dry spells. Returnee households experience food insecurity, have limited opportunities for income
generation and asset accumulation, and have restricted social and economic mobility.
Smallholder Agricultural and Rural Development Context – agriculture is the main engine of growth and economic development in
rural areas, accounting for 90 percent of rural livelihoods in South Sudan. However, the country’s high potential of agricultural
production has not been fully utilized to feed its own people.
Crops – the country is resource rich, with fertile soils and abundant water supplies from the Blue and White Nile rivers. It has a land
area of 648,000 km2, of which 75 percent is suitable for agriculture and 50 percent is highly suitable for crop cultivation. Currently,
agriculture is dominated by low-productivity subsistence farmers, cultivating on average, one ha. Many smallholder farmers own land
but are unable to invest in farming. In addition to conflict and insecurity, crop production is constrained by: a) pest/crop diseases; b)
limited use of quality inputs; c) limited availability of trained extension service providers; d) limited agricultural research; e) limited
irrigation; f) inadequate knowledge; g) inadequate marketing and transport infrastructure and services; h) inadequate rural financing
due to poorly organized rural financial institutions; i) poor post-harvest and value addition infrastructure and storage; and j) shortage
of labour and mechanization.
Livestock –the livestock sector contributes 13.6 percent to the economy[16]. Livestock (cattle, goats, sheep and poultry) represents a
significant proportion of agricultural activity in the country. There are an estimated 12 million cattle, 14 million goats and 13 million
sheep in the country. Livestock production, especially cattle, is undertaken in the arid and semi-arid zones of the country. Livestock
systems are either nomadic pastoralism or agro-pastoralism. For most household’s financial capital is held in the form of livestock
and traditional social support systems are based on livestock transactions. Livestock are sold for cash, slaughtered for cultural
practices, bartered for grain, used as payment for penalties, and given for dowry.
Fisheries – The fisheries sector provides an important source of food security and livelihoods and employment for women and youth.
The country has a vast wetland area covering 112,880 ha, with an additional 2.6 million ha during seasonal flooding. The wetland
area between Bor and Malakal, known as the Sudd, hosts over 100 species of fish. Formed by the White Nile, the Sudd swamps
covers 15 percent of the total area of South Sudan. The current potential for fish harvest in the swamps is estimated at 90,000
tonnes per year, and possibly up to 140,000 tonnes per year. The estimated potential annual catch for the whole country is about
220,000 tonnes. However, current reported annual fish landings is estimated at between 90,000 and 100,000 tonnes; less than 50
15.
16.
17.
percent of the potential. Challenges facing the subsector include lack of supporting infrastructure, inadequate and inappropriate
fishing equipment and difficulty of transportation between production and consumption areas.
6/31
National Strategies and Policies on Smallholder Agriculture, Rural Poverty Reduction and Enhanced Food Security and
Nutrition - GoSS’ overall development vision, related goals and strategy are articulated in the South Sudan Development Plan
(SSDP)[17] and implementation framework, the South Sudan Development Initiative (SSDI). Investment in agriculture is guided by
the Comprehensive Agriculture Master Plan/Irrigation Development Master Plan (CAMP/IDMP) 2015–2040. South Sudan also has a
National Nutrition Policy and has been a member to the Scaling-Up Nutrition (SUN) Movement since 2016. It has a gender policy
and many policies and laws incorporating gender perspectives but its laws and regulations are not implemented, and others are still
in draft form.
The Public Financial Management and Accountability Act, 2011 guides the country’s Public Financial Management (PFM)
architecture. The act has a clear stipulation of accountability, preparation, audit and examination of accounts functions. South Sudan
adopted the Public Procurement and Disposals of Assets Act, 2018, and the Regulations for 2006 which came to effect on 12th
September 2006. Because the 2018 Act is newer than the 2006 regulations, there is a need to update the procurement regulations
to fully align them with the Act. In addition, the 2006 regulations conflict with Procurement Guidelines of most International Financial
Institutions (IFIs). Accordingly, the majority of IFIs make use of their own procurement rules and guidelines and not the country’s
system. Therefore, there is a great need for building the country capacity in the area of public procurement regulations, processes
and procedures.
In 2006, the Government published an official Aid Strategy outlining the process for coordinating and aligning development
assistance in South Sudan. The strategy, which was reviewed in 2011, stipulates that development assistance should be
government-owned and led, aligned with government policies as set out in the SSDP and Budget Sector Plans (BSPs) and use
government systems and institutions for PFM, policy and service delivery, including at the State level. However, with the resurgence
of the civil war in 2013, the donor community stopped using government systems for PFM. Donors opted to implement and finance
projects via the following ways: a) through International Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs); b) using United Nations
Agencies; and c) a hybrid arrangement where the roles and responsibilities were divided between the Government and NGOs or UN
Agencies as implementing partners.
18.
Since 2013, GoSS has received support from different development partners to improve PFM capacities in: a) building state capacity
and accountability at the Central, State and County Governments; b) improving aid coordination in support of the country’s PFM
systems; c) assisting the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning in developing accounting and auditing legislation; and d)
strengthening the ability of government to sustainably expand the domestic resource base and efficiently allocate these resources in
a transparent and equitable manner for service delivery.
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
19.
20.
21.
22.
Gender - South Sudan has a Gender Development Index (GII) of 0.839; it is a patriarchal society that keeps strict gender norms and
rigid gender roles. Female-headed households are also more food insecure than male-headed households and poverty is more
prevalent in their households (44.5 percent)[18] than in male-headed households (38.3%).Women in South Sudan encounter
numerous barriers (e.g. social, cultural, economic, legal, political, and institutional) in relation to their participation in public affairs.
Accounting for 60.2 percent of agricultural labour, women play an important role, but their access to productive assets is limited.
Gender based violence is still prevalent and occurs as domestic violence, early and forced marriage, and the abduction of women
and children during cattle raids. South Sudan has the worst literacy rate in the world with approximately 80 percent of people in the
country unable to read and write[19]. Women represent the majority (81 percent) of this group, with only 19 percent above 15 years
literate. Other than structural and socioeconomic factors, socio-cultural perception further contributes to these rates. Most girls drop
out of school due to early marriage or to provide farming labour at home.
Persons with Disabilities (PWD)– Persons with disabilities in South Sudan face significant social and political exclusion and are
among the most marginalised in society[20]. They tend to be more illiterate, unemployed and less productive than their peers
without disabilities. Furthermore, households headed by an individual with disability are 38% more likely to live in poverty than
households headed by an individual without disability. Finally, there is limited capacity within the government structures to respond to
medical, educational and mobility needs of persons with disabilities.
Youth - the youth (15-35 years) comprise 70 percent of the population; the youth literacy rate is 27 percent[21]. Youth employment is
dominated by low-productivity, unremunerated/under-remunerated work. About 60 percent of employed youth are in the agricultural
sector, primarily subsistence farming and raising livestock. Unemployment challenges affect both male and female youth; the impact
on female is higher. South Sudanese youth lack technical skills in general but 60% of those who do not go to school are women.
Poverty and social norms related to e.g. early marriages force girls to drop out of school. Faced with lack of opportunities in rural
areas, and difficulties in accessing productive resources, youth migrate to urban centres where they engage in low-paying jobs in the
informal sector. The South Sudan Youth Development Policy (SSYDP) was developed in 2013 but since then, it has not been
passed into a final policy. Thus, no accountability framework for youth. Youth employment in general, and in the agro-pastoral
sector, could be a major opportunity for poverty reduction, and the preservation of cohesion and social peace in South Sudan.
Nutrition – Global Acute Malnutrition (GAM) at the national level is at 12.6 percent; 2.4 percentage points short of the critical phase
(15 percent) of malnutrition. On the other hand, the national stunting rate is 15.1 percent (Central Equatoria and Eastern Equatoria
had rates above the national average at 30 percent and 23 percent, respectively). Several aggravating factors that affect high
malnutrition rates include: a) high morbidity rates; b) poor quality of diet with only 4 percent of children achieving the required
Minimum Acceptable Diet (MAD); and c) low Women Dietary Diversity. The other aggravating factor is flooding that contributes to
internal displacement in some locations, disrupting households’ livelihoods and access to clean water. Malnutrition is also correlated
with food affecting availability and access.
23.
Households headed by women face higher risks of food insecurity and malnutrition exacerbated by larger consumption gaps
compared to male headed households. These women are also unable to assure optimal nutrition to household members due to
heavy workload. This results in poor care and feeding practices (inadequate breastfeeding and weaning, food preservation and
storage, mother’s education level, and poor access to life skills and nutrition education). This negatively impacts child nutrition. The
effect of early age at marriage and age at first birth on women nutritional status is significant and is linked to maternal malnutrition
and anaemia; a factor in fetal growth restriction.
7/31
24.
Climate and Environment – The country has extensive areas of arable land, grasslands, wetlands and tropical forests. Its natural
assets include significant agricultural, mineral, timber and energy resources. The climate is mostly hot and dry, with seasonal rains
that allow for two or three harvests a year in the country’s southern green belt. Although South Sudan contributes very little to global
greenhouse gas emissions, it is highly vulnerable to the impacts of rising temperatures and increased rainfall variability due to
climate change, since pastoralists and farmers rely heavily on seasonal rains. Indeed, according to the 2017 Climate Change
Vulnerability Index, South Sudan ranks among the five countries in the world most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. The
population of South Sudan is extremely vulnerable to the impacts of increased warming and unpredictable and reduced rainfall,
given its fragile state and its extreme dependence on rain-fed subsistence agriculture. A warmer climate and drier weather have food
security implications, reducing crop harvests and pasture availability and intensifying the impacts of droughts and floods.
Other SECAP Considerations
25.
Child Labour – South Sudan is characterised by high rates of child labour with 46 percent of 10-14-year-olds spending at least some
time each week performing economic activity. Over 60 percent of the working children are in the agriculture sector. The Southern
Sudan Child Act sets the minimum age for the admission of a child to paid employment at 14 years, but set a lower minimum age of
12 years for light work. Children’s involvement in economic activity is associated with compromised education.
26.
Returnees – improvement in the security situation has seen the influx of returnees from abroad, with 70 percent intent on remaining
permanently. Although 90 percent own land with no major access barrier, they lack the productive assets (seeds and tools). They
lack reliable livelihood opportunities and are involved in menial jobs mainly in providing farm labour.
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
Like many development partners, IFAD disengaged from supporting GoSS due to the civil war. The Peace Agreement and the
subsequent formation of the Government of National Unity have ushered in a reform agenda geared towards establishing the
building blocks for economic growth, peace and stability and strengthening livelihoods of the rural communities. The Peace
Agreement has motivated the return of the displaced population, with most settling in Eastern Equatoria[22]. The returnees are
faced with conditions of limited physical and financial assets and weak public and private service coverage. Agriculture and rural
infrastructure are dilapidated with seasonally impassable community access roads, and inefficient and expensive transportation from
farm to storage facilities and markets. Irrigation and water harvesting technologies are inadequate, with poor post-harvest and value
addition. Climate change impacts are resulting in more frequent heavy rainfall events, increased seasonal flooding and
crop/livestock pest and disease outbreaks.
Despite the formation of the Government of National Unity, the context remains fragile with localised inter-community conflict driven
by competition for natural resources, adverse weather conditions and flooding.  The main risk is the resumption of instability if the
peace deal fails. It is therefore critical that efforts towards re-integration of the rural population into viable livelihood opportunities are
given priority, as an important strategy towards the sustenance of the peace agreement.
IFAD’s only prior engagement in South Sudan was through the South Sudan livelihood Development Project (SSLDP), which ended
prematurely due to the security crisis in the country. SSLDP provides valuable lessons that have informed the design of SSLRP
including: the critical importance of rural infrastructure as the main enabler for famer access to markets and services; need to
implement through third parties, strength of community driven development and critical importance of addressing socio-cultural
issues during implementation.
There is significant evidence that Community Driven Development (CDD) is the most effective approach to empower communities,
especially in post-conflict countries[23]. CDD enables flexibility to respond to the scale and nature of community needs in diverse
local conditions. IFAD has had extensive experience working with the CDD approach, which focuses on empowering rural poor
people and their local institutions to articulate their needs and shape the development agenda in their respective communities. In the
implementation of SSLDP in South Sudan, CDD approach has been instrumental in providing access to infrastructure and services
to poor and marginalized people while, at the same time, giving them agency.
Different experiences have confirmed the validity of the CDD approach in supporting social and economic empowerment. In Ethiopia,
the Pastoral Community Development Programme (PCDP III) phases empowered communities to determine the investments under
the Community Investment Fund, the Western Upland Poverty Alleviation Project in Nepal allowed for a stronger and more effective
focus on the ultra-poor and the very poor through the Community Investment Plan (CIP) approach. According to IFAD-IOE (2019)
Evaluation Synthesis on IFAD’s support to community-driven development[24], CDD projects have helped in rehabilitating
infrastructure and have provided significant employment benefits to the local population in conflict and post-conflict countries.
IFAD’s re-engagement in South Sudan will be anchored within the framework of the Funds’ support to countries in fragile situations,
with a focus on bridging the gap from the humanitarian to development nexus. SSRLRP will use a Community-Driven Development
(CDD) approach, linked to the elaboration and implementation of inclusive Community Development Plans (CDPs), that identify
priority production and infrastructure investments needed to address climate change adaptation, and provide viable and sustainable
livelihoods for the target rural communities. In alignment with the GoSS Comprehensive Agriculture Master Plan (CAMP) and IFAD’s
Country Strategy Note (2021-2022) SSLRP will focus on re-establishing livelihoods for rural communities, focussing on returnee
households, young people and women. It will strengthen the resilience of rural communities to emergency and crises and by
increasing local agricultural production and availing livelihood opportunities, it will complement the peace-building process.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
B. Lessons learned
34.
Lessons have been sourced from the last IFAD-supported project in South Sudan, from other countries and from similar/related
projects financed by the GoSS or its development partners. These lessons are:
8/31
Where fragility, limited institutional capacities, limited availability of rural service providers and inadequacy of coordination
mechanisms occur, a Third Party IA is an ideal solution. In South Sudan now all International Financing Institutions (IFIs) are
using Third Party IA, either a United Nations agency or an international NGOs, with GOSS providing oversight. Similar
arrangements will be used by SSLRP;
When localised crises interrupt people’s lives, ‘crisis modifiers’ may be critical to enable early action and rapid response to protect
development gains. In 2015, DFID implemented the Building Resilience to Climate Extremes and Disasters (BRACED)
programme, which proved useful in managing conflict-related displacement in Burkina Faso, Mali and Niger and provided a
practical means to reduce the impact of a crisis on beneficiaries and protect resilience trajectories;
Integrated rural development approach in which smallholder agriculture is supported by other related services like water, feeder
roads, education, and engaging participation of the beneficiaries enables the growth of social capital between communities but
also strengthens vertical engagements with Local Governments (LGs and the State, thereby: a) strengthens the process of state-
community relationship through meaningful dialogue facilitated by Community Facilitators (CFs); b) empowers participating actors
by reshuffling existing roles and responsibilities of actors in the private and public domains; and c) rekindles the focus on social
protection by the state through provisions and allocations of intensive public works;
IFAD’s IOE Evaluation Synthesis on CDD in IFAD Projects (2019) has found that, while the requirement for community
contributions is useful to develop a sense of ownership, it needs to be limited to a level that all community members can meet;
otherwise the more disadvantaged groups might not be able to participate. A high financial contribution, typically between 20 and
30 per cent, reportedly restricted access of the poorest to the assets built in several cases. Considering the context, SSLRP
expects in-kind contribution by the communities at a level of 5 percent of the value of the CDP.
Recruitment of the IA prior to start-up will greatly minimise start-up delays[25]. Identifying and procuring the services of an IA can
be very protracted; this can result in a considerable delay of project activity commencement of up to one year. The identification
by GoSS of a consortium of NGOs as IA for SSLRP will ensure efficient and prompt start-up of implementation activities;
Frontloading of infrastructure is critical for beneficiaries to: a) pilot its use; b) identify and solve challenges associated with its use
and c) put mechanisms in place for the sustainable operation and maintenance of the infrastructure[26]. SSLRP will frontload the
sequencing of infrastructure activities;
Labour intensive public works (LIPW) creates temporary wage employment for the local community. For instance, in an IFAD
supported project in Rwanda, “…1,500 women and 3,500 men had access to the periodic road rehabilitation and maintenance
employment opportunities…”[27]. Labour intensive public works will also be applied under SSLRP to create job opportunities and
a source of income for the target local communities;
Productive infrastructure and institutional strengthening and capacity building are important for long-term sustainable
agricultural/community development[28]. This is the focus of Component 2 and Subcomponent 3.2 in SSLRP;
The location of community assets and infrastructure requires full transparency with the communities on the eligibility criteria and
should be undertaken in a participatory manner involving community leaders to mitigate potential conflict and viability of the
investments[29]. SSLRP will use a Community-Driven Development (CDD) process to involve key community-level stakeholders
in site selection, determination of investment areas and their involvement in operation and maintenance of assets;
In order to deliver services that are responsive to the agricultural and economic needs of the community, with a good outreach to
poor women and men, it is critically important that local government: a) county council (largest administrative structure); b) Payam
council; and c) Boma council and community institutions are engaged[30]. Under SSLDP, Boma and County Development
Committees (CDCs) proved to be the best entry points to reaching out to the target beneficiaries. SSLRP’s CDD approach is
consistent with this recommendation;
Women play a critical role in addressing household food security and nutrition goals.[31] It is, therefore, essential to ensure that
sufficient activities suitable for/oriented towards women are included in project design. In SSLRP, considerable efforts have been
made to ensure women’s effective participation in, and benefit from, planned project interventions.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
35.
36.
37.
The overall goal of SSLRP is to ‘contribute to improved and resilient livelihoods among the targeted rural communities’. The Project
Development Objective is to ‘empower communities to participate in decision-making processes that will recover agriculture
livelihoods, build household resilience and promote stability’[32].
Intervention Area – SSLRP will be implemented in three (out of 10) States and five  counties: Eastern Equatoria (Magwi and Torit);
Central Equatoria (Kajo Keji and Terekeka) and Jonglei  (Bor). The project will directly target 38,800 poor households (27 percent of
the three states combined, approximately 225,040 people[33]) of which 60 percent (135,024) will be women, 70 per cent youth
(I57,528).  It is estimated that nearly 10 percent of the target population (22,504) will be returnees and that 24 percent of the
households reached (9,312) will be women-headed.
Geographic Targeting Criteria – The target areas were jointly selected by GoSS and IFAD. Considering the high poverty index in
all three states (92.5-Eastern Equatoria, 75.61-Central Equatoria and 98-Jonglei1), selection was based on: a) food production
corridors (Greater Equatoria accounts for 40 percent of the country’s cereal production, while Jonglei has the highest livestock
numbers and high levels of fishing); b) States hosting high numbers of returnees (the three States account for the highest 
concentration of returnees); c) potential to build on previous IFAD investments in Eastern and Central Equatoria and other
development partners and d) stability and low risk of future conflict. Demographics of the Counties are presented below.
38.
Selection of Payams and Bomas  (villages) – Within each of the three counties, three payams will be selected. Selection of Payams
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
and Bomas will be done in consultation with the County administration and will follow the geographical criteria used in selecting the
States and Counties. In addition, the following characteristics will be considered: a) be easily accessible to allow regular access to
project team; b) Payams/Bomas from the previous SSLDP; c) Payams/Bomas where there are complementary investments by other
partners (e.g. AfDB, WFP), etc.; d) ethnic balance; e) neighbouring areas to increase the project’s impact, effectiveness and
efficiency and project monitoring; and f) climate vulnerability assessment for Payams/Bomas with low to no adaptive capacity. The
selection of Payams and Bomas will be done by the IA through a consultative process with the Local Government (Payam
Development committees (PDCs) and Boma Development committees (BDCs). An elaborate community mobilisation and
engagement plan will be developed to ensure social inclusion and full participation of the target beneficiaries. Community
participatory wealth ranking will be applied in the selection of vulnerable households for participation in the cash for work scheme
under LIPW.
9/31
Target Group – The primary target group are poor, food insecure smallholder producers engaged in fishing, cropping, and livestock
production. Within these groups, there will be special emphasis on the inclusion of youth (70 percent), women (60 percent) and
vulnerable groups, such as women headed households and returnees and persons with disabilities who will receive specific attention
to facilitate their social integration in agricultural production and economic activities.
Targeting Strategy – The targeting strategy includes self-targeting, direct and community targeting approaches. As most of the
interventions will be of interest for the target groups, direct targeting will be used to ensure social inclusion of women, youth and
vulnerable groups (returnees and persons with disabilities) and community through quotas. Self-targeting will ensure that
interventions respond to the needs and priorities of the target groups especially women, and communication and awareness
campaigns will be carried out for this purpose. SSLRP will work with existing CBOs, identified through the County Profile, and will
also seek to support the development of community groups.  Existing groups that will be supported include VSLA’s, agro-pastoral
groups, crop production and enterprise groups. The project will support a range of enterprises that will be attractive to the different
target groups e.g. Labour-Intensive Public Works (LIPW) for the returnee youth, nutrition interventions targeting pregnant and
lactating women and children under 2 years. Special considerations will be made to address the inclusion of the most vulnerable
social categories, such as returnees and persons with disabilities (these are described in more details in the Project Implementation
Manual (PIM). Community participatory wealth ranking will be applied in the selection of vulnerable households for participation in
the cash for work scheme under LIPW.
A total of 225,504 Food insecure smallholder producers will be targeted (60 percent women and 70 percent youth), representing
about 27 percent of the target population. The smallholder producers engage in mainly three livelihood activities: crop farmers, agro-
pastoralists/pastoralists and fisher folks. SSLRP will improve the livelihoods of the smallholder producers by enhancing productivity
(soil and water conservation, water for production and inputs), value addition (postharvest infrastructure), improved access to
markets and inputs. The smallholder producers will organise themselves into CBOs with common interests (both private and public
good). Beneficiaries will benefit from increased production of diversified foods of high nutritional value, reduced post-harvest losses
and maintaining the nutritional quality of the food and nutrition education targeting both men and women.
An estimated 135,302 women will be targeted by SSLRP. These include 24 per cent women and women headed households,
within which 10% will be returnees. SSLRP strategy for the inclusion of women is geared towards women's collective agency, and
improving their access and control of development resources. SSLRP will: a) promote women leadership and their representation in
decision-making roles in community institutions; b) put in place specific quotas and ensure 30 percent of all grants are awarded to
women only groups; c) use of gender sensitive approaches to trainings on literacy, financial literacy and community mobilisation; d)
promote technologies that reduce the burden on women and enterprises that allow for self-targeting of women through the CDPs;
and e) create awareness on gender-based violence. Village Savings and Loan Associations (VSLAs), which have about 90% women
membership, will be considered as CBOs in the CDD process. CBOs will provide an entry point to train members in GALS and to
improve the performance of the groups themselves and develop common areas of interest, address inequalities and strengthen
mutually beneficial linkages. This will be achieved through empowering women and men, improve relationships, help households
harness their collective potential, negotiate gender equitable decision making and workloads and improve nutrition. Although women
are allowed to participate in farming and managing assets, land rights remain a critical barrier to women’s empowerment.  Access to
critical resources such as land for women will be key targeting criteria and a pre-requisite to community selection. Through the
CDDP facilitated process, communities will be facilitated to make collective commitments to safeguard not only access to land but
also security of tenure, to incentivise women enterprises. This will be monitored over time.
Women will benefit from investments in vegetable gardening, small livestock and processing, and short term income through Labour-
Intensive Public Works (LIPW). Technical support will be provided at the beginning of the project to the entire implementation team,
including implementing agencies, to develop a gender operational plan that will incorporate measures and approaches to support
this. Women be will be provided with nutrition support, including training and awareness about nutrition, mentoring and support with
Integrated Homestead Food Production (IHFP) production to increase dietary diversity, and focus on nutrient rich foods, such as
legumes, fish, meat and poultry.
About 157,853 rural youth (60% women) aged between 15 and 35 years will be targeted. These are unemployed youth and with
low educational levels (Central Equatoria 32,453, Eastern Equatoria 70,125, Jonglei 54,950). This target group will include returnees
(10%). The youth will be provided with second chance learning opportunities and job relevant skills to support start-up farming
activities and service provision. Main interventions include: a) capacity building through entrepreneurship training, business skills and
formal courses in Good Agricultural Practices (GAP); b) access to capital through investment grants; c) cash injection through
participation in the LIPW (see Subcomponent 2.1 for details); and d) voice through representation on decision-making and
coordination bodies, such as community committees. A selection criterion will be defined in the CDP and other guidelines to ensure
that youth make up 60 percent of the CDP funded plans and 50 percent of Community Facilitators and GALs facilitators. SSLRP will
include actions to contribute to the elimination of child labour by coordinating with child protection agencies, such as United Nations
International Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF) and enforcing no child labour policy within the project target areas. The policy
will be informed by County Profile assessments that will be conducted to determine activities that are carried out by children among
other things.
45.
A total 16,331 returnees (Central Equatoria 15 percent, Eastern Equatoria 25 percent, Jonglei 1 percent) – This will include 60
percent women and 70 percent youth. Although 90 percent own land with no major access barrier, they lack the productive assets
(seeds and tools). They lack reliable livelihood opportunities and are involved in menial jobs, mainly in providing farm labour. They
will benefit through agriculture livelihood development (Component 2) and LIPW for short term employment gains. At least 10
percent of the CBO members will be drawn from the returnee’s community. Women headed households will be included in the
women target group.
10/31
46.
On Persons Living with Disabilities (PWD)- They will be targeted through training and capacity building activities linked to service
provision, income-generation and off-farm income opportunities, and voice in decision making. The PWDs will be integrated into
project activities depending on the nature of their disability e.g. for community facilitation, agro-processing, labour intensive public
works. SSLRP will define safe spaces (separate consultations) to enable them to voice their needs and concerns to be considered in
the process of developing CDPs. While PWDs are an important vulnerable group, specific targets for this group will be assigned
following county profiling exercise that will be conducted as a key start-up activity.
D. Components/outcomes and activities
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
Outcomes – SSLRP has two main outcomes: a) communities and local public governing bodies are empowered to plan and
implement investments that stabilize livelihoods and build assets at the household and community levels; and b) improved access to
productive assets, services and climate resilient infrastructure.
Components – SSLRP’s development objective will be achieved through the effective implementation of two technical components:
1) Community Driven Development Planning; and 2) Agriculture Production and Rural Livelihood Support. The third component,
Project Support and Capacity Building, will build the capacity of GOSS to support implementation via an IA. Component 0, Disaster
Risk Reduction and Management, aims at providing a timely response when adverse conditions e.g. weather extremes, conflict or
calamities like COVID-19 pandemic occur.
Component 0:Disaster Response and Risk Mitigation – The objective of this component is to ensure that in the event of an
environmental or man-made disaster that SSLRP can promptly reallocate resources from the other activities in support of the GoSS
emergency response. Component 0 can only be triggered following the declaration of an emergency situation by GoSS, and/or in
agreement of GoSS. This component will facilitate for ‘crisis modifiers’, to enable early action and rapid response to crises that
manifest in project areas, with a specific focus to protect development gains made by SSLRP. It will enable SSLRP to finance
activities that may not have been foreseen in the design, but deemed critical to prevent the erosion of development gains, sustain
resilience and strengthen the maturity of resilience outcomes attainable during the lifecycle of SSLRP. The component will be
underpinned by continuous monitoring and identification of risks by the IA, which will in-turn formally notify the PMU for facilitation of
decision-making by the oversight bodies.  . Funds would be reallocated from other components to support crisis modifiers through
either Annual Work Plan and Budget modifications, or deployment of IFAD’s Restructuring Policy. 
Component 1: Community Driven Development Planning – This Component’s objectives are to: a) build strong and inclusive
CBOs that will serve as promoters and managers of socio-economic change; b) work with CBOs to develop climate and gender
responsive Community Development Plans (CDPs), that respond to beneficiaries priorities; and c) identify strategic productive
investments to enhance the effectiveness of the CDPs. The CDP process will be underpinned by the development of County
Profiles, which will identify the key opportunities and constraints, market dynamics, community groups and their occupations,
infrastructure gaps, and context for IFAD’s mainstreaming themes. County Profiles will inform the preparation of the facilitation
guides to ensure that the CDPs financed are economic, productive and address core IFAD priorities, such as nutrition. CDP
development will be achieved through a guided facilitation process.
Subcomponent 1.1: Build Strong and Inclusive Community Based Organizations (CBOs) - For SSLRP, CBOs are the building
blocks of rural communities’ social capital, used as conduits for facilitating economic empowerment at the household and community
levels. The core objectives of the subcomponent are to: a) prepare the County Profiles for each of the five Counties; b) recruit
Community Facilitators and finalise the facilitation guidelines; c) strengthen existing CBOs; and d) support the emergence and
capacity of new CBOs. The selection of Community Facilitators will take into account gender and conflict sensitivity. SSLRP will
ensure that members of the CBOs will be diverse and representative of the different categories of people considered vulnerable
found within the communities (women, youth, vulnerable households, etc.).
This subcomponent will target both existing groups and help to establish new CBOs, including, a) agro-pastoral field schools; b)
VSLAs; c) youth enterprise groups; and d) community development committees, which will all be key proponents in the design,
contracting, supervision and management of social and productive infrastructure and other development activities. CBOs will
establish gender sensitive subproject committees which will be the main conduits to deliver training and capacity building, including
entrepreneurship, gender training and nutrition education. The project foresees that strategic infrastructural investments, like feeder
roads, will be jointly managed by village-level subproject committees comprising communities and public-oriented organisations (e.g.
Boma Development Committees (BDCs), Payam Development Committees (PDCs). The project will establish/strengthen an
estimated 485 CBOs.
The County Profiles will be prepared in consultation with beneficiaries, development partners and local government authorities, and
will provide core information on: a) existing infrastructure and soft (CBOs established, trained, etc.) investments; b) the status of
IFAD’s mainstreaming themes including climate and weather risk, gender dynamics, conflict and youth empowerment; and c) assist
in the selection of project sites (Payams, Bomas - villages); identification of strategic investments that will be financed under
subcomponent 2.2.; and overall gap analysis on the state of CBOs in the target Counties.
Subcomponent 1.2: Development of Community Driven Development Plans (CDPs) – this subcomponent will empower
communities to identify opportunities for their economic empowerment and elaborate CDPs that will improve livelihoods, inclusive of
increase overall levels of agricultural production and productivity (quality and quantity) in response to nutritional and identified market
demands. Potential activities in this case will include provision of training, advisory services, etc.
55.
Communities will be facilitated to develop CDPs through a five step process: a) Identification and targeting of public and private
CBOs and communities; b) Diagnostic assessment of existing CBOs and identifying needs; c) Facilitated process to identify
opportunities and develop gender and climate responsive plans that align to market demand and community nutrition and food
security needs; and d) approval of CDPs after public vetting; and e any relevant capacity building aligned to the CDPs.
Complementary activities under this subcomponent will include: definition of capacity needs by each CBOs to be able to implement
the CDPs; preparation of business plans for training of CIGs/CBOs; provision of tailor made group training in governance,
management and community procurement; as well as training in gender and environmental mainstreaming; regular savings, book
keeping and understanding of group by-laws.
11/31
56.
57.
CDP preparation will require dedicated inputs of technical experts or subject matter specialists, including livelihood and nutrition
experts, social inclusion, climate change, and conflict sensitivity, etc. These processes will be inclusive and interactive, responding
to local context, including the demands of households. The CFs will ensure that the different categories of beneficiaries are engaged
in the decisions and that technical experts provide credible guidance in the development of the CDPs in accordance with the menu
of legible activities.
Component 2: Agriculture Production and Rural livelihood Support–This component will finance approved CDPs developed
under Component 1, and strategic investments identified through the County Profiles and the CDPs. The types of activities to be
financed include: a) labour intensive community civil works; b) agriculture production and increased productivity of households; c) off-
farm income generating activities such as processing; d) strategic infrastructure for increased market linkages; and e) skills
enhancement for young people to provide agriculture advisory services. For the non-farm livelihoods, support may include enhancing
productivity of local employment, improving artisanal skills, improvement in rural infrastructure, reducing postharvest losses,
promoting market linkages, etc. From CDPs developed under Component 1, SSLRP will provide grants that will cover most costs
associated with the CDPs generated.  However, in-kind, contributions, such as part of the production costs (labour, cost of land and
contribution towards farm inputs) will be considered as counterpart financing from all the beneficiaries at a modest level of 5 percent
of the value of the CDP. The expected results from these targeted investments and services articulated in the CDPs include: a)
increased physical access to markets, processing and storage facilities) strengthened environmental sustainability and climate
resilience of poor rural people’s economic activities; c) land brought under climate-resilient management; and d) communities
receive nutrition support. The outcomes for Component 2 is ‘improved access to productive assets, services and climate resilient
infrastructure’.
58.
Subcomponent 2.1: Investments for Climate-Sensitive Agriculture Production and Rural Livelihoods - Outputs: a) Labour-
Intensive Public Works (LIPWs) CDPs – specifically targeting the youth and women. It will also target returnees that are settled in
homesteads and seeking to recover their development activities; and b) improved household food security and nutrition by
supporting household incomes through diverse on-farm and off-farm livelihoods.
59.
60.
61.
62.
12/31
Labour-Intensive Public Works (LIPWs)- The objectives of this intervention include: a) create community assets of strategic value
and that are complementary to the investments in livelihood options of the local communities; and b) temporary employment in
LIPW. This will allow an estimated 2,600 returnee households (mostly youth and women) in the target area to stabilize consumption
and recover livelihoods, to be to participate in the core livelihood initiatives under the project. This intervention will finance: a) the
cash provision to the beneficiaries participating in the LIPW activities; b) capacity building at the community level for operations and
management of infrastructure; and c) the equipment, materials, and semi-skilled labour needed to implement the LIPWs to the
required standard and quality. The costs incurred by Counties and Payams in implementing this intervention will be covered under
Subcomponent 2.2. 
Improved Household Incomes Support Activities (IHISAs) - has two core support activities: a) smallholder agriculture investment
support (SAIS); and b) off-farm support activities (OFFS). SAIS will target smallholder agriculture, including crops, livestock and
fisheries with the view to improving household’s food, nutrition and income security, both in the short and medium term.    
Objective of IHISAs – These include: a) improved food security and nutrition of the targeted beneficiaries through improving and
diversifying sources of households’ livelihood incomes; and b) support development of demand driven livelihood skills for
unemployed youth and the poor, creating opportunities for self-employment. The activities include: agro-processing and/or value
addition to crops, livestock, fisheries and other natural products like shea butter and honey processing, etc. It also includes
comprehensive skills development training and follow up mentoring support. Specific activities from off-farm activities will target the
youth, female headed households, persons with disabilities and returnees.
CDPs will be funded through grants of up to US$2,000 (in line with best practice in the country)[34] per CBO comprising a maximum
of 15 households. The grant support will seek to increase the current area of land under cultivation, procure improved agricultural
technologies and reduce postharvest losses, deliver of regular advice and support on agronomic practices and markets.  It could also
finance other alternatives that include: a) livestock/equipment for animal draft/tractor mechanization services; b) water harvesting; c)
purchase of small-scale irrigation equipment; d) purchase of renewable energy; e) postharvest management equipment, etc. It is
estimated that about 485 CDPs will be funded, and 30 percent of these will be women groups. Considering the homogenous nature
of the rural population in South Sudan, selection of beneficiary groups will be guided by the targeting strategy elaborated above and
in the PIM. Elite capture will be addressed by ensuring transparency and involving communities in decision making, including
sensitization, selection of CDPs and validation by the village/community structures i.e. Payam Development Committees (PDCs) and
Boma Development Committees (BDCs).  
63.
CBOs supported by SSLRP will benefit from aggregation centres and market infrastructure constructed by AFDBs AMVAT project in
Jonglei and Eastern Equatoria (details are included in the PIM).
64.
Subcomponent 2.2 - Community Infrastructure to Support Production and Marketing- This subcomponent provides for
community level infrastructure investments as follows: a) improving agricultural production; b) climate resilience; c) postharvest
storage and processing; and d) access to inputs and markets. Infrastructure gaps will be identified through the County Profiles and
validated through the CDP process. These infrastructure investments are expected to be complementary to the CDPs. Based on
prior experience and considering the contextual analysis, it is expected that the CDPs will identify a range of community
infrastructure needs within the following menu of options:
Soil and water conservation - includes terraces, contour bunds, check dams, gabions, side drains, etc. For optimal utilization of
these infrastructure, they would need to be accompanied by investment in agro-forestry activities, such as establishing tree
nurseries for selected agroforestry trees, shrubs and grasses;
Water supply systems for improving production such as: water harvesting structures; boreholes with solar pumping systems; small
dams and valley tanks, incorporating sand filtration and solar pumped abstraction and, river/spring abstractions with pipeline
distribution systems;
Infrastructure to reduce postharvest losses and for processing such as drying beds and sheds, storage facilities, de-hullers,
processing mills, etc.; and
Improving access to input and output markets through improvement in degraded/eroded sections of rural access roads such as:
alignment, widening and gravelling of existing feeder roads; year-round water crossings; drainage improvements; and, short
sections of road surface improvements.
65.
66.
67.
For each of the developed facilities a management committee will be capacitated to manage the day-to-day operations and
maintenance. The capacity building will be two-fold: a) capacity building in organization and management; and b) capacity building
in the technicalities of operations and maintenance specific to the particular type/technology of facility.
Component 3: Project Support and Capacity Building – The objective of the component is twofold: a) to manage SSLRP in an
efficient and effective manner by providing overall coordination to planning and implementation, financial management and control,
procurement support, Monitoring and Evaluation, knowledge management, and progress reporting. It will ensure liaison with other
relevant projects/programmes being implemented in the country that seek to address similar or related constraints; this would be
aimed at taking advantage of existent synergies and avoiding duplications; and b) augment the capacity of government institutions to
facilitate participatory planning and development processes. Accordingly, the component has two subcomponents: a)
Subcomponent 3.1: Third Party Implementation Arrangements; and b) Subcomponent 3.2: Institutional Capacity Building and Policy
Support.
Subcomponent 3.1: Third Party Implementation Arrangements – A third party IA, comprised of a consortium of NGOs led by
VSF-Germany, has been selected by the GoSS (further details are included in section K on Organizational Framework). The IA will
be responsible for all implementation of the core technical components (i.e. Components 1, 2 and 0 if deployed during the
implementation of the project). The main responsibilities of the IA will be to: a) prepare and execute the Annual Work Plans and
Budgets (AWPBs), implementation progress and financial reports for submission to the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) (for review,
comment and onward forwarding to the oversight body (National Technical Committee (NTC) and National Advisory Committee
(NAC); b) M&E, fiduciary and procurement systems and capacities and undertake relevant project-related fiduciary functions in
68.
69.
70.
compliance with IFAD Guidelines; c) work closely with the PCU and the target States and Counties during planning and
implementation to ensure consistency with State and County development agendas. The IA will use government frontline extension
agents where they exist, with the dual objective of strengthening their capacity and to serve as part of the exit strategy. 
13/31
The IA will include a core team of experienced staff to coordinate and oversee SSLRP implementation: a) Project Manager; b)
Technical Officers (Components 1 and 2); c) Monitoring, Evaluation and KM Officer; d) Financial Management Officer; and e)
Procurement Officer. The IA will also ensure mainstreaming of women’s empowerment and nutrition occurs, as well as ensuring all
activities are climate smart and climate resilient. A complete set of the IA’s responsibilities are detailed in the ToRs and RFP in the
PIM.
Subcomponent 3.2: Institutional Capacity Building and Policy Support– This subcomponent will strengthen capacities of
government staff at the national, State and County levels to be able to facilitate the coordination and implementation of development
projects, and to conduct policy review. In liaison with other partners (e.g. World Bank and AfDB), SSLRP will support the PCU to take
on a coordination role of development projects in MAFS.
Capacity building interventions will be premised on a capacity and systems needs assessment, which will detail specific capacity and
systems gaps at central, State and County levels of government. Indicative activities for capacity development include: a) enhancing
financial management capacity by installing financial management software in the PCU and relevant trainings on international
financial reporting requirements; b) preparation of procurement manuals for MAFS and provision of requisite training and TA; c)
provision of a decentralised M&E system at the State and County levels; and d) logistical and connectivity support to the focal points
at the County and Boma levels. SSLRP will also contribute towards strengthening the extension system, building on the National
Agriculture and Livestock Extension Policy (NALEP), and supporting the review and finalization of extension manuals and conducting
training of trainers (ToTs) to support the dissemination of extension modules.   
71.
Policy Support - SSLRP will support strengthening the national policy framework for agriculture and rural development. Specifically,
SSLRP will collaborate with the International Labour Organisation (ILO) on the development of: a) National Cooperatives
Development Policy Framework and Strategy – this would provide guidance on the formation, growth and development of
cooperative enterprises in the country; and b) National Rural Financial Policy Framework; it would guide the delivery of financial
services to smallholder producers and resource poor farmers in the rural areas.
E. Theory of Change
72.
73.
74.
In post-conflict situations, rural communities have very limited access to productive infrastructure, assets and public and/or private
services. A CDD approach is the most effective as it facilitates a deeper understanding of local needs, economic threats and
opportunities, whilst promoting social cohesion and facilitating social inclusion. SSLRP will therefore empower communities to
inclusively identify their main constraints and prioritize solutions through the Community Development Plans (CDPs) that promote
private and public investments into productive agriculture-based livelihood opportunities for the rural communities.
The underlying assumption is that the target communities, including returnees, are not able to produce sufficient quantities to
achieve food security, produce a surplus to sell, or to be able to consume a balanced and nutritious diet, due to prolonged periods of
conflict and violence. Communities and households remain vulnerable to climate change shocks and have limited adaptive capacity
to manage these shocks. Poor road infrastructure complicates the transportation of farm inputs and produce; and limits farmers
ability to diversify the household food basket with market-sourced foods. Given the post-conflict context of the country, the bulk of
the support provided to the rural population by development partners has mostly been humanitarian assistance, rather than long
term sustainable development.
SSLRP therefore seeks to bridge the humanitarian-development gap, by recovery opportunities anchored in the agriculture sector
that will promote livelihood development, peace and stabilization. SSLRP’s goal and development objective will be achieved through
a set of activities that will address constraints to agricultural productivity enhancement and livelihood improvement. Such activities
include: a) increasing access to productive inputs (improved seeds, extension and mechanization services); b) improving
postharvest handling and storage; c) developing climate smart agricultural infrastructure; d) increasing market linkages; and e)
creating stability and stabilization through temporary jobs for the youth in infrastructure construction. Climate resilience, especially
soil and water-focused interventions, will be considered as strategic investments given the impacts of adverse weather conditions on
livelihoods. Social inclusion of women and youth will be mainstreamed across project interventions with specific quotas and
interventions that allow for self-targeting. The project will be implemented within a conflict sensitive approach that will facilitate for
adaptive programming and crisis modification. Achievement of household nutrition will be a key outcome tracked in the log frame.
75.
These interventions will result in: a) diversified and increased volumes of crop and livestock products which will impact consumption
of more nutritious and healthy food; b) construction of climate-smart infrastructure that reduces the effects of heavy rainfall events
and floods on livelihoods; c) diversified enterprise opportunities in processing, d) improved access to nutrient dense and climate-
resilient crops and cropping patterns; and e) greater community cohesion and stability. By working to improve productivity, capacities
and livelihood opportunities, SSLRP will contribute to poverty reduction and local economic development in the project areas.
SSLRP beneficiaries will access aggregation centres and markets under the AFDB investment.
76.
Capacity building of different stakeholders will be critically important, not only to ensure effective and efficient activity
implementation, but also to increase the likelihood of sustaining successful interventions, and to strengthen the policy framework for
agriculture transformation in the country.
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
77.
Alignment with Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) – successful attainment of SSLRP’s goal and PDO will contribute to the
achievement of: a) SDG 1 (End poverty in all its forms everywhere) and SDG 2 (End hunger, achieve food security and improved
nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture)through implementation of CDP projects that enhance smallholder agricultural
production, increase productivity and promote off-farm livelihoods diversification, resulting in improved households’
food/income/nutrition security and livelihood assets. Nutrition-related interventions will focus on issues related to awareness, access,
78.
79.
80.
81.
availability, and affordability of nutrient-rich foods; b) SDG 5 (Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls) through the
Gender Action Learning Systems which will be used to address gender-based barriers at household and community levels and a 60
percent quota for women participation in SSLRP activities; c) SDG 6 (Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and
sanitation for all) through the construction of multi-purpose water supply systems; and d) SADG 13 (Take urgent action to combat
climate change and its impacts) by promoting climate smart agriculture and climate-proofing of all constructed/renovated
infrastructure.
14/31
Alignment with National Priorities – SSLRP is in alignment with GoSS CAMP and is more closely aligned to: a) food and nutrition
security; b) economic growth and livelihood improvement; and c) institutional development. The other policies are: a) South Sudan’s
NALEP; NALEP calls for a participatory extension service that involves the private, public sectors, and communities; and b) National
Development Strategy (2018 NDS) with the overarching objective of consolidating peace and stabilizing the economy. The project
will also seek to strengthen the capacity of the frontline extension agents in areas that will be identified by the capacity needs
assessment. The project responds to the Government’s Framework for Return, Reintegration and Relocation of Displaced Persons:
Achieving Durable Solutions in South Sudan, which emphasizes special consideration to conflict-affected persons - including
children, women, widows, persons with disabilities, and providing recovery and stabilization interventions for returnees. [35]
Alignment with IFAD Policies and Corporate Priorities – SSLRP is aligned with a number of IFAD’s policies, including IFAD’s
Strategic Framework 2016-25. The goal of the IFAD Strategic Framework is to ‘enable rural households and communities to gain
increasingly remunerative, sustainable and resilient livelihoods that help them permanently move out of poverty and food insecurity’;
this is largely similar to the project’s goal and development objective combined. SSLRP is also aligned with IFAD’s Special
Programme for Countries with Fragile Situations: Operationalizing IFAD’s Fragility Strategy. The project will focus on strengthening
communities, rural organizations and local institutions towards more resilient local governance systems, and using food security as a
primary entry point to tackle fragility and conflict[36].
The other areas where SSLRP is in alignment with IFAD policies/priorities are: a) Environment Natural Resource Management
(ENRM) Policy, Climate Change Strategy, and the Land Policy – The environmental and climate adaptation and mitigation measures
associated with the identified risks are fully integrated into SSLRP interventions. The SECAP Review Note (in Annex 3) provides
more details on ENRM and climate change adaptation and mitigation; b) Targeting Policy – Reaching the Poor (2010) – In order to
ensure project benefits reach the intended beneficiaries, target groups have been defined, a targeting strategy developed and means
of operationalizing that strategy integrated into the Project Design Report and the Project Implementation Manual; c) Gender
Equality and Women’s Empowerment (2012) – SSLRP is fully in line with IFAD’s policies on Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment. Measures are included to ensure that women and youth benefit from project interventions; d) Nutrition – the nutrition
focus in SSLRP aligns with IFAD’s corporate commitment to nutrition-sensitive interventions and links to the operationalization of
IFAD action plans on mainstreaming nutrition, and e) IFAD’s Youth Action Plan (2019-2021).
Country Ownership – Although designed remotely, SSLRP was designed jointly by IFAD and an in-country South Sudan Project
Delivery Team (SS-PDT) that comprised nine staff from MAFS, Ministry of Economic Planning and Ministry of Environment. The
team also included representatives from State and County governments. The culmination of the participatory design is reflected in a
joint Aide Memoire between IFAD and GoSS.  The Government was fully involved in the identification of the focal States and
Counties and will be involved in the process of selecting the participating Payams, Bomas and communities. Country ownership will
also be ensured through implementation modalities; the Implementing Agency will work with the County Development Committees
(to ensure compliance with the County development agenda) and through the frontline extension agents. Due to the remote nature of
the design, the County Profiles will ensure adequate consultations with beneficiaries in the determination of strategic priorities for
investments. More information is provided under Section IV.
82.
Harmonization and Partnerships– The design sought to coordinate and harmonize with ongoing and/or planned projects financed by
various development partners that support SSLRP-related thematic areas. The objective was to: a) take advantage of existent
synergies and avoid duplications; and b) explore the possibility for co-financing and/or parallel financing. The following partnership
opportunities have, thus far, been identified as potential partners for collaboration:
Table 2: Potential SSLRP Collaboration Partners
Donor
Project (existing or planned)
Potential Areas of Collaboration
African Development
Bank (AfDB)
AfDB was, at the time of SSLRP design,
preparing an investment (Agricultural
Markets, Value Addition and Trade
Development Project (AMVAT)) in the
amount of USD 13.7 million.
SSLRP has mobilised US$5.6 million parallel co-financing from
AMVAT. A project level MoU will be signed between SSLRP and
AMVAT with a focus on i) working in the same Payams and Bomas
to ensure alignment of the production/productivity interventions of
SSLRP to the aggregation centres (markets) supported by AMVAT.
The AWPB preparation stage will be a critical moment for joint-
planning to actualize the parallel co-financing.
SSLRP will benefit from the following AFDB investments in Central
and Eastern Equatoria and Jonglei i.e. i) Seed Testing Laboratory
Equipment, ii) Aggregation Centres, iii) Value chain studies
(Sorghum, Groundnut), Seed Sector Framework Study, and iv)
capacity development support to the Government-led PCU.
15/31
The Resilient Agriculture and Livelihood
Development Project (RALP)
World Bank (WB)
South Sudan – Emergency Locust
Response Project (SS-ELRP)
South Sudan Safety Net Project (SSSNP)
– under implementation
World Food
Programme (WFP)
Food and Nutrition Assistance for Relief
and Recovery;
Smallholder Agriculture Market Support
(SAMS) project.
Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO)
Embassy of the
Kingdom of the
Netherlands
FAO seed systems support/seed
distribution and seed local production;
FAO is the biggest stakeholder in the
seed sector. FAO procures annually
about 8000MT of assorted seeds for
distribution to farmers, over 90 percent
were imported.
FAO works with community-based
animal health workers to improve
livestock health in South Sudan. FAO
conducts extensive livestock vaccination
campaign across the entire country.
Their areas of interest include nutrition,
sustainable use of farmland, crop
productivity and income enhancement.
Specific projects being supported
include:
Water for Eastern Equatoria – Torit;
South Sudan Agribusiness Development
Project – Terekeka;
Seed Systems Development for South
Sudan
RALP and SSLRP will jointly support MAFS to build capacities,
systems and policies, and will collectively focus on the preparation
of the single Project Management Unit (PMU). RALP support will
focus on strengthening MAFS capacities to implement Bank
projects i.e. technical training, extension, advisory and project
management.
IFAD and World bank will therefore harmonise the capacity building
interventions to avoid duplication and ensure effectiveness;
Synergies with SSSNP will include; intervention co-location: While
SSSNP focuses on emergency cash transfers, SSLRP will support
the SSNP beneficiaries with sustainable livelihood options
Learn from accumulated experience in storage facilities and access
road construction, rehabilitation, maintenance efforts; cooperation
on support and operating the “road gang” concept in road
maintenance in Eastern Equatorial
SSLRP will collaborate with SAMS to identify groups and
households that are ready to take up SSLRP interventions i.e.
groups already strengthened, or households graduated from
humanitarian assistance
SSLRP beneficiaries will be linked to the SAM interventions i.e.
community aggregation centres to resolve the challenges of post-
harvest handling.
SSLRP will benefit from the annual Vulnerability Analysis and
Mapping (VAM) conducted by WFP
Of strategic interest to IFAD are the following FAO Projects
initiatives where synergies will be forged with SSLRP components
and subcomponents.
Linkage to existing farmer groups already benefiting or have
benefited from FAO mobilization or already receiving free seeds
from FAO
Making use of FAO Extension methodologies and manuals for
adoption for capacity building of farmer groups and fisher folks e.g.
FFS etc.
Extensive studies and analysis of the Food Security system –
SSLRP could benefit from studies such as annual crop yield
assessment reports etc.
Tap into FAO’s massive logistical capacity to undertake supervision
on behalf of IFAD
IFAD is in discussion with the Netherlands for potential co-financing
of SSLRP
International Labour
Organization (ILO)
Potential interventions:
16/31
National Cooperatives Development
Policy Framework;
National Rural Financial Policy
Framework
ILO has commissioned a study to Assess Cooperative Development
in South Sudan. Under component 3, SSLRP  will build on this work
and support the development of the National Cooperatives
Development Policy Framework, and the National Rural Financial
Policy Framework in partnership with ILO. In addition, the
assessment of cooperative development will also inform the capacity
development activities under sub-component 3.2.  
UNHCR
IFADs engagement with UNHCR in the
context of the South Sudan Livelihood
and Resilience Project (SSLRP) is
particularly on the strengthening of the
humanitarian development nexus.
The IFAD investment in South Sudan,
has the objective of empowering
communities to determine their priority
interventions  which will be articulated
through Community Development Plans
(CDPs)
UNHCR’s beneficiary profiles could help to identify SSLRP
beneficiaries who are ready to take up more sustainable livelihoods
in the target counties
Exchanges on the UNHCR Quick Impact Projects (activities) which
could possibly contribute towards the pipeline of CDP activities for
SSLRP 
Potential collaboration at the CDP implementation stage i.e. CDPs
requiring humanitarian type assistance could be implemented by
UNHCR through its partners.
Conflict Sensitivity
Resource Facility
(CSRF)
Conflict Sensitivity Resource Facility
(CSRF) supports the use of conflict
sensitivity in donor strategies and
programmes in South Sudan.
Information exchange on conflict dynamics in the target Counties,
Payams. This will assist in scenario-based planning through a
conflict sensitive lens.
Partnership for
Recovery and
Resilience (the 
Partnership or PfRR)
Partnership for Recovery and Resilience
(the Partnership or PfRR) is an inclusive
group of donors, UN Agencies and NGOs
who are committed to promoting local
ownership and working together to
reduce vulnerability and increase the
resilience of people, communities and
institutions in South Sudan on their way
to achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals.
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
SSLRP aligns with the PfRR outcomes to rebuild productive
capacities and rebuild trust in people and institutions
83.
84.
Total project costs are estimated at US$17.9 million over a 6-year period. IFAD will fund 54 percent of the project costs through an
investment of US$9.6 million. IFAD’s investment is split into a loan (20 percent) on highly concessionary terms and a grant (80
percent). Component 1: Community Driven Development Planning accounts for 26 percent of baseline costs (US$5.9 million).
Component 2: Agriculture Production and Rural Livelihoods Support accounts for 41 percent of baseline costs (US$7.3 million).
Lastly Component 3: Project Support and Capacity Building accounts for 33 percent of baseline costs (US$5.8 million). Component
0: Disaster Risk Reduction and Management is not a costed component.
The costing has been done in USD as the input currency. The South Sudan Pound (SSP) has been facing volatile fluctuations with
the central bank official rate in the region of 1 USD to SSP 170 (October 2020) while the “parallel market” was at US$1 to SSP 500.
South Sudan’s general inflation fell to 24.5% in 2019 from 83.5% in 2018 due to reduced financing of the fiscal deficit. The central
bank commitment to reduce monetization of the fiscal deficit is expected to continue, with resulting inflation declining further to 16.9
percent in 2020 and 9.7 percent in 2021[37]. With this trend, the costing in USD terms has yielded a low price contingency (USD
59,000 only) because the devaluation of the SSP vs USD will deal with any emerging price contingencies during implementation.
PFM reforms, which are ongoing, are focusing on stabilizing the macro-economic fundamentals and disciplining the financial sector.
South Sudan received a loan in 2020 from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) which is expected to stabilize the currency and
avail much needed foreign currency into the market; this is expected to stabilize the currency, and address inflation.
85.
IFAD Climate-Focused Financing – Climate resilient activities/interventions have been mainstreamed into Project Development
Objectives, Theory of Change and Monitoring and Evaluation Frameworks and specifically to project components under activity 2.2.1
and 2.2.2 for climate resilient infrastructure development as well as soil and water conservation activities. Furthermore, Climate Risk
analysis and adaptation options are prepared and will be considered during CDD and CDP preparation.  About 41 percent (USD 4
061 000) of the costs for CDD, CDP, capacity building, etc. are focused on climate adaptation given the decision to mainstream
climate change in the project components.
Table 3: Summary of Costs by Components (‘000 USD)
17/31
Table 4: Project Costs by Expenditure Category and Financier (‘000 USD)
Table 5: Project Costs by Component and Year (‘000 USD)
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
86.
IFAD will fund up to 54 percent of the project costs. This is split into a loan (20 percent) and a grant (80 percent) on highly
concessionary terms. The African Development Bank (AfDB) will fund US$5.6 million on a parallel basis through the AMVAT
Development Project. The AfDB investment that could potentially be relevant to SSLRP relates to investments in Eastern Equatorial
and Jonglei. In addition, there is a planned contribution to the joint PCU.
87.
Domestic co-financing constitutes 14 percent of the total project costs. This includes the GoSS’ contribution (9 percent) which will be
exclusively in the form of tax reimbursements and beneficiary in-kind contribution (5 percent).
Table 6: Project Costs by Component and Financier (‘000 USD)
Table 7: Project Costs by Expenditure Category and Financier (‘000 USD)
18/31
c. Disbursement
88.
The main categories include Grants and subsidies and Goods Inputs and Materials. The funds will be disbursed from IFAD on the
Revolving Account Mechanism for both the IA and MAFS. The use of direct payments will be encouraged as much as possible in
line with IFAD guidelines. The Implementing agency will maintain a designated account in USD to receive funds from IFAD and
operating account in South Sudanese pounds (SSP). All the other participating NGO will operate separate Local currency accounts
to receive the funds. Likewise the ministry of Agriculture shall maintain separate bank accounts for the funds they shall manage.
Funds held in the SSP denominated bank accounts will be reviewed from time to time, minimising the amounts as much as possible
with a view of mitigating against value erosion arising out of a volatile exchange rate. The Implementing agency will maintain the full
accounting system for the project except for sub component 3.2. The PCU at the MAFs will manage and account for the funds
disbursed under sub component 3.2.  Both the IA and the PCU at MAF will run computerised accounting systems that provide for
easy consolidation of the data.
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
89.
With the CDD approach, the exact number and type of subprojects that will be funded cannot be determined at the design stage;
these will be decided by the beneficiary communities. Even with the facilitated process, some projects that are not on the “exclusion
list” could emerge and get well justified for project financing beyond what is anticipated at design stage. That notwithstanding, the
following financial (and economic models) have been used as “representative” of enterprises that the project’s target beneficiaries
may choose through the CDD process:
1.  On-Farm Agriculture (Sorghum, Maize; groundnuts; Tomatoes)
2.  Livestock and Fisheries (Goat enterprise; Canoe fishing; Bee-keeping)
3.  Value Addition/Agribusiness (Fish selling; Fish value addition; Milk bar; Community market shade).
90.
In addition to the above models, analysis for labour based payment benefits in the infrastructure project investments and the results
are presented in Annex 4. The results of the financial analysis are presented in the table below, with a summary of the likely cost
benefit analysis of the enterprises beneficiaries may select under the CDD approach.
91.
Financial analysis – From the models above the summary of the financial analysis is presented below:
Table 10: Summary Results of the Financial Analysis
92.
Economic analysis – The overall economic analysis shows a positive Economic Rate of Return (ERR) of 24% and Net Present
Value (NPV) USD 39.3 million which justifies the investment in the project given that the social discount rate is around 6 percent.
Table 11: Summary Results of the Economic Analysis
19/31
93.
A sensitivity analysis has been done on a number of risks related to the project. For the sensitivity analysis, possible disasters have
been considered. These disasters cannot be applied on a straight line basis due to climate/disasters. There is no data in the SECAP
to use. However possible frequency of the risk has been assumed as follows: a) mild - 0, 10, 0, 20, 0; b) medium - 0, 10, 0, 60, 0;
and c) high - 0, 20, 10, 60, 0.  The overall sensitivity analysis results are presented in the table below showing that the project rate
of return can withstand the identified risks and shocks above:
Table 12: Summary Results of Sensitivity Analysis
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
94.
95.
Exit Strategy – By virtue of its CDD implementation approach, the SSLRP’s exit strategy is inbuilt. The beneficiary communities will
be in full control of the entire process from identifying the factors constraining productivity and livelihood improvement, to prioritising
the identified factors and to, finally, overseeing the process of implementing the agreed activities meant to address the limitations.
Their organisations, inclusive CBOs and Subproject Management Committees (SPMCs), will be promoters and managers of socio-
economic change and will be capacitated to plan, implement and operate subprojects. The other element of SSLRP’s exit strategy is
the fact that government structures at the national, State and, especially, County (Payam and Boma) levels will be involved from the
onset in AWPB preparation activities, overseeing activity implementation and in monitoring implementation progress. The IA will be
working through government frontline extension agents.
Capacities of the respective government institutions will be variously strengthened to ensure effectiveness. The process of
institutionalising SSLRP’s implementation, in the respective institutions at the different levels, will start from the very beginning of
project implementation. Other elements of the exit strategy include the expected method of operation, maintenance and
management of all the different infrastructure (multipurpose water points, drying yards, etc.) to be developed by the project.
Committees, representative of all interest groups, will be established and capacitated to operate, maintain and manage the
infrastructure and these will eventually assume total responsibility for these infrastructure.
96.
97.
98.
99.
Sustainability – The project’s sustainability was a significant design consideration, hence the formal inclusion of the South Sudan –
Project Delivery Team. In addition, the IFAD PDT recruited services of a local consultant who visited and consulted with officials of
some of the target Counties. SSLRP’s participatory design process aimed at ensuring that the project responds directly to issues
included in the respective State and County development agendas. Efforts to create ownership of the project from the very beginning
have provided the foundation and necessary commitment for post-SSLRP sustainability. Sustainability will also be ensured through
the project’s implementation approach since the process will be managed by the beneficiary communities themselves. Different
perspectives of SSLRP’s sustainability are presented hereunder.
20/31
Institutional Sustainability – As already highlighted, beneficiary communities and their organisations will be at the centre of
influencing SSLRP implementation at all stages. Although the process will be coordinated by a Third Party Implementing Agency, it
will, de facto, involve the public (at different levels of government) and community institutions. Thus, the project will be implemented
in accordance with the relevant Government development agenda, strategy and policy framework. The institutional framework will
continue to exist after the project and will be strengthened by the various capacity building activities as will be specified depending
on the findings of the capacity and systems needs assessment. In addition, the capacity of farmers and their institutions will be
strengthened. All these activities would be aimed at equipping the key public and community institutions with the tools needed to
sustain the successful project interventions beyond SSLRP’s life.
Economic/Income Sustainability – It is recognised that SSLRP is not, primarily, a market-based project. However, it is expected that
markets will play a role in the process of ensuring food/nutrition/income security of the target beneficiaries. Through increased
productivity, beneficiaries would be able to ensure food security. But there will be a need to sell the surplus production and use part
of the proceeds to buy some of the other foods needed for nutrition security that farmers might not be able to produce by
themselves. Thus, the diversification of household food-basket is with market-sourced foods. The extra income earned from the
surplus produce sold on the market would help the households variously in addressing their other needs. To that effect, farmers
and/or their organisations will be linked to the appropriate markets for their respective products. As long as the market linkages are
mutually beneficial to the involved stakeholders, the existent market pull will stimulate the production of the demanded products in a
sustainable manner.
Environmental Sustainability – As a means of enhancing environmental sustainability and climate resilience, SSLRP will use a
watershed approach to community development and will promote climate smart agriculture technologies and practices. A SECAP
review note has been developed in line with IFAD's guidelines. The SECAP review note identifies potential risks and proposes
mitigation measures and monitoring protocols, such as ESMPs. In addition, through the PCU, the project will ensure strong
integration with the existent expertise in the relevant line ministries and, where necessary, strengthen their capacities to coordinate
the implementation of proposed interventions, mitigate risks and monitor the implementation of ESMPs and other SECAP related
guidelines and recommendations. Climate risk analysis and vulnerability assessments will improve decision making and targeting of
interventions.
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
100.
Some potential risks could have a negative impact on the implementation of SSLRP and its development objective. This section
describes the magnitude of the risks and discusses mitigation measures included in project design. Selected risks and the
associated mitigations measures are presented in the table below. A more detailed account of the risk profile is presented in Annex
9: Integrated Project Risk Matrix (IPRM)
Table 13: Project Risks and Mitigation Measures
Risk categories
Risk Probability
(H, S, M or L)
Risk Impact
(H,S, M, L)
Mitigations/ comments
Political
Commitment
Substantial
Substantial
Governance
High
Substantial
Component 0 will enable SSLRP to reallocate funds to provide
emergency support as required.
SSLRP implementation will be based on County Development Plans
which will allow implementation to be independent of the
developments in the other Counties.
SSLRP expects a very modest counterpart funding from the
Government. IFAD is seeking to mobilize co-financing from
Development partners.
SSLRP will be implemented through a Third Party Implementing
Agency, selected by the GoSS, which has already been vetted by
IFAD within the context of the RPSF
IFAD will focus on building capacities of the GoSS PCU at the
central level and decentralised State levels.
SSLRP will work with ILO to strengthen the Cooperative
Development Policy Framework.  
Macroeconomic
High
Substantial
21/31
SSLRP builds on the foundation set by SSLDP to promote a
productive agricultural sector and diversification and alternative
livelihoods for the targeted households
Supervision missions will continuously assess value for money and
financial viability of investments  
Profitability analysis has been run in USD, to mitigate the volatility of
the exchange rate
Fragility and
Security
High
Substantial
Sector Strategies
and Policies
High
Moderate
Environment and
Climate Context
Substantial
Moderate
Capacity for
Implementation and
Sustainability
High
Moderate
SSLRP includes an un-costed component 0 to address any potential
disasters and emergency situations arising from the project.
The planned County Profiles will include an assessment of the
conflict dynamics in a county. 
SSLRP has undertaken an assessment of potential drivers of conflict
and developed mitigation measures.
The Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) will be deployed to
address any potential localized conflict 
IFAD will engage third party project supervision modalities if the
security situation is not conducive for IFAD missions
Third Party Implementing agency – where IFAD policies would apply
Component 1 and 2 will facilitate operationalisation of
decentralisation while integrating IFAD’s mainstreaming themes into
the CDD framework, through facilitation 
Component 3 – Cooperative Development Policy Framework which
will be supported together with ILO
Capacity needs assessment, which will inform capacity development
interventions and the provision of specialised technical assistance.
41 percent of project costs will be dedicated towards climate
adaptation. Component 2 will finance activities required to plan and
address the identified constraints to restore the hydrologic and
ecological functioning of watersheds, enhance the sustainability of
existing land uses and, improve its resilience to climate shocks. 
A high level of awareness by government and regular programs of
community level terracing and afforestation, which will also be
reinforced by project activities
Climate risks will be mitigated by increasing the ability of the affected
communities to adapt to environmental and economic variability, and
long term changes.
Climate Vulnerability Assessment tool and dashboard have been
used to prepare the Climate Risk and Vulnerability Analysis.
A consortium of NGOs will implement the project, under the
oversight of the PCU.
Core investments will take place at the County and Payam (Village)
levels, to strengthen sustainability
Contract with IA will detail M&E capacities and responsibilities
acceptable to IFAD
Component 3 will provide capacity-building support to the PCU to
build capacities in M&E, with complementary collaboration with
World Bank RLAP and AFDB AMVAT to strengthen capacities of the
PCU.
22/31
Ensure the selected Implementing agency has the staff capacities in
place including sound financial management systems and policies in
place.
The implementing agency will ensure that budgets plans are revised
in a timely manner, and executed in an orderly and predictable
fashion.
The implementing agencies will maintain separate accounts for the
SSLRP project for easy expenditure monitoring.
Continuous capacity building will be provided to the staff at the
Implementing agency as well as the Lead ministry on IFAD
guidelines.
The National Advisory team, at the PCU level will provide the first
level review and clearance of any withdrawal applications to be
submitted to ensure alignment with budget and agreed deliverables
in the MOU between GoSS and the Implementing agencies.
The funds disbursement arrangements will based on a Revolving
Account mechanism that will ensure advanced funds are well
accounted for before the release of the next tranche that is based on
forecast quarterly work plan budgets.
As part of the continuous supervision as well as implementation
support missions by IFAD, the FM teams will assess the internal
audit arrangements of implementing agency periodically during the
course of the project implementation.
The Ministry of Agriculture Internal audit unit will provide internal
audit services for funds managed by the ministry for component 3.2
The project will ensure the external audit will be performed in line
with IFAD guidelines as contained in the IFAD Handbook for
Financial Reporting and Auditing for IFAD funded projects.
Low levels of statement of expenditure threshold will be maintained
to provide for an expanded review of supporting documentation
before replenishments from IFAD to the Implementing agency and
GoSS.
In the event of capacity gaps in the course of implementation,
national or internal technical assistance will be engaged where
needed.
A clear framework to be put in place to track both government
contribution as well as Beneficiary in kind contributions
A computerised accounting system will be installed to manage day to
day transaction capturing at both the IA and at the PCU level and
monthly reporting to oversight bodies instituted.
Procurement in SSLRP will exclusively follow IFAD’s Project
Procurement Guidelines, IFAD’s Procurement Handbook and IFAD’s
Standard Bidding Documents due to the legal and regulatory
weaknesses highlighted in the PRM.
All contracts will be managed through the IFAD ICP contract
management module.
Most service providers will be paid through direct payments
IFAD prior review thresholds will be USD 20,000 for all
procurements. NOTUS system will be used.
An IFAD TA will support the procurement activities.
Undertake stakeholders’ feedback sessions.
Government implements a bottom-up approach in the identification
of investments, hence there is free and prior consent of the
communities 
Implementation of IFAD’s Framework for Operational Feedback from
Stakeholders: Enhancing Transparency, Governance and
Accountability
Financial
Management
High
Moderate 
Project Procurement Substantial
Moderate
Stakeholder
Grievances
Substantial
Moderate
Overall
High
Moderate
The main mitigation measure is the implementation through a third party
agency, in this case a consortium of international NGOs led by VSF-
Germany
101.
The major fiduciary risk is posed by the economic environment as well as the nascent status of the public financial management
system currently in the country. This automatically creates a high project Inherent risk which is being mitigated through split
implementation arrangements with a greater part of the project FM functions being performed by an third party implementation
agency with adequate FM systems as assessed at design and only sub component 3.2 being managed by the PCU at MAFs. The
foreseen disbursement arrangements i.e. ring fenced bank accounts; use of revolving account disbursement mechanism that will
further serve to reduce exposure of large project fund to possibilities of ineligible expenses; given that next releases of funds from
IFAD will be dependant on adequate accountability of the previous funds that will be based on quarterly budgets tagged to the
overall AWPB. Other internal control mechanisms will be applied during the implementation period such as low SOE thresholds,
frequent use of the direct payments disbursement mechanisms where it meets IFAD guidelines. Overall the various mitigation
measures are expected to lower the risk to Moderate.
23/31
I. Environment and Social category
102.
The project's Environmental and Social categorisation is B; this is based on the expected activities under each of the two technical
components. Some of the activities that could have environmental and social implications include: a) construction and/or
rehabilitation of water infrastructures; b) rehabilitation/upgrade/construction of rural access roads; c) construction and/or
rehabilitation of processing and storage facilities; d) application of agricultural inputs; etc. Given the size of the project and the scale
of the expected interventions, significant and irreversible environmental and social impacts are not expected. But, any potential
negative impacts will be addressed through the Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and other mitigation
measures. Most of the impacts would be localized to the project sites, short term in nature and, most importantly, manageable or
reversible through the proposed mitigation measures.
J. Climate Risk classification
103.
SSLRP's climate risk classification is medium. Over the last few decades, the country’s temperature has been increasing and rainfall
decreasing and this trend is forecast to continue at least over the life of the project. Since the mid-1970s, South Sudan has
experienced a decline of between 10 percent to 20 percent in average precipitation as well as increased variability in the amount and
timing of rainfall from year to year (USAID, 2016).  In addition, seasonal rainfall trends are highly variable across the country.
Analyses undertaken suggest that there has been a shift in the start and cessation of rainfall, leading to more erratic and
unpredictable rainfall patterns (WFP, VAM 2014). Climate risk analysis and climate vulnerability assessments covering all project
Counties have been done and attached as an annex with the SECAP Review Note.
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
104.
The Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security (MAFS) will be the lead executing agency for the Project. Building on the lessons
learnt and ongoing developments in the country, SSLRP will be implemented through tailored implementation arrangements where
the core technical components will be implemented by a Third Party Implementing Agency (IA), under the oversight of a
Government-led Project Coordination Unit (PCU). To gradually build capacities of the MAFS to implement projects, the PCU will
implement the capacity development activities under sub-component 3.2. 
105.
The IA will consist of a consortium of NGOs, led by VSF-Germany together with Save the Children and Action Against Hunger
(AAH). The consortium was established by GoSS, by combining the collective strengths of the initial list of INGOs shortlisted as
potential implementing partners of SSLRP. The consortium approach was proposed to reduce potential start-up delays and to tap
into the comparative advantages of the three NGOs that have all had prior experience working with GoSS. The main principles for
selecting the consortium partners include: a) relevance of their current portfolios to SSLRP interventions; b) prior and successful
experience with the GoSS in implementing projects, c) coverage of the geographic target areas of SSLRP, and their ability and
willingness to work in collaboration with Government and d) capacity to integrate decentralised structures into project
implementation.
106.
The consortium will be guided by a Framework outlining the roles and responsibilities of each organisation. VSF-Germany as the
lead in the consortium will be responsible for procurement, financial management, M&E and meeting all the reporting requirements
to GoSS and IFAD. VSF-Germany will enter into sub-agreements with Save the Children and AAH, outlining specific deliverables
under SSLRP. The consortium brings together NGOs that have a unique comparative advantage for the implementation of SSLRP.
Save the Children will be responsible for the cross-cutting themes related to social inclusion, AAH will work on Component 1 on
community development plans and LIPW, while VSF-Germany will implement Component 2 on the implementation of the CDPs and
strategic investments, and coordinate overall implementation.
107.
IFAD will provide its No Objection to the final draft contract between GoSS and the IA, and as well the sub-agreements between the
IA (VSF-Germany) and the consortium parties.  The contract between GoSS and the IA will only be signed after the approval of
SSLRP by IFAD’s Executive Board in April 2021, and signature of the Financing Agreement.
108.
The IA will be responsible for implementing the core technical components i.e. Component 1, Component 2 and Component 4,and
will be responsible for the following: a) preparing and executing the AWPBs, implementation progress and financial reports for
submission to the PCU (for review, comment and onward forwarding to the oversight body (NTC and NAC); b) have adequate M&E,
fiduciary and procurement systems and capacities and undertake all project-related fiduciary functions in compliance with IFAD
Guidelines; c) undertake all procurement activities for the relevant components an submit procurement packages to the PCU for
onward transmission to IFAD for No Objection, d) work closely with the PCU and the target States and Counties during activity
planning and implementation to ensure consistency with existent State and County development agendas. The IA will use
government frontline extension agents, where they exist, with the dual objective of strengthening their capacity and also serve as
part of the exit strategy at project completion. The IA will also work with other local partners and service providers in the
implementation of the project. 
24/31
109.
A complete set of the IA’s responsibilities will be presented in a detailed ToRs that will form part of the agreement that will be signed
with GoSS. IFAD will provide No Objection to the contract between GoSS and the IA before it is signed, and will ensure that the
contract will include i) IFAD’s anti-corruption policy, ii) IFAD’s Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) policy, iii) compliance with
SECAP, iv) land tenure security, v) gender and vi) indigenous peoples. The contract between GoSS and the IA will inter alia permit
IFAD officers’ right of access to sites, staff and documents.
110.
The IA will have a Project Management Team (PMT) to coordinate and oversee SSLRP activity implementation and the following is
an indicative composition of the PMT: a) Project Manager; b) Technical Officers (Components 1 and 2); c) Monitoring, Evaluation
and KM Officer; d) Financial Management Officer; and e) Procurement Officer. The IA will also ensure that it makes adequate
arrangements for the effective implementation of the mainstreaming themes of gender, youth, nutrition and Climate Change. The IA
will be expected to develop an MoU with AFDB to adequately align the SSLRP activities to the market infrastructure supported by
the Bank.
111.
Subcomponent 3.2, will be implemented by the PCU through service providers that will be recruited in line with IFAD’s procurement
guidelines. The PCU will be established as part of capacity development of MAFS and will oversee project coordination, and
contracting and supervision of the IA. The following are the foreseen staff composition of the PCU: a) Project Coordinator; b)
Monitoring, Evaluation and Knowledge Management Officer; c) Financial Management Officer; d) Procurement Officer; e) Project
Assistant; and f) Driver. The main role of the PCU will be to interface with IFAD and the Oversight Bodies i.e. National Technical
Committee (NTC) and National Advisory Committee (NAC). It will also coordinate the engagement of GoSS technical experts in the
implementation of the project, and liaise with the IA to capture generated knowledge and facilitate dissemination nationally and
regionally. The PCU will also ensure liaison, synergies and linkages with all other relevant projects/programmes being implemented
in the project area and the country that seek to address similar or related constraints. The PCU will also be expected to undertake
periodic monitoring of the project in the field.
112.
Considering that SSLRP is a CDD project, implementation will also employ a community-based participatory approach, at all levels,
with the objective of ensuring transparency, accountability, instilling ownership and increasing the likelihood of sustaining the
project’s successful interventions. Communities, through their organisations/groups, will be fully involved in the planning,
implementation and monitoring of project activities. The decentralised local government structure will play a key role at all stages of
SSLRP implementation (planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation and reporting). The structure is inclusive of the State
Development Committees, County Development Committees, Payam Development Committees and Boma Development
Committees; the expected working relationships between the different levels and the associated roles and responsibilities are
presented in the PIM. The central role of the decentralised structures will be to support targeting – identification of locations and
beneficiaries, awareness raising of communities and overall conflict sensitivity and social risk management. 
113.
An already existing governance structure will provide the oversight function to the project. A National Advisory Committee (NAC) is
in place chaired by the Undersecretary in the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security and Co-chaired by the Undersecretary
Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning.  NAC’s core responsibility will be to provide overall policy and strategic guidance and
advice to the project for effective smooth and accountable implementation. NAC coordinates with senior management of other
government ministries and development partners at all levels on issues related to related to the project; provides strategic and policy
advice on quarterly and annual project progress reports and work plans and approves AWPBs and progress reports before they are
submitted to IFAD for No Objection.
114.
The National Technical Committee (NTC) will also be part of the governance structure, chaired by the Director General of Agriculture
and Co-chaired by the Director of Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning. The NTC’s responsibility will be to: a) provide
technical guidance of the project; b) update the NAC on technical and operational issues related to the project; c) facilitate technical
and operational partnerships with stakeholders within the government to advance operational/coordination issues related to the
project; d) coordinate with technical counterparts of other government agents; e) update their undersecretaries on any progress and
challenges and plans of the project; f) provide technical and operational guidance to project quarterly and annual progress reports
and work plans; and g) participate in periodic monitoring of the project.
115.
SSLRP will also work with the following key Ministries: i) Ministry of Environment on the implementation of the SECAP, ii) Ministry of
Gender, Social Welfare and Religious Affairs, and the iii) Ministry of Animal Resources and Fisheries, whose technical experts and
resources will be mobilised to support the implementation of SSLRP.
116.
Adaptive Programming - SSLRP implementation in the target areas will be influenced by the prevailing security situation and/or
other calamities that could befall the country. The project will be implemented in a modular approach, enabling activities and
interventions in different locations to proceed if security is compromised or in the event of any other calamities. Features of adaptive
programming include: a) encouraging implementation through a consortium with local partners, b) CDD approach that contributes to
community empowerment for O&M of infrastructure and construction of basic infrastructure through LIPW; c) involvement and
empowerment of local governments; d) make an allowance to engage third party individuals/organizations to undertake monitoring
and supervision when missions cannot be fielded; e) sourcing of resources locally, to the extent possible; and f) flexibility that allows
for adjustment and restructuring of project interventions as needed. This would allow for sustenance of a certain degree of activity
implementation during some calamities, depending on the nature and extent of the calamity. For proper coordination and advance
preparation, SSLRP management will keep close liaison with institutions, such as the Partnership for Recovery and Resilience
(PfRR), WFP, United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR), and other humanitarian agencies that could help provide
early warning information.
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
117.
25/31
The GoSS has just resumed the implementation of the reforms in its Public financial management system within the country and
thus given that these process is still in nascent stage, the project will be managed for it financial management aspects in line with the
agreed implementation arrangement. The project Financial management will be split between the Implementing Agency which is
VSF – Germany working in consortium with other NGOs and the GoSS Lead agency (MAFs). The project will adopt and apply the
international accounting standards and the accounts will be maintained using IPSAS cash accounting. The implementing agency will
provide full financial management for the project except for sub component 3.2. Financial management for this subcomponent shall
be provided by a PCU under MAFS. Consolidated reports will be provided to IFAD by the PCU. The project financial management
inherent risk is assessed as high and the residual risk is mitigated to Moderate. This is mainly made possible through the use of the
implementing agency that has been assessed to have systems in place taking management of over 90% of the funds and hence
being in charge of the fiduciary aspects. Other key foreseen risks are elaborated in annex 8*** together with detailed mitigation
measures.
118.
Staffing and Organizational arrangements: VSF – Germany has operations in South Sudan, with an established office in Juba
and field offices in the countryside. The established structure includes a Head of Finance who supervises a Senior Accountant, Field
Finance and Administration Officer and Administrative Assistant. An accountant will be recruited to manage the project funds under
the leadership of the Head of Finance. At PCU level, the ministry shall recruit an accountant who will manage funds for the sub
component 3.2.
119.
Funds Flow arrangements: Accordingly, funds will flow directly from IFAD to the IA, apart from funds for Subcomponent 3.2 which
will flow to MAFS to support the PCU that will oversee the Subcomponent’s implementation. The funds will be disbursed from IFAD
on the Revolving Account Mechanism for both the IA and MAFS. The use of direct payments will be encouraged as much as
possible in line with IFAD guidelines. The Implementing agency will maintain a designated account in USD to receive funds from
IFAD and operating account in South Sudanese pounds (SSP). All the other participating NGO will operate separate Local currency
accounts to receive the funds. Likewise the ministry of Agriculture shall maintain separate bank accounts for the funds they shall
manage. Funds held in the SSP denominated bank accounts will be reviewed from time to time, minimising the amounts as much as
possible with a view of mitigating against value erosion arising out of a volatile exchange rate.
120.
Accounting and Financial Reporting: Both at the IA level and the PCU level in the MAFs, computerised accounting system will be
run based on an off shelve package accounting software for the day to day functions of the project in line with the requirements of
IFAD for easy tracking reporting. The accounting will comply with the Government adopted accounting standards. The policies and
systems including the detailed internal control mechanisms are detailed in the PIM. Financial reporting will be performed at IA level
and transmitted to the PCU for consolidation and transmittal of the relevant reports to IFAD.
121.
External audit: This will be performed in compliance with the IFAD guidelines as provided in the IFAD Handbook on Financial
Reporting and Auditing for IFAD funded projects. The consolidated accounts shall be finalised by the PCU and submitted for audit
within the agreed deadlines for IFAD submission. The TOR for the audit will receive a No Objection clearance from IFAD.
122.
Implementation of the IFAD Client Portal (ICP), an IFAD web-based site for electronic loan/grant information management including
online submission, authorization and approval of withdrawal applications, access of project documentation, among others, will be a
requirement for SSLRP from the first year of implementation.  ICP will be used to process withdrawal applications both from the IA
and PCU.
123.
Procurement – The national legal and regulatory framework, systems and capacities remain inadequate and do not meet
international standards for fair and transparent procurement processes. The full adoption of Project Procurement Framework is
therefore recommended for procurement by the IA and the Government PCU. Both the IA and the PCU will be supported by IFAD
through TA to ensure compliance with IFAD procurement processes and procedures and international best practice in procurement.
Each contract to be financed by proceeds of IFAD’s investment will be included in the Project Procurement Plan (PPP) prepared by
the IA, certified by the PCU and receiving No Objection from IFAD. The IA will establish a procurement unit in charge of, inter alia,
procurement planning, handling of the bidding process, conducting bid openings and evaluations of bids, and contract monitoring. A
Procurement Committee will be established at the IA and the PCU will review and certify the following documents or actions:
procurement plan, draft advertisements and bidding documents, evaluation reports and contract award recommendations, rejection
of bids, contracts or contract amendments above pre-defined thresholds.
124.
For subcomponent 3.2, where funds shall be channelled through MAFS for the functioning of the PCU and the relevant capacity
development activities, IFAD’s Project Procurement Framework (including IFAD’s Procurement Handbook and Standard
procurement Documents) shall apply. To mitigate potential risks, the threshold for IFAD’s prior review will be USD 20 000. There will
be quarterly reviews and/or supervision of procurement and IFAD will provide Technical Assistance, when needed, to support the
procurement processes as part of capacity building. MAFS will be expected to work through the No Objection Tracking Utility System
(NOTUS) for the submission of no objection requests and IFAD’s client portal (ICP) for contract management (Contract Management
Tool).
125.
Governance – As stated under Section IV (Organisational Framework), a government oversight body, comprising the NAC and
NTC, will provide an oversight role to ensure effective SSLRP implementation. They will provide strategic guidance towards the
achievement of Project objectives and contribute to the higher-level sector policy and strategic goals.
126.
Whilst the enforcement of good governance would be the primary responsibility of the Government, all SSLRP’s stakeholders will be
made aware that IFAD applies a zero tolerance policy towards fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive actions in Projects financed
through its loans and grants. Therefore, SSLRP will promote good governance through the involvement of communities and
beneficiaries in: a) the preparation of the annual work plans and budgets; b) the transparent and fair procurement process; and c) the
monitoring and evaluation of Project activities. A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) is provided and would provide an avenue
for any stakeholders interested in, among other things, providing any information that could ensure the project’s good governance.
For details about GRM, please refer to Section M. b. of this report.
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
127.
26/31
Planning – SSLRP’s planning will be led by the IA and will follow a bottom-up participatory process. The initial planning and
preparation of the AWPB will be carried out at the Boma level within the framework established for decentralised administration. The
Boma level plans will then be consolidated at the Payam level, then at the County level, State Level and, eventually, at the national
level. This will form the SSLRP-wide AWPB.  The AWPB will be a tool to direct implementation of the project as well as facilitate
process and progress monitoring. Submission of the draft AWPB to IFAD will be done at least 60 days before the commencement of
the project year. Project management will have the possibility of revising the approved AWPB at any time of the year but any
necessary adjustments would be subjected to the required approvals by both government and IFAD. Overall planning will be
informed by the prevailing security situation on the ground, which will inform the sequencing of activities across geographic sites.
Conflict scans will be deployed at the planning stage to ensure that proposed interventions are not likely to trigger localised conflict.
128.
The project will adopt a multi-year planning approach, which will cover the period up to the MTR. It will serve as an internalization
process for the IA and the counties of the PDR and supporting documents, and forming the basis for the annual work plans to be
developed subsequently since, building on experiences, strategies will be revised for the preceding AWPBs. The first AWPB will be
prepared based on the project’s appraisal report while subsequent AWPBs will rely on participatory review and planning processes
whereby beneficiaries will identify their community needs and resource priorities.
129.
The IA will coordinate the different service providers and counties and ensure that the AWPBs are realistic, reasonable and results-
oriented. The AWPB shall be initiated before the fiscal year ends. The Financial Management Specialist and Procurement Specialist
will be part of the entire process. The Procurement Plan and capacity building plan will be prepared together with the AWPB and
sent to IFAD for No-Objection.
130.
Considering that AfDB will be providing parallel financing to complement SSLRP activities, it will be critical that liaison during the
AWPB preparation is ensured. At this stage, the respective implementing agencies would need to liaise and agree on who is doing
what, where and when. At the time of activity planning, it will also be important to agree on the monitoring plan during the course of
implementing approved activities. Flexibility will need to be exercised to maximise effectiveness and efficiency of resource use.
131.
Monitoring and Evaluation – SSLRP’s M&E system will seek to strengthen the capacity of primary stakeholders to manage the
resources over which they have decision making power. Accordingly, SSLRP will adopt a hybrid type of monitoring which will
combine monitoring based on the logical framework and community monitoring. The former will seek to strengthen primary
stakeholder engagement and feedback while the latter will focus on providing information needed for impact-oriented project
management.
132.
IFAD’s COI Guidelines will be the methodological tool used to measure project outcomes and undertake the baseline, MTR and
Completion surveys. The project will collect data on project inputs/activities and the resulting outputs. Data on the project’s intended
outcomes will be collected annually through outcome surveys; this will likely start during the third year of implementation when some
outcomes may begin to manifest. Higher level project outcomes and impact data will be collected through outsourced surveys and
they will be carried out at baseline, midline and end-line periods. The M&E team will also collect, or facilitate the collection of, data
on mainstreaming themes and grievance redress mechanism. These will be incorporated into annual outcome and impact surveys.
Data on community indicators will also be collected annually from the second year of project implementation through community
monitoring surveys. The data to be collected will include quantitative data, to measure the project’s tangible output and outcomes,
and qualitative data, to complement the quantitative data and capture intangible results of the project.
133.
Institutionally, the M&E will have multiple levels, that is IA, State, County, Payam and community levels that will be aligned
with the project management system. Overall responsibility of M&E will rest with the IA’s M&E officer who will be supported
by State and County focal points and CFs. Further clarity on the M&E roles and responsibilities is provided in the PIM -
Annex 2 on the  Responsibility and Accountability Matrices of the SSLRP Stakeholders
134.
The collection of M&E data will be done using sound procedures and standard data collection templates which will be developed.
The IA’s M&E officer will consolidate data and reports from states and validate the information. The officer will prepare progress
reports linking physical achievements to the financial progress and estimating overall achievement of project objectives.
135.
Three surveys - baseline, midline, and end-line - will be done following methodologies developed after taking into consideration
inputs from relevant stakeholders, including the IFAD and GoSS. The project will operationalize satisfactory home-grown models of
monitoring and evaluation, which will include bottom-up participatory and community-based internal learning aspects.  In terms of
community monitoring, the project’s M&E will use community based structures, that is, local leaders and CFs, to assess
implementation progress and achievement of project objectives. Community monitoring will make use of indicators that will be
derived using participatory processes to allow communities to define change in their own terms. Monitoring in this respect will entail
conducting village surveys and focus group discussions allowing beneficiary communities to assess if the changes that they
anticipated have been achieved.
136.
The PCU will carry out at least two monitoring visits per year to the target areas to ensure Government engagement and promote
capacity building. IFAD will undertake periodic supervision missions to assess the status of project implementation and evaluate the
project’s direction with respect to its objectives, outputs and outcomes. Quarterly, bi-annual and annual reports will be produced by
respective service providers[38] with formal reporting responsibilities to the IA. The IA will consolidate the reports to produce a
Project-wide report for submission to GoSS and IFAD. The reports will provide information such as: a) overview of intervention
activities undertaken in the last quarter and cumulatively over the fiscal year; and b) progress and outputs in terms of the agreed
M&E indicators and community indicators; c) progress in terms of mainstreaming themes, i.e. nutrition, gender, youth, environment
and climate including reporting on SECAP and GRM. The reports will also provide lessons learnt and knowledge gaps identified.
The reports will further seek to identify constraints encountered so as to seek ways of addressing them.
137.
The M&E strategy will also contribute towards monitoring risks against the IPRM and also in view of the triggers for Component 0.
The SSLRP monitoring plan will identify the most significant risks likely to have the highest cost on the project and its beneficiaries.
Some of these were risks identified in the EFA and applied in the sensitivity analysis: a) the risk of the potential resumption of conflict
and how this could delay implementation; b) macro- economic issues around inflation and SSP volatility; c) flooding and related
climate catastrophes. Analysis of the risks will be the responsibility of the IA. The results from these analyses will be triangulated
using results from the WB’s risk and crisis monitoring reports, to provide risk information for sections or components that are not
project specific, such as political, macroeconomic, fragility and security contexts. Apart from WB, SSLRP will also coordinate with
other development agencies in South Sudan, e.g. UNHCR, FAO and WFP.
27/31
138.
Knowledge Management and Learning (KM&L) – SSLRP’s implementation strategy will include a process of learning and utilizing
the lessons learned to build a mass of knowledge in all areas of the programme. Knowledge areas to be filled by the system include
answers to the following performance questions: a) what are the livelihood threats and opportunities at the County Level – this will
be derived from the County Profiles, b) nutrition gap assessment in the target payams and bomas, c) level of agricultural production
and productivity change attributable to the project; d) what project implementation and monitoring capacities exists at county levels
and what are the gaps – Capacity Needs Assessment; c) how effective is the use of GALS approach in CDD promoting the
mainstreaming of gender. In addition, since SSLRP’ is a CDD, knowledge around areas such as; the number or percentage of
community action plans implemented; the extent to which primary beneficiaries are satisfied with the programme’s implementation;
the existence of an effective GRM. A KM action plan will be prepared to: a) identify knowledge gaps and prioritize knowledge
products to be developed; b) systematically document methods to ease the up-scaling of best practices in South Sudan or
repackaging of innovative approaches developed elsewhere; c) disseminate knowledge using various communication tools
(newsletter, brochures, websites, radio, FFS). Regular reflection workshops, drawing on M&E data to improve performance, will be
held and information sharing mechanisms (internal and external) developed. The South-South cooperation and exchange visits will
also be integrated in the KM&L strategy.
139.
Communication – The Project will develop a strategic communications plan for targeted groups. Since the target groups for the
products will vary, the nature of the products as well as the channel through which communication is to be done will also vary to suit
the needs of the information recipients. For primary beneficiaries, awareness raising campaigns will be used to promote issues
pertinent to the project, such as environment and natural resource management, climate change, nutrition, gender and use of
modern agricultural technologies. The messages will be disseminated through various forums, such as radios, religious gatherings,
community groups and schools. For ease of transmitting the messages, the information will be communicated in local languages
applicable to the recipients. CFs will play a central role in facilitating the dissemination of these messages to the primary
beneficiaries since they will be the primary link between the IA and the target communities. Technical information will be shared with
GoSS, IFAD and other stakeholders. This will be in the form of technical reports on results and lessons learnt. These will be
disseminated through publishing results, success stories and programme innovations using various media, organizing stakeholder
workshops or seminars and conducting review meetings. For this reason, knowledge sharing will form a crucial part of KM&L
because it will be the platform for scaling up, exchange of ideas and experiences.
b. Innovation and scaling up
140.
Innovations - Overall, SSLRP innovations will mainly be adaptations or adoptions; these have been in existence and are being
adapted to the selected project areas. These will include the following: a) promoting participatory approaches to planning and
resource allocation; this will be done through the CDD methodology where, through prioritisation, carefully considered CDPs will be
produced; b) promotion of low-cost but effective agricultural technologies, such as ox-plough use, field level threshers, solar drier
technologies that can lead to better productivity and improved incomes. Through facilitation, communities will be exposed to different
technologies to aid their informed decision making processes; c) through facilitation, target communities will be exposed to
enterprises and services, such as village SACCOs, VSLAs and cash for work services that provide strategic economic opportunities
and employment for poor rural people; d) linking of private sector stakeholders with farmers/farmers’ organisations to promote
bulking of produce, appropriate commodity storage, value addition/processing, etc.; this linkage  will enhance access to markets for
the target rural community beneficiaries; and e) promoting the use of the GALS approach and adapting it to CDD programming.
SSLRP will also facilitate for ‘crisis modification’ as an innovative approach to enable the project to respond to any crises that may
erode the gains of the project.
141.
Scaling-up of Results – With relatively limited resources, scaling up will be of paramount importance to the project to ensure that
the successfully demonstrated interventions can be implemented in other parts of the country or even within the same Counties but
extended to other Payams. Scaling up will be promoted through:
Government ownership – although SSLRP will be implemented by a Third party implementing agency, governments at all levels
will be part of the process. That way, government would be to promote the extension of successful results to other parts of the
County/State/Country either through the use of own resources or by securing funding from GoSS’ other development partners;
Collaboration with other development partners – SSLRP will build synergies with similar projects funded by other agencies to
promote scaling up of results;
Knowledge management and dissemination – documenting and sharing of successful results with national and regional
stakeholders. This will be done by establishing a knowledge management system that would enable the identification and
dissemination of lessons from SSLRP’s implementation experience.
M. Project Target Group Engagement and Feedback, and Grievance Redress
a. Project Target Group Engagement and Feedback.
142.
Objectives of Engagement and Feedback – The purpose of the engagement and feedback process is for achieving effective
stakeholder involvement and promoting greater awareness and understanding of issues so that the project is carried out effectively
within budget and on-time. The goals of the public consultations are to provide the SSLRP with: a) the status of implementation of
the identified measures; b) a sense of the concerns, priorities, and aspirations of the community members as they implement the
measures; c) information to shape the project as it progresses; and d) whenever possible, specific recommendations and proposals.
143.
Responsibilities – The IA will be responsible to ensure effective implementation of the engagement/feedback process by: a)
promoting openness and communication; b) ensuring effective stakeholder involvement; c) evaluating the effectiveness of the
engagement plan in accordance with the expected outcomes.
28/31
144.
Identifying Target Groups – For the purpose of the effective implementation of the engagement/feedback mechanism, stakeholders
shall be defined as all those people and institutions that have an interest in the successful planning and execution of the project’s
activities. This includes those likely to be positively and negatively affected by the project, people living in the vicinity of the proposed
works, special interest groups, vulnerable groups, marginalized and disadvantaged individuals or groups.
145.
The consultation process shall ensure that all those identified as stakeholders are conferred with. Subject to SSLRP IA approval, the
Environmental/Social consultant (to be recruited as and when needed) will share information about the subprojects with the public to
enable meaningful contributions and, thus, enhance the success of the project.
146.
The SSLRP IA will develop a detailed Public Consultation Plan (PCP), identifying all possible stakeholders, their specific information
needs, and the appropriate modes of consultation as well as feedback mechanisms.
147.
Information Disclosure – The type of information to be disclosed to the various stakeholders will depend on their interests and how
they will be affected by the project; on the other hand, it could depend on how SSLRP activities may be affected by them.
Thereafter, various communication tools will be utilized for the engagement process. These could include local newspapers, radio
advertisements, direct mailings to communities, presentations with or without focus group sessions, targeted mail, one-on-one
meetings, presentations, seminars, and general use of social media.
148.
Getting Feedback – Various approaches will be used to mobilize participation and feedback from expected or actual beneficiary
communities and their organizations throughout the project cycle. These include: a) scheduling regular updating meetings with key
stakeholders; b) availing suggestion boxes at SSLRP IA offices; c) engaging stakeholders in participatory planning (bottom-up
approach); d) engaging stakeholders in participatory M&E; e) conducting beneficiaries surveys to assess progress, gauge their
satisfaction with services delivered, and evaluate project results at project mid-term and end-term, and at shorter intervals, as
needed; and f) including beneficiary representatives or civil-society organizations (CSOs) as members of project steering
committees; this would induce a higher degree of beneficiary influence over decision making.
149.
Stakeholder Engagement Techniques – A variety of engagement techniques will be used to build relationships with stakeholders,
gather information from stakeholders, consult with stakeholders, and disseminate project information to stakeholders. The major
elements of the consultation programme should be timed to coincide with significant planning and decision-making activities in the
project cycle. Ideally, public consultations should be undertaken during: a) preparation of the Environmental Assessment (EA) terms
of reference; b) carrying out of an EA; and C) government review of an EA report.
150.
The first step will be to hold public consultations with the local communities, MAFS staff and all other interested/affected parties
during the screening process. These consultations will be aimed at briefing the communities/staff about the project activities, how the
activities will be carried out and what sectors of the environment are likely to be impacted. The public consultations will be done in a
participatory manner to encourage the communities to contribute to the screening process.
151.
Due to the movement restrictions brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic, full scale site visits/consultations may not be
conducted. Thus, the techniques that will be employed for the continuous engagement process will include limited face to face
engagements and site visits. More electronic communication will be used. The strategy will include the following: a) limited site visits;
b) limited face to face interviews; c) limited physical completion of questionnaires and more of electronic administering of
questionnaires; and d) limited focus group meetings and use of virtual meetings (WhatsApp, Zoom, Microsoft Teams etc.).
152.
The engagement process will be a continuous throughout the project and will be used as a means of checks and balances for the
proper implementation of the project. The process will employ a technically and culturally appropriate approach, which involves
identifying the concerned/affected stakeholders, soliciting their views, and continuously checking if their views are being taken care
of as the project implementation progresses.
b. Grievance redress.
153.
The implementation of SSLRP may generate several challenges and complaints especially to those, which relate to infringement of
rights of sections of the society. To address such complaints, and in the spirit of the continuous consultation process, a GRM has
been developed for SSLRP. The GRM consists of three parallel systems: a) a community-based system; b) a formal system; and c)
the IFAD complaints procedure.
154.
Community Based Grievance Redress Mechanism – The Community Based Grievance Redress Mechanism aims to use the
existing traditional structures. This would be used to facilitate agreements among community members but also to solve
disagreements where these might occur. The process will involve informal courts handled by traditional leaders (Community chiefs
etc.): a) Community Level –The first port of entry is the Community level run by the community Chiefs. The Chiefs preside over the
matter over a set time (possibly 15 days); b) Payam Level – When one party is not satisfied with the decision at Community Level,
the complaint can be taken up to the Payam Level. The Payam Grievance Redress Committee would then investigate and give their
ruling on the matter; and c) County Level – However, those who are not satisfied would be allowed to appeal to the County Council
(CC). At this level, the County Grievance Redress Committee, under the District Officer, would preside over the case. However, if
the aggrieved party is still not satisfied then they can ultimately take the formal route.
155.
Formal GRM – The formal GRM is detailed in Annex 12. It consists of the following steps:  a) the access point for
impacted/concerned people would be situated as close to the beneficiary farmers as possible, such as places at the sub-project and
SSLRP IA offices. SSLRP IA staff would be responsible for receiving the grievances, classifying, and logging them; b) an
acknowledgement of receipt would be given to the complainant containing an expectation of when they would receive a response; c)
the grievance is then assessed and investigated to identify all the key facts; d) a resolution is then arrived at and the proposed
actions are confirmed with SSLRP IA/MAFS senior members of staff; e) a response is then communicated to the complainant within
the timescale promised; f) the complainant is given room to appeal to the MAFS or the Courts of Law if they are not satisfied with the
response; and g) once done, the case is brought to a closure and all the staff members of SSLRP IA are made aware of the
complaint, any underlying issues and plans to prevent any future recurrence of the issue.
29/31
156.
Additional GRM Approaches – Besides the above GRM approaches, aggrieved persons can also employ additional channels to air
their complaints. These include the IFAD Complaints procedure. The objective of the IFAD Complaints Procedure is to ensure that
appropriate mechanisms are in place to allow individuals and communities to contact IFAD directly. The procedure allows the
concerned party to file a complaint if they believe they are or might be adversely affected by an IFAD-funded project/programme not
complying with IFAD's Social and Environmental Policies and mandatory aspects of SECAP. Parties adversely or potentially
adversely affected by IFAD-funded projects and programmes may bring issues to the Fund’s attention using
SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org. Complaints must concern environmental, social and climate issues only and should not be accusations
of fraudulent or corrupt activities in relation to project implementation – these are dealt with by IFAD's Office of Audit and Oversight.
157.
IFAD has zero tolerance to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse. Any Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) complaints received shall be
directed to IFAD's Ethics Office. Details on all aspects of the GRM process and procedures are in Annex 12.
N. Implementation plans
a. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
158.
Implementation Readiness and Start-up Plans. To address potential start-up delays, a draft AWPB, the associated Procurement
Plan and draft Project Implementation Manual have been prepared as part of the design. In addition, the relevant Terms of
Reference and the Request for Proposals (RFQ) for the selection of the IA have been prepared, and are included in the PIM. The
selection process of the Third Party Implementing Agency is expected to be finalised by the Government prior to the project’s
effectiveness date. Once the IA is selected, Financial Management and Procurement assessment of its systems will be done to
ascertain their compliance, with IFAD Guidelines on Financial Management and Procurement, and relevant recommendations will be
made.  Also, Terms of Reference for a number of consultancies were drafted by the PDT and this would give the IA a head-start
when recruiting consultants, especially during the first few months of implementation.
159.
IFAD will provide TA to support the IA selection, as well as on procurement and financial management. The Goss and the IA will be
expected to ensure full compliance with IFAD’s Client Portal (ICP), including NOTUS, Contracts Management and Financials. IFAD
will also be supported by a long-term consultant in-country, who will provide implementation support to the Government and the
Implementing Agency as needed.
Supervision, Mid-Term Review and Completion Plans
160.
Supervision – Supervision arrangements to be put in place will largely be influenced by the prevailing security situation in the
country and scenario based planning by the PDT in consultation with the Government and development partners. Due to IFAD’s
limited logistical capacity in the country, FAO-CFI will be engaged to support the supervision of the project, in consideration of the
huge FAO logistical infrastructure in South Sudan. Hence, IFAD will undertake Missions with, and through FAO-CFI, jointly with the
Government to assess achievements and lessons learned and, when required, provide implementation support with the objective of
ensuring effective project implementation and increase the likelihood of achieving the target objective. Under such a scenario,
Missions would be fielded at least once every twelve months, with provisions for periodic and frequent implementation support to
address any emergent issues that may have the potential to negatively impact project implementation. Considering the risk
associated with the implementation of Subcomponent 3.2, IFAD will ensure quarterly monitoring meetings for procurement and
financial management during the first year of implementation.  As part of the annual missions’ objectives, a review of the
effectiveness of implementation arrangements will be undertaken to ascertain whether any adjustment/restructuring is needed to
ensure optimum performance.
161.
If the security situation is not deemed conducive for physical IFAD supervision and implementation support missions, IFAD would
engage locally-based institutions/individuals (third party monitoring) to undertake field verification missions to complement IFAD’s
remote supervision provisions, in line with IFAD’s Guidance Note on Remote Supervision. This would be done in collaboration with
MAFS.
162.
Mid-Term Review (MTR) – A MTR will be undertaken midway through project implementation; it will evaluate whether the project is
on course to achieve the objectives. It will identify any prevailing constraints and recommend such re-orientation as may be required
to help the project to get back on course to achieve its objectives. However, the actual timing and nature of the MTR will, similarly, be
influenced by the security situation on the ground and dialogue with the Government. The MTR will also be a critical point for
assessing sustainability and actualisation of the exit strategy, particularly for investments that have a public good nature and will
require continuous involvement of the Government beyond the project completion date.
163.
Project Completion Plans – Undertaking of the Project Completion Review (PCR) exercise at the end of SSLRP implementation will
be led by GoSS but in close coordination with IFAD. The main purposes of the completion review process is to promote
accountability, reflect on performance and articulate lessons learned to inform future programme/project design and to define an
appropriate post-project strategy. The learning dimension of the completion process will be used by both IFAD and GoSS as the
foundation for improvements in future programme/project design and implementation. The completion review process will also be
critical for identifying opportunities for scaling-up best practices. The PCR would need to be undertaken after project completion but
before the project closure period but the prevailing security situation will influence the timing of the exercise. As part of the
completion activities, a Beneficiary Impact Assessment (BIA) will be undertaken and findings used to inform the PCR.
Footnotes
[1]From November 2017 to May 2020, UNHCR estimates that some 289,560 South Sudanese refugees have returned to South Sudan,
with 168,964 since October 2018 after signing of revitalized peace agreement
30/31
[2]Resilience in the PDO refers climate resilience. Climate Resilience is also mainstreamed in the project components, ToC and M and E
framework
[3]Such as the African Development Bank supported Agricultural Markets, Value Addition and Trade Development Project (AMVAT)
[4]Youth costs will account for an estimated cost of USD 12,440,800 based on beneficiary target of 70%
[5]Fund for Peace: Fragile States Index 2019: https://fragilestatesindex.org/country-data/
[6] World Bank Data 2018: https://data.worldbank.org/country/south-sudan
[7]http://hdr.undp.org/en/countries/profiles/SSD
[8] http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/688761571934946384/pdf/Doing-Business-2020-Comparing-Business-Regulation-in-
190-Economies.pdf
[9]Transparency International: Corruption Perceptions Index 2019: https://www.transparency.org/cpi2019
[10]GDP growth rate for S. Sudan has been as follows: -46.1 percent (2012); 13.3 percent (2013); 3.4 percent (2014); -10.8 percent
(2015); -6.3 percent (2016); -6.9 percent (2017); - 3.5 percent (2018); and 3.2 percent (2019) - Sources: Word Bank
http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/928961533737855697/pdf/129303-WP-PUBLIC-SouthSudanEconomicUpdateJuly.pdf;
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.KD.ZG?locations=SS; https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/southsudan/overview
[11]World Bank June 2018: Linking the Agriculture and Food Sector to the Job Creation Agenda
[12]African Development Bank, 2018: African Economic Outlook: South Sudan.
[13]South Sudan Economic Update: Poverty and Vulnerability in a Fragile Environment (English). Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group;
February 2020.
[14][10] https://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/global-economic-prospects, June 2020
[15]https://www.afdb.org/en/countries/east-africa/south-sudan/south-sudan-economic-outlook
[16]IGAD Policy Briefs 2016: IGAD Center for Pastoral Areas and Livestock Development (ICPALD)
[17]While SSDP was originally designed for the period 2011-2013, the Government decided, in February 2013, to extend the
implementation period to 2016. Eventually, it became a series of five-year development plans leading up to the South Sudan Vision for
2040.
[18] World Bank ,Poverty profile of southern states, 2011
[19]South Sudan National Bureau of Statistics (SSNBS).
[20]Legge, 2017
[21] SSNBS
[22]From November 2017 to May 2020, UNHCR estimates some 289,560 South Sudanese refugees have returned to South Sudan,
168,964 since October 2018 after signing of revitalized peace agreement.
[23] World Bank, 2013: Designing Community-Driven Development Operations in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Situations Social
Development Department - Lessons from a Stocktaking
[24]https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714182/41443317/SeminarCDD_BriefingPages_Web/2d2692df-9d79-db6c-c344-3c7797513d60
[25]AfDB-supported Short-Term Regional Emergence Response Project (STRERP) in South Sudan; PCR July 2020.
[26]IFAD-supported Hilly Areas Sustainable Agriculture Development (HASAD) Project in Lebanon; PCR 2019.
[27]IFAD-supported Kirehe Watershed Management Project, Rwanda; PCR 2016.
[28] HASAD PCR, 2019
[29] HASAD PCR, 2019
[30] SSLDP PCR
[31] IFAD-supported Post-Crisis Rural Recovery and Development Programme (PCRRDP) in Eritrea; PCR 2014
[32] Resilience in the PDO refers climate resilience. Climate Resilience is also mainstreamed in the project components, ToC and M and
E framework
[33] Estimated household size is 5.8 (WFP Crop and Food Security Mapping-2020)
[34]World Bank 2015: Republic of South Sudan Youth Start-up Business Grant Program  (Gives beneficiaries between $1000 to $1200 in
enterprise start up grants); IFAD/Dutch Embassy funded SSLDP allocated average of $2,008 for beneficiary group enterprise; World
Bank, 2014 - In its Private Sector-Driven Agricultural Modernization project design proposed an allocation of $ 2000 for micro projects.
31/31
[35]https://www.refworld.org/pdfid/5b72a64a4.pdf
[36]https://www.google.com/search?
q=IFAD+%2B+fragility&rlz=1C1GCEA_enIT870IT871&oq=IFAD+%2B+fragility&aqs=chrome..69i57j0.2957j0j8&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-
8.
[37]https://www.afdb.org/en/countries/east-africa/south-sudan/south-sudan-economic-outlook
[38]Includes state and county focal points
South Sudan
South Sudan Livelihoods Resilience Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Mission Dates:
20 August to 6 December 2020
Document Date:
01/03/2021
Project No.
2000002869
Report No.
5643-SS
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
South Sudan Livelihoods Resilience Programme
Logical Framework
1/18
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
2/18
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Outreach 
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households
members
Progress reports
six-monthly
IA
Household members
0 112752 225504
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
Progress reports
six-monthly
IA
Households
0
19440
38880
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the
project
Progress reports
six-monthly
IA
Females
Males
Young
Not Young
Total number of persons
receiving services
Male
Female
0
0
40
60
40
60
1) Government of
national unity will
continue to be
effective for peace
and stability to
continue prevailing
(A); 2) Continued
Government
commitment and
implementation of
the reforms agenda
under Revitalised
Peace Agreement
(A); 3) Government
of national unity will
continue ensure
peace and stability
(A); 4) 70 percent of
the rural population
are considered as
youth ; 5)
Investments in
climate resilient
infrastructure and
agricultural
technologies
promote increased
production (A); 6)
Increased income is
used on household
improvements (A);
7) Effectiveness of
local government
structures to support
the project
interventions –
Community
Development
Committees (CDCs)
and Payam
Development
Committees (PDCs)
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Committees (PDCs)
Assumptions
3/18
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Young
0
70
70
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
4/18
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Project Goal 
Contribute to improved and resilient livelihoods among the
targeted rural communities
Household asset index
National statistics,
household, poverty
& gender studies
Baseline,
mid-term,
completion
MAFS, IA
1) Government of
national unity will
continue to be
effective for peace
and stability to
continue prevailing
(A); 2) Continued
Government
commitment and
implementation of
the reforms agenda
under Revitalised
Peace Agreement
(A); 3) Government
of national unity will
continue ensure
peace and stability
(A); 4) 70 percent of
the rural population
are considered as
youth ; 5)
Investments in
climate resilient
infrastructure and
agricultural
technologies
promote increased
production (A); 6)
Increased income is
used on household
improvements (A);
7) Effectiveness of
local government
structures to support
the project
interventions –
Community
Development
Committees (CDCs)
and Payam
Development
Committees (PDCs)
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Committees (PDCs)
Assumptions
5/18
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Number
0
25
60
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
6/18
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Development Objective 
Empower communities to participate in decision making
processes that will recover agriculture livelihoods, build
household resilience and promote stability
Number of households reporting increase in yields of over
25% above baseline (design adoption rate 60%)
Number
0
6960
23328
SF.2.1 Households satisfied with project-supported
services
Households (%)
0
40
80
Households (number)
IE.2.1 Individuals demonstrating an improvement in
empowerment
0
25
60
Total persons
Total persons
Females
Females
Males
National statistics,
household, poverty
& gender studies
National statistics,
household, poverty
& gender studies
AOS,
Baseline,
midline and
completion
AOS,
Baseline,
midline and
completion
National statistics,
household, poverty
& gender studies
AOS,
Baseline,
midline and
completion
IA
IA
IA
1) Government of
national unity will
continue to be
effective for peace
and stability to
continue prevailing
(A); 2) Continued
Government
commitment and
implementation of
the reforms agenda
under Revitalised
Peace Agreement
(A); 3) Government
of national unity will
continue ensure
peace and stability
(A); 4) 70 percent of
the rural population
are considered as
youth ; 5)
Investments in
climate resilient
infrastructure and
agricultural
technologies
promote increased
production (A); 6)
Increased income is
used on household
improvements (A);
7) Effectiveness of
local government
structures to support
the project
interventions –
Community
Development
Committees (CDCs)
and Payam
Development
Committees (PDCs)
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Committees (PDCs)
Assumptions
7/18
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Males
Outcome 
Outcome 1: Communities and local public governing
bodies are empowered to plan and implement investments
that stabilize livelihoods and build assets at the household
and community levels
Percentage of CBOs successfully implementing a CDP
Percentage
Percentage of women
0
0
40
30
80
30
COI survey and
annual outcome
studies
SF.2.2 Households reporting they can influence decision-
making of local authorities and project-supported service
providers
COI survey and
annual outcome
studies
Households (%)
40
80
Households (number)
IA
IA
Baseline,
mid-term,
completion.
AOS
annually
Baseline,
mid-term,
completion.
AOS
annually
1) CDD approach is
essential to
facilitating social
cohesion &
economic
development; 2)
Intra-communal
dynamics facilitate
social inclusion and
cohesion; 3)
Strategic
infrastructure is
implemented and
maintained by the
communities
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
8/18
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Output 
Output 1.1: County profiles compiled
Number of county profiles prepared
Number
0
5
5
Service provider
report, M&E
reports
MTR and
completion
IA, Service
Providers
Output 
Output 1.2:CBOs established or strengthened
Number of Community Based Organizations (CBOs)
established and strengthened
Number
Women only CBOs
0
0
159
48
542
163
Service provider
report, M&E
reports
MTR and
completion
IA, Service
Providers
1) CDD approach is
essential to
facilitating social
cohesion &
economic
development; 2)
Intra-communal
dynamics facilitate
social inclusion and
cohesion; 3)
Strategic
infrastructure is
implemented and
maintained by the
communities
1) CDD approach is
essential to
facilitating social
cohesion &
economic
development; 2)
Intra-communal
dynamics facilitate
social inclusion and
cohesion; 3)
Strategic
infrastructure is
implemented and
maintained by the
communities
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
9/18
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Outcome 
Outcome 2: Improved access to productive assets,
services and climate resilient infrastructure
2.2.6 Households reporting improved physical access to
markets, processing and storage facilities
Households reporting
improved physical access
to markets
0
40
80
COI Survey and
project reports
Service provider
report M&E
Reports
IA
Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion,
MTR, AOS
Males
Females
Young
Households reporting
improved physical access
to processing facilities
Households reporting
improved physical access
to storage facilities
0
0
40
80
40
80
3.2.2 Households reporting adoption of environmentally
sustainable and climate-resilient technologies and
practices
Households
Total number of household
members
Males
Females
Young
Households
0
0
0
0
0
0
25
60
29160 139968
1450
11664
2900
23328
3045
24494
4860
23328
COI Survey and
project reports
Service provider
report M&E
Reports
IA
Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion,
MTR, AOS
1.2.4 Households reporting an increase in production
Households
Males
40
60
COI Survey and
project reports
Service provider
report M&E
Reports
IA
Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion,
MTR, AOS
1) Communities are
more likely to
demand the
following
infrastructure –
water supply,
processing and
storage facilities ; 2)
Strategic
infrastructure
identified,
implemented and
maintained by the
communities; 3)
Changes in weather
patterns will not
considerably vary
from predictions,
both in type &
magnitude of
change; 4)
Investments in
infrastructure can
lead to increased
production, access
to markets &
improved nutrition;
5) Intra-communal
stability is
maintained; 6)
Successful revisions
and
operationalisation of
the National
Nutrition Policy; 7)
Returnee youth are
successfully
mobilized to engage
in Labour intensive
public works (LIPW)
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
10/18
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Females
Young
Number of temporary jobs created for youth
Number
0
1000
2600
COI Survey and
project reports
Service provider
report M&E
Reports
1.2.8 Women reporting minimum dietary diversity (MDDW) COI Survey and
Women (%)
Women (number)
Households (%)
Households (number)
Household members
project reports
Service provider
report M&E
Reports
0
0
0
0
0
25
60
11600
17400
25
60
11600
17400
69600 104400
IA
IA
Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion,
MTR, AOS
Baseline,
mid-term,
MTR, AOS
and
completion
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
11/18
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Output 
Output 2.1: Increased physical access to markets,
processing and storage facilities
2.1.5 Roads constructed, rehabilitated or upgraded
Length of roads
0
30
95
2.1.6 Market, processing or storage facilities constructed
or rehabilitated
Market facilities
constructed/rehabilitated
Processing facilities
constructed/rehabilitated
Storage facilities
constructed/rehabilitated
0
0
0
0
21
0
0
65
0
Service provider
report, M&E
reports
Service provider
report, M&E
reports
MTR, AOS
and
completion
MTR, AOS
and
completion
IA, Service
Providers
IA, Service
Providers
1) Communities are
more likely to
demand the
following
infrastructure –
water supply,
processing and
storage facilities ; 2)
Strategic
infrastructure
identified,
implemented and
maintained by the
communities; 3)
Changes in weather
patterns will not
considerably vary
from predictions,
both in type &
magnitude of
change; 4)
Investments in
infrastructure can
lead to increased
production, access
to markets &
improved nutrition;
5) Intra-communal
stability is
maintained; 6)
Successful revisions
and
operationalisation of
the National
Nutrition Policy; 7)
Returnee youth are
successfully
mobilized to engage
in Labour intensive
public works (LIPW)
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
12/18
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Output 
Output 2.2: Strengthened environmental sustainability and
climate resilience of poor rural people's economic activities
3.1.1 Groups supported to sustainably manage natural
resources and climate-related risks
Groups supported
0
159
542
Service provider
report, M&E
reports
MTR, AOS
and
completion
IA, Service
Providers
1) Communities are
more likely to
demand the
following
infrastructure –
water supply,
processing and
storage facilities ; 2)
Strategic
infrastructure
identified,
implemented and
maintained by the
communities; 3)
Changes in weather
patterns will not
considerably vary
from predictions,
both in type &
magnitude of
change; 4)
Investments in
infrastructure can
lead to increased
production, access
to markets &
improved nutrition;
5) Intra-communal
stability is
maintained; 6)
Successful revisions
and
operationalisation of
the National
Nutrition Policy; 7)
Returnee youth are
successfully
mobilized to engage
in Labour intensive
public works (LIPW)
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Output 
Output 2.3: Access to agricultural technologies and
production services
13/18
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
1.1.3 Rural producers accessing production inputs and/or
technological packages
Females
Males
Young
Total rural producers
0
159
542
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Service provider
report, M&E
reports
MTR, AOS
and
completion
IA, Service
Providers
1) Communities are
more likely to
demand the
following
infrastructure –
water supply,
processing and
storage facilities ; 2)
Strategic
infrastructure
identified,
implemented and
maintained by the
communities; 3)
Changes in weather
patterns will not
considerably vary
from predictions,
both in type &
magnitude of
change; 4)
Investments in
infrastructure can
lead to increased
production, access
to markets &
improved nutrition;
5) Intra-communal
stability is
maintained; 6)
Successful revisions
and
operationalisation of
the National
Nutrition Policy; 7)
Returnee youth are
successfully
mobilized to engage
in Labour intensive
public works (LIPW)
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
14/18
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Output 
Output 2.4: Communities receive nutrition support
1.1.8 Households provided with targeted support to
improve their nutrition
Total persons participating
Males
Females
Households
Household members
benefitted
Young
0
0
0
0
0
0
17400
26100
5800
8700
11600
17400
11600
17400
69600 104400
4640
11600
Service provider
report, M&E
reports
MTR, AOS
and
completion
IA, Service
Providers
1) Communities are
more likely to
demand the
following
infrastructure –
water supply,
processing and
storage facilities ; 2)
Strategic
infrastructure
identified,
implemented and
maintained by the
communities; 3)
Changes in weather
patterns will not
considerably vary
from predictions,
both in type &
magnitude of
change; 4)
Investments in
infrastructure can
lead to increased
production, access
to markets &
improved nutrition;
5) Intra-communal
stability is
maintained; 6)
Successful revisions
and
operationalisation of
the National
Nutrition Policy; 7)
Returnee youth are
successfully
mobilized to engage
in Labour intensive
public works (LIPW)
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
15/18
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Outcome 
Outcome 3: Capacities strengthened at community, state &
local government levels to support project implementation
Policy 3 Existing/new laws, regulations, policies or
strategies proposed to policy makers for approval,
ratification or amendment
Number
0
1
2
IA reports
COI Survey,
Project, service
provider and
impact assessment
reports M&E
Reports
Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion,
quarterly,
MTR
1) Successful
finalisation of the
Cooperative
Assessment for
South Sudan by ILO
which will feed into
the preparation if
the Cooperative
policy; 2) PCU plays
a facilitative role for
the IA and key
project milestones
are met; 3) Effective
coordination occurs
with the World Bank
and African
Development Bank
investments
towards capacity
building of MAFS
and the PCU
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Output 
Output 3.1
16/18
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Capacity needs assessment prepared
Number
0
1
1
Source
Frequency Responsibility
IA reports
COI Survey,
Project, service
provider and
impact assessment
reports M&E
Reports
Baseline,
mid-term
and
completion,
quarterly,
MTR
1) Successful
finalisation of the
Cooperative
Assessment for
South Sudan by ILO
which will feed into
the preparation if
the Cooperative
policy; 2) PCU plays
a facilitative role for
the IA and key
project milestones
are met; 3) Effective
coordination occurs
with the World Bank
and African
Development Bank
investments
towards capacity
building of MAFS
and the PCU
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
17/18
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Output 
Output 3.2
Number of trainings provided to GoSS staff at central and
decentralized levels
Service provider
and M&E reports
MTR and
completion
IA, Service
providers
Number
0
5
5
1) Successful
finalisation of the
Cooperative
Assessment for
South Sudan by ILO
which will feed into
the preparation if
the Cooperative
policy; 2) PCU plays
a facilitative role for
the IA and key
project milestones
are met; 3) Effective
coordination occurs
with the World Bank
and African
Development Bank
investments
towards capacity
building of MAFS
and the PCU
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
18/18
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Output 
Output 3.3
Policy 1 Policy-relevant knowledge products completed
Number
0
1
3
Service provider
and M&E reports
MTR and
completion
IA, Service
providers
1) Successful
finalisation of the
Cooperative
Assessment for
South Sudan by ILO
which will feed into
the preparation if
the Cooperative
policy; 2) PCU plays
a facilitative role for
the IA and key
project milestones
are met; 3) Effective
coordination occurs
with the World Bank
and African
Development Bank
investments
towards capacity
building of MAFS
and the PCU
South Sudan
South Sudan Livelihoods Resilience Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Mission Dates:
20 August to 6 December 2020
Document Date:
01/03/2021
Project No.
2000002869
Report No.
5643-SS
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 2:  Theory of Change 
South Sudan
South Sudan Livelihoods Resilience Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Mission Dates:
20 August to 6 December 2020
Document Date:
01/03/2021
Project No.
2000002869
Report No.
5643-SS
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 3:  Project Cost and Financing 
South Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Design Report (PDR) 
1. 
Total  project  costs  have  been  estimated  at  USD  17.9  million  over  a  6-year  period  of 
implementation.  Component  1Community  Driven  Development  Planning  accounts  for  26%  of 
baseline costs (USD 4.6 million). Component2;Agriculture Production and Rural Livelihoods accounts 
for 41% of base line costs (USD 7.3 million). Lastly component 3;Project management, coordination 
&  capacity building accounts for 33% of baseline  costs (USD 5.9  million). Component 0;Disaster 
response  and  risk  mitigation  is  not  a  costed  component  but  is  provided  in  design  should  a 
reallocation of funds be needed during implementation in response to such events.1 
2. 
The costing has been done in USD as the input currency. The South Sudan Pound has been 
facing  volatile  fluctuations  with  the  central  bank  official  rate  in  the  region  of  1  USD  to  SSP  170 
(October  2020)  while  the  “the  black  market”  was  at  1  USD  to  SSP  500.  South  Sudan’s  general 
inflation fell to 24.5% in 2019 from 83.5% in 2018 due to reduced financing of the fiscal deficit. The 
central bank commitment to reduce monetization of the fiscal deficit is expected to continue, with 
resulting inflation declining further to 16.9% in 2020 and 9.7% in 20212. With this trend, the costing 
done in USD terms has yielded a low price contingency (USD 59,000 only) because the devaluation 
of the SSP vs USD will deal with any emerging price contingencies during implementation. Public 
Financial  Management  (PFM  reforms  which  are  ongoing  are  focusing  on  stabilizing  the  macro-
economic fundamentals and disciplining the financial sector. South Sudan has just received a loan 
from IMF which is expected to stabilize the currency and avail much needed foreign currency into 
the market – which may hopefully stabilize the currency, and address inflation. A component-wise 
and also by expenditure category break down of total project costs is presented in Table 1 and 2 
below. Project costs by component by year are presented in table 3. 
3. 
IFAD  climate-focused  financing.  Climate  resilient  activities/interventions  have  been 
mainstreamed  into  Project  Development  Objectives,  Theory  of  Change  and  Monitoring  and 
Evaluation  Frameworks  and  specifically  to  project  components  under  activity  2.2.1  and  2.2.2  for 
climate  resilient  infrastructure  development  as  well  as  soil  and  water  conservation  activities. 
Furthermore,  Climate  Risk  analysis  and  adaptation  options  are  prepared  and  will  be  considered 
during CDD and CDP preparation.   About 41% of the costs for CDD, CDP, capacity building etc are 
focused on climate adaptation. 
1Youth costs will account for an estimated cost of USD 12,440,800 based on beneficiary target of 70% 
2https://www.afdb.org/en/countries/east-africa/south-sudan/south-sudan-economic-outlook 
1 
Table1: Summary of Costs by Components 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
Table 2: Project costs by expenditure category and financier 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
2 
South SudanSouth Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)Components Project Cost Summary(SSP '000)(USD '000)LocalForeignTotalLocalForeignTotalA. Community Driven Development PlanningBuild strong and inclusive Community Based Organizations (CBOs)1,135,730368,6701,504,4002,2717373,009Development of Community driven development plans (CDPs)630,450176,550807,0001,2613531,614Subtotal Community Driven Development Planning1,766,180545,2202,311,4003,5321,0904,623B. Agriculture Production and Rural livelihood SupportInvestments for Increased Climate-Sensitive Agriculture Production and Rural Livelihoods542,000542,0001,0841,084Community Infrastructure to Support Production and Marketing2,886,900234,6003,121,5005,7744696,243Subtotal Agriculture Production and Rural livelihood Support3,428,900234,6003,663,5006,8584697,327C. Project Support and Capacity BuildingThird Party Implementation Arrangements569,675750,8251,320,5001,1391,5022,641Institutional Capacity Building and Policy Support1,448,675217,5151,666,1902,8974353,332Subtotal Project Support and Capacity Building2,018,350968,3402,986,6904,0371,9375,973Total BASELINE COSTS7,213,4301,748,1608,961,59014,4273,49617,923Price Contingencies4,1421,4535,595314Total PROJECT COSTS7,217,5721,749,6138,967,18514,4303,49717,927South SudanSouth Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)Expenditure Accounts Project Cost Summary(SSP '000)(USD '000)LocalForeignTotalLocalForeignTotal I. Investment CostsA. Grants and subsidies2,881,500-2,881,5005,763-5,763B. Vehicles43,75018,75062,5008838125C. Goods, Services and Inputs2,106,965902,9853,009,9504,2141,8066,020D. Consultancies474,900712,3501,187,2509501,4252,375E. Training202,75586,895289,650406174579Total Investment Costs5,709,8701,720,9807,430,85011,4203,44214,862II. Recurrent CostsA. Salaries and allowances1,440,140-1,440,1402,880-2,880B. Operations and Maintenance63,42027,18090,60012754181Total Recurrent Costs1,503,56027,1801,530,7403,007543,061Total BASELINE COSTS7,213,4301,748,1608,961,59014,4273,49617,923Physical ContingenciesPrice Contingencies4,1421,4535,595314Total PROJECT COSTS7,217,5721,749,6138,967,18514,4303,49717,927 
Table 3:Project costs by component and year 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
a.  Project financing/ co-financing strategy and plan 
4. 
IFAD will fund up to 54% of the project costs. This is split into a loan (20%) and a grant 
(80%) on highly concessionary terms. The African Development Bank (AFDB) will fund 32% of the 
total project costs amounting to USD 5.6 million that relate to investments in Eastern Equatorial 
and Jonglei and a contribution to the joint Project Coordination Unit.   
Domestic  co-financing  constitutes  14%  of  the  total  project  costs.  This  includes  the 
5. 
Government of South Sudan (GoSS) contribution (9%) which will be exclusively in the form of tax 
reimbursements and Beneficiary in-kind contribution (5%).  
Table 4:Project costs by component and financier 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
3 
South SudanSouth Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies(USD '000)Totals Including ContingenciesPY 1PY 2PY 3PY 4PY 5PY 6TotalA. Community Driven Development PlanningBuild strong and inclusive Community Based Organizations (CBOs)492661788652332863,009Development of Community driven development plans (CDPs)1781452193444143141,614Subtotal Community Driven Development Planning6708061,0079967464004,623B. Agriculture Production and Rural livelihood SupportInvestments for Increased Climate-Sensitive Agriculture Production and Rural Livelihoods6621322523183141,084Community Infrastructure to Support Production and Marketing2256551,7011,9171,745-6,243Subtotal Agriculture Production and Rural livelihood Support2317171,8332,1692,0633147,327C. Project Support and Capacity BuildingThird Party Implementation Arrangements1,4623132692092251652,641Institutional Capacity Building and Policy Support6917545385525402613,336Subtotal Project Support and Capacity Building2,1531,0668077607644265,977Total PROJECT COSTS3,0542,5893,6473,9253,5731,13917,927South SudanSouth Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)Components by FinanciersBeneficiary(USD '000)GoSSIFAD GrantIFAD LoanAfDB- ParallelContributionTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Community Driven Development PlanningBuild strong and inclusive Community Based Organizations (CBOs)24581,14538286101,332443,00917Development of Community driven development plans (CDPs)8675421713530331,6149Subtotal Community Driven Development Planning24552,01344503111,862404,62326B. Agriculture Production and Rural livelihood SupportInvestments for Increased Climate-Sensitive Agriculture Production and Rural Livelihoods86780163155451,0846Community Infrastructure to Support Production and Marketing1,124182,26336767121,28221807136,24335Subtotal Agriculture Production and Rural livelihood Support1,124153,13043930131,28218861127,32741C. Project Support and Capacity BuildingThird Party Implementation Arrangements8631,2234615761,174452,64115Institutional Capacity Building and Policy Support14541,5344631091,348403,33619Subtotal Project Support and Capacity Building23142,7584646782,522425,97733Total PROJECT COSTS1,60097,900441,900115,66632861517,927100 
Table 5:Project costs by expenditure category and financier 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
b.  Disbursement 
The  following  tables  provide  the  proposed  project  disbursement  profile/  time  frame.  The 
6. 
discussions  for  possible  co-financing  will  be  on  a  parallel  basis  with  coordination  and  synergies 
assured through the annual planning and budgeting processes. 
Table 6: Disbursement Profile by Semester by Financier 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
4 
South SudanSouth Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)Expenditure Accounts by FinanciersBeneficiary(USD '000)GoSSIFAD GrantIFAD LoanAfDB- ParallelContributionTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%I. Investment CostsA. Grants and subsidies842153,1305493016861155,76332B. Vehicles2318103821251C. Goods, Services and Inputs56792,86948783131,800306,02034D. Consultancies8741,0094310441,174492,37513E. Training581010017254396685793Total Investment Costs1,577117,109481,842123,47323861614,86283II. Recurrent CostsA. Salaries and allowances750265222,079722,88116B. Operations and Maintenance2212412274114621851Total Recurrent Costs221791265822,193723,06517Total PROJECT COSTS1,60097,900441,900115,66632861517,927100South Sudan South Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) (USD '000)Disbursements by Semesters and Government Cash Flow Costs toFinancing AvailablebeIFADIFADAfDB-BeneficiaryFinancedGoSSGrantLoanParallelContributionProjectCumulativeAmountAmountAmountAmountTotalCostsCash FlowCash Flow1 3335379901,1851,258-73-732 474641,18201,7191,797-78-1513 544111788141,4571,575-118-2694 408101378149011,015-114-3835 8752196881311,9132,116-203-5856 7422092531311,3341,533-198-7847 1,0002556501492,0542,269-215-9988 8702451821491,4461,657-211-1,2099 9432316221281,9242,106-182-1,39110 8152211251281,2901,468-178-1,56911 5141028623639-15-1,58512 386928486501-15-1,600Total 7,9041,9015,66686116,33317,932-1,600-1,600 
Table 7: Investment Vs Recurrent costs by financiers 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 
7. 
The  project  costs  are  summarised  in  six  disbursement  categories  including;  Works  (1); 
Equipment, Vehicles and inputs (2); Services (3); Technical Assistance (4); Grants and Subsidies 
(5); and Recurrent costs (6). The largest of these are Categories 5 and 2, collectively accounting 
for  55%  of  total  project  costs  (32%  and  23%  respectively).  The  project  has  a  ratio  of  5:1  for 
investments costs to recurrent costs.
5 
South Sudan South Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) Financing of Investment/Recurrent Costs and Financial Charges by Year (USD '000) FinancingPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6TotalI. Investment Costs  GoSS 146227397421356301,577 IFAD Grant 6678171,4841,7401,6297727,109 IFAD Loan 1062014184904421841,842 AfDB- Parallel 1,5977555053652513,473 Beneficiary Contribution 0.32826129825716861Total Investment Costs 2,5162,0293,0663,3142,9351,00214,862II. Recurrent Costs  GoSS 54444022 IFAD Grant 140136133131128128796 IFAD Loan 111010109960 AfDB- Parallel 383410436468497-2,193Total Recurrent Costs 5395615836126381383,071III. Financial Charges Total Financing of Costs 3,0552,5903,6483,9263,5741,14017,932 
Detailed cost tables 
6 
South SudanSouth Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)Table 1.1. Build strong and inclusive Community Based Organizations (CBOs)Detailed CostsExpenditures by Financiers(USD)QuantitiesTotals Including ContingenciesUnitPY 1PY 2PY 3PY 4PY 5PY 6TotalUnit CostPY 1PY 2PY 3PY 4PY 5PY 6TotalFin. RuleGoSSIFAD GrantIFAD LoanAfDB- Parallel I. Investment CostsA. CBOs developed from 15 payams1. Two days leadership orientation for participating Payams and Bomas per County /aPer County5527.000135,000135,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )13,50097,20024,3002. Rooms hire and associated facilities for 2 days per CountyPer County555002,5002,500IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )2501,8004503. Costs of the facilitation processPer CBO1198174188725431.50016,500147,000261,000282,000108,000814,500IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )81,450586,440146,610Subtotal CBOs developed from 15 payams154,000147,000261,000282,000108,000952,00095,200685,440171,360B. Social Inclusion and Nutrition1. Gender MainstreamingBeneficiary assessment, mobilisation and consultationSession3310.00030,00030,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )3,00021,6005,400Staff Training on Gender Empowerment and Social InclusionSession336001,8001,800IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )1801,296324Mapping and capacity assessment of existing VSLAsLs335001,5001,500IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )1501,080270Facilitated support to VSLAs (Finacial literacy)Session45909090904051004,5009,0009,0009,0009,00040,500IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )4,05029,1607,290Gender sensitisation across CBOs including VSLAsSession501001001003501005,00010,00010,00010,00035,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )3,50025,2006,300Expert of GALS methodologyPerson/month1125.0005,0005,00010,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )1,0007,2001,800Operationalise GALS in groups and householdsper year111111650.00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,000300,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )30,000216,00054,000IEC Materials for Gender sensititsationLs11.21.0001,0005005002,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )2001,440360Exchange visitsLs3361.0003,0003,0006,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )6004,3201,080Subtotal Gender Mainstreaming98,80077,50069,50072,00059,00050,000426,80042,680307,29676,8242. Nutrition MainstreamingNutrition gaps assessment (value chain/ Market profiles)Ls1122.0002,0002,0004,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )4002,880720Demostration Household Food ProductionSession501001001001001005501005,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00055,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )5,50039,6009,900Conduct Nutrition education sessionsSession1836363636361982003,6007,2007,2007,2007,2007,20039,600IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )3,96028,5127,128Social marketing for promotion of nutritious foodsLumpsum366666331.0003,0006,0006,0006,0006,0006,00033,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )3,30023,7605,940IEC Materials for Nutrition messagingLumpsum331.51.51.51.5121.0003,0003,0001,5001,5001,5001,50012,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )1,2008,6402,160Reinforce capacity of community extensionLumpsum3-3-3-91.0003,0003,0003,0009,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )9006,4801,620Cooking demonstrations and receipe developmentSession1836363636361982003,6007,2007,2007,2007,2007,20039,600IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )3,96028,5127,128Promotion of food storage and processingSession1836363636361981001,8003,6003,6003,6003,6003,60019,800IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )1,98014,2563,564Subtotal Nutrition Mainstreaming25,00037,00038,50037,50038,50035,500212,00021,200152,64038,160Subtotal Social Inclusion and Nutrition123,800114,500108,000109,50097,50085,500638,80063,880459,936114,984C. AFDB Parallel Financing1. ABC Post harvest and MIS Equipments-EESLs4243851.00042,00043,00085,000AFDB ( 100% )8,50076,5002. ABC MIS Equipments-EESLs4481.0004,0004,0008,000AFDB ( 100% )8007,2003. Post Harvest Equipment-CESLumpsum4243851.00042,00043,00085,000AFDB ( 100% )8,50076,5004. Post Harvest Equipments-JongleiLumpsum2122431.00021,00022,00043,000AFDB ( 100% )4,30038,7005. ABC MIS Equipments-CESLumpsum4481.0004,0004,0008,000AFDB ( 100% )8007,2006. ABC MIS Equipments-JongeiLs2241.0002,0002,0004,000AFDB ( 100% )4003,6007. SEG Field Equipments-EESLs1111221.00011,00011,00022,000AFDB ( 100% )2,20019,8008. SEG Field Equipments-CESLumpsum1111221.00011,00011,00022,000AFDB ( 100% )2,20019,8009. SEG Field Equipment-JongleiLs56111.0005,0006,00011,000AFDB ( 100% )1,1009,90010. ABC Office Furniture-EESLs4481.0004,0004,0008,000AFDB ( 100% )8007,20011. ABC Office Furniture-CESLumpsum4481.0004,0004,0008,000AFDB ( 100% )8007,20012. ABC Office Furniture-JongleiLumpsum2241.0002,0002,0004,000AFDB ( 100% )4003,60013. ABC Computers-EESLs89171.0008,0009,00017,000AFDB ( 100% )1,70015,30014. ABC Computers-CESLumpsum89171.0008,0009,00017,000AFDB ( 100% )1,70015,30015. ABC Computer-JongleiLs4481.0004,0004,0008,000AFDB ( 100% )8007,20016. SEG Training-EESLs15161719671.00015,00016,00017,00019,00067,000AFDB ( 100% )6,70060,30017. SEG Training-CESLumpsum15161719671.00015,00016,00017,00019,00067,000AFDB ( 100% )6,70060,30018. SEG Training-JongleiLumpsum8899341.0008,0008,0009,0009,00034,000AFDB ( 100% )3,40030,60019. ABC-BPA Training-EESLumpsum313335371361.00031,00033,00035,00037,000136,000AFDB ( 100% )13,600122,40020. ABC-BPA Training-CESLumpsum313335371361.00031,00033,00035,00037,000136,000AFDB ( 100% )13,600122,40021. ABC-BPA Training-JongleiLumpsum15161719671.00015,00016,00017,00019,00067,000AFDB ( 100% )6,70060,300Subtotal AFDB Parallel Financing115,000294,000308,000140,000857,00085,700771,300Total Investment Costs392,800555,500677,000531,500205,50085,5002,447,800244,7801,145,376286,344771,300II. Recurrent CostsA. AFDB Parallel Financing1. Field Extension Agent-EESPerson/month33353740421871.00033,00035,00037,00040,00042,000187,000AFDB ( 100% )187,0002. Field Extension Agent-CESPerson/month33353740421871.00033,00035,00037,00040,00042,000187,000AFDB ( 100% )187,0003. Field Extension Agent-JongleiPerson/month33353740421871.00033,00035,00037,00040,00042,000187,000AFDB ( 100% )187,000Total Recurrent Costs99,000105,000111,000120,000126,000561,000561,000Total491,800660,500788,000651,500331,50085,5003,008,800244,7801,145,376286,3441,332,300 
7 
South SudanSouth Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)Table 1.2. Development of Community driven development plans (CDPs)Detailed Costs(USD)QuantitiesUnitTotals Including ContingenciesUnitPY 1PY 2PY 3PY 4PY 5PY 6TotalCostPY 1PY 2PY 3PY 4PY 5PY 6TotalFin. RuleIFAD GrantIFAD LoanAFDB I. Investment CostsA. CDP preparation costsKajo-KejiPer Micro-Project211202540351332.0004,00022,00040,00050,00080,00070,000266,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )212,80053,200TerekekaPer Micro-Project510202527872.00010,00020,00040,00050,00054,000174,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )139,20034,800MagwiPer Micro-Project18123038441332.0002,00016,00024,00060,00076,00088,000266,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )212,80053,200ToritPer Micro-Project47152022682.0008,00014,00030,00040,00044,000136,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )108,80027,200BorPer Micro-Project3173636291212.0006,00034,00072,00072,00058,000242,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )193,60048,400Subtotal CDP preparation costs6,00062,000132,000252,000318,000314,0001,084,000867,200216,800B. AFDB Parallel FinancingSorghum value chain studyLs31311.00031,00031,000AFDB ( 100% )31,000Groundnuts value chain studyLs31311.00031,00031,000AFDB ( 100% )31,000Seed sector framework studyLs31311.00031,00031,000AFDB ( 100% )31,000Subtotal AFDB Parallel Financing93,00093,00093,000Total Investment Costs99,00062,000132,000252,000318,000314,0001,177,000867,200216,80093,000II. Recurrent CostsValue Chain ExpertPerson/month33353638401821.00033,00035,00036,00038,00040,000182,000AFDB ( 100% )182,000Seed ExpertPerson/month46485154562551.00046,00048,00051,00054,00056,000255,000AFDB ( 100% )255,000Total Recurrent Costs79,00083,00087,00092,00096,000437,000437,000Total178,000145,000219,000344,000414,000314,0001,614,000867,200216,800530,000South SudanSouth Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)Table 1.2. Development of Community driven development plans (CDPs)Detailed Costs(USD)UnitUnitPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6TotalCostPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6Total I. Investment CostsA. CDP preparation costsKajo-KejiPer Micro-Project211202540351332.0004,00022,00040,00050,00080,00070,000266,000TerekekaPer Micro-Project-510202527872.000-10,00020,00040,00050,00054,000174,000MagwiPer Micro-Project18123038441332.0002,00016,00024,00060,00076,00088,000266,000ToritPer Micro-Project-47152022682.000-8,00014,00030,00040,00044,000136,000BorPer Micro-Project-3173636291212.000-6,00034,00072,00072,00058,000242,000Total6,00062,000132,000252,000318,000314,0001,084,000Indicative Breakdown of USD 2,000 towards development of CDD PlansActivity Unit of MeasureQuantityUnit Cost (USD)Total Cost (USD)A: Consultant to develop from the discussions, both short to medium term plans agreed by the group.i) Fees/ aPers.day81501,200 ii)TravelRound Trip2150300    iii) DSA/bPer day378234    B: Where applicable design of the infrastructural intervention, its approval and dissemination.Per CDD plan1166166    B: CDD plan printing costsPer CDD plan1100100    Total per CDD plan2,000 a/ The Consultant will spend about 8 days working on the CDPb/  The 8 days include 3 days participating in the discussion at the community meetings, to collect the informationSouth SudanSouth Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)Table 1.2. Development of Community driven development plans (CDPs)Detailed Costs(USD)UnitUnitPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6TotalCostPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6Total I. Investment CostsA. CDP preparation costsKajo-KejiPer Micro-Project211202540351332.0004,00022,00040,00050,00080,00070,000266,000TerekekaPer Micro-Project-510202527872.000-10,00020,00040,00050,00054,000174,000MagwiPer Micro-Project18123038441332.0002,00016,00024,00060,00076,00088,000266,000ToritPer Micro-Project-47152022682.000-8,00014,00030,00040,00044,000136,000BorPer Micro-Project-3173636291212.000-6,00034,00072,00072,00058,000242,000Total6,00062,000132,000252,000318,000314,0001,084,000Indicative Breakdown of USD 2,000 towards development of CDD PlansActivity Unit of MeasureQuantityUnit Cost (USD)Total Cost (USD)A: Consultant to develop from the discussions, both short to medium term plans agreed by the group.i) Fees/ aPers.day81501,200 ii)TravelRound Trip2150300    iii) DSA/bPer day378234    B: Where applicable design of the infrastructural intervention, its approval and dissemination.Per CDD plan1166166    B: CDD plan printing costsPer CDD plan1100100    Total per CDD plan2,000 a/ The Consultant will spend about 8 days working on the CDPb/  The 8 days include 3 days participating in the discussion at the community meetings, to collect the informationQuantitiesTotals Including ContingenciesSouth SudanSouth Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)Table 2.1. Investments for increased agriculture production and rural livelihoodsDetailed Costs(USD)QuantitiesUnitTotals Including ContingenciesBeneficiaryUnitPY 1PY 2PY 3PY 4PY 5PY 6TotalCostPY 1PY 2PY 3PY 4PY 5PY 6TotalFin. RuleIFAD GrantIFAD LoanContribution I. Investment CostsA. Investment CostsKajo-KejiPer Micro-Project211202540351332.0004,00022,00040,00050,00080,00070,000266,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 15% ), BENEF_CONTRIB ( 5% )212,80039,90013,300TerekekaPer Micro-Project510202527872.00010,00020,00040,00050,00054,000174,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 15% ), BENEF_CONTRIB ( 5% )139,20026,1008,700MagwiPer Micro-Project18123038441332.0002,00016,00024,00060,00076,00088,000266,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 15% ), BENEF_CONTRIB ( 5% )212,80039,90013,300ToritPer Micro-Project47152022682.0008,00014,00030,00040,00044,000136,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 15% ), BENEF_CONTRIB ( 5% )108,80020,4006,800BorPer Micro-Project3173636291212.0006,00034,00072,00072,00058,000242,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 15% ), BENEF_CONTRIB ( 5% )193,60036,30012,100Total6,00062,000132,000252,000318,000314,0001,084,000867,200162,60054,200 
8 
South SudanSouth Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)Table 2.2. Productive community infrastructure developedDetailed CostsExpenditures by Financiers(USD)QuantitiesTotals Including ContingenciesUnitPY 1PY 2PY 3PY 4PY 5PY 6TotalUnit CostPY 1PY 2PY 3PY 4PY 5PY 6TotalFin. RuleGoSSIFAD GrantIFAD LoanAfDB- ParallelBeneficiary Contribution I. Investment CostsA. 2.2.1 Infrastructure for Soil & Water Conservation (Terraces, Contour bunds, gabions, etc) /aMagwi# hectares2754471281.00027,00054,00047,000128,000IFAD_G ( 50% ), IFAD_L ( 20% ), BENEF_CONTRIB ( 30% )23,04052,48020,99231,488Torit# hectares142522611.00014,00025,00022,00061,000IFAD_G ( 50% ), IFAD_L ( 20% ), BENEF_CONTRIB ( 30% )10,98025,01010,00415,006Kajo-Keji# hectares2958501371.00029,00058,00050,000137,000IFAD_G ( 50% ), IFAD_L ( 20% ), BENEF_CONTRIB ( 30% )24,66056,17022,46833,702Terekea# hectares173531831.00017,00035,00031,00083,000IFAD_G ( 50% ), IFAD_L ( 20% ), BENEF_CONTRIB ( 30% )14,94034,03013,61220,418Bor# hectares162925701.00016,00029,00025,00070,000IFAD_G ( 50% ), IFAD_L ( 20% ), BENEF_CONTRIB ( 30% )12,60028,70011,48017,220Subtotal 2.2.1 Infrastructure for Soil & Water Conservation (Terraces, Contour bunds, gabions, etc)103,000201,000175,000479,00086,220196,39078,556117,834B. 2.2.2 Community-level production Systems /b1. Water supply systems for production (crops&livestock) & domestic useMagwi# of facilities3441150.000150,000200,000200,000550,000IFAD_G ( 60% ), IFAD_L ( 20% ), BENEF_CONTRIB ( 20% )99,000270,60090,20090,200Torit# of facilities333950.000150,000150,000150,000450,000IFAD_G ( 60% ), IFAD_L ( 20% ), BENEF_CONTRIB ( 20% )81,000221,40073,80073,800Kajo-Keji# of facilities3441150.000150,000200,000200,000550,000IFAD_G ( 60% ), IFAD_L ( 20% ), BENEF_CONTRIB ( 20% )99,000270,60090,20090,200Terekea# of facilities3441150.000150,000200,000200,000550,000IFAD_G ( 60% ), IFAD_L ( 20% ), BENEF_CONTRIB ( 20% )99,000270,60090,20090,200Bor# of facilities3341050.000150,000150,000200,000500,000IFAD_G ( 60% ), IFAD_L ( 20% ), BENEF_CONTRIB ( 20% )90,000246,00082,00082,000Subtotal Water supply systems for production (crops&livestock) & domestic use750,000900,000950,0002,600,000468,0001,279,200426,400426,400C. 2.2.3. Investments in Post Harvest Infrastructure1. Community based basic processing facilities (drying beds,  mills etc)Magwi# of facilities5531310.00050,00050,00030,000130,000IFAD_G ( 60% ), IFAD_L ( 20% ), BENEF_CONTRIB ( 20% )23,40063,96021,32021,320Torit# of facilities3541210.00030,00050,00040,000120,000IFAD_G ( 60% ), IFAD_L ( 20% ), BENEF_CONTRIB ( 20% )21,60059,04019,68019,680Kajo-Keji# of facilities5641510.00050,00060,00040,000150,000IFAD_G ( 60% ), IFAD_L ( 20% ), BENEF_CONTRIB ( 20% )27,00073,80024,60024,600Terekea# of facilities4451310.00040,00040,00050,000130,000IFAD_G ( 60% ), IFAD_L ( 20% ), BENEF_CONTRIB ( 20% )23,40063,96021,32021,320Bor# of facilities3451210.00030,00040,00050,000120,000IFAD_G ( 60% ), IFAD_L ( 20% ), BENEF_CONTRIB ( 20% )21,60059,04019,68019,680Subtotal Community based basic processing facilities (drying beds,  mills etc)200,000240,000210,000650,000117,000319,800106,600106,600D. 2.2.4: Investments to Improve Access to Inputs & Markets1. Spot improvement on Feeder Roads /cMagwi# of km8982510.00080,00090,00080,000250,000IFAD_G ( 60% ), IFAD_L ( 20% ), BENEF_CONTRIB ( 20% )45,000123,00041,00041,000Torit# of km4441210.00040,00040,00040,000120,000IFAD_G ( 60% ), IFAD_L ( 20% ), BENEF_CONTRIB ( 20% )21,60059,04019,68019,680Kajo-Keji# of km91092810.00090,000100,00090,000280,000IFAD_G ( 60% ), IFAD_L ( 20% ), BENEF_CONTRIB ( 20% )50,400137,76045,92045,920Terekea# of km5651610.00050,00060,00050,000160,000IFAD_G ( 60% ), IFAD_L ( 20% ), BENEF_CONTRIB ( 20% )28,80078,72026,24026,240Bor# of km4551410.00040,00050,00050,000140,000IFAD_G ( 60% ), IFAD_L ( 20% ), BENEF_CONTRIB ( 20% )25,20068,88022,96022,960Subtotal Spot improvement on Feeder Roads300,000340,000310,000950,000171,000467,400155,800155,800E. AFDB Parallel FinancingAggregation Centre Infrastructure-EESLs90951001051105001.00090,00095,000100,000105,000110,000500,000AFDB ( 100% )90,000410,000Aggregation Centre Ifrastructure-CESLs90951001051105001.00090,00095,000100,000105,000110,000500,000AFDB ( 100% )90,000410,000Aggregation Centre Infrastructure Fund-JongleiLs45475052552491.00045,00047,00050,00052,00055,000249,000AFDB ( 100% )44,820204,180Seed Testing Laboratory EquipmentsLs3153151.000315,000315,000AFDB ( 100% )56,700258,300Total225,000655,0001,701,0001,917,0001,745,0006,243,0001,123,7402,262,790767,3561,282,480806,634 _________________________________\a Includes climate/ environment screening costs\b Includes climate/ environment screening costs\c These 95 kilometres may seem a small target but they are a strategic spot improvement that can link unreachable production areas to existing community access roads 
9 
South SudanSouth Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)Table 3.1. Third Party Implementation ArrangementsDetailed CostsExpenditures by Financiers(USD)QuantitiesTotals Including ContingenciesUnitPY 1PY 2PY 3PY 4PY 5PY 6TotalUnit CostPY 1PY 2PY 3PY 4PY 5PY 6TotalFin. RuleGoSSIFAD GrantIFAD LoanAfDB- Parallel I. Investment CostsA. Knowledge Management, Monitoring and Evaluation1. Knowledge managementInformation dissemination through audio-visual methodsLs444444241.0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,0004,00024,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )19,2004,800Production and dissemination of various extension messagesLs444444242.50010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,00060,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )48,00012,000Subtotal Knowledge management14,00014,00014,00014,00014,00014,00084,00067,20016,8002. State levelAnnual stakeholder workshopsLs33333153.0009,0009,0009,0009,0009,00045,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )36,0009,000Publication and dissemination of workshop proceedings (magazines)Ls33333153.0009,0009,0009,0009,0009,00045,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )36,0009,000Subtotal State level18,00018,00018,00018,00018,00090,00072,00018,0003. County levelAnnual Stakeholder meetingsLs55555252.50012,50012,50012,50012,50012,50062,500IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )50,00012,5004. Monitoring and evaluationMid term reviewStudy1136.50036,50036,500IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )29,2007,300Final impact evaluationLs1140.00040,00040,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )32,0008,000Annual progress surveysSurveys1111410.00010,00010,00010,00010,00040,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )32,0008,000BaselineStudy1140.00040,00040,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )32,0008,000Subtotal Monitoring and evaluation40,00010,00046,50010,00010,00040,000156,500125,20031,300Subtotal Knowledge Management, Monitoring and Evaluation54,00054,50091,00054,50054,50084,500393,000314,40078,600B. Third Party fees and costsPer year111111680.00080,00080,00080,00080,00080,00080,000480,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )86,400314,88078,720C. AFDB Parallel Financing Project Cordination and Management1. Third Party Administration AgencyLumpsum9979971.000997,000997,000AFDB ( 100% )997,0002. Baseline studyLumpsum31311.00031,00031,000AFDB ( 100% )31,0003. ESMP Study and MonitoringLumpsum21222324251151.00021,00022,00023,00024,00025,000115,000AFDB ( 100% )115,0004. Fiduciary Capacity Development-Financial Management and ProcurementLumpsum1516311.00015,00016,00031,000AFDB ( 100% )31,000Subtotal AFDB Parallel Financing Project Cordination and Management1,064,00038,00023,00024,00025,0001,174,0001,174,000D. Estimated budget for ESMF Implementation1. Site-specific ESIAs, ESMPs and environmental license feesLumpsum50,00030,00020,000100,000150,00030,00020,000100,000IFAD_G ( 100% )100,0002. Miigation measuresLumpsum70,00040,00020,00010,00010,000150,000170,00040,00020,00010,00010,000150,000IFAD_G ( 100% )150,0003. Monitoring and evaluation purposes (R&D, M&E, Field visits)Lumpsum70,00040,00020,00010,00010,000150,000170,00040,00020,00010,00010,000150,000IFAD_G ( 100% )150,0004. Environmental and social trainingLumpsum10,0005,0005,0005,0005,00030,000110,0005,0005,0005,0005,00030,000IFAD_G ( 100% )30,0005. Annual ReviewsLumpsum10,00010,00020,000110,00010,00020,000IFAD_G ( 100% )20,0006. Bi-Annual AuditLumpsum25,00025,00050,000125,00025,00050,000IFAD_G ( 100% )50,0007. End of Project AuditLumpsum40,00040,000140,00040,000IFAD_G ( 100% )40,0008. 10% contigencyLumpsum54,00054,000154,00054,000IFAD_G ( 100% )54,000Subtotal Estimated budget for ESMF Implementation264,000140,00075,00050,00065,000594,000594,000Total1,462,000312,500269,000208,500224,500164,5002,641,00086,4001,223,280157,3201,174,000 
10 
South SudanSouth Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)Table 3.2. Build institutional capacities at the state and local government levelsDetailed CostsExpenditures by Financiers(USD)QuantitiesTotals Including ContingenciesUnitPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6TotalUnit CostPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6TotalFin. RuleGoSSIFAD GrantIFAD LoanAfDB- Parallel I. Investment CostsA. Contribution to establishment of Single Project Coordination Unit (PCU)1. Office EquipmentDesktop Computer /aNumber13131.00013,00013,000AFDB ( 100% )2,34010,660Printer /bNumber10104004,0004,000AFDB ( 100% )7203,280Accounting software /cPackage1110.00010,00010,000AFDB ( 100% )1,8008,200Office furniture /dset13135006,5006,500AFDB ( 100% )1,1705,330Subtotal Office Equipment33,50033,5006,03027,4702. VehicleDouble Cabin VehicleNumber1145.00045,00045,000AFDB ( 100% )8,10036,9003. Supporting some oversight roles of MAFSNational technical Committee meetingsQuarterly444444241004004004004004004002,400IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )4321,574394Joint stakeholders meetingsPer year11111163.0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,00018,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )3,24011,8082,952Implementation support where neededLs/ year11111163.0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,0003,00018,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )3,24011,8082,952Double Cabin VehicleNumber1145.00045,00045,000IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )8,10029,5207,380Subtotal Supporting some oversight roles of MAFS51,4006,4006,4006,4006,4006,40083,40015,01254,71013,678Subtotal Contribution to establishment of Single Project Coordination Unit (PCU)129,9006,4006,4006,4006,4006,400161,90029,14254,71013,67864,370B. Building of other institutional capacities at the state and local government levels1. Capacity and System needs Assessment /eLumpsum33,56433,564IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )6,04220,6426,8812. Building of other institutional capacity at state and local government levelLogistical Support to the State and County Extension Agents /fMotorcycle65651.20078,00078,000IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )3,90055,57518,525Capacity Strengthening in Project Financial Management at National, State and County Levels /gSession11111525.00025,00025,00025,00025,00025,000125,000IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )6,25089,06329,688Capacity Strengthening in Project Procurement processes at National, State and County Levels /hSession11111520.00020,00020,00020,00020,00020,000100,000IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )5,00071,25023,750Capacity Strengthening in Project M&E and KM at National, State and County Levels /iSession11111525.00025,00025,00025,00025,00025,000125,000IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )6,25089,06329,688Capacity Strengthening of Government staff @ National, State and County Levels in Social Inclusion Aspects /jWorkshop2332101.8003,6005,4005,4003,60018,000IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )90012,8254,275Capacity Strengthening in Project Management at National, State and County Levels /kSession111325.00025,00025,00025,00075,000IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )3,75053,43817,813Motorcycle O&M /lPer Year65656565653251207,8007,8007,8007,8007,80039,000IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )1,95027,7889,263Internet Connectivity /mPer Year888888485.00040,00040,00040,00040,00040,00040,000240,000IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )12,000171,00057,000Subtotal Building of other institutional capacity at state and local government level43,600226,200148,200146,400117,800117,800800,00040,000570,000190,000Subtotal Building of other institutional capacities at the state and local government levels77,164226,200148,200146,400117,800117,800833,56446,042590,642196,881 
11 
South SudanSouth Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)Table 3.2. Build institutional capacities at the state and local government levelsDetailed CostsExpenditures by Financiers(USD)QuantitiesTotals Including ContingenciesUnitPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6TotalUnit CostPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6TotalFin. RuleGoSSIFAD GrantIFAD LoanAfDB- ParallelC. Development of the National Cooperatives Policy Frameworks1. Payment to consultantProfessional fees of Lead ConsultantMan/day13513542056,70056,700IFAD_G ( 60% ), IFAD_L ( 40% )10,20627,89618,598Assistant consultantMan/day45451004,5004,500IFAD_G ( 90% ), IFAD_L ( 10% )8103,289401Desk research, internet, airtimeestimated335301,590-1,590IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )2861,043261Subtotal Payment to consultant1,59061,20062,79011,30232,22819,2592. Conducting a cooperatives development stakeholders  validation meetings /nVenueMan/day15151001,5001,500IFAD_G ( 90% ), IFAD_L ( 10% )2701,096134Meals and Refreshmentparticipants13513510013,50013,500IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )2,4308,3032,768Transport refund for DGs from Statesparticipants606020012,00012,000IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )2,1607,3802,460Production of draft docmentsCopies1501505750750IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )135461154Full Board costs for DGsParticipants606075045,00045,000IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )8,10027,6759,225Organization costsestimated33100300300IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )5418562Subtotal Conducting a cooperatives development stakeholders  validation meetings73,05073,05013,14945,10014,8013. Conduct 1st technical review meeting /oVenueMan/day99100900900IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )162554185Meals and refreshmentsparticipants3030601,8001,800IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )3241,107369Transport refundparticipants30301003,0003,000IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )5401,845615Production of draft documentsCopies60605300300IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )5418562Organization costsestimated33100300300IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )5418562Subtotal Conduct 1st technical review meeting6,3006,3001,1343,8751,2924. Conduct 2nd technical review meeting /pVenueMan/day66100600600IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )108369123Meals and refreshmentsparticipants151540600600IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )108369123Transport refundparticipants15151001,5001,500IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )270923308Production of draft documentsCopies181859090IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )165518Oragnization costsestimated33100300300IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )5418562Subtotal Conduct 2nd technical review meeting3,0903,0905561,9006335. Production of national cooperative development strategic framework document copiesComputer design of the documentTechnical layout334001,2001,200IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )216738246Production of documentCopies300300103,0003,000IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )5401,845615PackagingCopies3003001375375IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )6823177Transportation and distributionCopies30030051,5001,500IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )270923308Subtotal roduction of national cooperative development strategic framework document copies6,0756,0751,0943,7361,2456. Administration, oversight, supervision, monitoring and evaluationLs15,13115,131IFAD_G ( 75% ), IFAD_L ( 25% )75710,7813,594Subtotal Development of the National Cooperatives Policy Frameworks16,721149,715166,43627,99197,62040,825D. AFDB Parallel Financing Project Coordination and Management1. Land Cruiser Hard topNumber41411.00041,00041,000AFDB ( 100% )7,38033,6202. Pick-up Double CabinNumber39391.00039,00039,000AFDB ( 100% )7,02031,9803. Office Furniture-MinistryNumber551.0005,0005,000AFDB ( 100% )9004,1004. Office Furniture-PIUNumber10101.00010,00010,000AFDB ( 100% )1,8008,2005. Computers and Printers-MinistryNumber441.0004,0004,000AFDB ( 100% )7203,2806. Computers and Printers PIUNumber881.0008,0008,000AFDB ( 100% )1,4406,560Subtotal AFDB Parallel Financing Project Coordination and Management107,000107,00019,26087,740Total Investment Costs330,785382,315154,600152,800124,200124,2001,268,900122,435742,972251,383152,110 
12 
South SudanSouth Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)Table 3.2. Build institutional capacities at the state and local government levelsDetailed CostsExpenditures by Financiers(USD)QuantitiesTotals Including ContingenciesUnitPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6TotalUnit CostPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6TotalFin. RuleGoSSIFAD GrantIFAD LoanAfDB- ParallelII. Recurrent CostsA. Contribution to establishment of Single Project Coordination Unit (PCU)1. Salary Top-ups for GoSS Staff attached to PCU /qPer year1111116132.100132,100132,100132,100132,100132,100132,100792,600IFAD_G ( 93.6% ), IFAD_L ( 6.4% )0741,87450,7262. Vehicle O & MLs3,2282,0911,6151,1095715889,202IFAD_G ( 90% ), IFAD_L ( 10% )-08,2829203. Other O & M costsa. Internet Connectivity /rper year7,3085,2272,6922,2181,14258819,176IFAD_G ( 95% ), IFAD_L ( 5% )2,30115,968907b. Stationery /sper year11111162.4002,4362,5092,5842,6622,7422,82415,757IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )1,89111,0932,773c. Electricity /tper year11111161.0502,4361,5681,2926653433536,658IFAD_G ( 85% ), IFAD_L ( 15% )7994,980879d. Other Utility  & jonitor work /uper year4,8723,1362,5841,33168535312,962IFAD_G ( 80% ), IFAD_L ( 20% )1,5559,1252,281Subtotal Other O & M costs17,05212,4419,1536,8774,9124,11854,5536,54641,1666,841Subtotal Contribution to establishment of Single Project Coordination Unit (PCU)152,380146,632142,868140,086137,583136,807856,3556,546791,32258,487B. AFDB Parallel Financing Project Coordination and Management1. National Project Officer-CordinatorPerson/month60647075813501.00060,00064,00070,00075,00081,000350,000AFDB ( 100% )350,0002. Monitoring and Evaluation ExpertPerson/month33363942451951.00033,00036,00039,00042,00045,000195,000AFDB ( 100% )195,0003. DriverPerson/month29323437401721.00029,00032,00034,00037,00040,000172,000AFDB ( 100% )172,0004. DSA ProfessionalPER DAYS31343639421821.00031,00034,00036,00039,00042,000182,000AFDB ( 100% )182,0005. DSA DriversPER DAYS31343639421821.00031,00034,00036,00039,00042,000182,000AFDB ( 100% )182,0006. PIU Vehicles mantenance and sparesLumpsum1010111112541.00010,00010,00011,00011,00012,00054,000AFDB ( 100% )6,48047,5207. PIU Vehicles-Fuel and LubricantsLumpsum1415151616761.00014,00015,00015,00016,00016,00076,000AFDB ( 100% )9,12066,880Subtotal AFDB Parallel Financing Project Coordination and Management208,000225,000241,000259,000278,0001,211,00015,6001,195,400Total Recurrent Costs360,380371,632383,868399,086415,583136,8072,067,35522,146791,32258,4871,195,400Total691,165753,947538,468551,886539,783261,0073,336,255144,5811,534,294309,8701,347,510 _________________________________\a Desktop with softwares and antivirus\b 2 for the PCU and 1 each for the 8 Focal Persons\c Should include the software itself, annual license and technical assistance\d 1 set for each Officer. Set consists of a desk, chair, lamp and a file cabinet\e This will be informed by the capacity and systems assessment\f Five motorcycles per State and a total of 15 motorcycles for the 3 States. Ten motorcycles per County for a total of 50 motorcycles for the 5 Counties.\g Specificities will be identified by the systems and capcity needs assessment. Costs include purchase and installation of an accounting software, inclusive of the annual license and technical assistance.\h Specificities will be identified by the systems and capcity needs assessment\i Specificities will be identified by the systems and capcity needs assessment. Costs include designing of a web-based M&E system\j Two workshops per Coounty for a total of 10 workshops.\k Assumes 2 field monitoring trips per year with 4 Experts on each trip seleted from the PCU and the relevant MAFS Departments and the driver. Each visit is estimated to last 7 days. A Per diem of USD 50 is assumed (i.e. (5*50*7*2) equating to USD 3,500     per\l An annual average of 10% of cost price is assumed (10% of 1,200 equating to USD 120 per year). This includes insurance of the motorcycle.\m An annual average of USD 5,000 is assumed for each office (3 State Offfices and 5 County Offices). This will be needed to support the Web-based M&E System.\n To make various imputs to the cooperative's development strategy draft document\o To provide more inputs into the contents of the cooperative's development strategy draft document through thematic working groups meetings discussions and consultations\p To revise, and refine the cooperatives development strategy draft document taking into consideration of the comments generated by the 1st technical review meeting\q PC (US$ 1,000 p.m); M&E/KM (US$ 800 p.m); FC (US $ 800 p.m); Procurement (US $ 800 p.m); Project Assistant (US $ 300 p.m); Driver (US $ 400 p.m); State Focal Persons (3) (@ US $ 500 p.m); County Focal Persons (5)  @ USD 500 pm\r An annual average of USD 7,200 is assumed\s About USD 200 per month\t About USD 200 per month but IFAD contribution will be on reducing as other development partners come on board\u About USD 400 per month.  IFAD contribution will be on reducing as other development partners come on board 
South Sudan
South Sudan Livelihoods Resilience Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Mission Dates:
20 August to 6 December 2020
Document Date:
01/03/2021
Project No.
2000002869
Report No.
5643-SS
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 4:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
Causal link between to SSLRP investments and benefits  
1. 
Through a Community Driven Planning (CDP)  approach, beneficiaries  will be supported to 
develop  CDP  plans  (sub-component  1.1).  After  successful  but  guided  CDP  plans  have  been 
developed,  they  will  be  funded  through  grants  from  SSLRP  sub-component  2.2  (interchangeably 
referred  to  as  micro-projects).    It  is  important  to  note  that  not  all  investments  will  be  through 
CDPs. Strategic Investments will be financed directly by the project The causal links between the 
SSLRP investments are presented in the table below: 
SSLRP intervention under each sub-
component (USD’000) 
Causal link to benefits 
1. Community Driven Development Planning 
Build 
inclusive 
Community  Based  Organizations 
(CBOs) 
strong 
3,009 
and 
For  better  adoption/  success  rates,  with  this  investment  CBOs  will  prepared  before 
moving into development of Community Driven Development Plans (CDPs)  
Development 
driven 
(CDPs) 
of  Community 
plans 
development 
 Here Actual CDPs are developed. A total of 542 plans are anticipated 
1,614 
2. Agriculture Production and Rural livelihood Support 
Investments for Increased 
Climate-Sensitive Agriculture 
Production and Rural Livelihoods 
1,084 
Community Infrastructure to 
Support Production and 
Marketing 
6,243 
Here  the  actual  investments  will  be  funded  by  the  project  on  grant-basis. 
Representative  models  used  in  the  EFA  are  in  3  categories:  On-farm  agriculture; 
Livestock and Fisheries and Value addition. With USD 2,000 grant to a group of 10-
15  household  (hh),  each  hh  will  receive  a  grant  in  the  range  of  USD  130-300 
equivalent  to  enable  them  start-up  or  revitalize  their  farms/  enterprises.    Potential 
increase in yields returns and affordability after the initial grant have been included 
in this EFA analysis. 
The expected outputs for the different categories of infrastructure, spread across all 
the  five  target  Counties,  are  estimated  based  on  the  available  budget  and  an 
assumed unit cost. These are presented hereunder: 
 
Soil  and  Water  Conservation  -  assuming  a  budget  of  USD  479,000  and  a  unit 
cost of USD 1,000/ha, it is expected that these activities will be implemented in 
an area of 479 hectares. The benefits there from are reflected in form increase 
in crop yields/ livestock models presented. 
 
  Water for Production -  budget availability is assumed to be USD 2.6 million and 
an  average  unit  cost  of  USD  50,000  per  facility.  This  implies  that  the  project 
would  support  development  of  52  facilities.  The  benefits  there  from  are 
reflected in form increase in crop yields/ livestock models presented. 
Postharvest Infrastructure - assuming a budget of USD 650,000 and an average 
investment  cost  of  USD  10,000  per  structure,  it  is  expected  that  the  project 
would fund a total of 65 facilities. Benefits there from have been captured in the 
models in form of reduced postharvest losses. 
Improved Access to Inputs and Markets - assuming a budget of USD 950,000, it 
expected  that  the  project  would  support  spot  improvements  of  road  sections 
totalling  95  kilometres.  Benefits  there  from  have  been  captured  in  form  of 
efficiency  gains  which  will  translate  into  reduced  transport  costs  for  both 
produce and inputs. 
 
3. Project Support and Capacity Building 
Third 
Party 
Arrangements 
Implementation 
2,641 
Institutional  Capacity  Building 
and Policy Support 
Total  financial costs 
3,182 
17,773 
Methodological Approach 
A  number  of  none-  quantifiable  benefits  such  as  contribution  to  project 
implementation capacity within GoSS structures will accrue from this investment by 
end of the project 
2. 
Data  Sources:  This  design  has  been  prepared  and  finalised  under  IFAD’s  COVID-19 
guidelines  for  remote  design.  It  has,  however,  benefited  from  extensive  engagements  with  the 
Government of South Sudan, development partners and missions by local consultants in-country. 
The  models  used  in  the  EFA  analysis  were  based  on  secondary  sources  especially  and  thanks  to 
FAO  South  Sudan,  SSLDP  and  contacts  of  colleagues  who  were  on  the  ground.  One  consultant 
1 
who was on the ground moved across some of the proposed Counties and States and was able to 
pick very indicative information such as farm gate prices. This complimented the secondary data. 
Some data was collected on zoom meetings with some government staff. On the Government side 
there  was  also  Project  Design  Team  (PDT)  that  dedicated  an  officer  specifically  for  EFA  related 
matters. Sources of data have been referenced as much as possible. 
Without  Project  (WOP)  yields:    In  the  case  of  SSLRP,  the  yields  in  the  WOP  situation  are 
3. 
very low. Most of the beneficiaries will be returnees who will be starting from almost nothing. The 
country  has  been  under  a  destructive  war  and  family  and  community  resources  were  destroyed. 
Most development assistance has, thus far, been more of humanitarian assistance in nature such 
as  food  supplies  but  not  on  the  farm  like  SSLRP  seeks  reopen.  WOP  would  be  higher  for 
households  that  are  already  well  established  but  in  the  case  of  SSLRP,  these  are  starting  from 
very low baselines. They will not be an improvement from a low technology to a better one, but 
rather completely new enterprise in the household. In such cases WOP, as per the EFA guidelines, 
is  a  proxy  of  the  alternative  forgone  “opportunity  cost”  of  the  time  the  household  will  have  to 
divert  from  elsewhere,  that  is,  what  the  household  would  earned  from  casual  labour  provision 
elsewhere). 
4. 
In most cases, the base yields used are 7-year averages from FAOSTAT. This is as shown 
in the table below. For others where base yields could not be obtained from FAOSTAT, WOP data 
was  obtained  from  model  kindly  provided  by  FAO  (South  Sudan)  covering  from  a  range  of  their 
operations in South Sudan.  
FAOSTAT on yields- average for Without Project (WOP) 
Summary Comparison between WOP and changes expected: Below is a summary table on 
5. 
the  main  variables  per  model  (yield,  production  revenue,  production  cost,  investment  cost,  net 
benefit). The interventions for the changes are attributable to the project thanks to the proposed 
CDP grants plus other activities such as soil and water conservation, technical assistance through 
the  CDP  processes  which  will  include  not  only  on-farm  attention  but  also  efforts  to  reduce  post-
harvest losses, efficiency gains thanks to the infrastructure investments, etc., as presented in the 
table in para. 1 of this EFA Annex. 
2 
Domain Code.Area CodeAreaElement CodeElementItem CodeItemYear CodeYearUnitValueFlagFlag DescriptionQCCrops277South Sudan5419Yield242Groundnuts, with shell20122012hg/ha5526FcCalculated dataQCCrops277South Sudan5419Yield242Groundnuts, with shell20132013hg/ha5310FcCalculated dataQCCrops277South Sudan5419Yield242Groundnuts, with shell20142014hg/ha5745FcCalculated dataAverage over 7 years = 569kg/haQCCrops277South Sudan5419Yield242Groundnuts, with shell20152015hg/ha5798FcCalculated dataQCCrops277South Sudan5419Yield242Groundnuts, with shell20162016hg/ha5758FcCalculated dataQCCrops277South Sudan5419Yield242Groundnuts, with shell20172017hg/ha5808FcCalculated dataQCCrops277South Sudan5419Yield242Groundnuts, with shell20182018hg/ha5890FcCalculated dataQCCrops277South Sudan5419Yield56Maize20122012hg/ha4615FcCalculated dataQCCrops277South Sudan5419Yield56Maize20132013hg/ha5311FcCalculated dataQCCrops277South Sudan5419Yield56Maize20142014hg/ha9640FcCalculated dataQCCrops277South Sudan5419Yield56Maize20152015hg/ha4412FcCalculated dataAverage over 7 years = 523kg/haQCCrops277South Sudan5419Yield56Maize20162016hg/ha4344FcCalculated dataQCCrops277South Sudan5419Yield56Maize20172017hg/ha4021FcCalculated dataQCCrops277South Sudan5419Yield56Maize20182018hg/ha4259FcCalculated dataQCCrops277South Sudan5419Yield83Sorghum20122012hg/ha7711FcCalculated dataQCCrops277South Sudan5419Yield83Sorghum20132013hg/ha8561FcCalculated dataQCCrops277South Sudan5419Yield83Sorghum20142014hg/ha13665FcCalculated dataQCCrops277South Sudan5419Yield83Sorghum20152015hg/ha8349FcCalculated dataAverage over 7 years = 901kg/haQCCrops277South Sudan5419Yield83Sorghum20162016hg/ha8242FcCalculated dataQCCrops277South Sudan5419Yield83Sorghum20172017hg/ha8295FcCalculated dataQCCrops277South Sudan5419Yield83Sorghum20182018hg/ha8269FcCalculated datahg = 100 g10 hg = 1 kg 
6. 
Cropping  patterns:  The  cropping  patter  in  South  Sudan  is  more  of  Intercropping  rather 
than  splitting  cropping  area  into  different  portions  for  different  crops.  For  Example  Maize  will  be 
intercropped  with  Beans  or  another  legume.  Similarly  for  Sorghum.  The  Main  crop  will  be 
considered  as  Maize  or  Sorghum  and  the  other  will  be  considered  secondary.  The  support  will 
mainly  target  the  main  crop,  beneficiaries  will  be  taking  care  of  the  “secondary”  crop.  Even  for 
Livestock specialising States there will be for sure some few crops around the household, but the 
analysis has been kept simple to target the “main crop/ enterprise” that will be supported under 
the CDP grants.  Both in the WOP and WP, farm size averages to two feddans approximates to one 
hectare  but  in  the  WOP  situations  yields  and  incomes  are  low  because  of  poor  seeds,  lack  of 
fertiliser  application,  soil  and  water  conservation,  high  post-harvest  losses,  high  out  of  pocket 
transport  fares  for  both  inputs  and  outputs  even  though  the  cropped  land  may  still  be  two 
feddans. 
Labour  requirements  and  costs:  In  the  models,  a  distinction  has  been  made  between 
7. 
family labour and hired labour. The various labour budgets are summarised in the table below: 
8. 
A  family  labour  rate  of  SSP  500/person  day  was  obtained  from  models  provided  by  FAO 
South Sudan. A premium of SSP 200 was added for hired labour to arrive at the rate of SSP 700 
that was used in the financial models. 
9. 
Self-consumption:  This  has  been  considered  in  the  various  models  but  at  various 
percentages  to  reflect  the  reality  of  how  much  a  household  can  consume.  The  table  below 
summarises the self-consumption used in the various models: 
3 
OutputTotal labourFamily labourHired labourTotal labourFamily labourHired labourSorghum70                65                   5                   80                72                   8                   Maize60                53                   7                   79                66                   13                 G.Nuts93                70                   23                 103              75                   28                 Tomatoes120              120                 -                    140              120                 20                 Goat enterprise-                   -                      -                    30                30                   -                    Canoe fishing-                   -                      -                    280              280                 -                    Bee keeping-                   -                      -                    53                45                   8                   Fish mongering-                   -                      -                    90                90                   -                    Fish value addition-                   -                      -                    300              300                 -                    WP by farm/ enterprise Y3WOPLabour requirements (person days)Summary of possible menu of  crop/ enterprise models that can have a direct impact at household levelWOPWP (Y3)WOPWP (Y3)WOPWP (Y3)WOPWPFarm/Enterprise Yr. 1Farm/Enterprise Yr. 2Farm/Enterprise Yr. 3Sorghum901     1,127     205,031  256,288     67,288    73,790    -              -                   23,793                   33,248                   37,068                   Maize523     654        118,946  148,682     53,384    65,623    -              -                   6,435                     10,323                   10,064                   G-nuts569     711        310,685  388,356     121,801  166,539  -              -                   18,399                   21,396                   21,283                   Tomatoes3,000  3,750     764,331  955,414     120,772  180,893  -              -                   140,516                 140,516                 140,516                 Goat Enterprise-          11          -              86,034       -              56,899    -              -                   (36,534)                  19,354                   29,134                   Canoe Fish-          5,096     -              339,733     -              218,960  -              35,000         (88,167)                  (29,487)                  50,853                   Bee Keeping-          1,030     -              224,932     -              19,665    -              133,000       (189,972)                112,468                 151,275                 Fish Mongering-          2,444     -              521,387     -              412,530  -              193,333       (154,102)                36,752                   57,728                   Fish Value Addition-          5,880     -              1,019,200  -              910,473  -              153,333       (123,962)                29,099                   47,547                   Simple average(44,844)                  41,519                   60,608                   Yields (Kgs)Production RevenueProduction costInvestment costsNet benefits 
10. 
Social  discount  rate:  There  are  data  challenges  on  long  term  government  bonds  rates  of 
return that GoSS invests in/ can invest in that would provide a good justification for the choice of 
the  social  discount  rate.  The  Project  Design  Team  (PDT)  did  all  possible  searches/  consultations 
and  could  not  find  such  a  rate.  The  PDT  then  benefited  from  technical  guidance  note  on 
discounting  of  costs  and  benefits  in  economic  analysis  in  situations  where  such  precise  social 
discount rates cannot be found. As an alternative/ proxy, in this technical guidance, it is suggested 
therein  to  use  3%  as  a  rough  estimate  for  expected  long  term  growth  date  for  developing 
countries  such  as  South  Sudan.  Given  reasonable  parameters  for  the  variables  in  standard 
Ramsey formula linking discount rates to growth this yields a discount rates of 6%. Even though 
6% has been has been used as the social discount rate, the sensitivity analysis has considered the 
range of other discount rates to calculate the effects of the NPV.  
11. 
Opportunity  cost  of  capital  (Discount  rate)  for  financial  analysis  purposes  at  household 
level:  Data  about  the  alternative  rates  of  return  a  typical    potential  beneficiary  household  would 
get if funds are deposited on savings/time deposit accounts is also not readily available in South 
Sudan.  The  best  available  record  is  in  2019  by  World  Bank.  This  showed  that  the  average  time 
deposit  rate  would  be  as  low  as  0.06%  which  puts  the  opportunity  cost  of  capital  at  household 
level to almost zero in rural South Sudan. However, given the informal sector and lack of data and 
acknowledged  operations  of  black  market  as  exhibited  by  the  difference  between  the  formal 
exchange rate and the real exchange rate, a discount rate of 10% has been considered as a fair 
estimate. 
Description of the Crop/Enterprise Models 
Financial analysis models used 
12.  While  it  is  noted  that  this  is  CDD  project  and  the  exact  models  demanded  by  the 
communities  will  only  be  known  during  implementation,  the  models  presented  represent  a  long 
list of what could be financed by the CDPs.  It is expected that there will not be a huge divergence 
during  implementation.  This  section,  therefore,  includes  a  very  brief  description  of  each  model.  
The following representative models have been used in the analysis: 
On farm Agriculture 
Livestock & Fisheries 
Value Addition/Agribusiness 
Sorghum  
Maize  
 G-
Nuts  
Tomatoes  
 Goat 
Enterprise  
Canoe 
Fish  
 Bee 
Keeping  
 Fish 
Mongering  
 Fish 
Value 
Addition  
 Milk 
Bar  
Community 
Market 
Shade 
4 
Own consumptionY1Y2Y3Y4Y5SorghumKg20%180207220225225225MaizeKg30%157180191196196196G-nutsKg20%114131139142142142TomatoesKg10%300375375375375375Goat EnterpriseKg3%-       12345Canoe FishKg3%-       90105153153153Bee KeepingKg2%-       1216212121Fish MongeringKg6%-       133131147147147Fish Value AdditionKg2%-       110110118118118Milk BarsLtrs1%-       192294392392392Community Market Shade% assumedUnit of measureWP (Kgs)WOP (Kgs) 
The Sorghum Crop Model 
This  is  a  very  popular  crop  in  South  Sudan  in  many  areas  as  per  the  World  Food 
13. 
Programme  (WFP)  monthly  bulletins  on  South  Sudan.  The  model  is  based  on  a  farm  size  of  one 
hectare. The Without Project (WOP) yields have been based on a 7 year average as per FAOSTAT 
as  stated  above  (901  kg/ha).  For  this  model,  With  Project  (WP)  support,  it  has  been  projected 
that yields above WOP can increase slowly and gradually as follows: 
Expected sorghum yields per ha  
 kgs  
901  
1,037  
1,100  
% change 
1,127  
25% 
WOP  Farm Year 1  Farm Year 2  Farm year 3 
14. 
FAOSS models for sorghum had indicated that this yield can increase to 900kg per feddan 
(equivalent to 2,142 kgs per ha).  The PDT decided, on prudence grounds, to restrict the increase 
above WOP to a maximum of 25%. Therefore, benefits may even be higher than presented in this 
EFA analysis. The farm gate price of about SSP 230/kg was obtained through rapid contacts with 
people  on  the  ground  not  through  a  scientific  study  but  random  cross-checks.  This  was  further 
corroborated to trending market prices for cereals allowing for sufficient margin for traders along 
the  value  chain  off  farm  in  order  to  arrive  at  plausible  farm  gate  price.  This  price  allows  for  a 
margin to value chain actors after the farm gate as per the trends in the World Food Programme 
(WFP) monthly market analysis of food prices especially the popular cereals in South Sudan. 
Own  consumption  and  post-harvest  losses  were  factored  into  the  analysis.  Own 
15. 
consumption at 20% seems high but it is the reality. Farmers are growing crops first and foremost 
for food security before considering marketable surplus which is also very important as SSLRP is 
indeed a livelihoods project. Post-harvest losses are expected to be reduced from a high of 5% in 
the WOP to 3% in the WP situation even better through the CDP processes. 
16. 
After deducting all costs, this Sorghum model shows that a beneficiary farmer can be able 
to  generate  a  gross  margin  of  SSP  136,402  per  annum  (USD  802  at  prevailing  official  exchange 
rate or USD 273 at parallel black market). These amounts may look small but can a make a real 
difference  in  beneficiaries’  lives.  The  following  summary  profitability  indicators  were  computed. 
FIRR could not compute because there is no a single year with negative cash flow. 
A  beneficiary  farmer  would  need  to  invest  SSP  77637  to  start  off  this  Sorghum  farm.  An 
17. 
affordability check was done. The project proposes to provide grants in the region of SSP 51,000. 
With  grant  the  affordability  check  results  were  as  following  showing  that  even  after  drawing  for 
other  family  expenses  the  household  can  be  able  accumulate  reserves  which  means  increase  in 
household assets as follows for instance: 
5 
Return to family labour*2,006           Discount rate10%NPV234,097       PVb1,312,551    PVc491,063       B/C ratio2.67             Switching values Benefits(0.63)           Switching values Costs1.67              
The Maize Crop Model 
18. 
This  is  also  very  popular  crop  in  South  Sudan  and  the  region  in  many  areas  as  per  the 
World Food Programme (WFP) monthly bulletins. This Maize model is based on a farm size of one 
hectare. The Without Project (WOP) yields have been based on a 7 year average as per FAOSTAT 
as  stated  above  (523  kg/ha).  For  this  model,  With  Project  (WP)  support,  it  has  been  projected 
that yields above WOP can increase slowly and gradually as follows: 
Expected maize yields per ha  
 kgs  
523  
601  
638  
% change 
654  
25% 
WOP  Farm Year 1  Farm Year 2  Farm year 3 
19. 
FAOSS  models  for  Maize  had  indicated  that  this  yield  can  increase  to  700kg  per  feddan 
(equivalent to 1,667 kgs per ha).  The PDT decided, on prudence grounds, to restrict the increase 
above WOP to a maximum of 25%. Therefore, benefits may even be higher than anticipated after 
SSLRP  investment.  Just  like  with  Sorghum  above,  the  farm  gate  price  of  about  SSP  250/kg  was 
obtained  through  rapid  contacts  of  people  on  the  ground.  This  was  further  corroborated  to 
trending market prices for cereals allowing for sufficient margin for traders along the value chain 
off  farm  in  order  to  arrive  at  plausible  farm  gate  prices.  This  price  allows  for  a  margin  to  value 
chain actors after the farm gate as per the trends in the World Food  Programme (WFP) monthly 
market analysis of food prices especially the popular cereals like maize in South Sudan. 
20. 
Own  consumption  and  post-harvest  losses  were  factored  into  the  analysis.  Own 
consumption at 30% seems high but it is the reality especially for Maize.  As stated above under 
Sorghum,  even  for  Maize,  Farmers  are  growing  crops  first  and  foremost  for  food  security  before 
considering  markets  which  is  also  very  important  as  SLRSP  is  indeed  a  livelihoods  project.  Even 
for Maize, post-harvest losses are expected to be reduced from a high of 5% in the WOP to 3% in 
the WP situation even better through the CDP processes. 
After  deducting  all  costs,  this  model  shows  that  a  beneficiary  farmer  can  be  able  to 
21. 
generate a gross margin of SSP 38,203 per annum (USD 225 at prevailing official exchange rate 
or  USD  76    at  parallel  black  market).  These  amounts  may  look  small  but  can  a  make  a  real 
difference  in  beneficiaries’  lives.  The  following  summary  profitability  indicators  were  computed. 
FIRR could not compute because there is no a single year with negative cash flow. 
6 
YearsYr 1Yr 2Yr 3Yr 4Yr 5Yr 6Yr 7Yr 8Yr 9Yr 10A: Financing Needs (i) CAPEX (farm tools and fertilisers have regarded as operating inputs and not CAPEX)-              -           -           -             -          -           -             -           -           -             (ii) Operating input (these now include the farm tools, seeds and fertilisers)38,037         38,350     38,877     38,877       38,877    38,877     38,877       38,877      38,877      38,877       (iii) Labour costs39,600         41,100     41,600     41,600       41,600    41,600     41,600       41,600      41,600      41,600       Sub-total for on farm costs77,637         79,450     80,477     80,477       80,477    80,477     80,477       80,477      80,477      80,477       Estimate of drawing for other family expenses (off-farm)150,000       150,000   150,000   150,000     150,000  150,000   150,000     150,000    150,000    150,000     Total financing needed227,637       229,450   230,477   230,477     230,477  230,477   230,477     230,477    230,477    230,477     B: Financing Plan (How to cover the above financing needs)OPENING BALANCE-                 56,892       74,616       97,018         119,420    141,822     164,224       186,627     209,029     231,431       Grant51,000           -             -             -               -            -             -               -             -             -               Family Labour34,000           35,500       36,000       36,000         36,000      36,000       36,000         36,000       36,000       36,000         Net production revenue199,528         211,674     216,879     216,879       216,879    216,879     216,879       216,879     216,879     216,879       Total financing available284,528         304,066     327,495     349,897       372,299    394,701     417,103       439,505     461,907     484,309       Closing Balance/ reserves (A-B)56,892           74,616       97,018       119,420       141,822    164,224     186,627       209,029     231,431     253,833       Financing plan/affordability check / household cash flow 
22. 
A  beneficiary  farmer  would  need  to  invest  SSP  67,646  to  start  off  this  maize  farm.  An 
affordability check was done. The project proposes to provide grants in the region of SSP 51,000. 
With  grant  the  affordability  check  results  were  as  follows  showing  that  even  after  drawing  for 
other  family  expenses  the  household  can  be  able  accumulate  reserves  which  means  increase  in 
household assets as follows: 
The Ground-nuts Crop Model 
23. 
This is a leguminous crop that is also popular and is part of daily family diet. The Without 
Project (WOP) yields have been based on a 7 year average as per FAOSTAT as stated above (569 
kg/ha).  For  this  model,  With  Project  (WP)  support,  it  has  been  projected  that  yields  above  WOP 
can increase slowly and gradually as follows: 
Expected groundnuts yields per ha  
 kgs  
569  
654  
694  
% change 
711  
25% 
WOP  Farm Year 1  Farm Year 2  Farm year 3 
24. 
FAOSS  models  for  Groundnuts  had  indicated  that  this  yield  can  increase  275-300kg  per 
feddan  (equivalent  to  714  kgs  per  ha).    This  has  also  been  restricted  to  25%  above  WOP.  The 
price of about SSP 600/kg corroborate well with other secondary data.  
25. 
After  deducting  all  costs,  this  model  shows  that  a  beneficiary  farmer  can  be  able  to 
generate a gross margin of SSP 146,101per annum (USD 859 at prevailing official exchange rate 
or  USD  292  at  parallel  black  market).  These  amounts  may  look  small  but  can  a  make  a  real 
difference  in  beneficiaries’  lives.  The  following  summary  profitability  indicators  were  computed. 
FIRR could not compute because there is no a single year with negative cash flow. 
7 
Financial Results (SSP) Return to family labour* 659                     Discount rate /a10%NPV70,420                PVb662,569              PVc432,851              B/C ratio1.53                    Switching values Benefits(0.35)                   Switching values Costs0.53                    YearsYr 1Yr 2Yr 3Yr 4Yr 5Yr 6Yr 7Yr 8Yr 9Yr 10A: Financing Needs (i) CAPEX (farm tools and fertilisers have regarded as operating inputs and not CAPEX)-                      -           -           -                 -          -          -          -          -          -             (ii) Operating input (these now include the farm tools, seeds and fertilisers)29,603                29,676     29,707      29,707            29,707    29,707    29,707    29,707    29,707    29,707       (iii) Labout costs38,043                39,411     41,569      41,569            41,569    41,569    41,569    41,569    41,569    41,569       Sub-total for on farm costs67,646                69,087     71,276      71,276            71,276    71,276    71,276    71,276    71,276    71,276       Estimate of drawing for other family expenses (off-farm)60,000                60,000     60,000      60,000            60,000    60,000    60,000    60,000    60,000    60,000       Total financing needed127,646              129,087   131,276    131,276          131,276  131,276  131,276  131,276  131,276  131,276     B: Financing Plan (How to cover the above financing needs)OPENING BALANCE-                         53,075       60,840       71,043              81,246      91,449      101,653    111,856    122,059    132,262       Grant51,000                   -             -             -                    -            -            -            -            -            -               Family Labour29,000                   30,000       32,000       32,000              32,000      32,000      32,000      32,000      32,000      32,000         Net production revenue100,721                 106,852     109,479     109,479            109,479    109,479    109,479    109,479    109,479    109,479       Total financing available180,721                 189,927     202,319     212,522            222,725    232,929    243,132    253,335    263,538    273,742       Closing Balance/ reserves (A-B)53,075                   60,840       71,043       81,246              91,449      101,653    111,856    122,059    132,262    142,466       Financing plan/affordability check / household cash flow 
26. 
A beneficiary farmer would need to invest SSP 159,467 to start  off this groundnuts farm. 
An  affordability  check  was  done.  The  project  proposes  to  provide  grants  in  the  region  of  SSP 
51,000. With grant the affordability check results were as follows showing that even after drawing 
for other family expenses the household can be able accumulate reserves which means increase in 
household assets: 
The Tomatoes Crop Model 
The  Without  Project  (WOP)  yields  have  been  based  on  FAOSS  models  considering  (3000 
27. 
kg/ha).  For  this  model,  With  Project  (WP)  support,  it  has  been  projected  that  yields  above  WOP 
can at least by 10%. 
Expected tomatoes yields per ha    kgs  
3,000  
% change 
3,750 
10% 
WOP  Farm Year 1 
28. 
The price  of about SSP 100/kg  corroborate well basing consultations made with the team 
on the ground. After deducting all costs, this model shows that a beneficiary farmer can be able to 
generate  a  gross  margin  of  SSP  676,716  per  annum  (USD  3981  at  prevailing  official  exchange 
rate or USD 1353 at parallel black market). These amounts may look small but can a make a real 
difference  in  beneficiaries’  lives.  The  following  summary  profitability  indicators  were  computed. 
FIRR could not compute because there is no a single year with negative cash flow. 
8 
Financial Results (SSP)Return to family labour*2,029            Discount rate10%NPV142,280        PVb1,988,923     PVc1,093,990     B/C ratio1.82              Switching values Benefits(0.45)            Switching values Costs0.82              YearsYr 1Yr 2Yr 3Yr 4Yr 5Yr 6Yr 7Yr 8Yr 9Yr 10A: Financing Needs (i) CAPEX (farm tools and fertilisers have regarded as operating inputs and not CAPEX)-               -          -          -          -          -          -             -          -          -             (ii) Operating input (these now include the farm tools, seeds and fertilisers)105,267        118,387  125,438  125,438  125,438  125,438  125,438      125,438  125,438  125,438      (iii) Labour costs54,200          56,100    57,100    57,100    57,100    57,100    57,100        57,100    57,100    57,100        Sub-total for on farm costs159,467        174,487  182,538  182,538  182,538  182,538  182,538      182,538  182,538  182,538      Estimate of drawing for other family expenses (off-farm)150,000        150,000  150,000  150,000  150,000  150,000  150,000      150,000  150,000  150,000      Total financing needed309,467        324,487  332,538  332,538  332,538  332,538  332,538      332,538  332,538  332,538      B: Financing Plan (How to cover the above financing needs)OPENING BALANCE-                  79,880      112,645    146,246    179,846    213,447    247,048        280,649    314,249    347,850        Grant51,000            -            -            -            -            -            -                -            -            -                Family Labour36,000            36,500      37,500      37,500      37,500      37,500      37,500          37,500      37,500      37,500          Net production revenue302,348          320,751    328,639    328,639    328,639    328,639    328,639        328,639    328,639    328,639        Total financing available389,348          437,132    478,784    512,384    545,985    579,586    613,187        646,787    680,388    713,989        Closing Balance/ reserves (A-B)79,880            112,645    146,246    179,846    213,447    247,048    280,649        314,249    347,850    381,451        Financing plan/affordability check / household cash flow 
29. 
A beneficiary farmer would need to invest SSP 215,784 to start off this tomatoes farm. An 
affordability check was done. The project proposes to provide grants in the region of SSP 51,000. 
With  grant  the  affordability  check  results  were  as  follows  showing  that  even  after  drawing  for 
other  family  expenses  the  household  can  be  able  accumulate  reserves  which  means  increase  in 
household assets as follows for instance: 
The Goat Enterprise Model 
30. 
In  this  livestock  model,  the  beneficiary  farmer  is  to  be  supported  with  2  Does  (at  9 
months) in year 1 and will be able to increase the herd to 6 Does at the end of year 3. It has been 
projected  that  the  herd  will  increase  slowly  and  gradually  as  follows.  The  herd  dynamics  are 
presented in the EFA spread sheet. 
Expected herd size  
 kgs  
2 
5 
% change 
6  
25% 
Farm Year 1 
Farm Year 2 
Farm year 3 
31. 
After  deducting  all  costs,  this  model  shows  that  a  beneficiary  farmer  can  be  able  to 
generate a gross margin of SSP 94,551per annum from sale of kids mainly but also the off-takes 
at some intervals. The following summary profitability indicators were computed. 
32. 
The  project  proposes  to  provide  grants  in  the  region  of  SSP  51,000.  With  grant  the 
affordability  check  results  were  as  following  showing  that  even  after  drawing  for  other  family 
expenses  the  household  can  be  able  accumulate  reserves  which  means  increase  in  household 
assets as follows for instance: 
9 
Financial Results (SSP)Return to family labour*4,834            *consider full development year family labour requirementsDiscount rate10%NPV1,006,563     PVb6,046,975     PVc4,158,128     B/C ratio1.45              Switching values Benefits(0.31)            Switching values Costs0.45              YearsYr 1Yr 2Yr 3Yr 4Yr 5Yr 6Yr 7Yr 8Yr 9Yr 10A: Financing Needs (i) CAPEX (farm tools and fertilisers have regarded as operating inputs and not CAPEX)-               -           -             -             -             -             -              -             -             -             (ii) Operating input (these now include the farm tools, seeds and fertilisers)131,784        131,784   131,784     131,784     131,784     131,784     131,784       131,784     131,784     131,784     (iii) Labour costs84,000          70,000     70,000       70,000       70,000       70,000       70,000         70,000       70,000       70,000       Sub-total for on farm costs215,784        201,784   201,784     201,784     201,784     201,784     201,784       201,784     201,784     201,784     Estimate of drawing for other family expenses (off-farm)150,000        150,000   150,000     150,000     150,000     150,000     150,000       150,000     150,000     150,000     Total financing needed365,784        351,784   351,784     351,784     351,784     351,784     351,784       351,784     351,784     351,784     B: Financing Plan (How to cover the above financing needs)OPENING BALANCE-                  647,716     1,258,432    1,869,149    2,479,865    3,090,581    3,701,297      4,312,014    4,922,730    5,533,446    Grant51,000            -             -               -               -               -               -                 -               -               -               Family Labour70,000            70,000       70,000         70,000         70,000         70,000         70,000           70,000         70,000         70,000         Net production revenue892,500          892,500     892,500       892,500       892,500       892,500       892,500         892,500       892,500       892,500       Total financing available1,013,500       1,610,216  2,220,932    2,831,649    3,442,365    4,053,081    4,663,797      5,274,514    5,885,230    6,495,946    Closing Balance/ reserves (A-B)647,716          1,258,432  1,869,149    2,479,865    3,090,581    3,701,297    4,312,014      4,922,730    5,533,446    6,144,162    Financing plan/affordability check / household cash flowFIRR87%FNPV ('000 SSP) 232,077FNPV (USD)65B/C0.63 
Canoe Fish Model 
Under this model, the investment would be a canoe, gillnets and fishing nets all totalling to 
33. 
an estimated capex of SSP 35000.  Annual catch level can be able to increase from a low level of 
2937 kgs in year one to a high level of 5044 Kgs in year three which is considered the climax. This 
data was obtained from FAOSS. It has been projected that the household will increase his annual 
catch gradually as follows: 
Expected Fish catch per year  
 kgs  
2937 
3422 
% change 
5044 
13% 
Farm Year 1 
Farm Year 2 
Farm year 3 
The  model  has  also  been  restricted  to  13%  all  over  the  project  years.  The  price  of  about 
34. 
SSP 67/Kg corroborate well with other secondary data.  
35. After  deducting  all  costs,  this  model  shows  that  this  will  translate  into  annual  net  income  of 
SSP  128,533.  The  costs  are  few  and  they  include  Labour,  resource  rent  and  operation  and 
maintenance. 
The  project  proposes  to  provide  grants  in  the  region  of  SSP  51,000.  With  grant  the 
36. 
affordability  check  results  were  as  following  showing  that  even  after  drawing  for  other  family 
expenses  the  household  can  be  able  accumulate  reserves  which  means  increase  in  household 
assets as follows for instance: 
Beekeeping Model 
37. 
Under this model, according to FAOSS, it’s assumed that the household who is supported 
up to 20 bee hives would be able to harvest 1,030 Kgs honey per year. It has been projected that 
the household harvests will increase gradually as follows: 
10 
YearsYr 1Yr 2Yr 3Yr 4Yr 5Yr 6Yr 7Yr 8Yr 9Yr 10A: Financing Needs (i) CAPEX133,000                -          -          -             -             -             -            -         -             -            (ii) Operating input-                        -          -          -             -             -             -            -         -             -            (iii) Labout costs16,000                  19,000    22,000    22,000       22,000        22,000        22,000      22,000    22,000        22,000      Sub-total for on farm costs149,000                19,000    22,000    22,000       22,000        22,000        22,000      22,000    22,000        22,000      Estimate of drawing for other family expenses (off-farm)100,000                100,000  100,000  100,000     100,000      100,000      100,000    100,000  100,000      100,000    Total financing needed249,000                119,000  122,000  122,000     122,000      122,000      122,000    122,000  122,000      122,000    B: Financing Plan (How to cover the above financing needs)OPENING BALANCE-                           51,478-      22,550      140,086       257,622        375,158        492,694      610,230   727,766        845,302      Grant51,000                     -            -            -               -                -                -              -           -                -              Family Labour16,000                     19,000      22,000      22,000         22,000          22,000          22,000        22,000     22,000          22,000        Net production revenue130,522                   174,029    217,536    217,536       217,536        217,536        217,536      217,536   217,536        217,536      Total financing available197,522                   141,550    262,086    379,622       497,158        614,694        732,230      849,766   967,302        1,084,838   Closing Balance/ reserves (A-B)51,478-                     22,550      140,086    257,622       375,158        492,694        610,230      727,766   845,302        962,838      Financing plan/affordability check / household cash flowNPV @10% (SSP)103,611         28%Benefit/Cost Ratio1.6IRRYearsYr 1Yr 2Yr 3Yr 4Yr 5Yr 6Yr 7Yr 8Yr 9Yr 10A: Financing Needs (i) CAPEX35,000         -                 -                -              -                -                -                   -                   -                   -                   (ii) Operating input60,623         68,697           95,733           95,733         95,733           95,733           95,733             95,733             95,733             95,733             (iii) Labout costs112,000       112,000         112,000         112,000       112,000         112,000         112,000           112,000           112,000           112,000           Sub-total for on farm costs207,623       180,697         207,733         207,733       207,733         207,733         207,733           207,733           207,733           207,733           Estimate of drawing for other family expenses (off-farm)150,000       150,000         150,000         150,000       150,000         150,000         150,000           150,000           150,000           150,000           Total financing needed357,623       330,697         357,733         357,733       357,733         357,733         357,733           357,733           357,733           357,733           B: Financing Plan (How to cover the above financing needs)OPENING BALANCE-                  1,203               10,627             101,160         191,693           282,227           372,760              463,293              553,827              644,360              Grant51,000            -                   -                   -                 -                   -                   -                      -                      -                      -                      Family Labour112,000          112,000           112,000           112,000         112,000           112,000           112,000              112,000              112,000              112,000              Net production revenue195,827          228,120           336,267           336,267         336,267           336,267           336,267              336,267              336,267              336,267              Total financing available358,827          341,323           458,893           549,427         639,960           730,493           821,027              911,560              1,002,093           1,092,627           Closing Balance/ reserves (A-B)1,203              10,627             101,160           191,693         282,227           372,760           463,293              553,827              644,360              734,893              Financing plan/affordability check / household cash flow 
Expected honey harvest per year  
 kgs  
618 
824 
1030 
Farm Year 1  Farm Year 2  Farm year 3 
After deducting all costs, this model shows that the beneficiary will be able to generate up 
38. 
to annual income of SSP 195,536  
The  project  proposes  to  provide  grants  in  the  region  of  SSP  51,000.  With  grant  the 
39. 
affordability  check  results  were  as  following  showing  that  even  after  drawing  for  other  family 
expenses  the  household  can  be  able  accumulate  reserves  which  means  increase  in  household 
assets as follows for instance: 
Fish Mongering Model 
40. 
In this model, the trader is expected to start of with a minimum sale of 2,213 Kgs in year 1 
and would be able to increase on the sales to 2,444 Kgs in the third year. The required support is 
basic scale, equipments and working capital. This data was also obtained from FAOSS. It has been 
projected that the household will increase his annual trade volume gradually as follows: 
Expected Fish sale per year  
 kgs  
2213 
2255 
% change 
2444 
22% 
Farm Year 1 
Farm Year 2 
Farm year 3 
The  model  has  also  been  restricted  to  22%  all  over  the  project  years.  The  price  of  about 
41. 
SSP 213/Kg corroborate well with other secondary data.  
42. 
This  model  shows  that  the  beneficiary  would  be  able  to  generate  up  to  annual  gross 
income of SSP 103,187. The operating costs are few and they include Labour,  resource  rent  and 
operation and maintenance with the financial results as follows: 
11 
Financial results (US$)Return to family labour*6,111                    Discount rate10%NPV686,636                IRR84%PVb1,221,604             PVc248,156                B/C ratio4.92                      Switching values Benefits(0.80)                     Switching values Costs3.92                      YearsYr 1Yr 2Yr 3Yr 4Yr 5Yr 6Yr 7Yr 8Yr 9Yr 10A: Financing Needs (i) CAPEX133,000                -          -          -             -             -             -            -         -             -            (ii) Operating input-                        -          -          -             -             -             -            -         -             -            (iii) Labout costs16,000                  19,000    22,000    22,000       22,000        22,000        22,000      22,000    22,000        22,000      Sub-total for on farm costs149,000                19,000    22,000    22,000       22,000        22,000        22,000      22,000    22,000        22,000      Estimate of drawing for other family expenses (off-farm)100,000                100,000  100,000  100,000     100,000      100,000      100,000    100,000  100,000      100,000    Total financing needed249,000                119,000  122,000  122,000     122,000      122,000      122,000    122,000  122,000      122,000    B: Financing Plan (How to cover the above financing needs)OPENING BALANCE-                           51,478-      22,550      140,086       257,622        375,158        492,694      610,230   727,766        845,302      Grant51,000                     -            -            -               -                -                -              -           -                -              Family Labour16,000                     19,000      22,000      22,000         22,000          22,000          22,000        22,000     22,000          22,000        Net production revenue130,522                   174,029    217,536    217,536       217,536        217,536        217,536      217,536   217,536        217,536      Total financing available197,522                   141,550    262,086    379,622       497,158        614,694        732,230      849,766   967,302        1,084,838   Closing Balance/ reserves (A-B)51,478-                     22,550      140,086    257,622       375,158        492,694        610,230      727,766   845,302        962,838      Financing plan/affordability check / household cash flow 
43. 
The  project  proposes  to  provide  grants  in  the  region  of  SSP  51,000.  With  grant  the 
affordability  check  results  were  as  following  showing  that  even  after  drawing  for  other  family 
expenses  the  household  can  be  able  accumulate  reserves  which  means  increase  in  household 
assets as follows for instance: 
Fish Value Addition Model 
44. 
In this model, the beneficiary is expected to start of with a minimum sale of 5,484 Kgs in 
year 1 and would be able to increase to 5,880 Kgs in the third year. The required support is basic 
scale, equipments and working capital some training. This data was also obtained from FAOSS.  
Expected Fish dried/ processed per year    kgs  
5484 
5478 
% change 
5880 
29% 
Farm Year 1 
Farm Year 2 
Farm year 3 
45. 
This model shows that the beneficiary would be able to generate as high as SSP 136,540 
annual  income  to  a  participating  household.  The  other  profitability  indicators  are  summarised 
below:  
46. 
The  project  proposes  to  provide  grants  in  the  region  of  SSP  51,000.  With  grant  the 
affordability  check  results  were  as  follows  showing  that  even  after  drawing  for  other  family 
expenses  the  household  can  be  able  accumulate  reserves  which  means  increase  in  household 
assets as follows for instance: 
Milk Bar Model 
47. 
Under  this  model,  according  to  information  from  FAOSS,  the  beneficiary  is  expected  to 
start  with  average  of  sale  of  19,221  litres  in  the  first  year  and  is  expected  to  increase  sales  to 
39,227 litres in the third year.  
12 
NPV @10% (SSP)69,520             20%Benefit/Cost Ratio0.0IRRYearsYr 1Yr 2Yr 3Yr 4Yr 5Yr 6Yr 7Yr 8Yr 9Yr 10A: Financing Needs (i) CAPEX193,333                                      -                 -                   -           -             -             -             -           -             -             (ii) Operating input342,373                                      348,016         373,200           373,200   373,200      373,200      373,200     373,200    373,200      373,200      (iii) Labout costs45,000                                        45,000           45,000             45,000     45,000        45,000        45,000       45,000      45,000        45,000        Sub-total for on farm costs580,707                                      393,016         418,200           418,200   418,200      418,200      418,200     418,200    418,200      418,200      Estimate of drawing for other family expenses (off-farm)100,000                                      100,000         100,000           100,000   100,000      100,000      100,000     100,000    100,000      100,000      Total financing needed680,707                                      493,016         518,200           518,200   518,200      518,200      518,200     518,200    518,200      518,200      B: Financing Plan (How to cover the above financing needs)OPENING BALANCE-                                                   112,643-           79,566-                31,380-       16,807          64,994          113,180       161,367     209,554        257,740        Grant51,000                                             -                   -                      -             -                -                -               -             -                -                Family Labour45,000                                             45,000             45,000                45,000       45,000          45,000          45,000         45,000       45,000          45,000          Net production revenue472,064                                           481,092           521,387              521,387     521,387        521,387        521,387       521,387     521,387        521,387        Total financing available568,064                                           413,450           486,820              535,007     583,194        631,380        679,567       727,754     775,940        824,127        Closing Balance/ reserves (A-B)112,643-                                           79,566-             31,380-                16,807       64,994          113,180        161,367       209,554     257,740        305,927        Financing plan/affordability check / household cash flowNPV @10% (SSP)232,197         53%Benefit/Cost Ratio1.2IRRYearsYr 1Yr 2Yr 3Yr 4Yr 5Yr 6Yr 7Yr 8Yr 9Yr 10A: Financing Needs (i) CAPEX153,337      -                   -                 -               -                 -                -                 -                 -                -                (ii) Operating input685,338      684,621           732,660         732,660       732,660         732,660         732,660         732,660         732,660         732,660         (iii) Labout costs150,000      150,000           150,000         150,000       150,000         150,000         150,000         150,000         150,000         150,000         Sub-total for on farm costs988,675      834,621           882,660         882,660       882,660         882,660         882,660         882,660         882,660         882,660         Estimate of drawing for other family expenses (off-farm)150,000      150,000           150,000         150,000       150,000         150,000         150,000         150,000         150,000         150,000         Total financing needed1,138,675   984,621           1,032,660      1,032,660    1,032,660      1,032,660      1,032,660      1,032,660      1,032,660      1,032,660      B: Financing Plan (How to cover the above financing needs)OPENING BALANCE-                12,885                127,784           264,324         400,864           537,404           673,944           810,484           947,024           1,083,564        Grant51,000          -                      -                   -                 -                   -                   -                   -                   -                   -                   Family Labour150,000        150,000              150,000           150,000         150,000           150,000           150,000           150,000           150,000           150,000           Net production revenue950,560        949,520              1,019,200        1,019,200      1,019,200        1,019,200        1,019,200        1,019,200        1,019,200        1,019,200        Total financing available1,151,560     1,112,405           1,296,984        1,433,524      1,570,064        1,706,604        1,843,144        1,979,684        2,116,224        2,252,764        Closing Balance/ reserves (A-B)12,885          127,784              264,324           400,864         537,404           673,944           810,484           947,024           1,083,564        1,220,104        Financing plan/affordability check / household cash flow 
Expected Fish sale per year  
 kgs  
19,221 
29,421 
% change 
39,227 
22% 
Farm Year 1  Farm Year 2  Farm year 3 
After deducting all costs, this model shows that the beneficiary will be able to generate up 
48. 
to annual income of SSP 8,043,050  
The  project  proposes  to  provide  grants  in  the  region  of  SSP  51,000.  With  grant  the 
49. 
affordability  check  results  were  as  follows  showing  that  even  after  drawing  for  other  family 
expenses  the  household  can  be  able  accumulate  reserves  which  means  increase  in  household 
assets as follows for instance: 
Infrastructure Efficiency Gains  
50. 
In  rural  South  Sudan  a  road  infrastructure  improvement  can  significantly  cut  down  on 
transport costs both for inputs and outputs. On a bad road, to transport one kg of produce/inputs 
per KM can be as high as SSP 30 even more according PDT members on the ground. This cost can 
be halved with spot improvements/ strategic community access road investments on proposed in 
the SSLRP design. On average the perimeter impacted by 1 km of road is 3 Km which translates 
into  the  number  of  farm  hectares  as  shown  below.  Using  maize  as  an  example  the  volume  of 
produce  and  the  associated  transport  cost  reduction  has  been  computed  in  the  table  below  to 
arrive at the multiplier benefits that can accrue from these strategic infrastructure investments. 
13 
Financial results (US$)Return to family labour*1,752               Discount rate10%NPV32,714,269      PVb129,708,814    PVc96,812,837      B/C ratio1.34                 Switching values Benefits(0.25)                Switching values Costs0.34                 YearsYr 1Yr 2Yr 3Yr 4Yr 5Yr 6Yr 7Yr 8Yr 9Yr 10A: Financing Needs (i) CAPEX14,127,802      -                    -                    -                      -                    -                    -                    -                    -                    -                    (ii) Operating input7,744,000        11,576,500       15,409,000       15,409,000         15,409,000        15,409,000        15,409,000        15,409,000        15,409,000        15,409,000        (iii) Labout costs42,000             42,000              42,000              42,000                42,000               42,000               42,000               42,000               42,000               42,000               Sub-total for on farm costs21,913,802      11,618,500       15,451,000       15,451,000         15,451,000        15,451,000        15,451,000        15,451,000        15,451,000        15,451,000        Estimate of drawing for other family expenses (off-farm)100,000           100,000            100,000            100,000              100,000             100,000             100,000             100,000             100,000             100,000             Total financing needed22,013,802      11,718,500       15,551,000       15,551,000         15,551,000        15,551,000        15,551,000        15,551,000        15,551,000        15,551,000        B: Financing Plan (How to cover the above financing needs)OPENING BALANCE-                      10,388,102-         4,412,264-           3,614,786              11,641,836          19,668,886          27,695,936          35,722,986          43,750,036          51,777,086          Grant51,000                -                      -                      -                        -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       Family Labour42,000                42,000                42,000                42,000                   42,000                 42,000                 42,000                 42,000                 42,000                 42,000                 Net production revenue11,532,701         17,652,338         23,536,050         23,536,050            23,536,050          23,536,050          23,536,050          23,536,050          23,536,050          23,536,050          Total financing available11,625,701         7,306,236           19,165,786         27,192,836            35,219,886          43,246,936          51,273,986          59,301,036          67,328,086          75,355,136          Closing Balance/ reserves (A-B)10,388,102-         4,412,264-           3,614,786           11,641,836            19,668,886          27,695,936          35,722,986          43,750,036          51,777,086          59,804,136          Financing plan/affordability check / household cash flow 
Computation Infrastructure efficiency gains 
Labour-Based Incomes from Supported Infrastructure Projects 
51. 
This is purely a financial benefit for returnee households but it is not an economic benefit 
as it is a cost to the project. Returnee households are expected to work for only 15 days at USD 
3-4  per  day,  and  would  gain  a  once-off  income  of  USD  45-60,  as  a  safety  net/buffer  to  enable 
then to resume and/or participate in core SSLRP interventions. The number of short-term jobs can 
increase to 2,600 assuming about 3 youths per household.  
52. 
The overall summary of the above explained models is as follows: 
EFA/Costabs and the Logical Framework 
53. 
As per both the EFA and log-frame, beneficiary phasing used is as follows: 
14 
AssumptionsPer km of road1Perimeter impacted by the road3kmAssumptionTotal area with road benefits, km220            km2ComputedTotal area with road benefits, ha1,007       haComputedOtherShare of cultivated hectares50%AssumptionSales per hectare, kg654kgAverage based on maize as representative crop in the regionTransport cost/kg, on a bad road30.0SSPTransport cost/kg, on a rehabilitated road15.0SSPSavings per kilo from using a rehabilitated road15.0SSPY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Y11Y12Y13Y14Y15Y16Y17Y18Y19Y20Km of roads built/rehabilitated, additional, farm tracks00303431000000000000000Km of roads built/rehabilitated, stockComputed00306495959595959595959595959595959595Hectares with improved road networkComputed-  -   30,205.75         64,439             95,652             95,652             95,652             95,652             95,652             95,652             95,652             95,652             95,652             95,652             95,652             95,652             95,652             95,652             95,652             95,652             Cultivated hectares with improved road networkComputed-  -   15,102.88         32,219             47,826             47,826             47,826             47,826             47,826             47,826             47,826             47,826             47,826             47,826             47,826             47,826             47,826             47,826             47,826             47,826             Total kilos sold through improved roads, SSP-  -   9,871,347         21,058,874       31,259,266       31,259,266       31,259,266       31,259,266       31,259,266       31,259,266       31,259,266       31,259,266       31,259,266       31,259,266       31,259,266       31,259,266       31,259,266       31,259,266       31,259,266       31,259,266       Savings from transport costs, SSP-  -   148,070,207     315,883,108     468,888,988     468,888,988     468,888,988     468,888,988     468,888,988     468,888,988     468,888,988     468,888,988     468,888,988     468,888,988     468,888,988     468,888,988     468,888,988     468,888,988     468,888,988     468,888,988     Savings, USD-  -   19,230             41,024             60,895             60,895             60,895             60,895             60,895             60,895             60,895             60,895             60,895             60,895             60,895             60,895             60,895             60,895             60,895             60,895             CountiesNo of ReturneesAvg income  per HHTotal Income per counties (USD)Total Income per counties (SSP)Bor150537,950                                                    3,975,000                                         Magwi3005315,900                                                  7,950,000                                         Torit150537,950                                                    3,975,000                                         Terekeka75533,975                                                    1,987,500                                         Kajo Keji2005310,600                                                  5,300,000                                         Total87546,375                                                  23,187,500                                       A) Sorghum  Maize  G-Nuts  Tomatoes  Goat Enterprise  Canoe Fish  Bee Keeping  Fish Mongering  Fish Value Addition  Milk Bar Community Market ShadePY1110301839(37)                          (88)              (190)            (154)           (124)                    (24,467)        (15,396)         PY212034213919-2911237296,002            3863PY3124342139295115158488,0544351PY4124342139415115158488,0544351PY5124342139675115158488,0544351PY6124342139675115158488,0544351PY712434210675115158488,0544351PY812434210675115158488,0544351PY912434210675115158488,0544351PY1012434210675115158488,054435187%31%71%31%32%27%23%5831611001431616640881689,3663,643** IRRs  do not compute where the stream of cash flows is positive throughput.Farm models' net incremental benefits(in  SSP 000)On farm AgricultureValue Addition/AgribusinessLivestock & Fisheries NPV (SSP'000)  IRR/**  
The phasing in EFA and log-frame have been linked well as shown in the EFA table above 
54. 
and extract from the log-frame below: 
R Results Hierarch 
Outreach 
Indicator 
Baseline 
Mid-Term 
Name 
1. Number of persons receiving services promoted or supported by the project 
1a. Corresponding number of households reached 
Households - Number 
1b. Estimated corresponding total number of household members 
Total number of HH members  
Males - Number 
Females - Number 
Youth - number 
 112, 752 
56, 376 
56, 376 
56, 376 
0 
0 
0 
0 
11,600 
0 
End Target 
38, 880 
225,5041 
135, 302 
135, 302 
135, 302 
A linkage between the log-frame and the EFA/cost tables has been ensured at lower levels 
55. 
of the log-frame as follows: 
1Calculated based on an average family size of 5.8 
15 
D) BENEFICIARIES AND PHASINGPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6Number of Beneficiarieshh5,000                    6,600                    9,720                    17,560                     TOTAL5,000                    6,600                    9,720                    17,560                     -                          Cumulative5,000                    11,600                  21,320                  38,880                    38,880                Adoption rate1Beneficieries in their Year 103,000                      3,960                      5,832                      10,536                      0Beneficieries in their Year 2003,000                      3,960                      5,832                        10,536                  Beneficieries in their Year 30003,000                      3,960                        5,832                    Beneficieries in their Year 400003,000                        3,960                    Beneficieries in their Year 5000003,000                    Beneficieries in their Year 6000000Total030006960127922332823328Incremental income by Farm/Enterprise YearIncremental income/Enterprise in Farm Year 1(56,142)          -   (168,425,248)        (222,321,327)        (327,418,682)        (591,509,470)           -                             Incremental income/Enterprise in Farm Year 230,221           -   -                               90,662,154            119,674,043          176,247,227            318,405,484        Incremental income/Enterprise in Farm Year 349,309           -   -                               -                               147,928,065          195,265,045            287,572,158        Incremental income/Enterprise in Farm Year 449,309           -   -                               -                               -                               147,928,065            195,265,045        Incremental income/Enterprise in Farm Year 549,309           -   -                               -                               -                               -                                 147,928,065        Incremental income/Enterprise in Farm Year 49,309           -   -                               -                               -                               -                                 -                             Total Incremental Income-   168,425,248-          131,659,173-          59,816,574-            72,069,133-              949,170,753        Components by Financiers(USD '000)BaselineMid-TermEnd TargetOutput 1.1CBOs established or strengthenedNumber0159542Development of Community driven development plans (CDPs)1,614Subtotal Community Driven Development Planning4,623B. Agriculture Production and Rural livelihood SupportOutput 2.1Number0159542Women-only groups048163Output 2.1Land brought under climate-resilient managementNumber0301479Output 2.2Increased physical access to markets, processing and storage facilitiesKilometers03095Output 2.2Processing facilities01565Storage facilities0Market Infrastructure0Community Infrastructure to Support Production and Marketing6,243Indicator 14: Number of kilometres of roads constructed, rehabilitated or upgraded (2.1.5)Indicator 15: Number of market,processingorstorage facilities constructedor rehabilitated (2.1.6)Increased access to marketing, processing and storage Investments for Increased Climate-Sensitive Agriculture Production and Rural Livelihoods1,084Indicator 16: Number ofgroupssupported tosustainablymanagenatural resources andclimate-relatedrisks(1.6.11)Strengthened environmental sustainability Indicator 17:  Number of hectares of land brought under climate-resilient management (3.1.4)SSLRP Proposed Investments/ CostabAssociated indicators for the logframe. A. Community Driven Development PlanningBuild strong and inclusive Community Based Organizations (CBOs)3,009Indicator 9: Number of Community Based Organisations (CBOs) established and strengthened  
56. 
The cost per beneficiary using economic costs was computed as follows: 
Overall Economic Analysis 
57. 
The assumptions for the project how economic benefits were derived are as follows: 
Main assumptions used in the EFA 
58. 
From the analysis above and applying a prudent adoption rate of 60% the ERR is estimated 
at 24% with ENPV of USD 39.3 million. This confirms the economic feasibility of the investment by 
IFAD and co-financiers in the GoSS. The overall economic analysis is presented in the table below: 
16 
B)                    16               38,880 people225,040Households                      72  USD x person                     414 USD x HHAverage increase in rural income per capitaWOP (SSP)MTR 4.4                   -          49,312 6.25.5PROGRAMME COSTS AND INDICATORS FOR LOGFRAMETOTAL PROGRAMME COSTS (in million USD)Average  increase in income per HH per yearC. Project Support and Capacity BuildingB. Agriculture Production and Rural livelihood SupportCost per beneficiaryComponents and Cost (USD million)A. Community Driven Development PlanningBeneficiariesC) Output SizePrice (SSP)MAIN ASSUMPTIONS & SHADOW PRICES1FINANCIAL Yields  (Annually)Sorghum1 haKgs1,127                 227                Maize1 haKgs654                    227                G-Nuts1 haKgs711                    546                Tomatoes1 haKgs3,750                 255                Goat enterpriseNo. of  Animals11                      800                Canoe FishingKgs5,096                 67                  Bee keepingKgs1,030                 218                Fish MongeringKgs2,444                 213               Fish Value AdditionKgs5,880                 173               FINANCIALECONOMICMilk BarLtrs.39,227               600               Community Market Shade.6525010.0%Official Exchange rate (OER)1706.0%Shadow exchange rate (SER)154.69CF tradable goods0.91                    Labour Conversion factor \30.87Disc. rate (opp. cost of capital)ECONOMIC 
Sensitivity Analysis Reflecting Key Risks 
In line with the IPRM, a number of risks have been identified. The ones that affect the EFA 
59. 
directly  are  mainly:  a)  the  risk  of  the  potential  resumption  of  conflict  and  how  this  could  delay 
implementation;  b)  macro-  economic  issues  around  inflation  and  SSP  volatility;  c)  flooding  and 
related climate catastrophes. The sensitivity analysis done is summarised below: 
17 
E. OVERALL ECONOMIC ANALYSISPY1-                                                    -                         -                      441             441        (441)                  PY2(134.5)                                           -                         135-                 547             547        (682)                  PY3(53.0)                                             148                    95                   1,069          1,069     (974)                  PY485                                                 316                    401                 1,190          1,190     (789)                 PY5191                                               469                    660                 1,056          1,056     (395.7)              PY61,213                                            469                    1,682              379             379        1,302                PY71,213                                            469                    1,682              379              379        1,302                PY81,213                                            469                    1,682              379              379        1,302                PY91,213                                            469                    1,682              379              379        1,302                PY101,213                                            469                    1,682              379              379        1,302                PY111,213                                            469                    1,682              379              379        1,302                PY121,213                                            469                    1,682              379              379        1,302                PY131,213                                            469                    1,682              379              379        1,302                PY141,213                                            469                    1,682              379              379        1,302                PY151,213                                            469                    1,682              379              379        1,302                PY161,213                                            469                    1,682              379              379        1,302                PY171,213                                            469                    1,682              379              379        1,302                PY181,213                                            469                    1,682              379              379        1,302                PY191,213                                            469                    1,682              379              379        1,302                PY201,213                                            469                    1,682              379              379        1,302                NPV@ 6% (SSP Millions)6,689             NPV@ 6 % ('000 USD)39,349           EIRR24%CASH FLOWInfrastructure investment efficiency gainsTotal Net Inc. Benefits (millions)Economic Costs      ('SSP 000) Economic O&M Costs  ('SSP 000) Total Incremental CostsBENEFITS COSTS Project year Incremental Benefits from on-farm agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries and AgribusinessIntergrated risk frameworkIRRNPV (US$)Link with risk analysisRisk categoriesInherent riskResidual risk24%39,3491. Political commitmentSubstantialSubstantial-10%22%5,921Fragility and Security.2. GovernanceHighSubstantial-20%20%4,876-30%19%4,37910%21%6,06120%19%5,432High19%5,46054%9%72148%6%-5842%3%-83610%21%6,06120%19%5,43230%17%4,80310%27%7,98720%29%9,284SubstantialSubstantialSubstantialOutbreak of pandemics like covid-194. Fragility and security4. MacroeconomicFlooding and weather related risks, Inter-community conflicts due to competition natural resourcesRisk probabilityCost IncreaseIncrease of benefits%Low uptake of good practicesAdoption ratesHigh inflation/Macroeconomic fundamentals as exhited by the exchange rate volutility and a stretchin difference between the official rate and black market exchange rateDecrease of Project benefitsSensitivity analysisProject costs2 Delay of benefits16%4,301Base Scenario1 Delay of benefitsHigh inflation/Macroeconomic fundamentals as exhited by the exchange rate volutility and a stretchin difference between the official rate and black market exchange rate 
Detailed Models and workings: 
18 
South Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)-Overall Summary of the Financial and Economic AnalysisSorghum FIN. MODEL Unit/ Measure Yr 1Yr 2Yr 3Yr 4Yr 5Yr 6Yr 7Yr 8Yr 9Yr 10Units Qty  Unit Price/ cost  Total- SSP Qty Unit price/ cost AmountQty Unit price/ cost AmountQty Unit price/ cost AmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountSales(Revenue)a and bkgs901          250          225,329     1,037      250          259,128     1,100        250           274,901     1,127       250            281,661       259,128      274,901     281,661    281,661    281,661    281,661    281,661    281,661   281,661  281,661      Own consumption 20%kgs180          250          45,066       207         250          51,826       220           250           54,980       225          250            56,332         51,826        54,980       56,332      56,332      56,332      56,332      56,332      56,332     56,332    56,332     Post Harvest loss; WOP 05%, WP 3%kgs45            250          11,266       31           250          7,774         33             250           8,247         34            250            8,450           7,774          8,247         8,450        8,450        8,450        8,450        8,450        8,450       8,450      8,450           Net sales168,996     199,528     211,674     216,879       199,528      211,674     216,879    216,879    216,879    216,879    216,879    216,879   216,879  216,879   Capex-             -             -           -           -            -           -            -           -          -           Input costsUn improved-seeds SorghumKg5              1,000       5,000         Improved sorghum seedsKg5             1,000       5,000         5               1,000        5,000         5              1,000         5,000           5,000          5,000         5,000        5,000        5,000        5,000        5,000        5,000       5,000      5,000       Manurekgs3              5,000       15,000       3             5,000       15,000       3               5,000        15,000       3              5,000         15,000         15,000        15,000       15,000      15,000      15,000      15,000      15,000      15,000     15,000    15,000     -             -             Hoespcs7              1,000       7,000         7             1,000       7,000         7               1,000        7,000         7              1,000         7,000           7,000          7,000         7,000        7,000        7,000        7,000        7,000        7,000       7,000      7,000       Spadespcs2              500          1,000         2             500          1,000         2               500           1,000         2              500            1,000           1,000          1,000         1,000        1,000        1,000        1,000        1,000        1,000       1,000      1,000       Slasherspcs10            700          7,000         10           700          7,000         10             700           7,000         10            700            7,000           7,000          7,000         7,000        7,000        7,000        7,000        7,000        7,000       7,000      7,000       Harvesting Knifespcs6              250          1,500         8             250          2,000         9               250           2,250         11            250            2,750           2,000          2,250         2,750        2,750        2,750        2,750        2,750        2,750       2,750      2,750       Sackspcs9              100          901            10           100          1,037         11             100           1,100         11            100            1,127           1,037          1,100         1,127        1,127        1,127        1,127        1,127        1,127       1,127      1,127       37,401       38,037       38,350       38,877         38,037        38,350       38,877      38,877      38,877      38,877      38,877      38,877     38,877    38,877     Labour budgetSite ClearancePer days10            500          5,000         10           500          5,000         10             500           5,000         10            500            5,000           5,000          5,000         5,000        5,000        5,000        5,000        5,000        5,000       5,000      5,000       FencingPer days5              500          2,500         5             500          2,500         5               500           2,500         5              500            2,500           2,500          2,500         2,500        2,500        2,500        2,500        2,500        2,500       2,500      2,500       PlantingPer days10            500          5,000         10           500          5,000         10             500           5,000         10            500            5,000           5,000          5,000         5,000        5,000        5,000        5,000        5,000        5,000       5,000      5,000       FertilizingPer days3             700          2,100         3               700           2,100         3              700            2,100           2,100          2,100         2,100        2,100        2,100        2,100        2,100        2,100       2,100      2,100       PloughingPer days5              700          3,500         5             700          3,500         5               700           3,500         5              700            3,500           3,500          3,500         3,500        3,500        3,500        3,500        3,500        3,500       3,500      3,500       WeeedingPer days8              500          4,000         8             500          4,000         8               500           4,000         8              500            4,000           4,000          4,000         4,000        4,000        4,000        4,000        4,000        4,000       4,000      4,000       HarvestingPer days6              500          3,000         8             500          4,000         10             500           5,000         10            500            5,000           4,000          5,000         5,000        5,000        5,000        5,000        5,000        5,000       5,000      5,000       DryingPer days6              500          3,000         7             500          3,500         8               500           4,000         9              500            4,500           3,500          4,000         4,500        3,500        4,000        4,500        3,500        4,000       4,500      3,500       OthersPer days20            500          10,000       20           500          10,000       20             500           10,000       20            500            10,000         10,000        10,000       10,000      10,000      10,000      10,000      10,000      10,000     10,000    10,000         Hired labourPer days5              700          3,500         8             700          5,600         8               700           5,600         8              700            5,600           5,600          5,600         5,600            Family LabourPer days65            500          32,500       68           500          34,000       71             500           35,500       72            500            36,000         34,000        35,500       36,000      36,000       39,600       41,100       41,600         39,600        41,100       41,600      Total costs73,401       77,637       79,450       80,477         77,637        79,450       80,477      80,477      80,477      80,477      80,477      80,477     80,477    80,477     Gross Margin before capex95,595       121,892     132,224     136,402       121,892      132,224     136,402    136,402    136,402    136,402    136,402    136,402   136,402  136,402   Net cash flow after capex121,892      132,224     136,402    136,402    136,402    136,402    136,402    136,402   136,402  136,402   Incremental Benefit with and without project26,297        36,629       40,807      40,807      40,807      40,807      40,807      40,807     40,807    40,807     Financial Results (SSP)Return to family labour*2,006           Discount rate10%NPV234,097       PVb1,312,551    PVc491,063       B/C ratio2.67             Switching values Benefits(0.63)           Switching values Costs1.67             YearsYr 1Yr 2Yr 3Yr 4Yr 5Yr 6Yr 7Yr 8Yr 9Yr 10A: Financing Needs (i) CAPEX (farm tools and fertilisers have regarded as operating inputs and not CAPEX)-              -           -           -             -          -           -             -           -           -             (ii) Operating input (these now include the farm tools, seeds and fertilisers)38,037         38,350     38,877     38,877       38,877    38,877     38,877       38,877      38,877      38,877       (iii) Labour costs39,600         41,100     41,600     41,600       41,600    41,600     41,600       41,600      41,600      41,600       Sub-total for on farm costs77,637         79,450     80,477     80,477       80,477    80,477     80,477       80,477      80,477      80,477       Estimate of drawing for other family expenses (off-farm)150,000       150,000   150,000   150,000     150,000  150,000   150,000     150,000    150,000    150,000     EstimatedTotal financing needed227,637       229,450   230,477   230,477     230,477  230,477   230,477     230,477    230,477    230,477     B: Financing Plan (How to cover the above financing needs)OPENING BALANCE-                 56,892       74,616       97,018         119,420    141,822     164,224       186,627     209,029     231,431       Grant51,000           -             -             -               -            -             -               -             -             -               Family Labour34,000           35,500       36,000       36,000         36,000      36,000       36,000         36,000       36,000       36,000         Net production revenue199,528         211,674     216,879     216,879       216,879    216,879     216,879       216,879     216,879     216,879       Total financing available284,528         304,066     327,495     349,897       372,299    394,701     417,103       439,505     461,907     484,309       Closing Balance/ reserves (A-B)56,892           74,616       97,018       119,420       141,822    164,224     186,627       209,029     231,431     253,833       Note: For Calculation and the Analysis, 10 Fedans of land has been considered.Without Project Year 0 Year 1Year 2Year 3Financing plan/affordability check / household cash flowWith Project 
19 
South Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)-Overall Summary of the Financial and Economic AnalysisYear 1Year 2Year 3Year 4Year 5Year 6Year 7Year 8Year 9Year 10Units Qty  Unit Price/ cost Total- SSP Qty  Unit price/ cost Amount Qty  Unit price/ cost Amount Qty  Unit price/ cost AmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountSales(Revenue)Kgs523          250           130,721          601         250         150,330  638         250         159,480     654         250            163,402    150,330    159,480    163,402      163,402    163,402    163,402   163,402     163,402    163,402   163,402      Own consumption 30%Kgs157          250           39,216            180         250         45,099    191         250         47,844       196         250            49,021      45,099      47,844      49,021        49,021      49,021      49,021     49,021       49,021      49,021     49,021         Post Harvest loss; WOP 5%, WP 3%Kgs26            250           6,536              18           250         4,510      19           250         4,784         20           250            4,902        4,510        4,784        4,902          4,902        4,902        4,902       4,902         4,902        4,902       4,902           Net sales84,969            100,721  106,852     109,479    100,721    106,852    109,479      109,479    109,479    109,479   109,479     109,479    109,479   109,479   Capex-            -           -             -           -           -           -             -           -           -           Operating costs   Seeds/cPackets2              5,000        8,400              2             5,000      8,400      2             5,000      8,400         2             5,000         8,400        8,400        8,400        8,400          8,400        8,400        8,400       8,400         8,400        8,400       8,400       HoePieces8              1,000        8,000              8             1,000      8,000      8             1,000      8,000         8             1,000         8,000        8,000        8,000        8,000          8,000        8,000        8,000       8,000         8,000        8,000       8,000       NPK (Basal Application)Kgs10           200         2,000      10           200         2,000         10           200            2,000        2,000        2,000        2,000          2,000        2,000        2,000       2,000         2,000        2,000       2,000       SlasherPieces5              1,200        6,000              5             1,200      6,000      5             1,200      6,000         5             1,200         6,000        6,000        6,000        6,000          6,000        6,000        6,000       6,000         6,000        6,000       6,000       PangasPieces5              800           4,000              5             800         4,000      5             800         4,000         5             800            4,000        4,000        4,000        4,000          4,000        4,000        4,000       4,000         4,000        4,000       4,000       SacksPieces10            100           1,046              12           100         1,203      13           100         1,276         13           100            1,307        1,203        1,276        1,307          1,307        1,307        1,307       1,307         1,307        1,307       1,307       29,603    29,676       29,707      29,603      29,676      29,707        29,707      29,707      29,707     29,707       29,707      29,707     29,707     Labour budgetLand ClearancePer days10            500           5,000              10           500         5,000      10           500         5,000         10           500            5,000        5,000        5,000        5,000          5,000        5,000        5,000       5,000         5,000        5,000       5,000       DiggingPer days10            500           5,000              10           500         5,000      10           500         5,000         10           500            5,000        5,000        5,000        5,000          5,000        5,000        5,000       5,000         5,000        5,000       5,000       FertilizingPer days4             700         2,800      4             700         2,800         4             700            2,800        2,800        2,800        2,800          2,800        2,800        2,800       2,800         2,800        2,800       2,800       plantingPer days10            500           5,000              10           500         5,000      10           500         5,000         10           500            5,000        5,000        5,000        5,000          5,000        5,000        5,000       5,000         5,000        5,000       5,000       WeedingPer days7              500           3,500              7             500         3,500      7             500         3,500         7             500            3,500        3,500        3,500        3,500          3,500        3,500        3,500       3,500         3,500        3,500       3,500       HarvestingPer days5              500           2,500              7             500         3,500      8             500         4,000         10           500            5,000        3,500        4,000        5,000          5,000        5,000        5,000       5,000         5,000        5,000       5,000       DryingPer days5              500           2,500              7             500         3,500      7             500         3,500         9             500            4,500        3,500        3,500        4,500          4,500        4,500        4,500       4,500         4,500        4,500       4,500       Sorting & ThreshingPer days6              500           3,000              7             500         3,500      8             500         4,000         10           500            5,000        3,500        4,000        5,000          5,000        5,000        5,000       5,000         5,000        5,000       5,000       TransportationTrips7              750           5,098              8             750         6,043      9             750         6,411         9             750            6,569        6,043        6,411        6,569          6,569        6,569        6,569       6,569         6,569        6,569       6,569           Hired labourPer days7              12           750         9,043      13           750         9,411         13           750            9,569        9,043        9,569        9,569              Family LabourPer days53            -                 58           500         29,000    60           500         30,000       66           500            33,000      29,000      33,000      33,000        38,043    39,411       42,569      38,043      42,569      42,569        Total costs59,044            67,646    69,087       72,276      67,646      69,087      72,276        72,276      72,276      72,276     72,276       72,276      72,276     72,276     Gross Margin Before Capex25,925            33,075    37,765       37,203      33,075      37,765      37,203        37,203      37,203      37,203     37,203       37,203      37,203     37,203     Net cash flow After Capex33,075      37,765      37,203        37,203      37,203      37,203     37,203       37,203      37,203     37,203     Incremental benefits With and Wihout Project WOP7,150        11,840      11,278        11,278      11,278      11,278     11,278       11,278      11,278     11,278     Financial Results (SSP) Return to family labour* 641                     Discount rate /a10%NPV66,011                PVb662,569              PVc437,260              B/C ratio1.52                    Switching values Benefits(0.34)                   Switching values Costs0.52                    YearsYr 1Yr 2Yr 3Yr 4Yr 5Yr 6Yr 7Yr 8Yr 9Yr 10A: Financing Needs (i) CAPEX (farm tools and fertilisers have regarded as operating inputs and not CAPEX)-                      -           -           -                 -          -          -          -          -          -             (ii) Operating input (these now include the farm tools, seeds and fertilisers)29,603                29,676     29,707      29,707            29,707    29,707    29,707    29,707    29,707    29,707       (iii) Labout costs38,043                39,411     42,569      42,569            42,569    42,569    42,569    42,569    42,569    42,569       Sub-total for on farm costs67,646                69,087     72,276      72,276            72,276    72,276    72,276    72,276    72,276    72,276       Estimate of drawing for other family expenses (off-farm)100,000              100,000   100,000    100,000          100,000  100,000  100,000  100,000  100,000  100,000     EstimatedTotal financing needed167,646              169,087   172,276    172,276          172,276  172,276  172,276  172,276  172,276  172,276     B: Financing Plan (How to cover the above financing needs)OPENING BALANCE-                         13,075       19,160-       48,957-              78,754-      108,551-    138,347-    168,144-    197,941-    227,738-       Grant51,000                   -             -             -                    -            -            -            -            -            -               Family Labour29,000                   30,000       33,000       33,000              33,000      33,000      33,000      33,000      33,000      33,000         Net production revenue100,721                 106,852     109,479     109,479            109,479    109,479    109,479    109,479    109,479    109,479       Total financing available180,721                 149,927     123,319     93,522              63,725      33,929      4,132        25,665-      55,462-      85,258-         Closing Balance/ reserves (A-B)13,075                   19,160-       48,957-       78,754-              108,551-    138,347-    168,144-    197,941-    227,738-    257,534-       Financing plan/affordability check / household cash flow Maize FIN. MODEL  Unit/Measure Without ProjectWith ProjectYear 0Year 1Year 2Year 3 
20 
South Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)-Overall Summary of the Financial and Economic AnalysisYear 1Year 2Year 3Yr4Yr5Yr6Yr7Yr8Yr9Yr10 Annual Total  Unit Price/ cost Amount Qty  Unit price/ cost Amount Qty  Unit price/ cost Amount Qty  Unit price/ cost AmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountSales(Revenue)a and bKGS569         600         341,443  654         600         392,659      694         600         416,560      711         600         426,804      392,659      416,560      426,804      426,804      426,804      426,804      426,804      426,804      426,804      426,804         Own consumption 20%KGS114         600         68,289    131         600         78,532        139         600         83,312        142         600         85,361        78,532        83,312        85,361        85,361        85,361        85,361        85,361        85,361        85,361        85,361            Post Harvest loss; WOP 5%, WP 3%KGS28           600         17,072    20           600         11,780        21           600         12,497        21           600         12,804        11,780        12,497        12,804        12,804        12,804        12,804        12,804        12,804        12,804        12,804            Net sales256,082  302,348      320,751      328,639      302,348      320,751      328,639      328,639      328,639      328,639      328,639      328,639      328,639      328,639      Capex-             -             -             -             -             -             -             -             -             -             Operating costs   Seeds/cPcs4             7,000      29,400    4             10,000    42,000        4             10,000    42,000        4             10,000    42,000        42,000        42,000        42,000        42,000        42,000        42,000        42,000        42,000        42,000        42,000        HoesPcs16           1,000      15,960    16           1,000      15,960        16           1,000      15,960        16           1,000      15,960        15,960        15,960        15,960        15,960        15,960        15,960        15,960        15,960        15,960        15,960        MalodaPcs16           700         11,172    16           700         11,172        16           700         11,172        16           700         11,172        11,172        11,172        11,172        11,172        11,172        11,172        11,172        11,172        11,172        11,172        MatchetsPcs16           700         11,172    16           700         11,172        16           700         11,172        16           700         11,172        11,172        11,172        11,172        11,172        11,172        11,172        11,172        11,172        11,172        11,172        Harvesting Tools-             -             -             -             -             -             -             -             -             -             -             -             Plastic SheetsPcs2             6,000      10,080    3             6,000      18,000        5             6,000      30,000        6             6,000      36,000        18,000        30,000        36,000        36,000        36,000        36,000        36,000        36,000        36,000        36,000        Steal BucketsPcs3             1,000      3,000      5             1,000      5,000          6             1,000      6,000          7             1,000      7,000          5,000          6,000          7,000          7,000          7,000          7,000          7,000          7,000          7,000          7,000          Storage BagsPcs11           150         1,707      13           150         1,963          14           150         2,083          14           150         2,134          1,963          2,083          2,134          2,134          2,134          2,134          2,134          2,134          2,134          2,134          105,267      118,387      125,438      105,267      118,387      Labour budgetLand ClearancePer days10           500         5,000      10           500         5,000          10           500         5,000          10           500         5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          Field MakingPer days10           500         5,000      10           500         5,000          10           500         5,000          10           500         5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          Digging HolesPer days8             500         4,000      8             500         4,000          8             500         4,000          8             500         4,000          4,000          4,000          4,000          4,000          4,000          4,000          4,000          4,000          4,000          4,000          PlantingPer days7             500         3,500      7             500         3,500          7             500         3,500          7             500         3,500          3,500          3,500          3,500          3,500          3,500          3,500          3,500          3,500          3,500          3,500          WeedingPer days10           500         5,000      10           500         5,000          10           500         5,000          10           500         5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          HarvestingPer days20           500         10,000    20           500         10,000        20           500         10,000        20           500         10,000        10,000        10,000        10,000        10,000        10,000        10,000        10,000        10,000        10,000        10,000        PackingPer days5             500         2,500      7             500         3,500          8             500         4,000          10           500         5,000          3,500          4,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          5,000          TransportationPer days23           700         16,100    26           700         18,200        28           700         19,600        28           700         19,600        18,200        19,600        19,600        19,600        19,600        19,600        19,600        19,600        19,600        19,600            Hired labourPer days23           26           700         18,200        28           700         19,600        28           700         19,600            Family LabourPer days70           72           500         36,000        73           500         36,500        75           500         37,500        54,200        56,100        57,100        Total costs133,591  159,467      174,487      182,538      159,467      174,487      182,538      182,538      182,538      182,538      182,538      182,538      182,538      182,538      Gross Margin Before Capex122,491  142,880      146,265      146,101      142,880      146,265      146,101      146,101      146,101      146,101      146,101      146,101      146,101      146,101      Net cash flow After Capex142,880      146,265      146,101      146,101      146,101      146,101      146,101      146,101      146,101      146,101      Incremental Benefits WOP20,389        23,774        23,610        23,610        23,610        23,610        23,610        23,610        23,610        23,610        Financial Results (SSP)Return to family labour*2,029            Discount rate10%NPV142,280        PVb1,988,923     PVc1,093,990     B/C ratio1.82              Switching values Benefits(0.45)            Switching values Costs0.82              YearsYr 1Yr 2Yr 3Yr 4Yr 5Yr 6Yr 7Yr 8Yr 9Yr 10A: Financing Needs (i) CAPEX (farm tools and fertilisers have regarded as operating inputs and not CAPEX)-               -          -          -          -          -          -             -          -          -             (ii) Operating input (these now include the farm tools, seeds and fertilisers)105,267        118,387  125,438  125,438  125,438  125,438  125,438      125,438  125,438  125,438      (iii) Labour costs54,200          56,100    57,100    57,100    57,100    57,100    57,100        57,100    57,100    57,100        Sub-total for on farm costs159,467        174,487  182,538  182,538  182,538  182,538  182,538      182,538  182,538  182,538      Estimate of drawing for other family expenses (off-farm)150,000        150,000  150,000  150,000  150,000  150,000  150,000      150,000  150,000  150,000      EstimatedTotal financing needed309,467        324,487  332,538  332,538  332,538  332,538  332,538      332,538  332,538  332,538      B: Financing Plan (How to cover the above financing needs)OPENING BALANCE-                  79,880      112,645    146,246    179,846    213,447    247,048        280,649    314,249    347,850        Grant51,000            -            -            -            -            -            -                -            -            -                Family Labour36,000            36,500      37,500      37,500      37,500      37,500      37,500          37,500      37,500      37,500          Net production revenue302,348          320,751    328,639    328,639    328,639    328,639    328,639        328,639    328,639    328,639        Total financing available389,348          437,132    478,784    512,384    545,985    579,586    613,187        646,787    680,388    713,989        Closing Balance/ reserves (A-B)79,880            112,645    146,246    179,846    213,447    247,048    280,649        314,249    347,850    381,451        Financing plan/affordability check / household cash flow Groundnuts Financial Model  Unit of Measure Without ProjectWith ProjectYear 0Year 1Yr2Yr 3 
21 
South Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)-Overall Summary of the Financial and Economic AnalysisYear 0Year2+Year3Year 4Year5Year 6Year 7Year 8Year 9Year 10Units QTY  Unit Price/ cost  Total- SSP  QTY  Unit price/ cost SSPSSPSSPSSPSSPSSPSSPSSPSSPSSPKGS3,000      100         300,000  3,750         100            375,000       375,000     375,000     375,000     375,000     375,000     375,000     375,000     375,000     375,000        Own consumption 2%KGS300         100         30,000    75              100            7,500           7,500         7,500         7,500         7,500         7,500         7,500         7,500         7,500         7,500             Post Harvest loss; WOP 10%, WP 5%KGS300         100         30,000    188            100            18,750         18,750       18,750       18,750       18,750       18,750       18,750       18,750       18,750       18,750           Net sales240,000   348,750       348,750     348,750     348,750     348,750     348,750     348,750     348,750     348,750     348,750      CAPEX -          -              -             -             -             -             -             -             -             -             -             Operating costs   Seeds/cPcs10           5,000      50,000    10              5,000         50,000         50,000       50,000       50,000       50,000       50,000       50,000       50,000       50,000       50,000       Fertilizers-                NPKKGS-          29           -          200            29              5,838           5,838         5,838         5,838         5,838         5,838         5,838         5,838         5,838         5,838             Transport/market expensePer 100 kgs20           700         14,000    20              1,000         20,000         20,000       20,000       20,000       20,000       20,000       20,000       20,000       20,000       20,000            Post harvest cratescrates38           100         3,800      450            100            45,000         45,000       45,000       45,000       45,000       45,000       45,000       45,000       45,000       45,000            Crop ProtectionPer season2             3,649      7,297      3                3,649         10,946         10,946       10,946       10,946       10,946       10,946       10,946       10,946       10,946       10,946       75,097    131,784       -             Labour budget     Land PreparationPer days15           500         10,000    15              500            7,500                 Nursery bed preparation and managementPer days20           500         10,000    20              500            10,000               PlantingPer days20           500         -          20              500            10,000                Fertiliser ApplicationPer days700         -          10              700            7,000                   Prooning and stakingPer days700         14,000    10              700            7,000                   WeedingPer days20           500         12,500    20              500            10,000                 HarvestingPer days25           500         10,000    25              500            12,500                 Loading on crates to homePer days20           500         60,000    20              500            10,000         120         140                Hired labourPer days-          700         84,000    20              700            14,000         14,000       14,000       14,000       14,000       14,000       14,000       14,000       14,000       14,000           Family LabourPer days120         500         -          140            500            70,000         70,000       70,000       70,000       70,000       70,000       70,000       70,000       70,000       70,000       Total labour costs-          84,000    84,000         84,000       84,000       84,000       84,000       84,000       84,000       84,000       84,000       84,000       Total operating costs159,097  Gross Margin80,903    132,966       132,966     132,966     132,966     132,966     132,966     132,966     132,966     132,966     132,966     Net Cash flow after CAPEX132,966       132,966     132,966     132,966     132,966     132,966     132,966     132,966     132,966     132,966     Incremental Benefits with and without project52,064         52,064       52,064       52,064       52,064       52,064       52,064       52,064       52,064       52,064       Financial Results (SSP)Return to family labour*950               *consider full development year family labour requirementsDiscount rate10%NPV319,908        PVb2,159,634     PVc817,020        B/C ratio2.64              Switching values Benefits(0.62)            Switching values Costs1.64              YearsYr 1Yr 2Yr 3Yr 4Yr 5Yr 6Yr 7Yr 8Yr 9Yr 10A: Financing Needs (i) CAPEX (farm tools and fertilisers have regarded as operating inputs and not CAPEX)-               -          -          -          -             -             -              -             -             -             (ii) Operating input (these now include the farm tools, seeds and fertilisers)131,784        131,784  131,784  131,784  131,784     131,784     131,784       131,784     131,784     131,784     (iii) Labour costs84,000          70,000    70,000    70,000    70,000       70,000       70,000         70,000       70,000       70,000       Sub-total for on farm costs215,784        201,784  201,784  201,784  201,784     201,784     201,784       201,784     201,784     201,784     Estimate of drawing for other family expenses (off-farm)150,000        150,000  150,000  150,000  150,000     150,000     150,000       150,000     150,000     150,000     EstimatedTotal financing needed365,784        351,784  351,784  351,784  351,784     351,784     351,784       351,784     351,784     351,784     B: Financing Plan (How to cover the above financing needs)OPENING BALANCE-                  103,966    170,932    237,899    304,865       371,831       438,797         505,764       572,730       639,696       Grant51,000            -            -            -            -               -               -                 -               -               -               Family Labour70,000            70,000      70,000      70,000      70,000         70,000         70,000           70,000         70,000         70,000         Net production revenue348,750          348,750    348,750    348,750    348,750       348,750       348,750         348,750       348,750       348,750       Total financing available469,750          522,716    589,682    656,649    723,615       790,581       857,547         924,514       991,480       1,058,446    Closing Balance/ reserves (A-B)103,966          170,932    237,899    304,865    371,831       438,797       505,764         572,730       639,696       706,662       Financing plan/affordability check / household cash flow Unit of Measure Tomatoes Financial Model Year 1  With Project Without Project 
22 
South Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)-Overall Summary of the Financial and Economic AnalysisStart ofEnd ofStart ofEnd ofthe yearthe yearthe yearthe yearDoes (over 9 months)20244015Female Kids (0-6 months)200412Male Kids (0-1 year)202413Unit TypeNo. UnitsUnit ScaleCost/UnitUnit TypeNo. UnitsUnit ScaleCost/UnitGross IncomeSales (Kgs)2                26879Sale of Kids5                   80879Does (over 9 months)Doe210,811PharmaceuticalsLumpsum711,551Lumpsum1111,551Stud Service FeesDoe/Yr2900Doe/Yr4900Other expenses (salt supplements, extra vet expenses) Lumpsum217,000Lumpsum217,000Labour month201500month251500Total ExpensesNet IncomeStart ofEnd ofStart ofEnd ofthe yearthe yearthe yearthe yearDoes (over 9 months)5121661217Female Kids (0-1 year)612713Male Kids (0-1 year)615715Unit TypeNo. UnitsUnit ScaleCost/UnitUnit TypeNo. UnitsUnit ScaleCost/UnitGross Income Sale of Kids7                108879Sale of Kids9                   128879PharmaceuticalsLumpsum1611,551Lumpsum1811,551Stud Service FeesDoe/Yr5900Doe/Yr6900Other expenses (salt supplements, extra vet expenses) Lumpsum217,000Lumpsum217,000Labourmonth301500month331500Total ExpensesNet IncomeStart ofEnd ofTotal Gross Income (Yrs 1-5):NPR443,690the yearthe yearDoes (over 9 months)71116Total Net Income (Yrs 1-5):NPR149,052Female Kids (0-1 year)825Male Kids (0-1 year)826Unit TypeNo. UnitsUnit ScaleCost/UnitAssumptions: Gross Income Sale of Kids11              163879     Birth rates assumed as 1.5/kidding, 3 kiddings/2 yearsPharmaceuticalsLumpsum1911,551Mortality assumed at 10% (mature females) and 20% (kids).Stud Service FeesDoe/Yr7900Year-old kids are assumed to weigh 15 kg.  Mature females, 25 kg.Other expenses (salt supplements, extra vet expenses) Lumpsum217,000All goats realize liveweight price of SSP 300 per kgLabourmonth351500Flock size is stabilized at 6 doesTotal ExpensesOnly does are retained in flock (servicing fee paid to buck owner)Net IncomeOwn consumption 3%Yr. 1Yr. 2Yr. 3Yr. 4Yr. 5Unit/measure (Kgs)12345WOP12345678910Gross Income22,85470,49694,551112,512143,277143,277143,277143,277143,277143,277Total expenses58,58947,54558,34763,50866,64966,64966,64966,64966,64966,649Net40000-35,73522,95036,20549,00476,62876,62876,62876,62876,62876,628FIRR101%FNPV ('000 SSP) 275,099FNPV (USD)77B/C0.73Yr 1Yr 2Yr 3Yr 4Yr 5Yr 6Yr 7Yr 8Yr 9Yr 10-           -             -           -           -                 -              -              -              -              -                 48,589     35,045       43,347     47,008     49,149           49,149        49,149        49,149        49,149        49,149           10,000     12,500       15,000     16,500     17,500           17,500        17,500        17,500        17,500        17,500           58,589     47,545       58,347     63,508     66,649           66,649        66,649        66,649        66,649        66,649           100,000   100,000     100,000   100,000   100,000         100,000      100,000      100,000      100,000      100,000         158,589   147,545     158,347   163,508   166,649         166,649      166,649      166,649      166,649      166,649         -             74,735-         139,285-     188,080-     222,576-           228,448-        234,319-        240,191-        246,062-        251,934-           51,000       -               -             -             -                   -                -                -                -                -                   10,000       12,500         15,000       16,500       17,500             17,500          17,500          17,500          17,500          17,500             22,854       70,496         94,551       112,512     143,277           143,277        143,277        143,277        143,277        143,277           83,854       8,261           29,734-       59,068-       61,799-             67,671-          73,542-          79,414-          85,285-          91,157-             74,735-       139,285-       188,080-     222,576-     228,448-           234,319-        240,191-        246,062-        251,934-        257,806-           YearsWith projectTotal financing neededB: Financing Plan (How to cover the GrantFinancing plan/affordability check / household cash flowA: Financing NeedsOPENING BALANCEFamily LabourClosing Balance/ reserves (A-B) (i) CAPEX(ii) Operating input(iii) Labour costsSub-total for on farm costsEstimate of drawing for other family Net production revenueTotal financing available17,50066,64976,628Costs and IncomeTotal143,27728,8496,30014,00036,20549,004CATEGORY             YEAR 5Herd GrowthBirthsDeathsEntrantsSales14,00014,00015,00016,50058,34763,50894,551112,51224,46127,6084,8865,400BirthsDeathsEntrantsSalesCosts and IncomeTotalTotalHerd GrowthBirthsDeathsEntrantsSales-35,73522,950CATEGORY             YEAR 3             YEAR 414,00014,00010,00012,50058,58947,5451,8003,240DeathsEntrantsSales22,85470,49621,62211,16717,805Costs and IncomeTotalTotalCATEGORY             YEAR 1             YEAR 2Goat Financial ModelBirthsDeathsEntrantsSalesBirths 
23 
South Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)-Overall Summary of the Financial and Economic AnalysisCanoe Fish Financial ModelYields, Imputs & Unite PriceItemUnitUnit PriceWithoutSSPProjectY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y8Y10Main ProductionAnnual catch levelKg6702,937             3,422             5,044               5,044               5,044               5,044               5,044               5,044               5,044               5,044               Own consumption88                  103                151                  151                  151                  151                  151                  151                  151                  151                  Unskilled LabourPer Day500160Inputs.Investments (CAPEX)Canoe, gillnets and fishing netls350001.00               OperatingLabourPer day500224224224224224224224224224224Resource rentper Kg 172937342250445044504450445044504450445044Operatiion and maintenance (10%)p.a116671111111111Financial Budget (SSP)WithoutProjectY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Main ProductionAnnual catch levelKg-              195,827         228,120         336,267           336,267           336,267           336,267           336,267           336,267           336,267           336,267           Unskilled LabourPer Day80,000         -                -                -                   -                   -                   -                   -                   -                   -                   -                   Sub-total Revenues80,000         195,827         228,120         336,267           336,267           336,267           336,267           336,267           336,267           336,267           336,267           InputsOperatingLabourPer day-              112000112000112000112000112000112000112000112000112000112000Resource rentper Kg -              48957570308406784067840678406784067840678406784067Operatiion and maintenance (10%)p.a-              11667116671166711667116671166711667116671166711667Sub-total Operating Costs-              172623180697207733207733207733207733207733207733207733207733Total Production Costs-              172623180697207733207733207733207733207733207733207733207733Gross Income80,000         2320347423128533128533128533128533128533128533128533128533Investments35000Net cash flow  (before financing)91,797-           32,577-           48,533             48,533             48,533             48,533             48,533             48,533             48,533             48,533             NPV @10% (SSP)103,611         28%Benefit/Cost Ratio1.61.6IRRWith ProjectWith Project 
24 
YearsYr 1Yr 2Yr 3Yr 4Yr 5Yr 6Yr 7Yr 8Yr 9Yr 10A: Financing Needs (i) CAPEX35,000         -                 -                -              -                -                -                   -                   -                   -                   (ii) Operating input60,623         68,697           95,733           95,733         95,733           95,733           95,733             95,733             95,733             95,733             (iii) Labout costs112,000       112,000         112,000         112,000       112,000         112,000         112,000           112,000           112,000           112,000           Sub-total for on farm costs207,623       180,697         207,733         207,733       207,733         207,733         207,733           207,733           207,733           207,733           Estimate of drawing for other family expenses (off-farm)150,000       150,000         150,000         150,000       150,000         150,000         150,000           150,000           150,000           150,000           Total financing needed357,623       330,697         357,733         357,733       357,733         357,733         357,733           357,733           357,733           357,733           B: Financing Plan (How to cover the above financing needs)OPENING BALANCE-                  1,203               10,627             101,160         191,693           282,227           372,760              463,293              553,827              644,360              Grant51,000            -                   -                   -                 -                   -                   -                      -                      -                      -                      Family Labour112,000          112,000           112,000           112,000         112,000           112,000           112,000              112,000              112,000              112,000              Net production revenue195,827          228,120           336,267           336,267         336,267           336,267           336,267              336,267              336,267              336,267              Total financing available358,827          341,323           458,893           549,427         639,960           730,493           821,027              911,560              1,002,093           1,092,627           Closing Balance/ reserves (A-B)1,203              10,627             101,160           191,693         282,227           372,760           463,293              553,827              644,360              734,893              Financing plan/affordability check / household cash flow 
25 
South Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)-Overall Summary of the Financial and Economic Analysis Unit/Measure Year 1Year 2Year 3Yr4Yr5Yr6Yr7Yr8Yr9Yr10Units Qty  Unit Price/ cost Total- SSPQty Unit price/ cost AmountQty Unit price/ cost AmountQty Unit price/ cost AmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountAmountSales(Revenue)a/618             240             148,320    824         240             197,760    1,030      240         247,200    148,320      197,760    247,200    247,200    247,200    247,200    247,200    247,200    247,200    247,200       Own consumption 15%kgs12               240             2,966        16           240             3,955        21           240         4,944        2,966          3,955        4,944        4,944        4,944        4,944        4,944        4,944        4,944        4,944            Post Harvest loss 10%kgs62               240             14,832      82           240             19,776      103         240         24,720      14,832        19,776      24,720      24,720      24,720      24,720      24,720      24,720      24,720      24,720          Net sales130,522    174,029    217,536    130,522      174,029    217,536    217,536    217,536    217,536    217,536    217,536    217,536    217,536    Capex133,000    133,000      -           -           -           -           -           -           -           -           -           Input costs-            Labour budget-            -            -             -           -           -           -           -           -           -           -           -           Beehive InstallationPer days2                 500             1,000        2             500             1,000        2             500         1,000        1,000          1,000        1,000        1,000        1,000        1,000        1,000        1,000        1,000        1,000        SupervisionPer days24               500             12,000      24           500             12,000      24           500         12,000      12,000        12,000      12,000      12,000      12,000      12,000      12,000      12,000      12,000      12,000      Water SupplyPer days-             -            -             -            -         -         -            -             -           -           -           -           -           -           -           -           -           HarvestingPer days1                 500             500           1             500             500           1             500         500           500             500           500           500           500           500           500           500           500           500           ProcessingPer days1                 500             500           3             500             1,500        5             500         2,500        500             1,500        2,500        2,500        2,500        2,500        2,500        2,500        2,500        2,500        TransportationPer days2                 500             1,000        4             500             2,000        6             500         3,000        1,000          2,000        3,000        3,000        3,000        3,000        3,000        3,000        3,000        3,000        MarketingPer days2                 500             1,000        4             500             2,000        6             500         3,000        1,000          2,000        3,000        3,000        3,000        3,000        3,000        3,000        3,000        3,000        -             -           -           -             -           -               Hired labourPer days-             -           -               Family LabourPer days32               500             16,000      38           500             19,000      44           500         22,000      16,000        19,000      22,000      22,000      22,000      22,000      22,000      22,000      22,000      22,000      -             -           -           Total costs149,000    19,000      22,000      149,000      19,000      22,000      22,000      22,000      22,000      22,000      22,000      22,000      22,000      Gross Margin Before Capex27,000       (18,478)     155,029    195,536    (18,478)      155,029    195,536    195,536    195,536    195,536    195,536    195,536    195,536    195,536    Net cash flow After Capex(151,478)    155,029    195,536    195,536    195,536    195,536    195,536    195,536    195,536    195,536    Incremental Benefits with and without project(178,478)    128,029    168,536    168,536    168,536    168,536    168,536    168,536    168,536    168,536    Financial results (US$)Return to family labour*6,111                    Discount rate10%NPV686,636                IRR84%PVb1,221,604             PVc248,156                B/C ratio4.92                      Switching values Benefits(0.80)                     Switching values Costs3.92                      YearsYr 1Yr 2Yr 3Yr 4Yr 5Yr 6Yr 7Yr 8Yr 9Yr 10A: Financing Needs (i) CAPEX133,000                -          -          -             -             -             -            -         -             -            (ii) Operating input-                        -          -          -             -             -             -            -         -             -            (iii) Labout costs16,000                  19,000    22,000    22,000       22,000        22,000        22,000      22,000    22,000        22,000      Sub-total for on farm costs149,000                19,000    22,000    22,000       22,000        22,000        22,000      22,000    22,000        22,000      Estimate of drawing for other family expenses (off-farm)100,000                100,000  100,000  100,000     100,000      100,000      100,000    100,000  100,000      100,000    EstimatedTotal financing needed249,000                119,000  122,000  122,000     122,000      122,000      122,000    122,000  122,000      122,000    B: Financing Plan (How to cover the above financing needs)OPENING BALANCE-                           51,478-      22,550      140,086       257,622        375,158        492,694      610,230   727,766        845,302      Grant51,000                     -            -            -               -                -                -              -           -                -              Family Labour16,000                     19,000      22,000      22,000         22,000          22,000          22,000        22,000     22,000          22,000        Net production revenue130,522                   174,029    217,536    217,536       217,536        217,536        217,536      217,536   217,536        217,536      Total financing available197,522                   141,550    262,086    379,622       497,158        614,694        732,230      849,766   967,302        1,084,838   Closing Balance/ reserves (A-B)51,478-                     22,550      140,086    257,622       375,158        492,694        610,230      727,766   845,302        962,838      Bee Keeping Financial ModelWithout ProjectWith ProjectYear 0Year 1Yr2Yr 3Financing plan/affordability check / household cash flow 
26 
South Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)-Overall Summary of the Financial and Economic AnalysisFish Mongering Financial ModelYields, Imputs & Unite PriceItemUnitUnit PriceWithoutSSPProjectY1Y2Y3Y4-10Y5Y6Y7Y8Y8Y10Main ProductionDried fish Kg213                  -               2,213          2,255          2,444         2,444        2,444          2,444          2,444         2,444          2,444         2,444          Own consumptionKg-               133             135             147            147           147             147             147            147             147            147             Unskilled LabourPer Day500                  117          InputsInvestments (CAPEX)-                       Scale and some equipmentsls193,333           1                 OperatingPurchase of dried fishKg133                  2,213          2,255          2,444         2,444        2,444          2,444          2,444         2,444          2,444         2,444          Rentls/month1,167               12               12               12              12             12               12               12              12               12              12               LabourPerson day500                  90               90               90              90             90               90               90              90               90              90               Operatio and maintenance (5%)p.a33,333             1                 1                 1                1               1                 1                 1                1                 1                1                 Financial Budget (SSP)WithoutProjectY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Main ProductionDried fishKg-               472,064      481,092      521,387     521,387    521,387      521,387      521,387     521,387      521,387     521,387      Unskilled LabourPer Day58,500     -                 -                 -                 -               -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 Sub-total Revenues58,500     472,064      481,092      521,387     521,387    521,387      521,387      521,387     521,387      521,387     521,387      InputsOperatingPurchase of dried fishKg-               295,040      300,683      325,867     325,867    325,867      325,867      325,867     325,867      325,867     325,867      Rentls/month-               14,000        14,000        14,000       14,000      14,000        14,000        14,000       14,000        14,000       14,000        LabourPerson day-               45,000        45,000        45,000       45,000      45,000        45,000        45,000       45,000        45,000       45,000        Operatio and maintenance (5%)p.a-               33,333        33,333        33,333       33,333      33,333        33,333        33,333       33,333        33,333       33,333        Sub-total Operating Costs-               387,373      393,016      418,200     418,200    418,200      418,200      418,200     418,200      418,200     418,200      Total Production Costs-               387,373      393,016      418,200     418,200    418,200      418,200      418,200     418,200      418,200     418,200      Gross Income58,500     84,691        88,076        103,187     103,187    103,187      103,187      103,187     103,187      103,187     103,187      Investments193,333      Net cash flow  (before financing)167,143-      29,576        44,687       44,687      44,687        44,687        44,687       44,687        44,687       44,687        NPV @10% (SSP)69,520             20%Benefit/Cost Ratio0.0With ProjectWith ProjectIRR 
27 
YearsYr 1Yr 2Yr 3Yr 4Yr 5Yr 6Yr 7Yr 8Yr 9Yr 10A: Financing Needs (i) CAPEX193,333                                      -                 -                   -           -             -             -             -           -             -             (ii) Operating input342,373                                      348,016         373,200           373,200   373,200      373,200      373,200     373,200    373,200      373,200      (iii) Labout costs45,000                                        45,000           45,000             45,000     45,000        45,000        45,000       45,000      45,000        45,000        Sub-total for on farm costs580,707                                      393,016         418,200           418,200   418,200      418,200      418,200     418,200    418,200      418,200      Estimate of drawing for other family expenses (off-farm)100,000                                      100,000         100,000           100,000   100,000      100,000      100,000     100,000    100,000      100,000      Total financing needed680,707                                      493,016         518,200           518,200   518,200      518,200      518,200     518,200    518,200      518,200      B: Financing Plan (How to cover the above financing needs)OPENING BALANCE-                                                   112,643-           79,566-                31,380-       16,807          64,994          113,180       161,367     209,554        257,740        Grant51,000                                             -                   -                      -             -                -                -               -             -                -                Family Labour45,000                                             45,000             45,000                45,000       45,000          45,000          45,000         45,000       45,000          45,000          Net production revenue472,064                                           481,092           521,387              521,387     521,387        521,387        521,387       521,387     521,387        521,387        Total financing available568,064                                           413,450           486,820              535,007     583,194        631,380        679,567       727,754     775,940        824,127        Closing Balance/ reserves (A-B)112,643-                                           79,566-             31,380-                16,807       64,994          113,180        161,367       209,554     257,740        305,927        Financing plan/affordability check / household cash flow 
28 
South Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)-Overall Summary of the Financial and Economic AnalysisFish value addition Financial ModelYields, Imputs & Unite PriceItemUnitUnit PriceWithoutSSPProjectY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Main ProductionDried fish- dry weightKg17305,484             5,478             5,880             5,880             5,880             5,880             5,880             5,880             5,880             5,880             Own consumptionKg0110                110                118                118                118                118                118                118                118                118                Provision unskilled Labour (wop)Per Day500140InputsInvestments (CAPEX)Solar tent and related drying elementsls1533331                    OperatingFish purchases- wet weight (dry weight/0.15)Kg1934,275           34,238           36,750           36,750           36,750           36,750           36,750           36,750           36,750           36,750           WaterLites0.33               34,275           34,238           36,750           36,750           36,750           36,750           36,750           36,750           36,750           36,750           Packagingper 50  Kg bag17110                110                118                118                118                118                118                118                118                118                Labour (asumes 2 persons on this project)labour500300                300                300                300                300                300                300                300                300                300                Operation and manintainence (10%)p.a300001                    1                    1                    1                    1                    1                    1                    1                    1                    1                    a/ on duty on averageWOP low price of 20 no CapexFinancial Budget (SSP)WithoutProjectY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Y6Y7Y8Y9Y10Main ProductionDried fish- dry weightKg0950,560         949,520         1,019,200      1,019,200      1,019,200      1,019,200      1,019,200      1,019,200      1,019,200      1,019,200      Provision unskilled Labour (wop)Per Day70000-                 -                -                 -                 -                -                -                -                 -                 -                 Sub-total Revenues70000950,560         949,520         1,019,200      1,019,200      1,019,200      1,019,200      1,019,200      1,019,200      1,019,200      1,019,200      InputsOperatingFish purchases- wet weight (dry weight/0.15)Kg0642,085         641,383         688,450         688,450         688,450         688,450         688,450         688,450         688,450         688,450         WaterLites011,425           11,413           12,250           12,250           12,250           12,250           12,250           12,250           12,250           12,250           Packagingper 50  Kg bag01,828             1,826             1,960             1,960             1,960             1,960             1,960             1,960             1,960             1,960             Labour (asumes 2 persons on this project)labour0150,000         150,000         150,000         150,000         150,000         150,000         150,000         150,000         150,000         150,000         Operation and manintainence (10%)p.a030,000           30,000           30,000           30,000           30,000           30,000           30,000           30,000           30,000           30,000           Sub-total Operating Costs0835,338         834,621         882,660         882,660         882,660         882,660         882,660         882,660         882,660         882,660         Total Production Costs0835,338         834,621         882,660         882,660         882,660         882,660         882,660         882,660         882,660         882,660         Gross Income70000115,222         114,899         136,540         136,540         136,540         136,540         136,540         136,540         136,540         136,540         Investments153,337         Net cash flow  (before financing)108,115-         44,899           66,540           66,540           66,540           66,540           66,540           66,540           66,540           66,540           NPV @10% (SSP)232,197         53%Benefit/Cost Ratio1.21                    With ProjectWith ProjectIRR 
29 
YearsYr 1Yr 2Yr 3Yr 4Yr 5Yr 6Yr 7Yr 8Yr 9Yr 10A: Financing Needs (i) CAPEX153,337      -                   -                 -               -                 -                -                 -                 -                -                (ii) Operating input685,338      684,621           732,660         732,660       732,660         732,660         732,660         732,660         732,660         732,660         (iii) Labout costs150,000      150,000           150,000         150,000       150,000         150,000         150,000         150,000         150,000         150,000         Sub-total for on farm costs988,675      834,621           882,660         882,660       882,660         882,660         882,660         882,660         882,660         882,660         Estimate of drawing for other family expenses (off-farm)150,000      150,000           150,000         150,000       150,000         150,000         150,000         150,000         150,000         150,000         Total financing needed1,138,675   984,621           1,032,660      1,032,660    1,032,660      1,032,660      1,032,660      1,032,660      1,032,660      1,032,660      B: Financing Plan (How to cover the above financing needs)OPENING BALANCE-                12,885                127,784           264,324         400,864           537,404           673,944           810,484           947,024           1,083,564        Grant51,000          -                      -                   -                 -                   -                   -                   -                   -                   -                   Family Labour150,000        150,000              150,000           150,000         150,000           150,000           150,000           150,000           150,000           150,000           Net production revenue950,560        949,520              1,019,200        1,019,200      1,019,200        1,019,200        1,019,200        1,019,200        1,019,200        1,019,200        Total financing available1,151,560     1,112,405           1,296,984        1,433,524      1,570,064        1,706,604        1,843,144        1,979,684        2,116,224        2,252,764        Closing Balance/ reserves (A-B)12,885          127,784              264,324           400,864         537,404           673,944           810,484           947,024           1,083,564        1,220,104        Financing plan/affordability check / household cash flow 
30 
South Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)-Overall Summary of the Financial and Economic AnalysiswopMilk Bars (Revenue) Financial ModelYr 0Yr 1Yr 2Yr 3Yr 4Yr 5Yr 6Yr 7 Yr 8Yr 9Yr 10Average Number of Litres of Milk to be Processed / day60                   90                       120                    120                    120                    120                    120                    120                    120                    120                    Processing Loss0%0%0%0%0%0%0%0%0%0%Average Number of Litres Sold  / day53                 81                    109                 109                 109                 109                 109                 109                 109                 109                 Average selling price of milk / litre600                 600                     600                    600                    600                    600                    600                    600                    600                    600                    Own consumption (1%)192                 294                     392                    392                    392                    392                    392                    392                    392                    392                    Number of Litres sold / year19,221            29,421                39,227               39,621               39,621               39,621               39,621               39,621               39,621               39,621               Total Revenue based on Selling of Litres / year - Assumption is business is done around the year with average litres of processed milk sold / day to be 10811,532,701     17,652,338         23,536,050        23,772,450        23,772,450        23,772,450        23,772,450        23,772,450        23,772,450        23,772,450        Total Revenue / year11,532,701     17,652,338         23,536,050        23,772,450        23,772,450        23,772,450        23,772,450        23,772,450        23,772,450        23,772,450        Capex-                  -                      -                    -                    -                    -                    -                    -                    -                    -                    Operational CostAverage Cost price for a liter of Milk400               400                  400                 400                 400                 400                 400                 400                 400                 400                 Cost price for liters purchased / year8,760,000     13,140,000      17,520,000     17,520,000     17,520,000     17,520,000     17,520,000     17,520,000     17,520,000     17,520,000     Cost of Coal for processing Milk / day200                 200                     200                    200                    200                    200                    200                    200                    200                    200                    Cost of Coal for processing Milk / year73,000          73,000             73,000            73,000            73,000            73,000            73,000            73,000            73,000            73,000            Salary for the processor / caretaker per month3,500             3,500            3,500                  3,500              3,500              3,500              3,500              3,500              3,500              3,500              3,500              Salary for the processor / caretaker per year42,000           42,000          42,000             42,000            42,000            42,000            42,000            42,000            42,000            42,000            42,000            Maintenance / year6,000            6,000               6,000              6,000              6,000              6,000              6,000              6,000              6,000              6,000              Total Cost / Year8,881,000     13,261,000      17,641,000     17,641,000     17,641,000     17,641,000     17,641,000     17,641,000     17,641,000     17,641,000     Profit / LossNet Saving  / year 42,000           2,651,701     4,391,338        5,895,050       6,131,450       6,131,450       6,131,450       6,131,450       6,131,450       6,131,450       6,131,450       Net cashflow After Capex2,651,701     4,391,338        5,895,050       6,131,450       6,131,450       6,131,450       6,131,450       6,131,450       6,131,450       6,131,450       Incremental Benefit with and without Project2,693,701       4,349,338           5,853,050          6,089,450          6,089,450          6,089,450          6,089,450          6,089,450          6,089,450          6,089,450          Note: All figures are in SSPFinancial results (US$)Return to family labour*1,752               Discount rate10%NPV32,714,269       IRR#DIV/0!PVb129,708,814    PVc96,812,837      B/C ratio1.34                 Switching values Benefits(0.25)                Switching values Costs0.34                 YearsYr 1Yr 2Yr 3Yr 4Yr 5Yr 6Yr 7Yr 8Yr 9Yr 10A: Financing Needs (i) CAPEX-                   -                    -                  -                      -                    -                    -                    -                    -                    -                    (ii) Operating input8,839,000        13,219,000       17,599,000     17,599,000         17,599,000        17,599,000        17,599,000        17,599,000        17,599,000        17,599,000        (iii) Labout costs42,000             42,000              42,000            42,000                42,000               42,000               42,000               42,000               42,000               42,000               Sub-total for on farm costs8,881,000        13,261,000       17,641,000     17,641,000         17,641,000        17,641,000        17,641,000        17,641,000        17,641,000        17,641,000        Estimate of drawing for other family expenses (off-farm)100,000           100,000            100,000          100,000              100,000             100,000             100,000             100,000             100,000             100,000             EstimatedTotal financing needed8,981,000        13,361,000       17,741,000     17,741,000         17,741,000        17,741,000        17,741,000        17,741,000        17,741,000        17,741,000        B: Financing Plan (How to cover the above financing needs)OPENING BALANCE-                      2,644,701           6,978,038          12,815,088            18,652,138          24,489,188          30,326,238          36,163,288          42,000,338          47,837,388          Grant51,000                -                      -                     -                        -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       -                       Family Labour42,000                42,000                42,000               42,000                   42,000                 42,000                 42,000                 42,000                 42,000                 42,000                 Net production revenue11,532,701         17,652,338         23,536,050        23,536,050            23,536,050          23,536,050          23,536,050          23,536,050          23,536,050          23,536,050          Total financing available11,625,701         20,339,038         30,556,088        36,393,138            42,230,188          48,067,238          53,904,288          59,741,338          65,578,388          71,415,438          Closing Balance/ reserves (A-B)2,644,701           6,978,038           12,815,088        18,652,138            24,489,188          30,326,238          36,163,288          42,000,338          47,837,388          53,674,438          Projected Financial Analysis - Milk Bar in Gok MacharWith projectFinancing plan/affordability check / household cash flow 
31 
South Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)-Overall Summary of the Financial and Economic AnalysisAweil Market Shade, Aweil Centre, NBeGCommunity Market shade Financial ModelWithout ProjectRevenueYear 0Year 1Yr2Yr 3Yr4Yr5Yr6Yr7Yr8Yr9Yr10Number of Sellers46                    59                65                65                65                65                65                65                65                65                Proposed Fee from each Seller / day250                  250              250              250              250              250              250              250              250              250              Total Fee Collected / day11,375             14,625         16,250         16,250         16,250         16,250         16,250         16,250         16,250         16,250         Total Fee Collected / month284,375           365,625       406,250       406,250       406,250       406,250       406,250       406,250       406,250       406,250       Capex18,284,787      -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               Operational CostProposed Salary of Cleaner12,500          12,500         12,500         12,500         12,500         12,500         12,500         12,500         12,500         12,500         Proposed Salary of Caretaker12,500          12,500         12,500         12,500         12,500         12,500         12,500         12,500         12,500         12,500         Total Salaries25,000                25,000          25,000       25,000       25,000       25,000       25,000       25,000       25,000       25,000       25,000       Maintenance Cost20,000          20,000         20,000         20,000         20,000         20,000         20,000         20,000         20,000         20,000         Total Cost45,000          45,000       45,000       45,000       45,000       45,000       45,000       45,000       45,000       45,000       SavingsNet Saving  / month239,375        320,625     361,250     361,250     361,250     361,250     361,250     361,250     361,250     361,250     Net Saving  / year25,000                2,872,500     3,847,500  4,335,000  4,335,000  4,335,000  4,335,000  4,335,000  4,335,000  4,335,000  4,335,000  Net cashflow after Capex(15,412,287)  3,847,500  4,335,000  4,335,000  4,335,000  4,335,000  4,335,000  4,335,000  4,335,000  4,335,000  Incremental Benefit wp and wop(15,437,287)     3,822,500    4,310,000    4,310,000    4,310,000    4,310,000    4,310,000    4,310,000    4,310,000    4,310,000    Note: All figures are in SSPReturn to family labour*173                        Discount rate10%NPV8,128,112              IRR23%PVb2,351,861              PVc276,506                 B/C ratio8.51                       Switching values Benefits(0.88)                      Switching values Costs7.51                       -               YearsYr 1Yr 2Yr 3Yr 4Yr 5Yr 6Yr 7Yr 8Yr 9Yr 10A: Financing Needs (i) CAPEX18,284,787            -                   -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               (ii) Operating input-                         -                   -               -               -               -               -               -               -               -               (iii) Labout costs25,000                   25,000             25,000         25,000         25,000         25,000         25,000         25,000         25,000         25,000         Sub-total for on farm costs18,309,787            25,000             25,000         25,000         25,000         25,000         25,000         25,000         25,000         25,000         Estimate of drawing for other family expenses (off-farm)100,000                 100,000           100,000       100,000       100,000       100,000       100,000       100,000       100,000       100,000       EstimatedTotal financing needed18,409,787            125,000           125,000       125,000       125,000       125,000       125,000       125,000       125,000       125,000       B: Financing Plan (How to cover the above financing needs)OPENING BALANCE-                            14,997,287-         10,734,787-     5,984,787-       1,234,787-       3,515,213       8,265,213       13,015,213     17,765,213     22,515,213     Grant-                      -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  Family Labour-                            -                      -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  -                  Net production revenue3,412,500                 4,387,500           4,875,000       4,875,000       4,875,000       4,875,000       4,875,000       4,875,000       4,875,000       4,875,000       Total financing available3,412,500                 10,609,787-         5,859,787-       1,109,787-       3,640,213       8,390,213       13,140,213     17,890,213     22,640,213     27,390,213     Closing Balance/ reserves (A-B)14,997,287-               10,734,787-         5,984,787-       1,234,787-       3,515,213       8,265,213       13,015,213     17,765,213     22,515,213     27,265,213     With ProjectFinancing plan/affordability check / household cash flow 
South Sudan
South Sudan Livelihoods Resilience Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Mission Dates:
20 August to 6 December 2020
Document Date:
01/03/2021
Project No.
2000002869
Report No.
5643-SS
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note 
I. 
Introduction 
1. 
The Social Environment and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP)  Review Note details 
the analysis of the social and environmental and climate change of SSLRP. It outlines the contextual 
background, risk factors and recommendations of how they can be reduced. To improve the terms 
on which people take part in society means to enhance their ability, opportunity, and dignity. The 
review  has  been  achieved  through  literature  review  of  social,  environment  and  climate  related 
strategies,  policies  and  programs  of  various  stakeholders  operational  in  South  Sudan  and  where 
possible  in  target  states.  Other  sources  included  the  Country  Strategic  Note  (CSN)  and 
reports/assessment prepared by international organizations, accessed from web or sourced directly 
from  partners.  The  State  of  the  Environment  and  outlook  report  for  South  Sudan  (2018)  and 
National  Adaptation  Program  of  Action  (NAPA)  for  South  Sudan  provided  an  environment  and 
climate change context.  
2. 
The main constraint was unavailability of up-to-date data on policies and legal frameworks 
and county specific context. In some cases, due to unavailability of data, the national overview has 
been extrapolated to the state level. . Nevertheless, the SECAP does provide a strong basis to inform 
the project design given the similarity in vulnerability factors across the country (conflicts, gender 
inequalities, youth, nutrition and food security situation) although local adaptations will need to be 
made. Further assessments will need to be done on the state of Internally Displaced People (IDPs) 
and returnees in the target counties to establish localised challenges and explore opportunities to 
engage them in the project.  
3. 
The project target areas are Central Equatoria (Terereka and KajoKeji counties) and Eastern 
Equatoria (Torit and Magwi Counties). The target beneficiaries are rural households overwhelmingly 
reliant on agriculture and livestock with extremely low human capital. 
II. 
Situational analysis and potential project impacts 
2.1. Overall poverty situation 
4. 
South Sudan emerged from the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) and independence 
as a relatively wealthy country, with oil revenues and foreign aid contributing to public expenditures 
many times larger than those of its neighbours. Yet, in a country where the vast majority depend 
on rural livelihoods, only 4% of land is under cultivation and levels of livestock production were well 
below their potential. It is one of the poorest countries in terms of monetary poverty ranking high 
among  the  poorest  countries  in  the  world  in  terms  of  multidimensional  indicators  of  welfare 
deprivation (HDR 2015). It is ranked 181 out of 188 countries in the Human Development Index. 
The most serious loss in human development in the three states arises from gender inequality and 
conflict summarised in Figure 1. 
1 
Figure 1: Loss in HDI due to Gender, Inequality and Conflict 
Loss in HDI due to Gender, Inequality and Conflict
Jonglei
Eastern Equatoria
Central Equatoria
National Average
HDI
Gender %
Inequality %
Conflict %
0
10
National Average
0.467
30
20
Central Equatoria
0
40
50
Eastern Equatoria
0
19.46
34.4
41.4
16.65
40.9
17.16
34.8
Conflict %
6.7
HDI
Gender %
Inequality %
27.2
70
60
Jonglei
0.554
17.95
32.9
61.2
UNDP HDR 2015 
The  Multidimensional  Poverty  Index  (MPI)1  of  Central  Equatoria  is  75.6  percent  with  a 
5. 
poverty intensity of 51.7 while that of Eastern Equatoria is 92.5 percent with a poverty intensity of 
60.7.  Jonglei  on  the  other  hand  has  an  MPI  of  98  with  over  80  percent  in  severe  poverty2.  It  is 
among states with extremely high levels of population in severe poverty. 
Table 1: Multidimensional Poverty Index 
State/County 
Central Equatoria 
Kajo Keji 
Terekeka 
Eastern Equatoria 
Magwi 
Torit 
Jonglei 
Bor South 
Population 
1 060 191 
105 783 
162 289 
994 188 
185 028 
154 976 
1 744 475 
239 320 
% of farming HH 
62 
90 
90 
73 
90 
85 
71 
87 
 Source: CFSAM South Sudan, 2019 1Poverty index Source UNDP HDR 2015 
Poverty Index1 
75.6 
92.5 
98 
South  Sudan  is  one  of  the  most  underdeveloped  countries  in  the  world,  with  structural 
6. 
poverty  especially  in  rural  areas.  Rural  poverty  is  characterized  by  a  general  lack  of  access  to 
services, infrastructure, and opportunities beyond basic agricultural production. Rural population is 
often isolated across large swathes of land with extremely poor infrastructure. South Sudan has the 
lowest road density in Sub-Saharan Africa with only about 200 kilometres of paved roads in rural 
areas, accounting for an estimated 2 percent of all roads. Seasonal weather and floods often leave 
much  of  the  country  totally  inaccessible  for  months  at  a  time  according  to  World  Development 
indicators (WDI).  
Life expectancy at birth in 2015 was estimated to be 56 years, which is much lower than the 
7. 
global average of 72 years and placing South Sudan among the bottom 10 countries. In some parts 
of the country, three in four children are out of school. Deprivation of schooling is the most serious 
source of overall deprivation. Supply of education opportunities is a key constraint in most cases 
and  the  demand  side  is  a  significant issue  especially in traditional  pastoralist  settings.  Education 
levels are extraordinarily low with three out of four household heads having completed no formal 
education (World Bank  2011). Poverty rates are  especially highest for those living in households 
whose  head  has  no  formal  education  or  only  some  primary  level  education.  Female-headed 
1 UNDP 2015: South Sudan Human Development Report 
2 Population ‘in severe poverty’ is the proportion with a deprivation score of 50 per cent or more) 
2 
households (28.6 percent) have higher poverty rates of 56.9 percent compared to 48.1 percent of 
households headed by men3.  
Conflict context 
8. 
Conflicts in South Sudan is attributed to political insurgency with isolated inter-communal 
and  inter-ethnic  clashes  over  cultural  and  dwindling  resources  exacerbated  by  climate  variability 
and change. South Sudan was drawn into a devastating conflict in 2013 following political disputes 
that overlapped with ethnic tensions. The crisis reflects the underlying tensions and mistrust that 
date back to the civil (1983 to 2005). In the Equatoria region, the increasing presence of different 
opposition factions since 2016 has contributed to growing insecurity in the county. Clashes between 
government forces and different armed factions has led to the mass exodus of population back into 
Uganda.  
9. 
Ethnic violence in South Sudan has a long history among the varied ethnic groups notably 
between  Dinkas  and  Neurs.  Social  exclusion  from  political  and  economic  participation  due  to 
ethnicity in has inflamed conflict, promoted violent confrontations resulting in loss of human life.  
10.  Widespread communal conflicts cause human and livestock displacement and disruption of 
crop production activities making households to be perpetually food insecure with weak resilience. 
Markets and trade routes are disrupted and large portions of the population in the conflict affected 
states are either minimally or completely unable to undertake agricultural activities in a particular 
season due to displacement, violence and uncertainty. Severe challenges in protracted conflict areas 
include  early  depletion  of  household  food  stocks,  dysfunctional  markets,  loss  of  livelihoods,  and 
displacement. 
11. 
Disagreements over administrative boundaries is common in Kajo keji and Magwi who share 
the border with Uganda. Communities in Kajo Keji have a history of boundary related disagreements 
with neighbouring communities (Kuku and Moyo). In Magwi, tension between the Madi and Acholi 
communities erupted into violence in 2011 relating to ownership and demarcation of land arising 
from the border between Madi-dominated Pageri Payam and Acholi-dominated Magwi Payam, and 
the location of the county headquarters and Ame road junction. The high bride price encourages 
cattle raiding especially in Terekeka and Bor. Bor has especially been host to some large cattle raids 
and  intercommunal  tensions.  Also,  tensions  between  the  Bor  Dinka  and  neighbouring  Murle 
community of Pibor have been long-standing and is reflected in cattle raids and the abduction of 
children, with attacks being reported as late as December 2019. 
Poverty  also  plays  in  the  vicious  violent  ethnic  conflicts  in  South  Sudan  as  amongst  the 
12. 
marginalized  ethnic  groups,  communities  clash  over  access  to  water  and  grazing lands.  Conflicts 
based on ethnicity have retarded development and contributed to food insecurity as people abandon 
their farms for safer areas. Conflict is often aggravated among nomadic groups over the issue of 
cattle  and  grazing  land  and  is  part  of  the  wider  nomadic  conflicts.  In  Terekeka,  intercommunal 
conflicts are common between the Mundari and Bari and Dinka involving local armed militias. While 
in Torit its tensions between cattle keepers and farmers. Community defence groups in Torit, such 
as the monyomiji among the Otuho, have played an ambivalent role in the conflict. Whilst they have 
cooperated with – and in some cases deterred – both government and opposition forces to improve 
security in the area, they have also been a key player in cattle raids and revenge killings. 
Gender 
13.  Women account for over 60% of the population in South Sudan as a direct result of over 39 
years  of  conflict  since  Sudan’s  Independence.  Years  of  conflict  have  deprived  women  of  their 
dependents, husbands and sons, coupled with discriminatory cultural traditions and abject poverty. 
These  factors  undermine  the  promotion  of  equal  rights  and  the  ability  of  women  to  actively 
participate in the development initiatives. Women work extra hours in a day, tending to their families 
and their responsibilities are not only physically challenging and time consuming but emotionally 
3  World  Bank  analysis  of  NBHS  2009.  Percentages  represent  individuals  below  the  poverty  line,  by  education  of  their 
household heads. 
3 
draining. This leaves them with barely enough time to take care of themselves or participate actively 
in community initiatives.  
14. 
Violence against women and the lack of recognition of women’s rights as a human right is a 
key  feature  that  exacerbates  this  situation  Gender  Based  Violence  (GBV).  Gender  inequality  and 
GBV  is  pervasive  and  has  been  propagated  by  the  conflict  and  used  as  a  weapon.  Although  the 
prevalence  is  unknown,  close  to  57  percent  of  women  who  experience  sexual  and  gender-based 
violence  do  not  report  it  or  share  it  with  others.  Societal  acceptance  of  domestic  violence  is 
widespread amongst both women and men. Research also shows that women in are just as likely 
as men to believe violence can solve conflicts. These factors, combined with a lack of access to legal 
recourse, and customary practices, further marginalise women.  
15. 
A large percentage of women in South Sudan are illiterate, with 50 percent of girls under the 
age of 18 are married. While the number of girls enrolled in school has increased over the last few 
years since the signing of the comprehensive peace agreement in 2005, it remains low compared 
to boys. This number severely declines for education past primary school level. The male literacy 
rate  is  40  percent  and  females’  is  28  percent,  showing  a  big  gap  between  the  sexes  (UNESCO, 
2018). The primary school gross enrolment rate is 67percent for males and 55 percent for females 
(World Bank, 2015). Girls’ enrolment decreases at higher grades. The gross intake ratio into the 
last grade of primary was 35 percent for males and 19 percent for females (UNESCO, 2011). Girls’ 
primary  school  completion  rates  are  low  because  of  gender  norms,  customs  and  cultural  beliefs, 
insecurity, poverty, and poor learning environments. Girls are also expected to help with housework, 
or they are forced to early marriages and early pregnancies. Long distances to school and lack of 
sanitation facilities hinder schooling for girls. There is also the risk of sexual harassment in schools 
or when girls travel long distances to reach schools 
16.  Women  constitute  60.2  percent  of  agricultural  workforce  and  account  for  80  percent  of 
agricultural  labour  force.  However,  they  have  limited  control  over  crops  produced  for  sale.  They 
face insurmountable challenges like limited access to productive assets. The Local Government Act 
(2009) and the Transitional constitution addresses property rights for women however, there is no 
regulation  in  place  to  make  it  operational.  Moreover,  customary  laws  refuse  to  grant  property 
ownership to women: women’s access to land is permitted only by their husbands and male family 
members.  This  limits  women’s  participation  in  extensive  agriculture  and  hinders  their  access  to 
credit and loan funding. The only assets they can acquire and manage includes small ruminants like 
goats and chicken, sale of vegetables and fishing during the dry season. The use of any profits from 
their  economic  activities  must  be  approved  by  their  husbands  (ACTED).  Agricultural  extension 
services are targeted to male farmers (88.7 percent) with women (9.7 percent) expected to receive 
information  second-hand  from  their  husbands  or  male  relatives.  One  of  the  reasons  for  this 
imbalance  is lack  of  women  extension  workers  due  to  women’s  low  literacy  (JICA  Gender  Profile 
2018).Furthermore, women lack skills, facilities and tools for labour intensive agricultural activities.  
17.  Women have been accorded equal status in the law, and the transitional constitution that 
guarantees equality between the two sexes. It further promotes women´s participation in public life 
and their representation in the legislative and executive organs by at least 25 percent to redress 
imbalances created by history, customs, and traditions. While there have been legislative reforms 
aimed  at  eradicating  gender  inequality  and  discrimination  against  women,  due  to  discriminatory 
traditional practices, the situation of women and girls has not substantively improved. Furthermore, 
while quotas have helped to boost women’s representation in South Sudan’s public sphere, women 
are often limited to low-level roles due to the presence of structural barriers such as low literacy 
and the lack of opportunity (Institute of Security Studies 2019). These are obstacles to women’s 
empowerment  and  their  inclusion  in  decision  making.  On  property  ownership,  the  Constitution 
(2011) guarantees the rights of women to share in the estates of their deceased husbands together 
with any surviving legal heir  of the deceased (Article 16.5).  In practice, the deceased’s property 
remains within the deceased husband’s family and is generally dispersed among his male relatives. 
Widows  are  therefore  vulnerable  and  at  the  mercy  of  their  deceased  husbands’  families  for 
support.(Gender  Index.org).  Supporting  women  in  agriculture  can  strengthen  the  economy  by 
diversifying their sources of income. 
4 
Youth  
South Sudanese youth are defined as between 18-35 years and consist of 70 percent of the 
18. 
population. 72 percent of are under 30 years of age, and 51% under 18 years. The youth literacy 
rate is 27% (NBS Census 2010). An exceptionally large share of the active population is found in 
non-wage, low-productivity employment concentrated in the agriculture sector. These youths have 
grown up and survived in a hostile environment without protection due to the long civil war in the 
country and inter-and intra-communal fighting.  
19. 
Culturally created social norms continue to be one of the impediments for the youth to realise 
their potential. Female youth face challenges in obtaining education due to early pregnancies and 
forced  marriages.  The  male  youth  on  the  other  hand  are  expected  to  look  after  livestock  which 
exposes them to insecurity such as cattle raids and abductions (UNICEF 2015). Conflicts propagated 
by youth are due to lack of employment opportunities and the need to gain resources such as cattle 
for dowry payment. Another motivation is the pride people take in being ‘warriors’ as the community 
respects  people  who  defend  the  community.  These  factors  combined  with  existence  of  politically 
motivated ethnic tensions threaten to prolong conflict in South Sudan and make it even harder for 
youth  to  pursue  a  productive  and  non-violent  future.  The  lack  of  training  and  education 
opportunities,  marketable  skills,  and  experience  favours  recruitment  by  armed  militias,  further 
exposing households to violence, displacement, and limited productive labour (Institute of Security 
Studies 2019). While there are youth structures and organisations, many are politicised or organised 
along ethnic lines, limiting their potential to help build peace. Unlike women’s inclusion, which by 
law  requires  at  least  25%  of  women  representation in  political  institutions  and  related  activities, 
South Sudan laws do not specify youth representation in programmes / activities. Hence, they are 
always under-represented and their needs ignored, with decisions being made. 
20.  While empowerment and livelihood programs are needed for both male and female youth, 
there is urgent need for the engagement and empowerment of male youth to foster a greater sense 
of  responsibility.  Male  youth  can  play  a  vital  role  in  fostering  peacebuilding,  but  the  level  of 
participation is also influenced by the level of education. Education is among the factors influencing 
whether someone has a peace dividend. This means that it is generally schooled youths who have 
an  incentive  to  be  involved  in  peace  efforts  because  they  are  aware  of  the  benefits  peace  and 
stability can bring for their future. Less educated youth on the other hand, the cattle camp youth, 
might  have  different  perceptions  about  peace  and  conflict,  and  might  regard  conflict  as  the  only 
option  to  access  resources  and  establish  their  position  within  society.  Young  women  are  less 
involved in community-level peacebuilding efforts as many positions of power, both at customary 
as well as state level, are held by men. Given that peace and gender equality are intricately linked, 
this calls for more gender-responsive conflict resolution programming. Therefore, any youth-related 
interventions  will  be  implemented  with  a  view  to  not  contributing  to  increased  tensions  between 
communities and considering the risk management. 
21. 
Agriculture and livestock production remain sectors that youth continue to engage in, given 
their  high  potential  to  provide  essential  livelihoods  opportunities  and  expansion  of  productive 
markets. It is necessary to give more attention to the potential roles that young people can play 
within these two sectors. Productive and empowered youths will keep a household and a community 
together in times of  conflict-related shocks and in the case  of natural hazards such as droughts, 
floods, or disease outbreaks. In the face of so many other economic and social stressors, the role 
of youth as part  of the solution rather than the problem is an important transformative capacity 
that promotes resilience . 
Child labour 
22. 
Children in South Sudan engage in the worst forms of child labour, including in armed conflict 
and cattle herding. Levels of child involvement in economic activity are remarkably high affecting 
almost half of 10-14-year-olds (45percent) according to BILA4 (2018). These children spend at least 
some  time  each  week  performing  economic  activity.  Most  of  these  economic  activities  constitute 
4 Bureau of International Labour Affairs 2018 
5 
child  labour  in  a  legal  sense.  South  Sudan  Child  Act  of  2008  has  set  the  minimum  age  for  the 
admission of a child to paid employment at 14 years but set a lower minimum age of 12 years for 
light work (AfDB 2015). Children’s involvement in economic activity is associated with compromised 
education. Although school attendance is low for all children in South Sudan, this is especially the 
case  for  working  children.  Their  school  attendance  rate  of  24  percent  is  only  half  that  of  their 
nonworking  peers.  And  the  negative  educational  impact  of  work  of  course  extends  well  beyond 
school attendance, as the time and energy required by work can impede school performance among 
those who manage to attend school.  
23. 
In rural areas where subsistence farming and pastoralism are labour intensive, it is common 
that children under 15 years old assist their parents at work. Poverty is also negatively correlated 
with schooling and positively correlated with girls’ labour reinforcing the danger of a vicious circle 
with  the  persistence  of  uneducated  generations  of  children.  Also  if  the  household  head  works  in 
agriculture, children are more likely to work in agriculture as well. Although the government has 
established institutional mechanisms for the enforcement of laws and regulations on child labour, 
the exceptionally low number of worksite inspections conducted at the national level impedes the 
enforcement of child labour laws. 
Vulnerable Groups 
24. 
Returnees: According to UNHCR data on returnee flows, more than 126,800 refugees have 
spontaneously returned to South Sudan since January 2019 with 55 percent being female headed 
households and 1.3 percent child headed. The highest number of spontaneous refugee returnees 
was  recorded  in  Kajo-Keji  of  Central  Equatoria.  Although  most  returnees  have  settled in  Eastern 
Equatoria and Central Equatoria states, these may or may not be their places of origin. Returning 
families have challenges of shelter and NFIS5 because they are not able to return with any items 
thus  end  up  fully  dependent  on  sharing  items  with  hosting  families  which  strain  resources  and 
relationships. Lack of comprehensive health services in the places of returns has a huge impact for 
the returning families. Although many returnees have land for farming, they lack seeds and tools. 
Reliable livelihoods opportunities are scarce and although they may have capacity, they lack start-
up capital. House, land and property issues is another challenge for returning families because they 
cannot return to their places of origin as their land/houses and properties have been occupied by 
the cattle keepers from other states. While a marked increase in displaced people deciding to return 
would  be  an  indication  of  greater  stability  and  prospects  for  prosperity  and  potentially  reinforce 
these in the long term, high volumes of returns could in the short to medium term worsen vulnerable 
people’s  well-being  and  living  conditions,  and  erode  community  resilience.  This  could  be  due  to 
greater  competition  over  limited  food  and  livelihoods,  pressures  put  on  already  stretched  basic 
services, or problems related to housing, land and property. The current level of service provision 
in areas of return is estimated to be unsustainable for higher rates of return 
Internally displaced persons (IDPs): More recently, as the war has moved southward, 
25. 
the Equatoria region has received many IDPs (413,000). Most IDPs live outside of camps. About 7 
in 10 IDPs are now displaced in their state of origin, with half of them even in their county of origin 
indicating that they did not travel far to reach the camps. This also implies that they would not have 
to  cover  large  distances,  security  permitting,  to  check  on  their  dwellings  and  livelihoods  or, 
eventually, return home. 
26. 
Persons  with  Disabilities:  Households  that  have  members  with  physical  disability 
generally have a reduced capacity to generate adequate resources for food and other basic needs 
than those with able-bodied members.  
Food Security 
27. 
Nearly 6.4 million people or 54 per cent of the population are acutely food insecure according 
to the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) analysis. UNOCHA estimates that nearly 
7.5 million people are in need of some type of humanitarian assistance or protection in South Sudan. 
5  Non-Food  Items  include  essential  household  items  such  as  mattresses,  blankets,  plastic  sheets,  containers  for  water, 
cooking utensils and hygiene kits 
6 
Of the 78 counties in South Sudan, 45 are in severe need and 33 are in extreme need. Some 21 
per cent of the counties in extreme need are in Jonglei and 15 per cent in Eastern Equatoria. These 
include  5.2  million  people  from  host  community,  1.4  million  IDPs,  nearly  600,000  returnees  and 
about 300,000 refugees. Within these population groups, there are vulnerable groups with specific 
needs and they include children, women headed households, the elderly, people with disabilities, 
single-headed household members, and the extremely poor. 
28. 
Food insecurity in South Sudan is highly seasonal and largely influenced by recurrent and 
frequent shocks and conflict. Since the  conflicts started in December  2013, households have not 
managed to produce enough even during the main cultivating seasons. Instead the minimal harvest 
realized does not take households long enough before they fall into food insecurity. For instance, 
the 2019 cropping season production met only 63 percent of the 2020 national cereal needs. Despite 
a 10% increase in cereal production the demand outstripped supply mainly because of flooding, low 
number  of  farming  households  and  small  planted  area.  Insecurity  and  disrupted  livelihoods  are 
some  of  the  bottlenecks  to  households’  access  to  other  food  sources  like  wild  foods,  fish  and 
livestock products. Currency depreciation and high food prices have affected the purchasing power 
of vulnerable households who rely on markets for food and basic needs. It is expected that the food 
security situation will continue to deteriorate due to the seasonal food scarcity along with a reduction 
in humanitarian assistance. 
29. 
The food insecurity situation however has not varied significantly between cropping seasons 
in  the  last  5-years  as  households  have  not  managed  to  produce  enough  even  during  the  main 
cultivating seasons. Consequently, for majority of households’ cereal stocks last for up to 3 months. 
Given  persistently  low  food  and  income  sources  among  at  least  half  of  the  national  population, 
humanitarian  food  assistance  continues  to  play  a  pivotal  role  in  mitigating  food  gaps  at  the 
household level and preventing more extreme food insecurity outcomes at the county level. Most 
households  have  been  supported  through  humanitarian  assistance  that  may  not  be  adequate  to 
meet all their needs (WFP 2018). Based on the imminent refugee returns and large cereal deficits, 
it is anticipated that additional pressure will be exerted on local market supply of staple foods in 
both Eastern Equatoria and Central Equatoria, where large returnee populations exist and insecurity 
and banditry periodically disrupt trade flows and household movement (IPC 2020). The two main 
seasons  that  influence  food  insecurity  in  a  normal  year  are  in:  May-September  when  most 
households go through the lean season with minimal food stocks to consume; and October – April 
that  marks  the  harvest  and  post-harvest  period  when  households  have  available  food  stocks  to 
consume from own production. 
Devaluation of the South Sudanese Pound in December 2015 has seen the cost of market 
30. 
commodities  (white  maize  grain,  white  sorghum,  cooking  oil,  petrol)  increase  over  the  years. 
Commodity prices have generally been above 5-year averages, a situation attributed to continued 
depreciation  of  the  South  Sudanese  Pound  (SSP)  against  the  US  dollar,  interrupted  supply  by 
conflicts/insecurity, the inability of traders to import adequate amount of food given the shortages 
in US dollars in the market and increasing transportation cost as fuel prices go up and the impact 
of COVID-19 restrictions on imports. The ongoing economic crisis and effects of conflict continue to 
make it difficult for majority of households to  access food from markets. Access to markets  also 
gets worse during the rainy season when road conditions deteriorate and cut off supplies. Below is 
a summary of food security situation by state.  
31. 
Central Equatoria State: Food consumption gaps outcomes have persisted in the state due 
to  high  food  prices,  localized  insecurity  limiting  food  access,  increased  returnees,  in  addition  to 
flood-induced  crop  losses  especially  in  Terekeka.  The  proportion  of  households  with  poor  food 
consumption is 40 percent and consumption gaps are high during the lean season due to depleted 
household food stocks and high food prices which usually limit their access to foods through markets 
in addition to seasonal reduction in livestock products. Livestock movement is seasonally practiced 
by pastoralists from Terekeka County starting from May, moving to the uplands of Juba, Lainya and 
Yei counties and then returning home between September and November. The number of animals 
in Kajo Keji has decreased significantly in recent years mainly due to the prevailing insecurity. The 
situation  sharply  deteriorated  due  to  increased  conflict,  resulting  in  the  displacement  of  several 
7 
farming  households  to  neighbouring  countries  of  Uganda  and  Kenya.  This  meant  that  farmers  in 
these areas were unable to cultivate far-fields and were limited to homestead areas. There is heavy 
reliance on fresh cassava, but access to cassava fields is still limited by insecurity, especially in far 
fields.  Abandoned  cassava  fields in  Kajo  Keji  remain  unharvested  due  to  insecurity  and  the  poor 
state of feeder roads used to transport harvested cassava (CFSAM 2020). There has however been 
an improvement in security situation with the signing of the peace agreement. Other than conflicts, 
farming household experience  shocks ranging from drought,  flood,  crop diseases, pests, and the 
death  or  theft  of  livestock.  Individuals  living  in  rural  areas  are  more  likely  to  experience  these 
shocks, particularly drought or flood. 
Eastern Equatoria State has experienced improvements in food security in the last year 
32. 
with reduced number of the population classified in Crisis (IPC Phase 3). An estimated 31.9 percent 
(340,000)  are  in  Crisis  compared  to  56  percent  at  the  same  time  last  year  with  37  percent  of 
households with poor food consumption. The improvements in food security conditions are driven 
by improved security, availability of food stocks at household level, livestock products, game meat, 
and market access. As with Central Equatoria, February to April marks the period when the food 
security situation deteriorates due to an increase in food prices, depletion of household food stocks, 
seasonally limited availability of wild foods, and reduction in livestock products as livestock migrate 
to dry season grazing areas. From May to July, marginal improvement in the food security situation 
is usually expected as livestock return near homesteads, and some green harvest and wild foods 
become seasonally available to households.  
33. 
Food  assistance  contribution  is  significant  in  Great  Equatoria.  The  commonly  cultivated 
cereals  include  sorghum,  cassava  and  maize;  Sorghum  is  the  main  cereal  grown.  Cassava  is 
significant contributor to households’ food consumption. Farmers mainly use own local seeds carried 
over  from  the  previous  harvest  or  purchased  in  the  market  with  dry  planting  being  common, 
especially in the areas where rains have a comparatively later onset. In the absence of a widespread 
adoption of ox-ploughing, hand-digging is the normal method of cultivation, with labour provided 
by the family in most areas. Ox-ploughs are mainly used by farmers in Magwi County. There are 
about 20 Government tractors and 12 private tractors in Eastern Equatoria State. The hiring rate 
for Government tractors is SSP 10 000/feddan in Torit and SSP 7 500 in Magwi. These few functional 
tractors and ox-ploughs have contributed to the cultivation of more land during the 2019 season. 
However,  efficient  utilization  of  existing  tractors  is  highly  constrained  by  shortage  of  spare  parts 
and high fuel prices (CFSAM 2020). 
34. 
Jonglei: Cereal and food security assessment in Jonglei have been constrained by insecurity 
except for Bor South county. According to CFSAM assessment, farming in Bor South in 2019 was 
limited to areas around the homesteads compared to previous years due to insecurity in far fields. 
The food insecurity rose to unprecedented levels during the post-harvest period of January 2020 
because  of  extensive  flooding,  at  a  time  when  food  would  ‘normally’  be  the  most  abundant.  An 
estimated 1.26 million people, representing 65 percent of the state population were facing Crisis 
(IPC Phase 3) or worse acute food insecurity in January 2020. Floods damaged homes and public 
infrastructure,  destroyed  crops,  increased  post-harvest  losses,  restricted  the  gathering  of  wild 
foods,  resulted  in  considerable  population  displacement,  disrupted  market  supply  and  increased 
commodity prices, and led to significant losses of livestock due to disease and starvation. This also 
resulted in widespread contamination of water supplies, unhygienic environment and deteriorating 
health  conditions,  exacerbating  the  vulnerability  of  an  already  impoverished  and  asset-stripped 
population. Additionally, the macro economic crisis has continued to result in high food prices even 
at a time of the year when they would seasonally decline. Cattle raiding and intercommunal conflict, 
involving revenge killings, have continued to result in deaths, loss of livestock, disrupted livelihoods 
and  restricted  access  to  wild  foods  and  fish.  Livestock  raiding  is  also  prominent.  Raiding  is 
traditionally common amongst the Nuer, Murle and Dinka tribes, but it is now increasingly exercised 
by the Murle tribes. 
8 
Nutrition 
The  prevalence  of  global  acute  malnutrition  (GAM)  among  children  increased  from  13  per 
35. 
cent in 2018 to 16 per cent in 2019, exceeding the global emergency threshold of 15 per cent. In 
2020,  more  than  1.3  million  under-five  children  are  projected  to  be  acutely  malnourished.  The 
under-5 mortality rate is 106 per 1,000 births and maternal mortality rate sits at about 2,504 deaths 
per 100,000 live births. Around 75 per cent of all child deaths are due to preventable diseases, such 
as diarrhoea, malaria, and pneumonia. Acute malnutrition is attributed to the persistent high food 
insecurity, poor quality and diversity of food, low water quality as well as high morbidity due to a 
weak health system. Moreover, heavy workloads among women, cultural beliefs and traditions also 
play  a  big  role  in  malnutrition.  The  situation  is  further  compounded  by  effects  of  conflicts  and 
insecurity. The GAM rates in Central Equatoria have been on a rapid increase for the last 3 seasons. 
The  latest  prevalence  of  15.3  (Emergency  levels)  percent  is  an  increase  from  5.2  percent  (Alert 
phase) from previous season. 
Table 3: Prevalence of Malnutrition6 
National  
GAM 
12.6 
Central 
Equatoria 
15.3 
Eastern 
Equatoria 
9.7 
Stunting 
30.0 
Adapted from Food Security and Nutrition Monitoring System round 25 Dec 2019 
23.7 
15.1 
Jonglei 
23.9 
9.4 
36. 
The stunting levels of Eastern and Central Equatoria are higher than the national average 
representing levels of very high public health significance. Stunting, unlike wasting is not affected 
by rapid food shortage or diseases experienced in certain seasons. It however causes irreversible 
physical and mental damage to children and is associated with an underdeveloped brain, with long-
lasting harmful consequences, including diminished mental ability and learning capacity, poor school 
performance  in  childhood.  Performing  below  average  in  these  areas  may  also  limit  their  future 
productivity and reduced earnings and increased risks of nutrition-related chronic diseases, such as 
diabetes, hypertension, and obesity. This cycle could threaten the health of their future children.  
The status of complementary feeding of children 6 to 23 months remains poor. Intake of the 
37. 
recommended food groups (Minimum Dietary Diversity – MDD) is very low in all states at 14 percent. 
Unexpectedly high morbidity during the post-harvest season, poor complementary feeding practices 
contribute to the high level of acute malnutrition. This suggests that malnutrition may be related to 
behaviour and/or lack of awareness of child feeding practices among caregivers (IPC 2020). There 
has been an increase in number of women who are wasted over the past years. In Jonglei, at least 
55 percent of women are malnourished while in Central Equatoria is 20.7 and in Eastern Equatoria 
(24.8)  has  registered  some  improvements.  Maternal  nutrition  is  linked  with  poor  child  nutrition 
outcomes; hence child nutrition status may be affected adversely if the maternal nutrition status 
continues to worsen.  
38. 
Overall dietary diversity among women of childbearing age is at 30, 37 and 21 percent in 
Central, Eastern Equatoria and Jonglei respectively. This is as result of poor access to food and the 
intra-household  dynamics  that  mean  women  are  the  last  to  eat  in  times  of  food  stress.  Women 
suffer greater food insecurity, due to their cultural and social roles as care givers of children and 
older people, meaning that they may refuse or pass on food within families, especially in female-
headed  households  where  there  may  be  a  concentration  of  needs  (Oxfam  2016).  Maternal 
undernutrition  contributes  to  neonatal  deaths  through  small  for  gestational  age  births;  stunting, 
wasting, and micronutrient deficiencies are estimated to contribute to child deaths annually (Lancet 
2010).Heavy  women’s  workload  and  limited  childcare  options  are  factors  compounding  child 
malnutrition. Additionally, early age at marriage and age at first birth is significant and contributes 
6  
Acceptable 
<5% 
Alert 
5- <10 % 
Serious 
10 to<15% or>usual and increasing 
Critical 
15-30%Or >usual and increasing 
9 
to foetal growth restriction, which increases the risk of neonatal death and for survivors, of stunting 
by 2 years of age.  
39. 
Malnutrition is associated with multiple immediate and underlying causes including WASH, 
care practices, poor quality of diets (as evidenced by the low MAD and WDD) and morbidity. Access 
to health services is poor and leads to high incidences of diseases. This is further compounded by 
the  chronic  nature  of  waterborne  diseases,  low  use  of  latrines,  poor  personal  hygiene  and  living 
environments,  and  limited  access  to  hygienic  materials.  An  estimated  60  per  cent  of  the  total 
population  either  rely  on  unimproved  or  surface  water  sources;  or  have  to  walk  more  than  30 
minutes to reach the improved water sources or face protection risks even if they could access the 
improved  sources.  Flooding  also  contributes  to  internal  displacements  causing  disruptions  to 
livelihoods and water. Insufficient food consumption is a primary cause of malnutrition. Generally, 
more than 8 in 10 households had inadequate food consumption7 in Central Equatorial and Jonglei. 
Eastern Equatoria, 40 percent had acceptable consumption score. The three counties also have the 
largest proportion of households with poor household dietary diversity score8 (0 to 2 food groups). 
Cereals and vegetables are the two commonly consumed food items. Majority of households in CES 
and Jonglei (68 and 75 percent) are faced with moderate hunger in EES only 33 percent9. 
Table 4 Average days of consumption by different food commodities  
Cereal 
 Pulses  Milk 
Meat Fish Eggs  Vegetables 
Fruits  Oil 
Sugar  Condiments 
4.65  
CES 
6.06  
EES 
Jonglei  4.74 
1.74  
1.18  
0.76  
0.26  
1.90  
1.55  
0.37  
0.86  
0.87  
3.39  
3.68  
1.18  
1.50  
0.87  
0.58  
1.35   0.97  
2.56   0.87  
1.74   0.74  
2.75  
4.16  
0.95  
40. 
Over 50 percent of households in CES and EES consume food obtained through their own 
production especially cereals, tubers and pulses, while market purchase constitutes the second most 
important source of food. Jonglei has a mixture of own production, markets and food assistance. 
Households are generally dependent on market purchases for their consumption of meat/fish and 
eggs.  For  fruits,  gathering  from  the  wild  is  the  primary  source  of  consumption  in  Jonglei  (70 
percent),  while  own  production  constitutes  the  main  source  of  fruit  consumption  in  Eastern  and 
Central  Equatoria.  Poor  households  generally  spend  a  higher  proportion  of  their  already  meagre 
incomes on food especially on cereals and tubers. In target states, the proportion of income spent 
on food is higher than the national average at 82 percent in Jonglei, 78 percent in Central Equatoria 
and 81 percent in Eastern Equatoria. 
41. 
The unstable food security situation has led households to resort to food based and livelihood 
coping strategies. The prevalence of coping strategies involving a decrease in food intake (eating 
less expensive and preferred foods, limiting portion size, reducing adult consumption, and eating 
fewer meals) around the harvest period remain high. This peaks during the lean period as household 
food stocks decreased and market prices increased). This is worst in Central Equatoria where 85 
percent employ coping strategies in agreement with the worsening in severe food insecurity. The 
recent  FSNMS  (2020)  also  found  a  significant  association  between  coping  behaviour  scale  and 
malnutrition rates. Households practising highest coping behaviour (maximum coping) contributed 
to 45% of the overall malnourished cases. 
7 Food consumption score is a proxy indicator of household caloric availability, the high proportion of household with poor 
and  borderline  food  consumption  was  an  indication  that  households  consumed  less  nutritionally  dense  diets  consisting 
mostly of cereals and vegetables 
8 Household Dietary Diversity Score (HDDS) on the other hand provides a picture on quality of household diets in terms of 
access and socio-economic status. 
9 Household hunger scale measures households’ experience of food deprivation. 
10 
2.2. Implications of COVID-19 
42. 
The COVID-19 pandemic has triggered an unprecedented global health, humanitarian, socio-
economic and human rights crisis, exacerbating the vulnerabilities of affected populations. In South 
Sudan,  the  pandemic  is  putting  significant  pressure  on  already  overburdened  health  and  social 
service delivery systems, exacerbating the vulnerabilities of affected populations. The rural poor, 
internally displaced persons, and refugees are especially at risk as they tend to live in overcrowded 
settings  where  it  is  difficult  to  practice  physical  distancing  and  water  and  sanitation  services  are 
lacking. Many people live in informal, clustered settlements and in big households, with some homes 
housing about 30 people or more at a time, an environment favourable for the transmission and 
spread of COVID-19. 
43. 
Mitigation  measures  designed  to  reduce  virus  transmission  have  reduced  access  to  wider 
services,  loss  of  household  income  for  the  poor  and  vulnerable  and  is  affecting  capacities  of 
households to access nutritious, safe, and affordable foods and basic social services. This has been 
caused by disruption to livelihoods including closing of markets to trading except for items deemed 
essential  like  food  and  medicine.  The  closing  of  borders  has  also  reduced  the  amount  of  cereals 
imported into the country. Importation of maize from Uganda to South Sudan has reduced by 30 
percent prompting an increase in the price of maize and sorghum by 20 to 25 percent and that of 
wheat  surged  by  40%  (FEWSNET  2020).  In  Magwi,  market  prices  of  maize  increased  between 
February and April by 25 and 85 percent, respectively. Screenings implemented in the framework 
of  the  measures  to  contain  the  spread  of  COVID‑19  has  also  significantly  slowed  down  the 
commodity movement 
44. 
Should  the  government  impose  restrictions  on  people’s  movements  through  community 
quarantines, markets will become more disrupted, leading to less available food, less diversity of 
options,  and  higher  prices,  especially  on  more  scarce  foods.  As  the  COVID-19  pandemic  is  still 
evolving, it is difficult to predict with precision the geographic reach and degree of impact on food 
production and distribution systems. 
45. 
Public health measures such as social distancing that restrict movements to reduce COVID-
19 transmission are also heightening protection risks and vulnerabilities for already at-risk groups 
including  children,  women,  and  crisis-affected  families.  Households  with  limited  resources  are 
bearing the full brunt of these measures and the resulting stressors and socio-economic impacts. 
The restrictions on movement place a higher risk on women to experience Gender Based Violence, 
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse, because women are confined in their homes or camps with abusers. 
These measures may also increase youth’s vulnerability to recruitment and use by armed forces or 
armed groups. Women and girls are especially vulnerable to the impact of the COVID-19 response 
due to the additional care burden they bear for their families and the risk of sexual violence as they 
struggle to meet their daily needs in the context of lock downs and curfews (SUD Institute 2020). 
46. 
Adequate  water,  sanitation,  and  hygiene  (WASH)  services  are  essential  to  infection 
prevention  and  control.  Good  handwashing  and  hygiene  practices  are  also  essential  to  reducing 
transmission  and  exposure  to  the  coronavirus.  However,  across  the  South  Sudan,  70  percent  of 
people, lack access to safe water at home, and 80 percent people, lack access to safely managed 
sanitation (REACH 2019) 
2.3. 
Environment and climate context, trends, and implications 
a. Environmental assessment 
47. 
South Sudan is covered by extensive grasslands, wetlands and tropical forests. Its natural 
assets include significant agricultural, mineral, timber and energy resources. The climate is mostly 
hot and dry, with seasonal rains that allow for two or three harvests a year in the country’s green 
belt. Apart from oil, however, its natural resources are largely unexploited and only 4.5 per cent of 
its potential arable land is cultivated (State of The Environment, 2018).  
11 
48. 
Agriculture: In South Sudan about 80 per cent of the population lives in rural areas where 
subsistence  agriculture  is  the  mainstay  of  people’s  livelihoods.  The  agriculture  sector  is 
characterised  by  small,  hand-cultivating  household  units  belonging  to  larger  family  aggregations 
practising different combinations of rain-fed agriculture, livestock grazing and pastoralism, wild food 
harvesting and fishing (MOAF, 2013); (EU, 2016). About 81 per cent of households cultivate land, 
74 per cent own livestock and 22 per cent engage in fishing (RSS, 2015). Although agriculture is 
the  backbone  of  the  subsistence  economy  of  South  Sudan  (BRACED,  2016a),  production  is  very 
low. In 2009, the agriculture sector contributed one-third of the country’s GDP (UNDP, 2012). 
49. 
South  Sudan’s  agricultural  potential  is  immense,  but  largely  unrealized.  It  has  about  33 
million  hectares  of  land  across  six  agro-ecological  zones  that  are  suitable  for  agriculture  (see 
Appendix  3),  but  only  about  four  percent  is  currently  cultivated.  The  livestock  sector  is  not 
commercialized and suffers from high incidence of disease,  rustling, and resource-based  conflict. 
This  has  impacted  negatively  on  nutritional  status  of  households  particularly  children  under  5. 
Limited  use  of  productivity-enhancing  technologies,  capacity  constraints,  high  Labour  costs,  and 
poor infrastructure hinder progress and constrain production, productivity and the competitiveness 
of South Sudan’s agriculture relative to its neighbors. Sorghum is the main cereal crop (70% of the 
cereal-area) followed by Maize (27%).) (Country Strategy Note, 2019). 
Individual households cultivate an average of between 0.84 and 2.4 hectares of cereals and 
50. 
other crops (UNDP, 2012). Crops are usually grown in mixed and/or sequential plantings (mixed 
cropping  and  interplanting).  Sorghum  and  millet,  the  main  cereal  crops,  are  usually  grown  with 
sesame, while root crops such as cassava are often inter-planted with groundnuts, maize, pumpkins 
or other vegetables. This practice conserves biodiversity; mitigates weather, pest and disease risks; 
provides  optimal  ground  cover  and  prevents  soil  erosion;  conserves  soil  nutrients;  and  saves  on 
labour (MOAF, 2013); (Dima, 2006). The practice of irrigated agriculture is insignificant in South 
Sudan.  Individual  farmers  use  simple  Water-lifting  techniques  like  hand  pumps  and  other  low-
technology methods such as storage ponds and drains in flood plains to irrigate small plots of crops 
and vegetable gardens  (Fernando &  Garvey, 2013). Given the many permanent, large and small 
rivers, seasonal watercourses, groundwater reservoirs and vast areas of wetlands, there is a huge 
potential  for  expanding  irrigation  and  introducing  medium  and  large-scale  irrigation  projects  to 
boost agricultural products. 
51. 
Soils: are important in influencing the potential for agriculture. There are 34 soil types in 
South Sudan. Vertisols are a type of clay known as “black cotton soils” that are potentially highly 
productive but are prone to erosion; they are mostly found in the eastern part of the country (RSS, 
2015). Fluvisols, a lowland soil in semi-arid zones that is moderately-to-highly fertile, is found along 
rivers, lakes and alluvial plains (FAO, 1993). Other soil types include Leptosols, Lixisols, Regosols, 
Cambisols etc. Spatial patterns of agricultural potential and population density of the two selected 
states  showed  that,  the  majority  of  geographic  areas  of  the  two  states  have  high  agricultural 
potential with high to medium population density and some areas have high to medium agricultural 
potential with medium to low population density. 
52. 
Forests: Forests and woodlands of various types cover a large proportion of South Sudan’s 
vast territory (RSS, 2015). Its natural forests have high levels of biodiversity and wildlife habitat, 
and generate important ecosystem goods and services. These include provisioning of goods (shelter, 
timber,  fuel,  food,  medicines  etc.)  and  services,  carbon  sequestration,  hydrological  cycling,  soil 
stabilisation  and  cultural  services.  More  than  90  per  cent  of  the  country’s  population  directly 
depends on forests for fuelwood and charcoal production, timber for construction, and non-timber 
forest products for food and nutrition security; however, this resource is fast disappearing with an 
annual  deforestation  rate  estimated  at  between  1.5  and  2  per  cent  (FAO,  2016).  A  menu  of 
infrastructures  have  already  been  identified  and  during  the  CCD,  the  community  will  select  the 
appropriate  infrastructures  that  best  fulfil  their  requirements:  Such  as  feeder  roads,  storage 
facilities, irrigation schemes etc. Therefore, some tree clearance might be required to prepare land 
for  the  infrastructure  development.  However,  given  the  resource  allocated  for  infrastructure, 
significant tree clearance is not expected. SSLRP will also positively contribute to forest sector in 
12 
the  country  through  the  planned  soil  and  water  conservation  activities  aimed  at  ensuring 
sustainability of the infrastructures.  
53. 
Biodiversity:  South  Sudan  is  endowed  with  a  natural  environment  rich  in  biological 
resources. These include a large variety of ecosystems, a vast array of globally important species 
of flora and fauna and an unknown lode of genetic diversity. It is home to the Sudd swamp, one of 
the world’s largest tropical wetlands, and to one of the greatest circular migrations of wildlife on the 
planet.  Sudd  swamp  has  been  declared  a  wetland  of  international importance  under  the  Ramsar 
Convention  on  Wetlands.  Most  of  the  population  live  close  to  the  natural  environment,  directly 
depending upon forests and woodlands for fuel and food products, local soils in which to grow their 
crops, pastures for their livestock and nearby water sources for household needs. These ecosystem 
goods and services constitute the foundation of South Sudan’s socioeconomic development (MOE, 
2014). South Sudan has 14 national parks or protected areas and is home to the world’s second 
largest  animal  migration  after  the  great  Serengeti-Maasai  Mara  wildebeest  migration;  this  epic 
migration  of  antelopes  offers  tremendous  opportunity  for  the  development  of  ecotourism;  The 
country harbours an immense diversity of wildlife species, many of which face threats from human 
activities,  including  wildlife  poaching  and  trafficking;  deforestation;  settlements,  cropland  and 
livestock expansion; road construction; mining and oil development; and climate change impacts. 
SSLRP  is  not  expected  to  have  significant  impact  on  biodiversity  lose.  Watershed  approach  of 
interventions added with the conservation activities will enhance the biodiversity of the project site.  
54.  Water resources: South Sudan’s water resources are unevenly distributed both spatially 
across  the  country,  and  temporally,  since  water  quantities  vary  substantially  between  years 
depending  on  periodic  major  flood  and  drought  events.  The  Nile  River  hydrological  basin  covers 
most of the country. Water is held in perennial rivers, lakes and wetland areas, in seasonal pools, 
ponds,  rivers,  streams  and  extensive  floodplains.  Water  demand  is  still  low  given  the  country’s 
relatively  small  population,  density  and  the  lack  of  industrial  development,  but  it  is  expected  to 
increase rapidly in the future with projected population growth and economic development. In 2007, 
the Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation reported that the impact of human activities on the 
availability  and  quality  of  water  resources  was  already  evident  and  a  growing  concern.  There  is 
increased pollution, reduced river flows, declining water tables in urban areas and both surface and 
ground  waters  are  becoming  contaminated  (MWRI,  2007).  For  the  environment  and  resilient 
assessment, two types of zonation are considered from different source. These are: agro-ecological 
zones which divide the republic of South Sudan in to seven agro-ecological zones (NAPA, 2016) and 
the  other  one  is  based  on  livelihood  which  categorizes  the  country  into  twelve  livelihood  zones 
(WFP/VAM, 2014),: 
Agro-ecological zonation  
55. 
South Sudan has been classified into seven agro-ecological zones (NAPA), which have been 
determined taking into account the following considerations: livelihood patterns (crop production, 
livestock  rearing,  off-farm  income  generation),  physical  geography,  agro-ecology  and  market 
access.  
56. 
These are:  
I.  Greenbelt  (Western  Bahr  el  Ghazal;  Western,  Central  and  Eastern  Equatoria):  Rely 
almost exclusively on agriculture. Smallholder rural and urban/peri-urban livestock keeping is 
focused on poultry and goats – few cattle. Traditional and modern beekeeping and wild gathering 
of honey are additional sources of income.  
II.  Ironstone  Plateau  (Northern  and  Western  Bahr  el  Ghazal;  Warrap;  Lakes;  Western, 
Central  and  Eastern  Equatoria):  Heavily  dependent  on  crop  production.  Parts  are  largely 
agro-pastoral  with  livestock  production  the  predominant  source  of  income.  During  periods  of 
distress, the sale of livestock is a source of income.  
III.  Hills  and  Mountains  (Central  and  Eastern  Equatoria;  Jonglei):  Both  agriculture  and 
pastoralism are practiced. Reliance on cattle increases during difficult years  
13 
IV.  Arid/Pastoral (Jonglei; Eastern Equatoria): Driest zone, with one cropping season. Swamps 
are used for grazing during the dry season. Characterised by nomadic pastoralism with a strong 
reliance on livestock. Small-scale crop production supplements livestock production.  
V.  Nile and Sobat Rivers (Jonglei; Unity; Upper Nile): Abundance of water resources and good 
vegetation for grazing but flooding hampers access. An important dry season grazing area. Crops 
are also grown  
VI.  Western Flood Plains (Northern Bahr el Ghazal; Lakes; Warrap): Main source of income 
is agro pastoralism, which is supplemented by fish and wild foods. Livestock are important for 
both food and income  
VII. Eastern  Flood  Plains  (Jonglei;  Upper  Nile):  Inhabited  by  both  pastoralists  and  agro-
pastoralists. Low-lying terrain and black cotton soils pre-dispose the area to flooding.  
57. 
The project will be implemented in Eastern and Central equatorial and Jonglie states of the 
republic of South Sudan and the two states have experienced almost all of the agro-ecological zones 
with various degree of geographic coverage. Preparation of PDR should take these considerations 
into account during the identification of intervention and CDD processes. For example: the Nile and 
Sobat Rivers zone which includes one of the SSLRP target country, Jonglie, is characterized by the 
abundance of water, including good cover of vegetation for grazing, excess flooding usually hampers 
access.  Therefore,  the  CDD/CDP  and  project  interventions  in  the  Jonglie  county  need  to  plan  to 
exploit the water and grazing resources and consider climate (flood) resilient infrastructures. 
Livelihood Zonation  
South  Sudan  is  categorized  in  to  twelve  livelihood  zones  (FEWS  NET,  2018).  This  kind  of 
58. 
characterization  on  livelihood  provides  useful  information  to  better  identify  food  security  and 
resilience  patterns  and  inform  programmes  to  support  the  most  vulnerable  populations.  The 
beneficiary states, Eastern and Central Equatoria and Jonglie, for the SSLRP are laid under three 
livelihood zones namely: Equatorial maize and cassava zone, highland forest and sorghum zone, 
eastern  semi-arid  pastoral  and  eastern  plain  sorghum  and  cattle.  Typical  characteristics  of  the 
livelihood zones are described as follows:  
Equatorial maize and cassava zone 
59. 
This livelihood zone is bordered by Uganda, the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and 
Central African Republic (CAR). It covers the former counties of Tambura, Ezo, Nzara, Yambio, Ibba, 
Maridi,  Yei,  Lainya,  and  parts  of  Mundri,  Kajo-Keji,  Magwi,  and  Ikotos.  Livelihood  patterns  are 
agriculture  focused  but  supplemented  by  livestock,  fishing,  hunting,  and  gathering  of  a  range  of 
wild  foods  and  bush  products.  In  a  normal  year,  the  zone  is  highly  productive  and  considered  a 
surplus area due to good soils and reliable rainfall, and market access, both local and cross-border, 
is relatively good. The zone is largely found in the Greenbelt agro-ecological zone. With fertile soils, 
it  is  considered  one  of  South  Sudan’s  highest  potential  cereal  producing  areas.  The  zone’s 
topography is mostly a mix of mountains, hills and valleys which form the plateau in the southern 
reaches  along  the  border.  The  area  further  inland  is  primarily  flat  plainlands  with  an  estimated 
altitude  between  800  –  1200  meters  (m)  above  sea  level.  Soil  types  vary  from  the  lowland  to 
highland  areas  with  a  mixture  of  fertile  loamy  clay  and  sandy  soils  that  are  most  suitable  for 
agricultural production.  
60. 
The  zone  has  a  bi-modal  rainfall  pattern  with  two  reliable  seasons  and  average  annual 
precipitation of 1100-1600 millimeters (mm); although the seasonal averages range 600-900 mm 
each season. Rains typically start in March to June with a break in late June then restart in July to 
November. The temperatures are relatively warm throughout the year, especially in lowlands, and 
cooler in highlands averaging between 27-30° Celsius in January to February and 30-35° Celsius 
from December to March. This zone is one of the most naturally endowed areas in the country with 
diverse vegetation cover including dense deciduous equatorial rain forests to the south that become 
less  dense  bushes  towards  the  north.  The  major  forests  Nabanga,  Sakure,  Kpatuo,  Bangangayi, 
Gilo,  Hatire,  Imilai,  Kalisoni,  Upper  Talanga,  and  Lumarati  are  found  in  this  zone  and  provide  a 
source of hunting, plentiful timber materials for housing and fuel, and a broad variety of naturally 
occurring uncultivated foods and fruits such as wild yams, shea butter, tamarind, wild lemon, and 
14 
wild vegetables (Luge and Lugutalang). Chronic hazards have led to the decline in agricultural and 
livestock  production  in  the  zone.  The  main  chronic  hazards  include:  insecurity,  inflation  (high 
prices), resource-based conflicts (farmers versus pastoralists), localized seasonal floods, crop pests 
and livestock diseases.  
Highland forest and sorghum zone 
This  zone  is  located  along  the  mountain  ranges  of  the  Greater  Equatorial  region  and 
61. 
administratively extends across Juba, Magwi, Torit, Budi, and parts of Ikotos. The southeastern part 
of the zone shares a border with Uganda. This is an agricultural zone with minor dependence on 
livestock. The zone is a cereal deficit area characterized by low production output due to low rainfall 
and  dependence  on  one  growing  season.  The  presence  of  Kidepo  National  Reserve,  and  parts  of 
Bandingilo National Park provide access to a range of naturally-occurring foods and bush products 
that are exploited by the inhabitants for consumption and cash income. The zone’s topography is 
characterized by highlands and foothills along border areas with Uganda where altitude ranges from 
1200 – 2000 m above sea level, while the valley and floodplains in the northeast and northern parts 
range 600 – 900 m above sea level. Soils are relatively fertile and suitable for crop production as 
compared to the neighbouring South-Eastern Semiarid Pastoral zone.  
The zone has a unimodal rainfall pattern with an average annual precipitation of 900 – 1000 
62. 
mm. There are two distinct seasons: a rainy season from April to November and a short dry season 
from December to March. There is one major growing season from April to July although localized 
areas in the highlands have a second growing season for groundnuts and sesame from September 
to  December.  Average  temperatures  reach  a  maximum  of  about  42°  Celsius  in  February  and 
minimum of 30° Celsius in December and January. Land cover is a mixture of forest, bush shrubs 
and  grasslands  punctuated  by  agricultural  land.  Kidepo  National  reserve,  parts  of  Bandingilo 
National park, Imatong and Nimule forests are found in this zone and provide a source of natural 
resources such as wild honey, game meat, wild foods, and fruits, especially shea butternut trees. 
Inhabitants  exploit  natural  resources  as  part  of  their  normal  livelihoods  as  well  as  to  cope  with 
limited access to food  and cash income.  The forests and national parks present the potential for 
tourism, but this is not active due to insecurity.  
 Livelihood constraints facing household in this zone are consistent with risks associated with 
63. 
agro-climatic  shocks  affecting  agro-pastoral  areas  elsewhere  in  South  Sudan.  Chronic  hazards 
include insecurity (insurgencies and clan related looting), inflation over the past three years (high 
prices),  cattle  raiding  and  presence  of  migratory  cattle  during  growing  season,  as  well  as,  pests 
(rodents, termites, armyworm, monkeys, birds), diseases and weeds (striga) which limit agricultural 
productivity in the zone.  
South-Eastern semi-arid pastoral 
This semi-arid livelihood zone lies at the south-eastern tip of southern Sudan within former 
64. 
Eastern  Equatoria  and  Jonglei  States,  covers  many  parts  of  Pibor  and  Greater  Kapoeta  and  is 
bordered  by  Kenya  and  Ethiopia.  Local  livelihoods  are  typically  pastoral  with  very  limited  crop 
production but supplemented with wild food consumption and sales. Access to food is predominantly 
through market purchase and exchange with other zones and grains from Kenya and Ethiopia. The 
zone is characterized by vast plains which stretch towards the foothills of the mountain ranges near 
the  Ethiopian  border.  Altitude  ranges  between  400-1100  m  above  sea  level.  The  soils  are 
predominantly sandy loam with presence black cotton clay tending to be higher in the north, west, 
and east of the zone. Though soils are suitable for crop farming, semi-arid conditions severely limit 
crop production. The zone is typically a dry Sahelian savannah, with rainfall that averages 200 -600 
mm  per  annum.  The  rains  start  in  June  and  end  in  October.  Average  temperatures  are  38-40° 
Celsius, with a minimum of 20° Celsius in December and January and a maximum of 42° Celsius in 
March.  
65. 
Livestock  rearing  drives  the  zone’s  economy.  The  zone  is  inhabited  by  almost  pure 
pastoralists who survive in a very harsh, drought-prone environment. Livestock kept include cattle, 
camels, goats, and sheep and, to lesser extent, poultry (mainly for household consumption). In the 
15 
dry season, herders usually move into Ethiopia and Kenya in search of water and pasture. There is 
limited crop production, including sorghum and small-scale vegetable production (e.g., okra).  
66. 
The rainy season starts in June and ends in October. Although this area is mainly suitable 
for rearing livestock, small quantities of sorghum and some vegetables are grown. Cultivation starts 
with land preparation in February to March, followed by wet sowing in April and weeding in June 
b. Climate trends and impacts 
South  Sudan  lies  within  the  tropical  zone  between  latitudes  3oN  and  13oN  and  longitudes 
67. 
24oE and 36oE. The climate ranges from Tropical Semi-Humid with a short rainy season in the north, 
to Tropical Wet-Dry and Tropical Rainy climates with longer wet seasons in the south. South Sudan 
receives ~1 billion m3 of rain annually, which can be classified into two major rainfall regimes – 
unimodal and bimodal. The unimodal rainfall regime occurs in the north with a six month wet season 
from  May  to  October.  The  southern  part  of  the  country  has  a  bimodal  rainfall  regime  with  high 
rainfall  for  7-8  months  a  year,  which  ranges  from  500-600  mm  annually  to  1500  mm  annually. 
Rainy seasons are influenced by the annual shift of the Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone and the 
shift to southerly and south westerly winds, which leads to higher temperatures and humidity as 
well as increased cloud cover. There are prominent variations in rainfall and the length of the dry 
season.  However,  there  is  little  temperature  variation  over  the  country  or  within  season.  Mean 
annual temperatures vary between 26oC and 32oC (NAPA, 2016). 
68. 
The  meteorological  service  of  South  Sudan  suffers  from  inadequate  weather  and  climate-
forecasting equipment (BRACED, 2016). Available data show that temperatures in South Sudan are 
rising and the weather is becoming drier (USAID, 2016). It is likely that these changes are related 
to  global  climate  change.  According  to  Richardson  (2011),  there  has  been  an  increase  of 
temperature by 1.3oC and rainfall reduced by 20% between 1900 and 2009. In the 2000s, much of 
South Sudan was over 2 °C warmer on average than in the 1970s, with the central and southern 
regions registering an increase of as much as 0.4 °C per decade – one of the highest increases in 
the world. By 2060, South Sudan will get warmer by about 1 °C over and above 2020 values. Rains 
in South Sudan have declined by 10-20 per cent since the mid-1970s. Average rainfall is expected 
16 
to  decline  by  10-20  per  cent  for  any  observed  warming  of  more  than  1  °C.  A  general  trend  of 
delayed and shortened rainy seasons over the years has been reported in many places  
69. 
Climate change has long been affecting agriculture and water sector in South Sudan. Most 
of the people, being dependent on rainwater, the delayed onset of rainy season and prolonged dry 
spell changes the seasonal calendar of the country, which in turn affects the production system.  
70. 
Although South Sudan contributes very little to global greenhouse gas emissions, it is highly 
vulnerable  to  the  impacts  of  rising  temperatures  and  increased  rainfall  variability  due  to  climate 
change, since pastoralists and farmers rely heavily on seasonal rains. Indeed, according to the 2017 
Climate Change Vulnerability Index, South Sudan ranks among the five countries in the world most 
vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. The others are the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 
the Central African Republic, Haiti and Liberia (Reliefweb, 2017). Climate change is thus a significant 
driver of environmental change in South Sudan. 
71. 
In  addition  to  the  scientific  evidence  of  climatic  change  in  South  Sudan,  agro-pastoralists 
and farmers have noticed the delayed onset of rains, prolonged dry spells at the beginning of the 
wet season and an increase in the intensity of rainfall events, resulting in more erratic and heavy 
flooding (Murray, 2016). 
72. 
The population of South Sudan is extremely vulnerable to the impacts of increased warming 
and unpredictable and reduced rainfall, given its fragile state and its extreme dependence on rain-
fed  subsistence  agriculture. A warmer  climate and drier weather have food security implications, 
reducing crop harvests and pasture availability and intensifying the impacts of droughts and floods. 
If the current climate change trend continues, rain-fed agriculture may become untenable. 
73. 
Green House Gas emission: The state of conflict, insecurity, limited capacity and lack of 
financial  resources  in  South  Sudan  have  made  collecting  data  on  greenhouse  gas  emissions 
challenging. Given the low level of industrial development, however, they are likely to be relatively 
small,  with  most  emissions  derived  from  land  use,  land-use  change  and  forestry,  as  well  as  the 
agriculture  sector  (RSS,  2015).  Diesel  generators  for  energy  and  the  transportation  sector  also 
contribute  to  overall  emissions.  The  United  Nations  Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  estimates 
that  in  2013,  South  Sudan  emitted  1,448  kilotonnes  of  CO2  and  per  capita  emissions  were  0.1 
metric tonnes (FAO, 2016). 
2.3 Poverty and targeting profiles (full integration of all themes) 
74. 
Poverty is a multidimensional issue that is underpinned by conflict and vulnerabilities from 
a range of factors. The MPI poverty is based on the number of deprivations a population suffers. 
These deprivations are in Health, Education and Living Standards. Poverty intensity in both states 
17 
is  higher..  Vulnerabilities  are  not  constant  and  are  affected  by  the  ever-changing  relationship 
between politics, localised conflicts, natural and climatic shocks. Thus, targeting for the project will 
have  an  objective  of  reducing  the  vulnerabilities  in:  Climate  change,  Gender  dynamics,  Food 
Security, and Livelihoods. Flexibility should be built within the targeting strategy to ensure that it 
remains responsive to the ever-changing needs of the communities and the beneficiaries. Based on 
the socio-economic profile, return on investment would be higher if women and youth are prioritised 
and the agricultural sector (through smallholder farmers) strengthened to ensure stable incomes 
and food and nutrition security.  
75. 
Cultural  Diversity:  South  Sudan  has  64  tribes with  the  largest  being  the Dinkas,  who 
constitute about 35% of the population. The second largest are the Neurs. Dinkas and Neurs account 
for  almost  half  of  the  population  and  dominate  the  government  and  the  army.  The  main  ethnic 
groups in the project target area include Kuku, Mundari, Madi, and Acholi and Loluba.  
Table 3: Distribution of ethnic groups 
State 
Central Equatoria 
Eastern Equatoria 
Jonglei 
Target Profiles 
County 
Ethnic Groups 
Kajokeji 
Terekeka 
Magwi 
Torit 
Bor South  
Kuku 
Mundari 
Madi 
Acholi, Loluba 
Nuer, Murle 
76. 
The  target  counties  consist  of  smallholder  pastoral  and  agro-pastoral  communities  and 
households.  Agro-pastoral  HH  cultivate  staple  food  and  cash  crops  as  well  as  own  small  herd  of 
livestock, but have limited access to inputs, assets and services. The project has a strong focus on 
the inclusion of women and youth, returnees and persons with disabilities. Their characteristics are 
described below. 
Agro-pastoral households. The target agro-pastoral HH usually grow food and cash crops 
77. 
in fields located both close and far from their homestead. The women members of the HH have land 
located close to the homestead where they are grow vegetables for consumption or sale. The main 
crops grown are sorghum, maize, cassava and pulses. Major challenges of smallholder agro-pastoral 
HH include low agricultural productivity due to the limited availability of good quality seeds, erratic 
rainfall,  pest  infestations,  and  declining  soil  fertility.  Furthermore  the  lack  of  adequate  access  to 
sufficient productive assets prevents smallholder agro-pastoral HH from making maximum use of 
the land (draught power/machinery, good quality seeds, fertilizer, and labour). Agro-pastoral HHs 
usually receive low prices from the sale of their products due to absence of organized commodity 
markets and the fact that the smallholder agro-pastoral HHs need to sell their products as quickly 
as possible after harvest to gain cash and therefore weaken their bargaining power. Lack or limited 
access to credit together with poor savings is one the main constraints that prevents agro-pastoral 
HH from purchasing inputs and accessing hired machinery and labour for the more expensive and 
labour intensive farming activities - weeding and harvesting. As a result, HH leave more than half 
of  their  available  land  uncultivated  and  engage  in  off-farm  wage  labour.  Traditionally,  Livestock 
keepers did not sell their animals because they used them against future losses, wealth status within 
the community and due to lack of integration into the cash economy. 
78.  Women, including women headed households. Gender equality and empowerment of 
women is vital as evidence demonstrates that in economies where gender equality is greater there 
is  economic  growth  and  better  quality  of  life.  Rural  women  in  South  Sudan  face  constraints  that 
hamper  their  productive  potential.  They  have  fewer  opportunities  than  men  to  benefit  from 
education, training, and productive agricultural employment due to traditional gender patterns in 
allocation of household labour, early marriages, and restriction of their movement. This has seen 
women constrained in terms of employment opportunities and their involvement in on farm activities 
is  less  skilled  and  less  financially  rewarding.  Although  they  contribute  substantial  proportion  of 
18 
agricultural labour, they get lower wages. Furthermore, women and girls are less healthy, poorer, 
more food insecure and less educated; and suffer the highest maternal mortality rate in the world 
and one of the highest rates of child marriage. In the pastoral and traditional rainfed sector, women 
provide a remarkable contribution to the household’s wellbeing and food security. Women’s specific 
responsibilities include: (i) farming, both on the HH fields together with their husbands and on small 
household plots where they mainly grow green vegetables both HH consumption and sale; (ii) all 
HH work, which includes preparing food, collecting fire wood and fetching water; (iii) childcare; (iv) 
rearing small animals; and (v) petty trade. The varied tasks mean that women generally work longer 
hours than men. In spite of their responsibilities, women have access to smaller plots of land and 
generally  can  control  cash  income  coming  from  petty  trade  and  poultry  rearing,  but  are  rarely 
involved in decisions concerning key productive assets, such as land and livestock sale. Women also 
have limited decision-making power in the household or within the community. Their empowerment 
is hindered by a high rate of illiteracy, persisting gender inequalities perpetuated by the customary 
law, and early marriage. Compared to men, women earn lower incomes, but tend to allocate more 
of  their  earnings  to  buy  food  items  for  their  HH.  Women  headed  households  are  particularly 
vulnerable, are socially, culturally, and economically disadvantaged but are responsible for ensuring 
the wellbeing of their families by securing a large part of the household income from agricultural 
activities.  Households  headed  by  women  face  higher  risks  of  food  insecurity  and  malnutrition 
exacerbated by larger consumption gaps compared to male headed households.  
79. 
Rural youth: The target youth will be those aged between 18-35 years, (although the official 
government  definition  ranges  from  15-35  years).  Youth  are  an  important  element  in  achieving 
stability and reducing insecurity. Under-employed youth are frustrated and idle and contribute to 
social unrest and armed conflicts. While agriculture offers opportunity to create employment, young 
women and men face constraints to participate and thrive in the sector (access to land, extension 
services and linkage to markets). The majority of the young people live in rural areas with no access 
to basic services or sustainable livelihood opportunities, limited or no employment opportunities, as 
well  as  limited  access  to  capacity  building  or  microfinance  services  that  would  enable  them  to 
establish  their  own  businesses.  Conflict  in  the  country  has  prejudiced  the  chances  of  a  whole 
generation of youth for educational and developmental opportunities. Thus, initiatives that improve 
the  opportunities  for  them  to  participate  in  decent  agricultural  and  non-agricultural  work  could 
provide  benefits  for  social  harmony.  The  project  will  facilitate  youth  to  take  advantage  of 
opportunities  arising  along  the  traditional  value  chain  (seed  supply,  storage,  technology  etc), 
strengthen  their  capacity  in  enterprise  development  through  skills-based  training  and  support 
linkages for markets. 
80. 
The project will be implemented in the Greater Equatoria region (Central and Eastern) and 
Jonglei state. Selection the states is based on criteria that considers poverty level, political stability 
to enable sustainable investment in smallholder agriculture, community development, rural youth 
and  poor  women.  The  three  states  are  Central  Equatoria  (Terekeka  and  Kajo-Keji  Counties)  and 
Eastern Equatoria (Magwi and Torit Counties) and Jonglei (Bor South County). There are various 
studies  (reports)  issued  on  the  status  of  climate  change  and  its  impact,  poverty  level,  livelihood 
zonation, vulnerability, distribution of natural resource, aggregated land use by state etc. Therefore, 
geographical 
these 
parameters/indicators in order to ensure  IFAD’s  engagement in South Sudan meets its  objective 
and also to ensure the neediest rural small holders are reached.  
targeting  (selection  of  beneficiary  sites)  will  adequately  consider 
81. 
Central  Equatoria:  This  livelihood  zone  is  considered  to  have  high  resilience  due  to 
moderate exposure to hazards and low food insecurity level. Although most household’s income is 
highly climate-sensitive, seasonal rains rarely fail. Poorer households subsist from their own crop 
and livestock production supplemented by food obtained from hunting and fishing and wild foods, 
and food purchased with income from agricultural and casual labour. The main constraints to market 
access include long distances, poor road conditions, seasonal flooding and insecurity. 
82. 
Eastern Equatoria: This livelihood zone is low in resilience due to over reliance on rain fed 
crop farming and sedentary cultivation with less reliance on livestock. Due to favourable climatic 
conditions,  households  have  good  harvest  but  lack  access  to  local  markets  but  have  good  trade 
19 
linkages with neighbouring zones. Household incomes are constrained by a lack of roads, hilly and 
mountainous terrain and poor road conditions, which limits access to markets. 
83. 
Jonglei: This is one of the zones with relatively poor resilience. The poor resilience stems 
from being highly exposed to hazards, high food insecurity with low livelihood diversity. Being one 
of  areas  prone  to  civil  unrest  with  intercommunal  conflicts,  livelihood  activities  are  adversely 
affected. The constraints to market access for households are insecurity, livestock diseases and a 
lack of feeder roads in the most rural parts of the zone. 
Institutional  analysis  (most  important  institutions  and  their  capacities;  policies  and 
84. 
frameworks relevant for project) 
85. 
National Development Strategy (2018 NDS): The overarching objective of the new NDS 
is to Consolidate Peace and Stabilize the Economy. It also provides the medium-term framework 
for  implementing  of  the  Vision  2040,  focusing  on  Justice,  Liberty  and  Prosperity.  The  NDS  is 
articulated around six interconnected priorities: (i) Creation of enabling conditions for and facilitate 
the return of displaced citizens; (ii) Developing and enforcing the rule of law; (iii) Ensuring secure 
access to adequate and nutritious food; (iv) Silencing the guns; (v) Restoring and expanding the 
provision of basic social services. 
III. 
3.1. 
Gender 
86. 
Below are a number of gender policy frameworks in South Sudan. In practice, many gender-
oriented policies in South Sudan have not been implemented or remain in draft form. Gender Focal 
Points  or  departments  created  by  the  Ministry  of  Gender,  Child,  and  Social  Welfare  in  various 
government institutions are inadequately funded (Edward, 2014). The general political and public 
attitude  and  indifference  to  gender  issues,  the  low  prioritization  of  gender  issues,  as  well  as  the 
institutional and organizational weakness of the governance institutions continue to be a challenge 
(GenderIndex.org South Sudan 2019) 
-  The comprehensive draft National Gender Policy (NGP): Developed by the Ministry of 
Gender, Social Welfare and Religious Affairs, to which advocates for programmes that have 
specific impact on the gender mainstreaming and women’s empowerment. 
-  National Gender Policy (2013): The Policy provides an overall context for mainstreaming 
gender equality in all national development processes and a framework to address existing 
inequalities and remedy historical imbalances. 
-  The National Social Protection Policy Framework of the Ministry of Gender, Child, 
and Social Welfare (MGCSW). The overall goal of this framework is to address multiple 
vulnerabilities  and  secure  livelihoods  as  well  as  access  to  social  services  for  the  most 
vulnerable.  An  integrated  set  of  approaches,  including  cash  transfers,  are  directed  at 
vulnerable  groups  including  orphans,  widows,  persons  with  disabilities  and  the  poorest 
households.  It  coordinates  all  social  protection  initiatives  nationwide  and  therefore  an 
important  backbone  of  resilience  in  South  Sudan,  the  Framework’s  six  objectives  are:  1) 
Inclusive  social  protection:  ensuring  access  to  basic  social  services  for  all;  2)  Protective 
environments  for  children;  3)  Strengthened  linkages  among  social  protection,  economic 
development and sustainable livelihoods; 4) Improved livelihoods for women; 5) A systems 
approach to social protection; and 6) Progressive realisation of coverage. 
-  Comprehensive Agriculture Master Plan (CAMP) This is a gender sensitive policy that 
recognises  the  importance  of  gender  in  agriculture  and  provides  ways  of  mainstreaming 
gender  in  agriculture.  It  has  set  gender  analysis  and  gender  mainstreaming  planning  as 
objectives of Planning Department, and gender mainstreaming as an objective of Extension 
Department.  CAMP  is  a  national  agriculture  development  plan  set  to  guide  agricultural 
development in the country for 25 years(2015-2040). It is an investment plan developed to 
align  with  national  development  policies  and  objectives  such  as  Vision  2040  and  National 
Development  Strategy  (NDS).  It  covers  five  subsectors  (crops,  livestock,  fishery,  forestry 
20 
- 
and  institutional  development)  for  effective  and  efficient  agricultural  development  by  all 
stakeholders engaged in agricultural development in South Sudan 
International and regional legal framework on gender: South Sudan is a signatory to 
the  Geneva  Conventions,  the  Convention  Relating  to  the  Status  of  Refugees,  and  the 
Convention on the Rights of the Child. South Sudan ratified the CEDAW in 2014. However, 
it has yet to ratify the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on 
Civil  and  Political  Rights  and  the  International  Covenant  on  Economic,  Social  and  Cultural 
Rights. South Sudan is part of the African Union (AU) and is obliged to observe international 
and regional agreements, but it is the only country of the AU that has not ratified the African 
Charter on Human and People’s Rights (1986) prohibiting discrimination against women and 
articulating the protection of women’s rights, and its supplementary protocol, the Protocol 
on the Rights on Women in Africa (the Maputo Protocol). Maputo Protocol was signed in 2013 
and  ratified  in  2014.  The  ratification  The  Maputo  Protocol  inclusively  recognizes  women’s 
rights such as the right to peace and the right to protection in situations of armed conflict. 
It also addresses violence against women, FGM, and the situation of women in polygamous 
marriages. Some think that the articles dealing with marriage and reproductive health go 
against the traditions of South Sudan.  
3.2. 
Youth 
-  South  Sudan  Youth  Development  Policy  of  the  Minister  of  Culture,  Youth  and 
Sports. This policy is intended to empower youth to influence democracy and peacebuilding 
in  the  country,  and  to  include  youth  in  the  peaceful  and  productive  nation-building  and 
development  agenda  which  cannot  exist  without  them.  Given  the  proportion  of  youth  in 
South  Sudan’s  population  and  the  risks  associated  with  them,  ones  which  have  been 
exacerbated since the  recent conflict, this is a  policy of  critical importance. Amid calls for 
concrete and timely implementation are cautions that ‘youth’ be considered in its broadest 
sense to include rural, female and minority group youth who often risk being overlooked by 
youth-oriented policy initiatives. The policy has been under review since 2006-2007 and is 
yet to be unveiled. 
-  The South Sudan Youth Forum (SSYF) is a platform of the national youth councils and 
non- governmental youth organisations in South Sudan. It strives for youth rights in national 
institutions. The Forum works in the fields of youth policy and youth work development.  
3.3. 
Child labour 
-  Revitalized  Agreement  on  the  Resolution  of  the  Conflict  in  the  Republic  of  South 
Sudan  (R-ARCSS):  Replaced  all  components  of  the  Agreement  on  the  Resolution  of  the 
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan signed in 2015, including the Joint Action Plan with 
the  UN  to  Combat  the  Use  of  Child  Soldiers,  and  reaffirms  commitments  made  under  the 
2017  Agreement  on  the  Cessation  of  Hostilities.  Establishes  the  structure  of  a  Revitalized 
Transitional Government of National Unity and outlines actions to be taken by signatories, 
including prohibiting the recruitment and use of child soldiers by armed forces or militias. 
-  General Education Strategic Plan (2017–2022): Aims to improve access and quality of 
education by providing capitation grants, teacher salaries, and cash transfers to girls in upper 
primary and secondary schools. 
3.4. 
Food Security and Nutrition  
-  Food  Security  Council  (FSC)  was  established  to  ensure  the  overall  alignment  and 
harmonization of food security initiatives of the various line ministries and commissions, and 
to provide guidance for national food security policies and programmes. It is also a platform 
21 
for enhanced coordination and fostering linkages among the nine ministries that deal with 
various aspects of food security.  
-  A Resilience Technical Working Group established to coordinate the current analytical 
efforts and programming efforts. Recognises that building resilience requires a multi-sector 
approach and a long-term commitment to flexible programming aimed at reducing the risk 
and strengthening capacities; and it also requires a partnership approach to the development 
of a common resilience building agenda. 
-  Scaling Up Nutrition: South Sudan joined the SUN Movement in 201310 
-  National  Health  Policy  2016-2026:  Includes  nutrition  as  a  component  with  the  Basic 
Package  of  Health  and  Nutrition  Services  (BPHNS).  It  provides  guidance  on  nutrition, 
therapeutic feeding, and control of malnutrition in special and vulnerable groups. 
-  Food Security Policy  2012: Supports policy measures and strategies meant to mitigate 
the adverse effects and impacts from climate change in the medium and long-term. These 
include  the  development  of  community  adaptive  capacity  for  climate  change  through  the 
development of crops that can resist droughts and floods. 
3.5. 
Environment and Climate  
-  Draft Environmental Protection Policy 2013: Provides policy guidance on how to address 
climate  change  issues  by  developing  a  national  strategy  and  climate  change  policy,  and 
mechanisms for adaptation and mitigation. It encourages the formulation and enactment of 
laws  that  maintain  and  preserve  ecological  functions  and  the  integrity  of  forests  that 
conserve  biological  diversity  and,  water  and  soil  resources  in  fragile  ecosystems  and  that 
promote passive and non-invasive forest management activities as alternative sources for 
income generation (livelihood improvement). 
-  Draft  Environmental  Protection  Bill  2013:  Aims  to  protect  the  environment  in  South 
Sudan and to promote ecologically sustainable development that improves quality of life. It 
provides  for  the  preparation  of  a  National  Environmental  Action  Plan  and  designation  of 
Environmentally  Sensitive  Areas  (ESAs)  for  the  actual  or  prospective  habitat  of  any 
environmentally sensitive species required to be protected for the purpose of meeting the 
government’s international obligations under any of the Multilateral Agreements (MEAs). 
-  The Agriculture Sector Policy Framework for 2012-2017: Provides for the protection 
of  plants,  seed  management  and  development  of  a  plant  genetic  resources  conservation 
programme  and  a  biosafety  framework.  This  includes  promoting  in  situ  and  community 
conservation and management and creating awareness of plant genetic resources. 
-  Policy on Agriculture and Livestock 2012: Aims to transform agriculture and livestock 
from traditional/subsistence systems to achieve food security, wealth creation and national 
economic  growth  through  science  based,  market  oriented,  competitive,  and  profitable 
agricultural systems.  
-  Fisheries Policy 2012 – 2016: Aims at responding to climate change and natural disasters 
through research and development of strategies. Provides a framework to manage fisheries 
resources  to  maximise  production  and  avoid  overfishing  and  to  prevent  destruction  of 
wetlands and promote their conservation. 
-  Draft Policy on Wildlife Conservation and Protected Areas 2012: Recognises climate 
change  as  a  global  reality  with  serious  implications  for  natural  ecosystems  and  wildlife 
resources. The policy calls for designing coping strategies to address the impacts of climate 
change on habitats and populations of wildlife species. 
-  Forest  Policy  2014:  Recognises  the  critical  role  played  by  forests  in  providing  “critical 
environmental  services,  water  catchment  and  in  mitigating  climate  change.”  The  forestry 
policy proposes the ratification of the UNFCCC so that the country can benefit from the Clean 
Development  Mechanism  (CDM).  It  also  proposes  establishing  a  designated  national 
authority “to facilitate the flow of climate change benefits to South Sudan.” The policy also 
10 Scaling Up Nutrition South Sudan https://scalingupnutrition.org/sun-countries/south-sudan/  
22 
emphasises the need for measures “so that South Sudan can access financing under REDD.” 
(REDD refers to Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation). It calls for 
delineation and gazettement of forests to attain a national forest cover of 20 per cent of land 
area.  
-  The Water Bill 2013: Aims to provide mechanisms to protect water sources from pollution, 
erosion or any other adverse effects by creating protected zones within a catchment draining 
to,  or  above,  any  water  facility  forming  part  of  a  water  supply  or  any  catchment,  lake, 
reservoir, aquifer, wetland, spring, or any other source of water. It also aims to conserve 
available water resources, to manage water quality and to prevent pollution of ground and 
surface  waters;  manage  floods  and  droughts  and  mitigate  water-related  disasters  and 
establish  appropriate  management  structures,  including  mechanisms  for  inter-sectoral 
coordination and stakeholder participation. 
3.6. 
Potential Partner Government Institutions  
-  Ministry  of  Environment  and  Forestry:  Tasked  with  developing  policy  and  regulatory 
frameworks  on  environment  and  forestry.  The  Directorate  of  Climate  Change  and 
Meteorology in the Ministry develops and implements programmes to address climate change 
issues and coordinates the implementation of South Sudan’s obligations under the UNFCCC 
and the Convention on Biodiversity (CBD). 
-  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Food  Security:  Its  mandate  is  to  develop  and  implement 
policies,  objectives  and  strategies  for  South  Sudan’s  agricultural  sector  to  improve  food 
security and contribute to economic growth and environmental sustainability, and to facilitate 
and  encourage  the  equitable  and  sustainable  development  of  improved  livelihoods.  It 
exercises its role through the Directorate  of Research and Training and the Directorate  of 
Agriculture and Extension services. 
-  Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation: Responsible for managing water resources 
and  developing  water  policies,  strategies,  and  plans,  such  as  the  Irrigation  Development 
Master Plan and the Water Resources Utilisation and Development Master Plan. 
-  Ministry  of  Livestock  and  Fisheries:  Charged  with  livestock  and  fishery  policy 
development.  The  Directorate  of  Veterinary  Services  is  responsible  for  preparing  and 
enforcing  laws  governing  livestock  diseases  control/eradication  and  the  safety  of  food  of 
animal  origin.  This  includes  safeguarding  public  health  by  tracking  animal  diseases 
transmissible to humans as well as domestic animal disease control 
IV. 
Environmental and social category 
87. 
The  categorization  for  Environment  and  Social  is  made  based  on  the  implementation  of 
project  components  indicated  in  the  draft  concept  note.  The  main  activities  that  could  have 
environmental and social concern are; construction and/or rehabilitation of water infrastructures, 
rehabilitation/upgrading/construction of road, construction of processing and storage facilities and 
some agricultural inputs. The project will apply the Community Driven Development (CDD) approach 
at all beneficiary counties. Thus, selection of infrastructure per county will be based on the need of 
the  community  and  this  will  be  included  in  the  Community  Development  Plan  (CDP).  However, 
taking the budget allocated for infrastructure development into consideration, Infrastructures with 
huge environmental and social impacts are not as such expected. Some of the anticipated impacts 
are  pollution  of  environmental  media  such  as  water,  soil,  etc,  land  clearance/deforestation, 
occupational  health  hazard,  water  use  conflicts,  temporary/permanent  displacement  of  people, 
conversion and/or loss of physical cultural resources during construction of infrastructures etc. Most 
of  the  impacts  are  localized  to  the  project  site,  short  term  and  most  importantly  can  be 
avoided/reduced or mitigated by properly applying mitigation measures. The planning, design and 
implementation as well as Monitoring and Evaluation of the sub-project infrastructure development 
will  be  subjected  to  environment  and  social  screening,  and  preparation  of  sub-project  level 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). ESMPs will ensure that adverse impacts  are 
addressed and the infrastructures are not located in sensitive areas. In case, minor physical and 
economic resettlements are inevitable, appropriate compensation and livelihood restoration should 
23 
be effected as per the available national law and methodologies and if need be, as per IFAD 2017, 
Resettlement Action Framework will be prepared and implemented accordingly.  
88. 
Therefore,  the  environmental  and  social  category  of  the  project  is  “B”  and  Draft 
Environmental  and  Social  Management  Framework  (ESMF)  is  prepared.  The  ESMF  should  be 
mainstreamed  in  the  project  design  and  implementation  process  and  also  some  budget  for  the 
mitigation  measures  is  secured  as  for  other  project  components.  Category  B  projects  include 
infrastructure  development  that  may  have  Moderate  environmental  and  social  impacts.  Thus 
irreversible  environmental  impacts  as  well  as  permanent  displacement  are  not  anticipated. 
Furthermore, the ESMF should also guide the type and scale of infrastructure to be chosen during 
the Community Development Plan preparation.  
V. 
Climate risk category 
89. 
Climate classification is based on the anticipated climate scenario in South Sudan and nature 
of the project. Generally, temperature has been increasing and rainfall decreasing in South Sudan 
since  the  last  decades  and  this  is  set  to  continue  (forecasted)  for  coming  decades  (SOE,  2018). 
According  to  other  source  rainfall  will  decrease  in  the  north  and  increase  in  the  south.  Seasonal 
rainfall trends are highly variable across the country. Recent rainfall data showed that increasing 
trends  particularly  in  the  northern  parts  of  the  country  and  declining  rainfall  in  the  western  and 
southern parts of the country. In addition, analyses suggest that there has been a shift in the start 
and  cessation  of  rainfall,  leading  to  more  erratic  and  unpredictable  rainfall  patterns  (WFP,  VAM 
2014). Since the mid-1970s, South Sudan has experienced a decline of between 10 to 20 per cent 
in average precipitation as well as increased variability in the amount and timing of rainfall from 
year to year (USAID, 2016). South Sudan is highly vulnerable to the impacts of rising temperatures 
and increased rainfall variability due to climate change, since pastoralists and farmers rely heavily 
on seasonal rains. Indeed, according to the 2017 Climate Change Vulnerability Index, South Sudan 
ranks  among  the  five  countries  in  the  world  most  vulnerable  to  the  impacts  of  climate  change. 
Climate change is thus a significant driver of environmental change in South Sudan. As far As SSLRP 
is concerned, Climate Change will affect the agricultural production and infrastructure development 
in the beneficiary counties through delayed onset of rain, prolonged dry spell and also flood. The 
climate  classification  is  therefore  moderate  and  basic  climate  risk  analysis  is  prepared. 
Furthermore,  climate  resilience  interventions  are  mainstreamed  in  the  PDR.  Furthermore,  during 
CDD and preparation of CDP, adaptation options that have been identified in the climate risk and 
vulnerability  analysis  reports  will  be  considered  taking  into  consideration  the  impact  of  climate 
change at the community/county level. Although GHG counting is difficult for this project, the soil 
and water conservation as well as afforestation activities will enhance carbon sequestration. 
VI. 
Recommendations for project design and implementation  
90. 
Nutrition:  SSLRP  has  identified  the  following  pathways  to  reach  the  desired  nutrition 
outcomes.  These  will  require  a  comprehensive  situation  analysis  on  nutrition  context  including 
nutrient  gaps  of  the  targeted  beneficiaries.  SSLRP  aims  to  improve  household  food  security  and 
community  nutrition  practices  to  adopt  nutritious  foods  intake  through  the  following  nutrition 
pathways: (i) Integrated Homestead Food Production for diet diversification and income generation; 
encouraging and supporting households to adopt kitchen gardens for production of nutrient-rich and 
nutritious foods, such as fruits and vegetables; and increase consumption of animal-sourced foods, 
including  fish  and  dairy  products.  Promotion  of  livelihood  diversification  at  household  level  by 
promoting  or  introducing  fast  maturing  indigenous  crops.  This  will  be  done  through  the  VSLAs 
women  group  who  will  also  be  provided  training  on  improved  farming  methods  to  enhance  crop 
yield  to  ensure  household  resilience.  (ii)  Reduce  post-harvest  losses.  SSLRP  will  explore  suitable 
technologies and innovations for food preservation to increase shelf life for nutrition. This will include 
training  farmers  to  equip  them  with  knowledge  on  safe  home  storage,  home  processing,  food 
preservation to increase shelf-life. The cost of food increases drastically during lean season, causing 
these low-income households to spend over half of their income on food. This leads them to prioritise 
their food security spending on less nutritious staple crops (iii) Increased food production for own 
consumption and local markets. This will include promotion of household consumption of safe and 
nutritious  and  dissemination  of  agricultural  practices/  technologies  for  increased  production  and 
24 
productivity  of  nutritious  food  both  for  own  consumption  and  sale  of  surplus;  and  promotion  of 
agricultural  practices  to  increase  year  round  availability  of  food  for  the  households  and  in  local 
markets. This will be coupled with social marketing campaigns to increase community awareness 
and  create  demand  for  the  food  surplus  in  the  markets.  (iv)  Targeted  nutrition  education  for 
household  members  and  communities  will  be  integrated  through  the  programme  interventions. 
Nutrition  education  for  extension  workers  and  integration  of  nutrition  modules  will  be  integrated 
within extension workers’ modules. Health and Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) campaigns 
(where  there  will  be  Rehabilitation  and  maintenance  of  water  sources).  Social  Behaviour 
Communication  (SBCCC)  campaigns  will  seek  to  demystify  socio  cultural  practices  and  myths 
associated with foods and encourage adoption of nutritious foods amongst key populations such as 
pregnant and lactating mothers, children under 5 years and adolescents. 
91.  Women Empowerment: Women empowerment and attitude towards women: program will 
promote  women  as  individuals  capable  of  being  productive  in  ways  that  have  the  potential  to 
mitigate effects of shocks and stress and enhance food and livelihood security through: (i) Economic 
empowerment  for  enhanced  access  to  and  control  of  productive  resources,  finance  and  services. 
(ii)Access to information, knowledge and extension services will be promoted through business skills 
training, and access to extension services. (iii)Balanced workloads due to increased resilient crop 
yields  through  use  of  labour  and  time-saving  technologies  to  encourage  shifts  towards  equitable 
sharing of workload burden within the households. (iv) Support to women’s voice in decision-making 
power  at  household  and  community  level  will  be  implemented  through  leadership  trainings  and 
mentorship of women in groups and enforcing 50 percent representation of women in committees. 
(v) Other gender related interventions such as awareness raising on issues related to prevention of 
early marriage and GBV, importance of adolescent girls' education, will be integrated through the 
GALS methodology. 
92. 
Youth Empowerment: Youth face financial, educational, gender-based, and social barriers, 
which  effectively  limit  the  opportunities  available.  The  project  will  be  designed  to  address  these 
barriers by integrating business, literacy, and life skills training and creating links to specific value 
chain  opportunities  for  youth  (both  women  and  men)  who  do  not  have  formal  education,  in 
combination  with  more  market-focused  activities.  A  strong  focus  on  creation  of  employment 
opportunities  for  the  youth  will  advanced  through  the  following  activities:  (i)  capacity  building, 
apprenticeship, entrepreneurship training, business skills and formal courses in animal husbandry 
(ii)  access  to  capital  through  grants,  (iii)  voice  through  representation  on  decision-making  in 
entrepreneurship groups. Youth will therefore be engaged in a wide variety of off-farm activities at 
production  level  and  at  other  points  in  the  value  chains  (iv)Inclusive  community  planning  and 
Conflict management through entrepreneurship groups by integrating the training of communities 
in  conflict  mediation  and  dialogue,  through  providing  peace  building  training  to  youths  and 
facilitating communal peace dialogue. SSLRP will promote greater youth affirmative action to ensure 
participation of youth in public life dialogue. 
93. 
Community Managed Disaster Risk Reduction: Mobilisation of community to collectively 
address disasters caused by natural hazards especially climate change, which has a multiplier effect 
on natural resources, water, and land (common source of conflict). The interventions will include: 
(i)Support establishment of local community groups to address issues of conflict, drought, gender 
issues and peace building (ii) Build capacity of these community groups to identify risks and hazards 
early enough and to disseminate information to communities.(iii)Optimize community preparedness 
for  early  action  e.g.  weather  predictability  through  identification  of  traditional/  community  early 
warning indicators and linking them with modern early warning information system. Additionally, 
weather/climate data/information is lacking in South Sudan and institutions are not well equipped 
with the appropriate infrastructure and expertise. Therefore, weather information dissemination to 
end users should be considered as a priority for adaptation of Disaster Risk Reduction 
Partnerships will play a key role in enabling resilience building given the communities face 
94. 
varied challenges that require a mix of interventions (humanitarian and development) and how they 
are implemented. Thus, the project will use multi-sector coordination mechanisms geared towards 
building sustainable systems.  
25 
95. 
Integrate peace building approach: SSLRP will adopt a conflict sensitive programming 
as a cross cutting approach and integration across all levels of the interventions by implementing 
context specific actions. This entails a detailed analysis of the drivers of conflict in the project area 
and identification of mitigation actions to be mainstreamed in the project. This will also ensure that 
the  project  interventions  minimize  negative  impacts  and  maximize  positive  impacts  on  peace 
building. For example, at the community level, the following entry points will be used to promote 
horizontal social cohesion:  
-  Through the CDD create mechanisms for joint planning and management of the delivery of 
social services and resources  
-  Strengthening or establishing inter-group mechanisms for conflict resolution and decision-
making (traditional, legal, mediation, etc.)  
-  Supporting community mechanisms for protection of children and young people 
Child  labour:  Promote  use  of  strategies  that  prevent  unfavourable  conditions  in  labour 
96. 
market  instead  of  relying  on  child  labour  this  could  be  adoption  of  modern  and  labour-saving 
agricultural  technologies.  Enhanced  productivity  in  agriculture  can  release  the  pressure  on  child 
labour. Additionally SSLRP will actively strive to reduce risks of child labour through: (i) Increase 
awareness  on  legislation  by  training  to  project  staff  to  ensure  compliance  with  regulations  (ii) 
sensitization  on  the  importance  of  addressing  child  labour  issues  within  the  community,  iii)  To 
increase the school enrolment rate of children by sensitizing community leaders, elders, parents, 
and  especially  the  girls  on  the  merits  of  education.  (iv)  Child  labour  related  risks  adequately 
reflected in all safeguards instruments, contracts with suppliers and other third parties to be funded 
with IFAD funds. 
97. 
COVID-19: The program will conduct an assessment of the impact of COVID in the target 
area and use the findings to prepare a COVID-19 response plan that is grounded in knowledge of 
gender  dynamics,  gender  relations,  sex  and  age  disaggregated  data  that  takes  into  account  the 
differing experiences of all vulnerable groups (IDP’s women and children, women and children in 
refugee camps), the gendered roles, needs, responsibilities and dynamics.  
Conflicts: SSLRP will consider a livelihood systems approach to ensure that project activities 
98. 
do  not  become  potential  source  of  conflicts  given  the  spill  over  nature  of  development  projects 
(compared to humanitarian). To do this effectively, the program will develop a probability matrix of 
how  program  interventions  could  become  conflict  drivers  and  how  to  mitigate  that.  A  risk-  and 
conflict-sensitive  analysis  will  be  done  to  develop  an  approach  that  will  inform  the  selection  of 
communities,  households,  and  activities  especially  for  interventions  involving infrastructure,  land 
and water. 
99. 
Climate Information: Climate information has been the prioritized adaptation option for 
SSLRP. Climate information is comprising of Weather infrastructures such as weather station and 
dissemination  of  an  up  to  date  weather  information  to  end  users.  For  SSLRP,  taking  the  budget 
availed for the project into consideration, weather infrastructures cannot be considered. However, 
partnership/collaboration with other developmental partners,  engaged  in South Sudan in general 
and the target counties in particular, is important to make sure that the target beneficiaries receive 
up to date and credible weather information.  
100.  Irrigation: There is huge potential for irrigation but this practice is insignificant. Therefore, 
taking  the  surface  and  ground  water  resources  in  the  selected  states,  construction  of  small  to 
medium scale irrigation schemes can be considered to benefit smallholder farmers. Therefore, the 
community and other stakeholders should be aware of these things during CDD and also preparation 
of CDPs. 
101.  Promotion of clean energy: More than 90% of the South Sudanese depend on forest for 
fuelwood and charcoal production (FAO, 2016). Therefore, it is highly recommended that provision 
of clean and renewable energy source as well as energy saving technologies is crucial in maintaining 
the  forest  cover  and  the  goods  and  services  it  provide.  The  community  should  be  aware  of  the 
renewable energy technologies during CDD and CDP preparation.  
26 
102.  Outcomes of the climate risk analysis and also IFAD’s climate adaptation framework should 
be made available during CDD and preparation of CDP. Identification and implementation of sub-
projects  (after  the  CDD  and  CDP)  should  adhere  to  SECAP  requirements  such  as  preparation  of 
ESMP, RAP, Indigenous people plan, FPIC etc.  
VII.  Further studies needed (including timeline and costs) 
1.  Youth  assessment  specific  to  the  counties  to  identify  vulnerabilities,  capacity  gaps  and 
potential avenues for engaging them in agribusiness.  
2.  Gender  audit  (including  gender  sensitive  value  chain  analysis)  to  identify  factors  that 
hamper and those that could support the engagement of women in profitable agribusiness. 
3.  More information is needed for a complete picture of children employment and identify the 
types of work that pose the greatest threat to children’s health and safety.  
4.  Feasibility Studies for Infrastructure assessment especially for markets and access roads 
5.  Livelihood  patterns  (Migrations  etc)  especially  for  livestock  communities  in  Eastern 
Equatoria  
6.  As per SECAP’s procedure and depending on scale and type of activities, project/site specific 
ESIA,  ESMP  and  other  studies  may  be  required.  Although  the  climate  classification  is 
moderate, basic climate risk analysis is prepared. These studies will be undertaken during 
implementation and thus will be included in the project costs.  
VIII.  Monitoring and evaluation (what and who monitors and at what cost?)  
103.  Day to day monitoring of implementation progress will be the responsibility of the project 
team, based on the project's Annual Work Plan and its indicators. During the first months of the 
project, the project team will complete and fine-tune baseline data for each indicator and will define 
and fine-tune performance. Specific targets for the first year of implementation, progress indicators 
and their means of verification will be developed at the Start up Workshop. IFAD supervision and 
Implementation Support missions shall rate RLDP’s effectiveness and provide recommendations to 
enhance the programme’s performance 
104.  The  M&E  system  will  give  strong  emphasis  to  monitoring  of  targeting  performance.  All 
implementing Agencies (IA) will be required to provide disaggregated  data on women and youth 
participation,  in  relation  to  overall  project  targets,  including  further  disaggregation  by 
IDPs/Returnees/Host community. The M&E system will collect and analyse information about project 
outreach, effectiveness of the targeting strategy and specific benefits for women and youth. This 
requires strong coordination and collaboration between the M&E responsible person and the Gender 
and Social Development experts/Focal Points at all levels. Impact will be assessed on the basis of 
methodologically  gender  sensitive  baseline,  mid-term  and  completion surveys  which  will  use  key 
indicators to measure women’s empowerment 
105.  Gender indicators: Outreach disaggregated by gender. Proposed Indicators shall consider: 
(i) number of women members in groups, (ii) number of women in leadership positions (iii) number 
of  women  accessing  grants  and  livelihood  packages.  Disaggregation  by  IDPs/Returnees/host 
community. 
106.  Nutrition indicators:  
-  Outcome level indicator: No. of HH reporting improved food security as measured by 
the Food Insecurity Experience Scale (FIES)11 
11 FIES consists of eight questions regarding people's access to adequate food: 1) You were worried you would not have 
enough food to eat? ; 2) You were unable to eat healthy and nutritious food?; 3) You ate only a few kinds of foods?; 4) You 
had to skip a meal?; 5) You ate less than you thought you should?; 6) Your household ran out of food?; 7) You were hungry 
but did not eat?; 8) You went without eating for a whole day? 
27 
-  Outcome  level  indicator:  Percentage  of  women  reporting  improved  quality  of  their 
diets12  
-  Output level indicator: Number of persons/households provided with targeted support 
to improve their nutrition13 
107.  Youth Indicators: Outreach disaggregated by age. Proposed indicators shall consider: (i) 
Youth  members  of  groups  and  (ii)  number  of  youth  accessing  grants  and  livelihood  packages. 
Disaggregation by IDPs/ Returnee/ host community. 
108.  Environment and Climate: The M and E will be done in two ways: (1) with the project M 
and E system in which specific indicators are included for measurement and follow-up and (2) based 
on the indicators and activities indicated in the ESMP.  In  either case general indicator are 100% 
execution of ESIA/ESMP  
IX. 
References 
1.  World  Bank  (2011).  A  Poverty  Profile  for  the  Southern  States  of  Sudan.  The  World  Bank 
Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Unit, Africa Region 
2.  World  Bank  (2018)  The  Impact  of  Conflict  and  Shocks  on  Poverty;  South  Sudan  Poverty 
Assessment 2017 
3.  UNDP (2015) South Sudan Human Development Report 
4.  IPC (2020) Acute Food Insecurity and Acute Malnutrition Analysis January 2020 – July 2020 
5.  UNICEF  (2015)  Youth-Led  Participatory  Action  Research  Budi  County,  Eastern  Equatoria 
State, South Sudan August 2015  
6.  JICA (2017) Country Gender Profile Republic of South Sudan 
7.  OXFAM (2017) South Sudan Gender Analysis: A snapshot situation analysis of the differential 
impact  of  the  humanitarian  crisis  on  women,  girls,  men  and  boys  in  South  Sudan.  Joint 
agency consolidated gender analysis  
8.  World Food Program (2018) South Sudan Integrated Context Analysis 
9.  Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC 2020) IPC acute food insecurity and acute 
malnutrition analysis; January to July 2020 
10. Gender Concern International Women in South Sudan “Predicament, Challenge and Hope” 
http://www.genderconcerns.org/images/gal/Women%20in%20South%20Sudan.pdf 
11. Report of the commission on human rights in South Sudan 
12. Liezelle  Kumalo  and  Cassie  Roddy-Mullineaux  (2019  )  Sustaining  Peace;  Harnessing  the 
Power of South Sudanese Women. Institute for Security Studies. 
13. Ricardo Hausmann, Laura D. Tyson, and Saadia Zahidi, The Global Gender Gap Report 2010 
29–31, 
(Geneva: 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GenderGap_Report_2010.pdf. 
Economic 
Forum, 
2010), 
World 
14. UNICEF. Child Protection.  
https://www.unicef.org/southsudan/UNICEF-South-Sudan-Child-Protection-Briefing-Note-
Oct-2018.pdf.  
15. UNICEF. Childhood under attack: The staggering impact of South Sudan’s crisis on children. 
https://www.unicef.org/southsudan/UNICEF_South_Sudan_Report_Childhood_under_Attac
k_15Dec_FINAL.pdf. 
16. Bureau of International Labour Affairs (2018) No Advancement – Efforts Made but Complicit 
in  Forced  Child  Labour:  2018  Findings  On  The  Worst  Forms  Of  Child  Labour. 
https://www.dol.gov/sites/dolgov/files/ILAB/child_Labour_reports/tda2018/South%20Suda
n.pdf 
12 IFAD Core Indicator 
13 IFAD Core Indicator 
28 
17. Africa  Development  Bank  (AfDB  2015)  Child  Labour  and  Schooling  in  South  Sudan  and 
Sudan: Is There a Gender Preference? 
18. What works to prevent VAWG (2019). Economic and Social Costs of VAWG South Sudan  
19. The SUD Institute (2020) Policy Brief: The COVID-19 Pandemic Vulnerability Factors in South 
https://reliefweb.int/report/south-sudan/policy-brief-covid-19-pandemic-
Sudan 
vulnerability-factors-south-sudan 
20. BRACED. (2016a). Building Resilience to Climate Extremes and Disasters in South Sudan: 
An  anthropological  study  exploring  the  perceptions  of  climate  change,  adaptation  and 
resilience among agro-pastoral and agriculturalist communities in the Greater Bahr el Ghazal 
Region.  
21. Dima, S. (2006). Land use systems in South Sudan and their impacts on land degradation. 
Conference on Environmental Management Plan in Post Conflict South Sudan, (p. 23). Juba. 
Retrieved November 28, 2016, from hhttp://postconflict.unep.ch/sudanreport/sudan_websi
te/doccatcher/data/Juba%20 Workshop%20Papers/dima%20paper.doc 
22. Diao, X., You, L., Alpuerto, V., & Folledo, R. (2012). Assessing Agricultural Potential in South 
Sudan  –  A  Spatial  Analysis  Method.  In  B.  Alam,  Application  of  Geographic  Information 
Systems. Intech. doi:10.5772/47938  
23. EU. (2016). Seed policy status in South Sudan. European Union, International Cooperation 
and Development  
24. FAO.  (2016,  September  6).  FAO  South  Sudan  strengthening  natural  resources.  Retrieved 
November 05, 2016, from FAO and emergencies: http://www.fao.org/emergencies/fao-in-
action/stories/stories-detail/en/c/418029/  
25. Fernando,  N.,  &  Garvey,  W.  (2013).  Republic  of  South  Sudan  –  The  Rapid  Water  Sector 
Needs  Assessment  and  a  Way  Forward.  World  Bank.  Retrieved  November  20,  2016,  from 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/434701468302991568/pdf/799230v10ESW0P
0Box0379795B00PUBLIC0.pdf  
26. MOAF. (2013). Environmental and Social Assessment Report. Juba: Ministry of Agriculture 
and  Forestry  (MOAF),  Republic  of  South  Sudan.  Retrieved  November  07,  2016,  from 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/687411468103733448/E4220v20South00021
0201300Box377316B.doc.  
27. MOE.  (2014).  The  National  Environment  Protection  and  Sustainable  Development  Policy, 
2014-2024.  Juba:  Ministry  of  Environment  (MOE),  Republic  of  South  Sudan.  Retrieved 
November 13, 2016  
28. Murray, L. (2016). Building Resilience to Climate Extremes and Disasters in South Sudan. 
London: Building Resilience and Adaptation to Climate Extremes and Disasters (BRACED) 
Programme. Retrieved December 15, 2016  
29. MWRI.  (2007).  Water  Policy.  Juba:  Ministry  of  Water  Resources  and  Irrigation  (MWRI), 
Government of South Sudan. Retrieved November 14, 2016  
30. Reliefweb. (2017). Retrieved July 6, 2017, from Climate Change Vulnerability Index 2017: 
http://reliefweb.int/report/world/climate-change-vulnerability-index-2017  
31. Republic of South Sudan, Country Strategy Note, 2019. Main Report and appendices 
32. Richardson,  T.  (2011,  2011).  Pastoral  Violence  in  Jonglei.  Washington,  DC:  Inventory  of 
Conflict and Environment (ICE), Trade Environment Database (TED), American University  
33. RSS. (2015). Comprehensive Agricultural Development Master Plan - Final Report - Annex 
IV - Situation Analysis Report 2013/2015. Japan International Cooperation Agency. Republic 
of  South  Sudan  (RSS)  JIN  Corporation.  Retrieved  November  10,  2016, 
from 
http://open_jicareport.jica.go.jp/pdf/12233656_01.pdf  
34. South Sudan First State  of  Environment and  Outlook Report (2018)  UNEP and Ministry  of 
Environment  
35. UNDP.  (2012).  Investing  in  Agriculture  for  Food  Security  and  Economic  Transformation. 
United Nations Development Programme South Sudan  
29 
36. USAID.  (2016).  Climate  Change  Risk  Profile.  Washington,  DC:  United  States  Agency  for 
from 
2016, 
International  Development 
https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/2016%20CRM%20 
Fact%20Sheet%20-%20South%20Sudan_0.pdf  
(USAID).  Retrieved  November 
17, 
37. WFP/VAM Nairobi Regional Bureau (2014): Climate risk and food security in South Sudan: 
Analysis of climate impacts on food security and livelihoods  
30 
South Sudan
South Sudan Livelihoods Resilience Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Mission Dates:
20 August to 6 December 2020
Document Date:
01/03/2021
Project No.
2000002869
Report No.
5643-SS
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
The Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
i 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 PAGES 
Currency Equivalents ................................................................................................................................ 3 
Weights and Measures ............................................................................................................................. 3 
Fiscal Year ................................................................................................................................................... 3 
Map of the Project Area ........................................................................................................................... 6 
Executive Summary .................................................................................................................................. 7 
Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 12 
I. 
1.1.  COUNTRY BACKGROUND AND THE PROJECT AREA ............................................................................... 12 
1.2.  AGRICULTURE, BASIC PROBLEMS AND OPPORTUNITIES ...................................................................... 13 
1.3.  KEY STAKEHOLDERS AND INVOLVEMENT OF SMALLHOLDERS.............................................................. 14 
FOCUS OF THE PROJECT .......................................................................................................................... 14 
1.4. 
II.  Summary of Project Description .................................................................................................. 15 
III.  Summary of Implementation To-date ........................................................................................ 19 
IV.  The Work plan 2021 ....................................................................................................................... 20 
V.  Budget Estimates and Financing Arrangements ...................................................................... 24 
VI.  Implementation ArrangemeNT .................................................................................................... 30 
VII.  Expected Benefits and Beneficiaries ........................................................................................... 32 
VIII. Constraints, Risks and Mitigants ................................................................................................. 33 
2 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
Currency Equivalents 
Currency Unit 
USD 1.0 
Weights and Measures 
1 kilogram 
1 kg 
1 kilometre (km) 
1 metre  
1 square metre 
1 acre 
1 hectare 
1 Feddan  
Fiscal Year 
1 January-31 December 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
South Sudanese Pounds (ERN) 
ERN 170.00  
1000 g 
2.204 lb. 
0.62 mile 
1.09 yards 
10.76 square feet 
0.405 hectare 
2.47 acres 
1 acre 
3 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
Abbreviations and ACRONYMS 
AfDB 
ALDP   
AWPB   
BDC 
CAMP   
CBOs   
CDC 
CDD 
CDP 
CF 
COSOP  
CSN 
DSF 
ESMF   
ESMP   
GDP 
GIS 
GiZ 
GOSS   
HDI 
IA 
IFAD 
ILO 
IPM 
IWRM   
KM 
M&E 
MAFS   
MTR 
NAC 
NGO 
NTC 
PCR 
PDO 
PDR 
PDT 
PIM 
PMT 
PP 
PSD 
RBAs   
SECAP  
SME 
SSLRP  
SSP 
SSPDT  
TA 
ToC 
ToF 
ToT 
African Development Bank 
Agriculture and Livelihood Development Project  
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Boma Development Committee 
Comprehensive Agricultural Master Plan  
Community Based Organisations 
County Development Committees 
Community Driven Development  
Community Development Plans  
Community Facilitators  
Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 
Country Strategy Note 
Debt Sustainability Framework 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
Gross Domestic Product 
Geographic Information System 
German Development Agency  
Government of the Republic of South Sudan 
Human Development Index 
Implementing Agency 
International Fund for Agricultural Development  
International Labour Organisation  
Integrated Pest Management  
Integrated Water Resources Management  
Knowledge Management  
Monitoring and Evaluation  
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security  
Mid Term Review  
National Advisory Committee  
Non-Governmental Organisation 
National Technical Committee  
Project Completion Report  
Project Development Objective 
Project Design Report  
Project Delivery Team 
Project Implementation Manual  
Project Management Team 
Procurement Plan 
Private Sector Development  
Result Based Allocations  
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
Small and Medium Enterprises  
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project 
South Sudanese Pounds 
South Sudan Project Delivery Team 
Technical Assistance  
Theory of Change  
Table of Figures 
Training of Trainers  
4 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
VC 
WB 
WFP 
WHO 
Value Chain 
World Bank 
World Food Programme 
World Health Organisation 
5 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
Map of the Project Area 
6 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
Executive Summary 
Plan Objective – The objective of this inaugural Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) is, 
essentially, to set the stage for the effective implementation of the South Sudan Livelihoods 
and  Resilience  Project  (SSLRP).  This  plan  primarily  focuses  on  establishing  processes  and 
procedures  that  guide  the  effective  and  successful  implementation  of  the  project  following 
established guidelines. 
Strategic Approach and Focus – As far as a strategic approach is concerned, SSLRP will 
build  on  similar  or  related  in-country  experience,  such  as  the  completed  South  Sudan 
Livelihood  Development  Project  (SSLDP)  whose  objective  was  to  raise  smallholder 
agricultural  production  and  productivity  in  the  same  targeted  communities.  SSLRP 
implementation  will  also  make  use  of  lessons  of  experience  generated  by  several  projects 
funded by other donors such as the World Bank, the African Development Bank (AfDB), the 
Germany  International  Development  Agency  (GiZ)  and  the  Dutch  Government.  Such 
projects  include:  a)  South  Sudan  Skills  and  SafetyNet  Project  (SSSNP)  -  WB;  b)  South 
Sudan  Agrobusiness  Development  Project  (SSADP)  –  Dutch;  c)  Agriculture  and  Livelihoods 
Development (ALDP) – WB; d) Agricultural Markets and Trade Improvement Project (AMTIP) 
–  AfDB;  e)  Food  and  Nutrition  Assistance  for  Relief  and  Recovery  (FNARR)  –  WFP;  and  f) 
Food Security and Agricultural Development (FSAD)- KfW GiZ. These interventions focused 
on  the  mix  of  re-establishment  of  livelihoods  for  crisis-affected  rural  households  and  on 
more  structured  development  interventions  in  Markets,  agricultural,  livestock  and  fisheries 
development, and natural resources management. SSLRP implementation is to be guided by 
the experiences emanating from all these interventions. 
This being the first year of SSLRP implementation, the approach to be employed during the 
course of 2021 will largely focus on establishing firm, but simple, processes and procedures 
to serve as a solid basis for Project implementation in the subsequent years. Essentially, the 
approach will include the following: 
a)  Ensuring  the  PCU  core  staff  are  mobilised  and  adequately  facilitated  (in  terms  of  skills 
and equipment) to work with the Implementing Agency (IA) for effective implementation 
of SSLRP; 
b)  Ensuring that the staff of the implementing Agency at the different levels are mobilised 
and  adequately  facilitated  (in  terms  of  skills  and  equipment)  to  provide  effective 
guidance to SSLRP implementation in the five counties. This will be done through skills 
development/enhancement  (where  required)  and  the  provision  of  the  relevant 
equipment/tools/software; 
c)  Liaising  with  ongoing  Projects  (funded  by  either  GoSS  or  other  GoSS  development 
partners)  to  exploit  any  existent  synergies  as  a  way  of  avoiding  duplication  and, 
therefore, ensuring effective resource use; 
d)  Establishing  effective  collaboration  between  and  among  the  different  implementing 
institutions  to  ensure  that  the  different  activities  are  appropriately  sequenced.  This 
collaboration  will  also  serve  as  a  learning  mechanism  whereby  some  institutions  will 
learn from others so as to pass on relevant experience and ensuring that past mistakes 
are avoided; 
e)  Developing  and  effectively  communicate  to  all  stakeholders  reasonable  schedule  to 
ensure  that  they  all  know  what  to  do,  when  to  do  it,  and  respecting  all  the  implicit 
approval processes. 
Summary  Description  of  the  2021  Plan  –  The  plan  contained  herein  is  summarised 
hereunder by components and subcomponents. 
7 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
Component 1: Community Driven Development Planning – The activities are designed 
to  facilitate  communities  to  understand  their  environment,  natural  resources,  and  food 
security  and  nutrition  needs;  identify  the  constraints  to  sustainably  improving  production 
and increasing their market linkages; develop and implement costed CDPs to address these 
challenges. 
Subcomponent  1.1:  Build  Strong  and  Inclusive  Community  Based  Organizations  – 
CBOs are the promoters and managers of socio-economic change and are expected to plan, 
finance,  implement  and  operate  subprojects.  They  represent  the  building  blocks  of  rural 
communities’ social capital and they help develop community members’ potential for social 
and  economic  development.  The  objective  of  this  subcomponent  is,  therefore,  to  support 
the  development  of  strong  CBOs  that  are  representative  of  the  different  population 
segments  (women,  youth,  vulnerable  households)  in  the  community  and  that  are 
capacitated  to  develop  CDPs.  The  following  activities  are  planned  for  SSLRP’s  first  year  to 
gradually contribute to the subcomponent’s objective: 
  CBOs developed from 15 Payams  
o  Two days leadership orientation for participating Payams and Bomas per 
County;  
o  Rooms hire and associated facilities for 2 days per County; 
o  Costs of the facilitation process; 
  Gender Mainstreaming 
o  Beneficiary assessment, mobilisation and consultation; 
o  Staff Training on Gender Empowerment and Social Inclusion; 
o  Mapping and capacity assessment of existing VSLAs; 
o  Facilitated support to VSLAs (Financial literacy); 
o  Gender sensitisation across CBOs including VSLAs; 
o  Expert of GALS methodology; 
o  Operationalise GALS in groups and households; 
o 
o  Exchange visits 
IEC Materials for Gender sensititsation; 
  Nutrition Mainstreaming 
o  Nutrition gaps assessment (value chain/ Market profiles); 
o  Demonstration Household Food Production; 
o  Conduct Nutrition education sessions; 
o  Social marketing for promotion of nutritious foods; 
o 
IEC Materials for Nutrition messaging; 
o  Reinforce capacity of community extension; 
o  Cooking demonstrations and recipe development; 
o  Promotion of food storage and processing. 
  AMVAT/AfDB Parallel financing activities. 
Subcomponent 1.2: Development of Community Driven Development Plans (CDPs) 
–  Communities  will  be  facilitated  to  development  CDPs.  Ideally,  these  will  be  packages  of 
activities identified that can respond to the collective needs of the beneficiaries. In terms of 
activities, an estimated number of CDPs per County is made as follows: 
  Kajo-Keji – 13; 
  Terekeka – 5; 
  Magwi – 9; 
  Torir – 4; and 
  Bor – 3. 
  AMVAT/AfDB Parallel Financing activities. 
8 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
Component  2:  Agriculture  Production  and  Livelihood  Support  -  The  objective  of  the 
component  is  to  serve  as  a  financing  arm  for  the  vetted  subprojects  emanating  from  the 
CDPs  developed  under  Component  1.  The  objective  of  this  component  will  be  achieved 
through the effective implementation of three subcomponents. Following hereunder are the 
activities planned for 2021 under each of the subcomponents. 
Subcomponent  2.1:  Investments  for  Increased  Climate-Sensitive  Agriculture 
Production  and Rural Livelihoods -  Investments under this subcomponent will focus  on 
enhancing  smallholder  agricultural  production  and  productivity  and  promotion  of  off-farm 
livelihoods  that  would  improve  households’  food  security,  incomes,  and  livelihood  assets. 
This  being  a  CCD  project,  no  specific  activity  can  be  identified  apriori.  However,  it  is 
assumed that a total of 34 subprojects will be supported during the first year as follows: 
  Kajo-Keji – 13; 
  Terekeka – 5; 
  Magwi – 9; 
  Torir – 4; and 
  Bor – 3. 
Subcomponent  2.2  -  Community  Infrastructure  to  Support  Production  and 
Marketing – Planned activities under this subcomponent will be infrastructure subprojects 
selected  from  the  CDPs.  Given  the  importance  of  watershed  management,  the  community 
facilitation  process  with  ensure  that  investments  in  watershed  improvement  are  given  first 
priority. As such, following below is the expected initial investment in infrastructure: 
 
Infrastructure for Soil & Water Conservation (Terraces, Contour bunds, gabions, etc.)1 
o  Kajo-Keji – 27; 
o  Terekeka – 12; 
o  Magwi – 29; 
o  Torir – 17; and 
o  Bor – 15. 
  AMVAT/AfDB Parallel Financing. 
Component  3:  Project  Support  and  Capacity  Building  –  This  will  be  a  cross-cutting 
component servicing the technical component and facilitating the pathways for the effective 
implementation of the CDD approach. The component comprises two subcomponents: 
Subcomponent 3.1: Third Party Implementation Arrangements – A third party IA will 
be  selected  by  the  Government  through  a  competitive  recruitment  process.  Planned 
activities for 2021 include: 
Information dissemination through audio-visual methods; 
 
  Production and dissemination of various extension messages; 
  Annual stakeholder workshops; 
  Publication and dissemination of workshop proceedings (magazines); 
  Annual progress surveys; 
  Baseline survey; and 
  Third Party fees and costs. 
Subcomponent  3.2:  Institutional  Capacity  Building  and  Policy  Support  –  The 
objective  of  this  subcomponent  is  to  strengthen  capacities  of  government  staff  and  other 
non-state actors, at the national, State and County levels, to facilitate participatory planning 
1Includes climate/environment screening activities and the associated costs. 
9 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
and  development  processes.  The  focus  of  the  subcomponent  will  be  on  supporting  the 
establishment  of  a  Project  Coordination  Unit  (PCU)  at  MAFS  and  addressing  other  capacity 
gaps  as  would  have  been  identified  by  a  Capacities  and  Systems  Needs  Assessment. 
Planned activities for 2021 include: 
  Establishment of Project Coordination Unit; 
o  Desktop Computers2; 
o  Printers3; 
o  Accounting software4; 
o  Office furniture5. 
  Double Cabin Vehicle; 
  Supporting some oversight roles of MAFS 
o  NTC/NAC meetings; 
o 
o 
Joint stakeholders’ meetings; 
Implementation support where needed; 
  Building of other institutional capacity at state and local government level; 
  Development of the National Cooperatives Policy Frameworks 
o  Professional fees of Lead Consultant; 
o  Assistant consultant; 
o  Desk research, internet, airtime; 
  Conducting a cooperatives development stakeholders validation meetings 
o  Venue; 
o  Meals and Refreshment; 
o  Transport refund for DGs from States; 
o  Production of draft documents; 
o  Full Board costs for DGs; 
o  Organization costs 
  Conduct 1st technical review meeting 
o  Venue; 
o  Meals and refreshments; 
o  Transport refund; 
o  Production of draft documents; 
o  Organization costs 
  Conduct 2nd technical review meeting 
o  Venue; 
o  Meals and refreshments; 
o  Transport refund; 
o  Production of draft documents; 
o  Organization costs 
  Production of national cooperative development strategic framework document copies 
o  Computer design of the document; 
o  Production of document; 
o  Packaging; 
o  Transportation and distribution 
  Administration, oversight, supervision, monitoring and evaluation 
  ESMF Implementation 
o  Site-specific ESIAs, ESMPs and environmental license fees; 
o  Mitigation measures; 
o  Monitoring and evaluation purposes (R&D, M&E, Field visits); 
2Desktop with software and antivirus. 
32 for the PCU and 1 each for the 8 Focal Persons. 
4Should include the software itself, annual license and technical assistance. 
51 set for each Officer. Set consists of a desk, chair, lamp and a file cabinet. 
10 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
o  Environmental and social training 
  AMVAT/AfDB Parallel Financing for Project Coordination and Management 
Summary  Budget  and  Financing  –  Presented  in  this  section  is  the  summary  cost 
information  giving  an  overall  picture  of  financial  resources  required  for  the  2021  SSLRP’s 
work-plan and budget and the respective sources of financing. The total budget for SSLRP’s 
2021  AWPB  is  about  USD  6.4  million.  A  total  of  about  USD  1.5  million  (or  23%  of  the 
budget)  is  allocated  to  Component  1:  Community  Driven  Development  Planning;  USD 
979,000  (or  15%  of  the  budget)  is  allocated  to  Component  2:  Agriculture  Production  and 
Rural  livelihood  Support;  and  about  USD  4  million  (or  62%  of  the  budget)  is  allocated  to 
Component  3:  Project  Support  and  Capacity  Building.  About  43.7%  of  the  budget  will  be 
financed  by  IFAD  (8.7%  from  the  IFAD  loan  and  35%  from  the  IFAD  grant);  48%  will  be 
from  AfDB’s  parallel  financing,  8%  from  GoSS  and  the  remainder  will  be  financed  by  the 
beneficiaries (0.5%). 
11 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
1.1. 
Country Background and the Project Area 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Political  and  Economic  Context  –  the  Republic  of  South  Sudan  is  a  landlocked 
1. 
resource-rich country in Eastern Africa. South Sudan is the continents’ youngest nation and 
was  created  in  July  2011  when  it  seceded  from  Sudan.  It  is  the  third  most  fragile  state  in 
the world after Yemen and Somalia6. Its fragility is characterized by conflict, displacement of 
people  and  resulting  food  insecurity.  The  prolonged  civil  war  was  driven  by  historical, 
political,  social  and  economic  marginalization,  resulting in  tensions  due  to  ethnic  divisions, 
corruption  and  power  struggles.  With  the  formation  of  the  new  government  in  February 
2020, South Sudan has entered an important transition phase, from conflict towards peace 
and the initiation of economic recovery. 
2. 
However, conflict remains one  of the social challenges in South Sudan. The country 
has experienced armed conflicts, at different times, since 2013. This has caused death and 
immigration and migration of South Sudanese as well as economic and social destructions. 
But,  regarding  project-induced  conflicts,  efforts  will  be  made  to  work  towards  conflict 
avoidance  through  the  provision  of  quality  service  and  public  participation.  Close 
collaboration  with  the  different  partners  operating  in  South  Sudan  will  be  critical  in 
anticipating,  monitoring  and  mitigating  conflicts.  In  addition,  a  Grievance  Redress 
Mechanism (GRM) has been prepared. Project target group engagement strategy, inclusive 
of the GRM, will ensure the participation of communities in planning, implementation as well 
as Monitoring and Evaluation (see Section M of this report). 
3. 
The  country’s  population  is  12.3  million  (50  percent  male,  50  percent  female)  with 
85 percent living in rural areas. In 2016, 83 percent of the population were living below the 
poverty  line7.  As  of  2018,  the  country  ranked  186  out  of  189  countries  in  the  Human 
Development  Index  (HDI),  had  a  life  expectancy  of  57  years,  average  of  4.8  years  of 
schooling  and  a  Gross  National  Income  (GNI)  per  capita  of  USD  963.  With  less  than  13 
people per square kilometre, the population density is one of the lowest in Africa. 
4. 
Economy  –South  Sudan  ranks  185  out  of  190  economies,  due  to  insecurity,  poor 
road  infrastructure,  lack  of  crop  storage,  and  lack  of  agricultural  market  infrastructure. 
Value addition is constrained by lack of raw materials, lack of power, lack of skilled workers, 
and  lack  of  finance.  Transparency  International  ranked  the  country  179  out  of  180  in  its 
corruption perception index8. The economy has had negative GDP growth for five of the past 
seven years9 due to conflict and economic shocks around oil prices and monetizing the debt. 
While inflation has reduced, food prices remain high; the cost of the minimum expenditure 
basket  increased  by  489  percent  between  May  2016  and  May  201810.  Despite  its  natural 
resource  endowment,  Foreign  Direct  Investment  (FDI)  has  been  volatile  in  the  face  of 
insecurity and was, in fact, negative in 2016 and 201711. 
6
7
Fund for Peace: Fragile States Index 2019: https://fragilestatesindex.org/country-data/ 
 World Bank Data 2018: https://data.worldbank.org/country/south-sudan 
8Transparency International: Corruption Perceptions Index 2019: https://www.transparency.org/cpi2019 
9GDP growth rate for S. Sudan has been as follows: -46.1 percent (2012); 13.3 percent (2013); 3.4 percent (2014); -10.8 percent (2015); -6.3 
percent (2016); -6.9 percent (2017); - 3.5 percent (2018); and 3.2 percent (2019) - Sources: Word Bank  
http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/928961533737855697/pdf/129303-WP-PUBLIC-SouthSudanEconomicUpdateJuly.pdf; 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.KD.ZG?locations=SS; https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/southsudan/overview 
10World Bank June 2018: Linking the Agriculture and Food Sector to the Job Creation Agenda 
11African Development Bank, 2018: African Economic Outlook: South Sudan.  
12 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
South  Sudan’s  economy  has  rebounded  during  2018-19,  with  a  growth  rate  of  3.2 
5. 
percent  after  contracting  for  four  consecutive  years  since  2014/1512.  The  recovery  is 
attributed to: a) improvement in the oil and mining sectors and b) economic dividends from 
the  peace  agreement,  leading  to  a  recovery  in  non-oil  sectors.  The  country’s  general 
inflation  rate  fell  to  24.5  percent  in  2019  from  83.5  percent  in  2018.  The  central  bank 
commitment to reduce monetization of the fiscal deficit will continue, with resulting inflation 
predicted to decline further to 16.9 percent in 2020 and 9.7 percent in 202113.  
6. 
Project  Target Area – SSLRP will be implemented in three States and  five counties: 
Eastern Equatoria (Magwi and Torit); Central Equatoria (KajoKeji and Terekeka) and Jonglei 
(Bor).  These  target  areas  were  jointly  selected  by  GoSS  and  IFAD  based  on:  a)  food 
production  corridors  (Greater  Equatoria  accounts  for  40  percent  of  the  country’s  cereal 
production,  while  Jonglei  has  the  highest  livestock  numbers  and  high  levels  of  fishing);  b) 
States  hosting  high  numbers  of  returnees  (the  three  States  account  for  the  highest 
concentration  of  returnees);  c)  potential  to  build  on  previous  IFAD  investments  in  Eastern 
and Central Equatoria and other development partners and d) stability and low risk of future 
conflict. 
1.2. 
Agriculture, Basic Problems and Opportunities 
7. 
Agriculture  is  the  main  engine  of  growth  and  economic  development  in  rural  areas, 
accounting for 90 percent of rural livelihoods in South Sudan. However, the country’s high 
potential of agricultural production has not been fully utilized to feed its own people. 
8. 
Crops  –  the  country  is  resource  rich,  with  fertile  soils  and  abundant  water  supplies 
from the Blue and White Nile rivers. It has a land area of 648,000 km2, with 62m ha of land 
in  the  Nile  river  basin,  of  which  75  percent  is  suitable  for  agriculture  and  50  percent  is 
highly suitable for crop cultivation. Currently, the country’s agriculture is dominated by low-
productivity subsistence farmers, cultivating on average, one ha. Many smallholder farmers 
own  land  but  are  unable  to  invest  in  farming.  In  addition  to  conflict  and  insecurity,  crop 
production  is  constrained  by:  a)  pest/crop  diseases;  b)  limited  use  of  quality  inputs;  c) 
limited availability of trained extension service providers; d) limited agricultural research; e) 
limited irrigation; f) inadequate knowledge about improved inputs; g) inadequate marketing 
and  transport  infrastructure  and  services;  h)  inadequate  rural  financing  due  to  poorly 
organized  rural  financial institutions;  i)  poor  post-harvest  and  value  addition infrastructure 
and storage; and j) shortage of labour and mechanization. 
Livestock  –the  livestock  sectorcontributes13.6  percent  to  the  economy14.  Livestock 
9. 
(cattle, goats, sheep and poultry)  represents a significant proportion of agricultural activity 
in  the  country.  There  are  an  estimated  12  million  cattle,  14  million  goats  and  13  million 
sheep  in  the  country.  Livestock  production,  especially  cattle,  is  undertaken  in  the  arid  and 
semi-arid zones of the  country. Livestock  systems are  either nomadic pastoralism or agro-
pastoralism.  For  most  household’s  financial  capital  is  held  in  the  form  of  livestock  and 
traditional social support systems are based on livestock transactions. Livestock are sold for 
cash,  slaughtered  for  cultural  practices,  bartered  for  grain,  used  as  payment  for  penalties, 
and given for dowry.  
10. 
Fisheries  –  The  fisheries  sector  provides  an  important  source  of  food  security  and 
livelihoods  and  employment  for  women  and  youth.  The  country  has  a  vast  wetland  area 
covering 112,880 ha, with an additional 2.6 million ha during seasonal flooding. The wetland 
area between Bor and Malakal, known as the Sudd, hosts over 100 species of fish. Formed 
by  the  White  Nile,  the  Sudd  swamps  covers  15  percent  of  the  total  area  of  South  Sudan. 
12South Sudan Economic Update: Poverty and Vulnerability in a Fragile Environment (English). Washington, D.C.: 
World Bank Group; February 2020. 
13https://www.afdb.org/en/countries/east-africa/south-sudan/south-sudan-economic-outlook 
14IGAD Policy Briefs 2016: IGAD Center for Pastoral Areas and Livestock Development (ICPALD) 
13 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
The current potential for fish harvest in the swamps is estimated at 90,000 tonnes per year, 
and  possibly  up  to  140,000  tonnes  per  year.  The  estimated  potential  annual  catch  for  the 
whole  country  is  about  220,000  tonnes.  However,  current  reported  annual  fish  landings  is 
estimated  at  between  90,000  and  100,000  tonnes;  less  than  50  percent  of  the  potential. 
Challenges  facing  the  subsector  include  lack  of  supporting  infrastructure,  inadequate  and 
inappropriate  fishing  equipment  and  difficulty  of  transportation  between  production  and 
consumption areas.  
1.3. 
Key Stakeholders and Involvement of Smallholders 
11. 
Government  institutions  (national,  State,  County,  Payam  and  Boma)  have  an 
inherent interest in the successful implementation of SSLRP. The Ministry of Agriculture and 
Food  Security  (MAFS)  will  be  responsible  for  overseeing  the  overall  implementation  of  the 
Project;  the  Third-Party  Implementing  Agency  will  be  reporting  to  MAFS.  MAFS  will  also 
liaise and work with other Ministries and partners whose mandates have a direct bearing on 
the  achievement  of  SSLRP’s  goal  and  development  objective.  At  the  State  and  County 
levels,  Focal  Persons  will  be  appointed  to  serve  as  a  link  between  the  SSLRP  and  the 
respective  development  committees  (State  Development  Committees  and  County 
Development  Committees).  They  will  ensure  that  SSLRP’s  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budgets 
are  relevant  to  the  respective  State  and  County  development  agendas.  Of  particular 
importance are the smallholders’ Community Based Organisations (CBOs). 
The smallholders and their organisations are the central focus of SSLRP; they will be 
12. 
involved variously during the course of project implementation. Their involvement, not only 
as  beneficiaries  but  also  as  active  participants,  will  ensure  ownership  of  the  project  and 
sustainability  of  the  different  interventions.  Community-Driven  Development  (CDD)  will  be 
the implementation approach to be used by SSLRP. That, de facto, makes CBOs key players 
in  identifying  the  smallholders’  problems,  prioritizing  them,  development  of  Community 
Development  Plans  (CDPs)  and  oversee  the  process  of  implementing  subprojects  that  will 
emanate  from  the  CDPs.  The  design  process  established  that  many  of  these  institutions 
have various capacity limitations. Weak institutions coupled with poor public investments in 
the  rural  communities  have  undermined  rural  development.  Accordingly,  the  respective 
institutions’ capacities will be augmented through capacity strengthening interventions. 
1.4. 
Focus of the Project 
Despite  the  formation  of  the  Government  of  National  Unity,  South  Sudan’s  context 
13. 
remains  fragile  with  localised  inter-community  conflict  driven  by  competition  for  natural 
resources,  adverse  weather  conditions  and  flooding,  as  well  as  the  risk  of  a  perpetuated 
humanitarian  crisis  if  the  returnees  and  the  general  population  are  not  integrated  into  the 
economy. The main risk is the resumption of national scale instability, if the peace deal fails. 
It  is  therefore  critical  that  efforts  towards  re-integration  of  the  rural  population into  viable 
livelihood opportunities are given priority, as an important strategy towards the sustenance 
of  the  peace  agreement.  There  is  strong  evidence  on  the  role  of  sustainable  human 
development  in  discouraging  people  (including  young  people)  from  engaging  in  acts  of 
violence. 
14. 
Thus,  SSLRP’s  focus  will  be  on  re-establishing  livelihoods  for  rural  communities, 
putting  particular  emphasis  on  returnee  households,  young  people  and  women.  It  will 
strengthen  the  resilience  of  rural  communities  to  emergency  and  crises,  rebuild  local 
agricultural  production  and  stabilize  incomes  through  micro-enterprises  and  short-term 
employment.  SSLRP  will  complement  the  Revitalized  Agreement on  the  Resolution  of  the 
Conflict  in  the  Republic  of South  Sudan (R-ARCSS),  which  commits  to  restore  economic 
foundations by generating employment and improving livelihoods. 
14 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
II.  SUMMARY OF PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
2.1 
Goal, Objective and Strategic Approach 
The  SSLRP  goal  is  to  ‘contribute  to  improved  and  resilient  livelihoods  among  the 
15. 
targeted  rural  communities’.  The  Project  Development  Objective 
‘empower 
communities  to  participate  in  decision-making  processes  that  will  recover  agriculture 
livelihoods, build household resilience and promote stability’. 
is  to 
SSLRP’s  development  objective  will  be  achieved 
the  effective 
16. 
implementation of two technical components: a) Community Driven Development Planning; 
and  b)  Agriculture  Production  and  Rural  Livelihood  Support.  The  third  component,  Project 
Support  and  Capacity  Building,  will  seek  to  ensure  that  SSLRP  is  effectively  implemented, 
including the provision of capacity building to selected  GoSS institutions at the central and 
local  levels.  Capacity  building  activities  will  not  only  contribute  to  effective  project 
implementation  but  will  also  increase  the  likelihood  of  sustaining  successful  project 
interventions. Lastly, the fourth component, Disaster Risk Reduction and Management, will 
provide  a  timely  response  to  adverse  conditions  (e.g.  weather  extremities,  pest  attack, 
localised conflict, COVID-19 pandemic, etc.). 
through 
17. 
Approach  –  SSRLRP  will  use  a  CDD  approach  linked  to  the  elaboration  and 
implementation  of  inclusive  CDPs  that  identify  priority  production  and  infrastructure 
investments  needed  to  address  climate  change  adaptation,  and  provide  viable  and 
sustainable  livelihoods  for  the  target  rural  communities.  This  is  an  integrated  rural 
development approach in which smallholders’ sources of livelihood, such as agriculture, are 
supported  by  other  related  services,  such  as  water 
for  production,  etc.  The 
engagement/participation  of  the  beneficiaries  in  the  process  enables  the  growth  of  social 
capital  between  communities;  it  also  strengthens  vertical  engagements  with  Local 
Governments.  Sustainability  will  also  be  ensured  through  the  project’s  implementation 
approach since the process will be managed by the beneficiary communities themselves. 
2.2 
Target Group 
18. 
The  primary  target  group  of  SSLRP  is  poor,  food  insecure  agro-pastoral  households 
engaged  in  various  agricultural  activities  (fishing,  cropping,  and  livestock).  Within  these 
groups,  there  will  be  special  emphasis  on  the  inclusion  of  youth  (70  percent),  women  (60 
percent) and vulnerable groups, such as returnees, women headed households and persons 
with  disabilities  who  will  receive  specific  attention  to  facilitate  their  social  integration  in 
agricultural production and economic activities. 
2.3 
Component Summary Description 
SSLRP’s  development  objective  will  be  achieved 
19. 
implementation of the following components: 
through 
the  effective 
20. 
Component  1:  Community  Driven  Development  Planning  –  the  objectives  are 
to: a) build strong and inclusive Community Based Organizations (CBOs) that will serve as 
promoters and managers of socio-economic change; b) work with CBOs to develop climate 
and gender responsive Community Development Plans (CDPs), that respond to the priorities 
identified  by  communities,  women  and  the  youth;  and  c)  identify  strategic  infrastructure 
investments that will complement and enhance the effectiveness of the CDPs. 
21. 
Subcomponent  1.1:  Build  Strong  and  Inclusive  Community  Based 
Organizations  -  For  SSLRP,  CBOs  represent  an  inclusive  entity  of  people  with  similar  or 
common interests. It will take two weeks or more to identify CBOs with common purposes 
after  guided  facilitation.  In  whatever  form,  CBOs  are  the  building  blocks  of  rural 
15 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
communities’  social  capital,  used  as  conduits  for  developing  the  individual  members  in  the 
group.  This  subcomponent  will  target  both  existing  and  help  to  establish  new  CBOs.  New 
CBOs could include new households returning from displacement or refugee camps, or new 
interest groups formed based on identified interests aligned to the Project’s activities.  
Subcomponent  1.2:  Development  of  Community  Driven  Development  Plans 
22. 
(CDPs)  –  Communities,  through  their  CBOs  supported  under  Subcomponent  1.1,  will  be 
facilitated to development  CDPs.  Ideally, these  will be packages of activities identified that 
can  respond  to  the  collective  needs  of  the  beneficiaries.  CDP  preparation  could  take  up  to 
six  months  and  will  require  dedicated  inputs  of  technical  experts  or  subject  matter 
specialists,  including  livelihood  and  nutrition  experts,  social  inclusive  and  climate  change 
experts,  conflict  sensitivities,  etc.  These  processes  will  be  inclusive  and  interactive, 
responding to local context, including the demands of households. 
Component  2:  Agriculture  Production  and  Rural  livelihood  Support  –  This 
23. 
component  will  finance  approved  CDPs  developed  under  Component  1.  It  is  expected  the 
types  of  activities  to  be  financed  will  be:  a)  labour  intensive  civil  works;  b)  agriculture 
production  and  increased  productivity  of  individual  households;  and  c)  agricultural 
productive  assets.  It  should  be  pointed  out  that  a  set  of  community-level  strategic 
infrastructure will be funded; these will be selected based on their contribution to increasing 
production  (both  crops  and  livestock),  reducing  postharvest  losses;  enabling  processing  of 
produce  and  improving  access  to  inputs  and  markets.  They  will  be  communal  assets 
considered to add considerable value to the respective communities’ wellbeing. Funding for 
the  strategic  infrastructure  will  be  deducted  from  the  total  allocated  to  Component  2;  the 
remainder of the funds will be used to fund the CDD-generated subprojects as contained in 
the CDPs. 
24. 
Subcomponent 2.1: Investments for Increased Climate-Sensitive Agriculture 
Production  and  Rural  Livelihoods  -  Outputs:  a)  Labour-Intensive  Public  Works  (LIPWs) 
CDPs  –  specifically  targeting  the  youth  and  women.  It  will  also  target  returnees  that  are 
settled down in their homesteads and seeking to pick up on the development activities; and 
b)  improved  household  food  and  nutrition  security  by  supporting  household  incomes 
through diverse on-farm and off-farm livelihoods. 
25. 
Subcomponent  2.2  -  Community  Infrastructure  to  Support  Production  and 
Marketing - The rural communities in the target areas lack access to infrastructure, assets 
and  services  that  could  enable  them  to  increase  their  capacity  to  produce.  Thus  they  are 
producing insufficient quantities for their food security and hardly any surplus for markets. 
Even when they are able to produce a surplus, because they lack postharvest infrastructure, 
they  lose  a  substantial  proportion  of  their  produce.  To  compound  their  situation  further, 
because  of  the  poor  road  infrastructure,  they  have  challenges  taking  to  the  market  any 
surplus that they generate. This subcomponent, therefore, provides for investments that will 
redress  this  situation  by:  a)  improving  agricultural  production;  b)  climate  resilience;  c) 
postharvest storage and processing; and d) access to inputs and markets. 
26. 
Component  3:  Project  Support  and  Capacity  Building  –  The  objective  of  the 
component is twofold: a) to manage SSLRP in an efficient and effective manner by providing 
overall  coordination,  including  planning  and  implementation,  financial  management  and 
control,  procurement  support,  Monitoring  and  Evaluation,  knowledge  management,  and 
progress  reporting.  It  will  also  ensure  liaison  and  linkage  with  all  other  relevant 
projects/programmes  being  implemented  in  the  country  that  seek  to  address  similar  or 
related  constraints;  this  would  be  aimed  at  taking  advantage  of  existent  synergies  and 
avoiding  duplications;  and  b)  augment  the  capacity  of  selected  government  institutions  to 
facilitate  participatory  planning  and  development  processes.  Accordingly,  the  component 
16 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
has two subcomponents: a) Subcomponent 3.1: Third Party Implementation Arrangements; 
and b) Subcomponent 3.2: Institutional Capacity Building and Policy Support. 
27. 
Subcomponent 3.1: Third Party Implementation Arrangements – A third party 
IA  will  be  selected  by  the  Government  through  a  competitive  recruitment  process.  The  IA 
will be responsible for all implementation of SSLRP: a) preparing and executing the Annual 
Work  Plans  and  Budgets  (AWPBs),  implementation  progress  and  financial  reports  for 
submission  to  the  Project  Coordination  Unit  (PCU)  (for  review,  comment  and  onward 
forwarding  to  the  oversight  body  (National  Technical  Committee  (NTC)  and  National 
Advisory Committee (NAC)); b) M&E, fiduciary and procurement systems and capacities and 
undertake all project-related fiduciary functions in compliance with IFAD Guidelines; c) work 
closely  with  the  PCU  and  the  target  States  and  Counties  during  activity  planning  and 
implementation  to  ensure  consistency  with  existent  State  and  County  development 
agendas. 
28. 
Subcomponent  3.2:  Institutional  Capacity  Building  and  Policy  Support–  This 
subcomponent  will  strengthen  capacities  of  government  staff  at  the  national,  State  and 
County  levels  to  be  able  to  facilitate  future  development  projects,  and  to  conduct  policy 
review. The first activity will be the formation of the PCU; when in place, it PCU will develop 
ToRs for the capacity and systems needs assessment and competitively hire a consultant to 
conduct  review  and  produce  a  report  detailing  the  specific  capacity  and  systems  gaps  at 
central, State and County levels of government, together with recommendations of how to 
address  the  gaps.  The  PCU  will  competitively  hire  a  service  provider(s)  to  address  these 
gaps. 
29. 
Component 4: Disaster Risk Reduction and Management – The objective of this 
component is to ensure that in the event of a disaster, whether environmental or man-made 
that SSLRP can quickly reallocate resources from the other activities in support of the GoSS 
emergency  response.  Component  4  can  only  be  triggered  following  the  declaration  of  an 
emergency situation by GoSS, or with agreement of GoSS. The reallocation of funds would 
involve  a  request  from  the  PCU  to  the  Country  Director  asking  for  reallocation  of  funds  to 
Component 4. 
2.4 
Project Cost and Financing by Component 
30. 
Total project costs are estimated at USD 17.8 million over a 6-year period. IFAD will 
fund 55.1 percent of the project costs through an investment of USD 9.8 million. This is split 
into  a  loan  (11.2  percent)  on  highly  concessionary  terms  and  a  grant  (43.9  percent).  The 
African  Development  Bank  (AfDB)  will  fund,  on  a  parallel  basis,  through  the  Agricultural 
Markets,  Value  Addition  and  Trade  Development  Project  (AMVAT)  in  Kajo-Keji,  Terekeka, 
Magwi, Torit and Bor Counties amounting to USD 5.6 or 31.9 percent of the total costs. 
17 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
Table 1: Project Costs by Component and 
Financier
Table 2: Project Costs by Expenditure Category and Financier (‘000 USD) 
2.5 
Project Organization and Implementation Arrangements  
31. 
SSLRP  will  be  implemented  by  a  Third  Party  Implementing  Agency  (IA)  that  will  be 
recruited by GoSS. The IA will be responsible for the overall and effective implementation of 
the  project  as  a  whole,  including,  but  not  limited  to  the  following:  a)  preparing  and 
executing  the  Annual  Work  Plans  and  Budgets  (AWPBs),  implementation  progress  and 
financial reports for submission to the PCU ( for review, comment and onward forwarding to 
the  oversight  body  (NTC  and  NAC);  b)  have  adequate  M&E,  fiduciary  and  procurement 
systems  and  capacities  and  undertake  all  project-related  fiduciary  functions  in  compliance 
with  IFAD  Guidelines;  c)  work  closely  with  the  PCU  and  the  target  States  and  Counties 
during  activity  planning  and  implementation  to  ensure  consistency  with  existent  State  and 
County development agendas. The IA will use government frontline extension agents, where 
they exist, with the dual objective of strengthening their capacity and also serve as part of 
the exit strategy at project completion.  
32. 
An  already  existing  governance  structure  will  provide  the  oversight  function  to  the 
project.  A  National  Advisory  Committee  (NAC)  is  in  place  chaired  by  the  Undersecretary 
Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Co-chaired  by  the  Undersecretary  Ministry  of  Finance  and 
Economic  Planning.  NAC’s  core  responsibility  will  be  to  provide  overall  policy  and  strategic 
18 
South Sudan South Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) Components by Financiers BeneficiaryLocal(USD '000) GoSSIFAD GrantIFAD LoanAfDB- ParallelContributionTotalFor.(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesA. Community Driven Development Planning Build strong and inclusive Community Based Organizations (CBOs) 2998.41,53643.338410.81,33237.5--3,55220.09002,352299Development of Community driven development plans (CDPs) --86753.721713.453032.8--1,6149.13531,261-Subtotal Community Driven Development Planning 2995.82,40446.560111.61,86236.1--5,16629.11,2533,613299B. Agriculture Production and Rural livelihood Support Investments for Increased Climate-Sensitive Agriculture Production and Rural Livelihoods --86780.016315.0--545.01,0846.1-1,084-Community Infrastructure to Support Production and Marketing 96718.01,83434.162411.61,28223.966312.45,37030.24693,934967Subtotal Agriculture Production and Rural livelihood Support 96715.02,70141.878712.21,28219.971711.16,45436.34695,018967C. Project Support and Capacity Building Third Party Implementation Arrangements 863.689337.62239.41,17449.4--2,37713.41,2551,03686Institutional Capacity Building and Policy Support 2476.51,79647.638510.21,34835.7--3,77621.26142,914247Subtotal Project Support and Capacity Building 3345.42,68943.76099.92,52241.0--6,15334.61,8693,950334D. Disaster Risk Reduction and Management ---------------Total PROJECT COSTS 1,5999.07,79343.91,99611.25,66631.97174.017,773100.03,59112,5821,599South Sudan South Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) Expenditure Accounts by Financiers BeneficiaryLocal(USD '000) GoSSIFAD GrantIFAD LoanAfDB- ParallelContributionTotalFor.(Excl.Duties &Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Exch.Taxes)TaxesI. Investment Costs A. Grants and subsidies 68514.02,70155.278716.1--71714.74,89027.5-4,205685B. Vehicles 2318.0----10382.0--1250.7386523C. Goods, Services and Inputs 7249.73,99353.693512.51,80024.2--7,45241.92,2364,493724D. Consultancies 874.844324.41116.11,17464.7--1,81510.21,08963987E. Training 5810.010017.3254.339668.4--5793.317434858Total Investment Costs 1,57710.67,23748.71,85712.53,47323.47174.814,86283.63,5369,7491,577II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and allowances 0-51819.01294.72,07976.3--2,72615.3-2,726-B. Operations and Maintenance 2212.03820.8105.211462.0--1851.05510722Total Recurrent Costs 220.855619.11394.82,19375.4--2,91116.4552,83322Total PROJECT COSTS 1,5999.07,79343.91,99611.25,66631.97174.017,773100.03,59112,5821,599 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
guidance  and  advice  to  the  project  for  effective  smooth  and  accountable  implementation. 
More specific role will include: a) providing overall policy and strategic guidance and advice 
to the IA and NTC; b) coordinating with senior management of other government ministries 
and  development  partners  at  all  levels  on  all  issues  related  to  related  to  the  project;  c) 
updating  respective  senior  management  within  their  ministries  on  strategic  and  policy 
related issues of project developments; d) providing strategic and policy advice on quarterly 
and  annual  project  progress  reports  and  work  plans;  and  e)  facilitating  strategic 
partnerships with high level senior stakeholders within the government. 
The  National  Technical  Committee  (NTC)  will  also  be  part  of  the  governance 
33. 
structure,  chaired  by  the  Director  General  of  Agriculture  and  Co-chaired  by  the  Director  of 
Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic  Planning.  The  NTC’s  responsibility  will  be  to:  a)  provide 
technical  guidance  of  the  project;  b)  update  the  NAC  on  technical  and  operational  issues 
related to the project; c) facilitate technical and operational partnerships with stakeholders 
within the government to advance operational/coordination issues related to the project; d) 
coordinate  with  technical  counterparts  of  other  government  agents;  e)  update  their 
undersecretaries  on  any  progress  and  challenges  and  plans  of  the  project;  f)  provide 
technical  and  operational  guidance  to  project  quarterly  and  annual  progress  reports  and 
work plans; and g) participate in periodic monitoring of the project.  
2.6 
Beneficiaries, Expected Benefits and Sources  
SSLRP  will  target  a  total  of  38,880  households  (225,040  beneficiaries).  The  main 
34. 
target group of the project is the rural smallholder households specifically targeting women, 
youth, returnees and persons with disabilities. SSLRP will pay particular attention to women 
headed  households  with  a  target  of  50%  while  ensuring  that  women  in  men  headed 
households are not left out. 
35. 
SSLRP  will  use  a  variety  of  targeting  mechanisms  to  ensure  equitable  participation 
in,  and  benefits  from,  programme  activities  and  opportunities  for  women,  men,  youth  and 
vulnerable  groups.  Such  mechanisms  include:  a)  Community  based  targeting  which  will 
seek  to  involve  beneficiaries  in  selection  of  community  based  organisations;  b)  Direct 
targeting  that  will  ensure  the  identification  of  key  beneficiaries,  based  on  set  criteria  and 
validation,  participation  of  vulnerable  groups  in  planning,  implementation,  and  evaluation, 
including  female-headed  households  and  households  with  vulnerable  persons;  and  c)  self-
targeting to facilitate the participation of women in socio-economic groups. These targeting 
mechanisms  will  be  supported  by  empowering  and  enabling  measures,  such  as  capacity 
building, and social mobilisation and strategic partnerships. 
III.  SUMMARY OF IMPLEMENTATION TO-DATE 
36. 
This  chapter  is  supposed  to  present  the  summary  of  achievements  to  date  both  in 
physical  terms  (physical  achievements  in  relation  to  targets)  and  financial  terms 
(disbursement  status).  It  is  also  supposed  to  highlight  the  constraints  encountered  during 
implementation  (thus  far);  the  constraints  highlighted  are  supposed  to  be  addressed  for 
improved  implementation.  Lastly,  the  chapter  is  supposed  to  state  the  number  of  target 
beneficiaries reached, disaggregated by gender. However, this is the first project year of the 
6-year project and, as such, there is no implementation progress to report herein. However, 
at the time of preparing the AWPB,  a number of activities had been  undertaken as part  of 
implementation  readiness.  Such  activities  included:  a)  preliminary  steps  as  part  of  the 
process  of  selecting  the  IA.  A  list  of  potential  IAs  was  vetted  by  the  MAFS.  The  ToRs  and 
RFP for selecting an IA were already prepared; b) the Government was already taking steps 
establish the PCU structure at MAFS and this would be followed with the appointment of the 
PCU  membership;  c)  preparation  for  major  procurement  bidding  documents;  d)  Fiduciary 
assessment of government by the IFAD Finance Management Division; e) preparation of the 
19 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
Project Implementation Manual. All these will greatly help kick-start actual, on-the-ground, 
project implementation once SSLRP is launched.  
IV.  THE WORK PLAN 2021 
2.1 
The Planning Process 
37. 
Ideally,  the  planning  process  for  an  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  should  be 
participatory, involving all the relevant stakeholders through consultative meetings/workshops 
at  various  levels.  Under  such  a  situation,  there  are  three  major  sources  of  information  and 
these include: 
a)  Project Design Report – it provides the general framework for Project implementation; 
b)  the  findings  of  the  needs  assessment  and  participatory  planning  exercises  in  the 
Project areas; and  
c)  The findings of annual strategic reviews and performance evaluation. 
38. 
However, this being SSLRP first AWPB, its preparation was largely based on the Project 
Design  Report  and  was  prepared  by  a  consultant.  It  is  expected  that  starting  with  the  2022 
AWPB onwards, the decentralised and participatory planning process will take over where the 
process will, necessarily, utilise all three sources of information as listed above. 
2.2 
Plan Focus 
39. 
This  being  the  first  Project  Year,  the  focus  of  the  plan  is  to  put  processes  and 
procedures  in  place  to  facilitate  a  smoother  implementation  of  the  Project  during  the 
proceeding  Project  Years.  This  will  include  establishing  of  the  PCU,  familiarising  the 
oversight  body  (NTC  and  NAC)  with  the  goal,  objectives  and  implementation  approach  of 
the  project  and  putting  a  system  in  place  that  will  help  operationalise  the  two  technical 
components  (Component  1:  Community  Driven  Development  Planning;  Component  2: 
Agriculture  Production  and  Livelihood  Support.  In  addition,  the  plan  will  establish  systems 
that  will  monitor  performance  and  periodically  check  whether  implementation  is  on  course 
to  achieving  the  overall  Project  Development  Objectives.  The  Project  will  procure  an 
Implementing  Agent  as  required  following  the  Government  of  South  Sudan/IFAD 
procurement policies. 
By design, implementation of SSLRP, will, progressively, be initiated to target areas 
40. 
of  the  project  depending  on  the  level  of  readiness  of  implementers  to  manage  additional 
area/activities.  An  intervention  area  will  be  targeted,  activities  initiated  and  all  key 
systems/processes effectively established to set project activities off to a good start before 
moving on to the next target areas. 
41. 
It  is  hoped  that  once  the  systems  have  been  put  in  place,  subsequent  AWPBs  will 
benefit  and  receive  effective  implementation.  However,  in  the  event  that  the  specified 
activities get completed before the end of the Project year, the IA will revise the AWPB and 
include  additional  activities.  When/if  such  a  revision  is  done,  the  revised  AWPB  would  be 
resubmitted to the PCU for review and approval and to  IFAD for  review and provision of a 
No Objection. 
2.3 
Description of the Work Plan 
42. 
SSLRP  interventions  will  directly  benefit  approximately  38,880  rural  households  or 
more than 225,000 household members. However, as already stated, the focus of this first 
AWPB  is  on  putting  processes  and  procedures  in  place  and,  therefore,  only  a  small 
percentage  of  the  target  beneficiaries  is  likely  to  be  reached  in  the  first  Programme  year. 
Following below is the description of the work plan; this has been done by component and 
subcomponent.  
20 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
Component  1:  Community  Driven  Development  Planning  –  The  activities  are 
43. 
designed to facilitate communities to understand their environment, natural resources, and 
food  security  and  nutrition  needs;  identify  the  constraints  to  sustainably  improving 
production  and  increasing  their  market  linkages;  develop  and  implement  costed  CDPs  to 
address these challenges. 
44. 
Subcomponent  1.1:  Build  Strong  and  Inclusive  Community  Based 
Organizations – CBOs are the promoters and managers of socio-economic change and are 
expected to plan, finance, implement and operate  subprojects. They represent the building 
blocks  of  rural  communities’  social  capital  and  they  help  develop  community  members’ 
potential  for  social  and  economic  development.  The  objective  of  this  subcomponent  is, 
therefore,  to  support  the  development  of  strong  CBOs  that  are  representative  of  the 
different  population  segments  (women,  youth,  vulnerable  households)  in  the  community 
and  that  are  capacitated  to  develop  CDPs.  The  following  activities  are  planned  for  SSLRP’s 
first year to gradually contribute to the subcomponent’s objective: 
  CBOs developed from 15 Payams  
o  Two days leadership orientation for participating Payams and Bomas per 
County;  
o  Rooms hire and associated facilities for 2 days per County; 
o  Costs of the facilitation process; 
  Gender Mainstreaming 
o  Beneficiary assessment, mobilisation and consultation; 
o  Staff Training on Gender Empowerment and Social Inclusion; 
o  Mapping and capacity assessment of existing VSLAs; 
o  Facilitated support to VSLAs (Financial literacy); 
o  Gender sensitisation across CBOs including VSLAs; 
o  Expert of GALS methodology; 
o  Operationalise GALS in groups and households; 
o 
o  Exchange visits 
IEC Materials for Gender sensitisation; 
  Nutrition Mainstreaming 
o  Nutrition gaps assessment (value chain/ Market profiles); 
o  Demonstration Household Food Production; 
o  Conduct Nutrition education sessions; 
o  Social marketing for promotion of nutritious foods; 
o 
IEC Materials for Nutrition messaging; 
o  Reinforce capacity of community extension; 
o  Cooking demonstrations and recipe development; 
o  Promotion of food storage and processing. 
  AMVAT/AfDB Parallel financing activities. 
Subcomponent  1.2:  Development  of  Community  Driven  Development  Plans 
45. 
(CDPs)  –  Communities  will  be  facilitated  to  development  CDPs.  Ideally,  these  will  be 
packages of activities identified that can respond to the collective needs of the beneficiaries. 
In terms of activities, an estimated number of CDPs per County is made as follows: 
  Kajo-Keji – 13; 
  Terekeka – 5; 
  Magwi – 9; 
  Torir – 4; and 
  Bor – 3. 
  AMVAT/AfDB Parallel Financing activities. 
21 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
Component  2:  Agriculture  Production  and  Livelihood  Support  -  The  objective 
46. 
of the component is to serve as a financing arm for the vetted subprojects  emanating from 
the CDPs developed under Component 1. The objective of this component will be achieved 
through the effective implementation of three subcomponents. Following hereunder are the 
activities planned for 2021 under each of the subcomponents. 
47. 
Subcomponent 2.1: Investments for Increased Climate-Sensitive Agriculture 
Production  and Rural Livelihoods -  Investments under this subcomponent will focus  on 
enhancing  smallholder  agricultural  production  and  productivity  and  promotion  of  off-farm 
livelihoods  that  would  improve  households’  food  security,  incomes,  and  livelihood  assets. 
This  being  a  CCD  project,  no  specific  activity  can  be  identified  apriori.  However,  it  is 
assumed that a total of 34 subprojects will be supported during the first year as follows: 
  Kajo-Keji – 13; 
  Terekeka – 5; 
  Magwi – 9; 
  Torir – 4; and 
  Bor – 3. 
48. 
Subcomponent  2.2  -  Community  Infrastructure  to  Support  Production  and 
Marketing – Planned activities under this subcomponent will be infrastructure subprojects 
selected  from  the  CDPs.  Given  the  importance  of  watershed  management,  the  community 
facilitation  process  with  ensure  that  investments  in  watershed  improvement  are  given  first 
priority. As such, following below is the expected initial investment in infrastructure: 
 
Infrastructure for Soil & Water Conservation (Terraces, Contour bunds, gabions, etc.)15 
o  Kajo-Keji – 27; 
o  Terekeka – 12; 
o  Magwi – 29; 
o  Torir – 17; and 
o  Bor – 15. 
  AMVAT/AfDB Parallel Financing. 
49. 
Component  3:  Project  Support  and  Capacity  Building  –  This  will  be  a  cross-
cutting  component  servicing  the  technical  component  and  facilitating  the  pathways  for  the 
two 
effective 
subcomponents: 
the  CDD  approach.  The  component  comprises 
implementation  of 
50. 
Subcomponent 3.1: Third Party Implementation Arrangements – A third party 
IA will be selected by the Government through a competitive recruitment process. Planned 
activities for 2021 include: 
Information dissemination through audio-visual methods; 
 
  Production and dissemination of various extension messages; 
  Annual stakeholder workshops; 
  Publication and dissemination of workshop proceedings (magazines); 
  Annual progress surveys; 
  Baseline survey; and 
  Third Party fees and costs. 
51. 
Subcomponent 3.2: Institutional Capacity Building and Policy Support – The 
objective  of  this  subcomponent  is  to  strengthen  capacities  of  government  staff  and  other 
non-state actors, at the national, State and County levels, to facilitate participatory planning 
15Includes climate/environment screening activities and the associated costs. 
22 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
and  development  processes.  The  focus  of  the  subcomponent  will  be  on  supporting  the 
establishment  of  a  Project  Coordination  Unit  (PCU)  at  MAFS  and  addressing  other  capacity 
gaps  as  would  have  been  identified  by  a  Capacities  and  Systems  Needs  Assessment. 
Planned activities for 2021 include: 
  Establishment of Project Coordination Unit; 
o  Desktop Computers16; 
o  Printers17; 
o  Accounting software18; 
o  Office furniture19. 
  Double Cabin Vehicle; 
  Supporting some oversight roles of MAFS 
o  NTC/NAC meetings; 
o 
o 
Joint stakeholders’ meetings; 
Implementation support where needed; 
  Building of other institutional capacity at state and local government level; 
  Development of the National Cooperatives Policy Frameworks 
o  Professional fees of Lead Consultant; 
o  Assistant consultant; 
o  Desk research, internet, airtime; 
  Conducting a cooperatives development stakeholders validation meetings 
o  Venue; 
o  Meals and Refreshment; 
o  Transport refund for DGs from States; 
o  Production of draft documents; 
o  Full Board costs for DGs; 
o  Organization costs 
  Conduct 1st technical review meeting 
o  Venue; 
o  Meals and refreshments; 
o  Transport refund; 
o  Production of draft documents; 
o  Organization costs 
  Conduct 2nd technical review meeting 
o  Venue; 
o  Meals and refreshments; 
o  Transport refund; 
o  Production of draft documents; 
o  Organization costs 
  Production of national cooperative development strategic framework document copies 
o  Computer design of the document; 
o  Production of document; 
o  Packaging; 
o  Transportation and distribution 
  Administration, oversight, supervision, monitoring and evaluation 
  ESMF Implementation 
o  Site-specific ESIAs, ESMPs and environmental license fees; 
o  Mitigation measures; 
o  Monitoring and evaluation purposes (R&D, M&E, Field visits); 
16Desktop with software and antivirus. 
172 for the PCU and 1 each for the 8 Focal Persons. 
18Should include the software itself, annual license and technical assistance. 
191 set for each Officer. Set consists of a desk, chair, lamp and a file cabinet. 
23 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
o  Environmental and social training 
  AMVAT/AfDB Parallel Financing for Project Coordination and Management 
V.  BUDGET ESTIMATES AND FINANCING ARRANGEMENTS 
5.1Summary Budget and Funding 
52. 
Presented  in  this  section  are  summary  tables  giving  an  overall  picture  of  financial 
resources  required  for  the  2021  SSLRP’s  work-plan  and  budget.  The  budget  information  is 
presented  by  component,  financier  and  categories  of  expenditure.  The  total  budget  for 
SSLRP’s 2021 AWPB is about USD 6.4 million. A total of about USD 1.5 million (or 23% of 
the  budget)  is  allocated  to  Component  1:  Community  Driven  Development  Planning;  USD 
979,000  (or  15%  of  the  budget)  is  allocated  to  Component  2:  Agriculture  Production  and 
Rural  livelihood  Support;  and  about  USD  4  million  (or  62%  of  the  budget)  is  allocated  to 
Component  3:  Project  Support  and  Capacity  Building.  About  43.7%  of  the  budget  will  be 
financed  by  IFAD  (8.7%  from  the  IFAD  loan  and  35%  from  the  IFAD  grant);  48%  will  be 
from  AfDB’s  parallel  financing,  8%  from  GoSS  and  the  remainder  will  be  financed  by  the 
beneficiaries (0.5%). 
24 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
Table 3: SSLRP 2021 Annual Work Plan and Budget and Financing by Component (USD ‘000) 
Table 4: SSLRP 2021 Annual Work Plan and Budget and Financing by Category (USD ‘000) 
25 
South SudanFirst Year Annual Plan BudgetComponents by FinanciersBeneficiary(USD '000)GoSSIFAD GrantIFAD LoanAfDB- ParallelContributionTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Community Driven Development PlanningBuild strong and inclusive Community Based Organizations (CBOs)1098.947839.31209.850941.9--1,21618.9Development of Community driven development plans (CDPs)0-5721.3145.319673.4--2674.2Subtotal Community Driven Development Planning1097.353536.11349.070547.5--1,48323.1B. Agriculture Production and Rural livelihood SupportInvestments for Increased Climate-Sensitive Agriculture Production and Rural Livelihoods0-5780.01115.0--45.0711.1Community Infrastructure to Support Production and Marketing16318.0434.7171.965972.6262.890814.1Subtotal Agriculture Production and Rural livelihood Support16316.710010.2282.865967.3293.097915.2C. Project Support and Capacity BuildingThird Party Implementation Arrangements744.343425.21086.31,10964.3--1,72526.9Institutional Capacity Building and Policy Support1788.01,17952.729013.059126.4--2,23834.8Subtotal Project Support and Capacity Building2526.41,61340.739910.11,70042.9--3,96461.7D. Disaster Risk Reduction and Management------------Total PROJECT COSTS5248.22,24835.05608.73,06447.7290.56,425100.0South SudanFirst Year Annual Plan BudgetExpenditure Accounts by FinanciersBeneficiary(USD '000)GoSSIFAD GrantIFAD LoanAfDB- ParallelContributionTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%I. Investment Costs A. Grants and subsidies 1910.710056.82815.8--2916.71752.7B. Vehicles 2318.0----10382.0--1262.0C. Goods, Services and Inputs 36411.21,51946.737511.599330.5--3,25050.6D. Consultancies 754.634221.2855.31,10968.8--1,61125.1E. Training 3510.010128.7257.219054.1--3515.5Total Investment Costs 5159.32,06137.45139.32,39543.4290.55,51485.8II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and allowances -0-17120.4435.162574.5--83813.0B. Operations and Maintenance 912.01622.245.64460.2--731.1Total Recurrent Costs 91.018720.5475.166973.4--91214.2Total PROJECT COSTS5248.22,24835.05608.73,06447.7290.56,425100.0 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
5.2 Detailed Budget by Components and Category Indication 
Presented  in  this  section  are  the  detailed  cost  tables  giving  an  overall  picture  of  financial 
53. 
resources required for the 2021 AWPB and corresponding activities on which funds will be utilised. 
26 
South Sudan First Year Annual Plan Budget Table 1.1. Build strong and inclusive Community Based Organizations (CBOs) Detailed Costs (USD) QuantitiesTotals Including ContingenciesUnitQ1Q2Q3Q4TotalQ1Q2Q3Q4Total I. Investment Costs A. CBOs developed from 15 payams 1. Two days leadership orientation for participating Payams and Bomas per County /a Per County5135,675135,6752. Rooms hire and associated facilities for 2 days per County Per County52,5132,5133. Costs of the facilitation process Per CBO119810927,638256,223283,860Subtotal CBOs developed from 15 payams 165,825256,223422,048B. Social Inclusion and Nutrition 1. Gender Mainstreaming Beneficiary assessment, mobilisation and consultation Session3330,15030,150Staff Training on Gender Empowerment and Social Inclusion Session331,8091,809Mapping and capacity assessment of existing VSLAs Ls331,5081,508Facilitated support to VSLAs (Finacial literacy) Session-4590135-4,6139,41214,026Gender sensitisation across CBOs including VSLAs Session501001505,02510,45815,483Expert of GALS methodology Person/month1125,0255,22910,254Operationalise GALS in groups and households Quarterly11250,25052,290102,540IEC Materials for Gender sensititsation Ls111,0051,005Exchange visits Ls333,1373,137Subtotal Gender Mainstreaming 94,7724,61380,527179,9122. Nutrition Mainstreaming Nutrition gaps assessment (value chain/ Market profiles) Ls1-12,0502,050Demostration Household Food Production Session501001505,12610,45815,584Conduct Nutrition education sessions Session1836543,6187,53011,148Social marketing for promotion of nutritious foods Lumpsum3693,0766,2759,350IEC Materials for Nutrition messaging Lumpsum324.53,0151,5694,584Reinforce capacity of community extension Lumpsum333,0153,015Cooking demonstrations and receipe development Session1836543,6917,53011,221Promotion of food storage and processing Session1836541,8453,7655,610Subtotal Nutrition Mainstreaming 9,64815,78837,12662,562Subtotal Social Inclusion and Nutrition 104,42020,401117,653242,474C. AFDB Parallel Financing 1. ABC Post harvest and MIS Equipments-EES Ls424243,92443,9242. ABC MIS Equipments-EES Ls444,1834,1833. Post Harvest Equipment-CES Lumpsum424243,92443,9244. Post Harvest Equipments-Jonglei Lumpsum212121,96221,9625. ABC MIS Equipments-CES Lumpsum444,1834,1836. ABC MIS Equipments-Jongei Ls222,0922,0927. SEG Field Equipments-EES Ls111111,50411,5048. SEG Field Equipments-CES Lumpsum111111,50411,5049. SEG Field Equipment-Jonglei Ls555,2295,22910. ABC Office Furniture-EES Ls444,1834,18311. ABC Office Furniture-CES Lumpsum444,1834,18312. ABC Office Furniture-Jonglei Lumpsum222,0922,09213. ABC Computers-EES Ls888,3668,36614. ABC Computers-CES Lumpsum888,3668,36615. ABC Computer-Jonglei Ls444,1834,18316. SEG Training-EES Ls15163115,07516,73331,80817. SEG Training-CES Lumpsum15163115,07516,73331,80818. SEG Training-Jonglei Lumpsum88168,0408,36616,40619. ABC-BPA Training-EES Lumpsum31336431,15534,51265,66720. ABC-BPA Training-CES Lumpsum31336431,15534,51265,66721. ABC-BPA Training-Jonglei Lumpsum15163115,07516,73331,808Subtotal AFDB Parallel Financing 115,575307,467423,042Total Investment Costs 385,82020,401681,3431,087,564II. Recurrent Costs A. AFDB Parallel Financing 1. Field Extension Agent-EES Person/month8.8.8.1741.8,2918,3748,45817,69342,8172. Field Extension Agent-CES Person/month8.8.8.1741.8,2918,3748,45817,69342,8173. Field Extension Agent-Jonglei Person/month8.8.8.1741.8,2918,3748,45817,69342,817Total Recurrent Costs 24,87425,12225,37453,080128,450Total 410,69325,12245,775734,4231,216,014 _________________________________\a 180*75*2 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
27 
South Sudan First Year Annual Plan Budget Table 1.2. Development of Community driven development plans (CDPs) Detailed Costs (USD) QuantitiesTotals Including ContingenciesUnitQ1Q2Q3Q4TotalQ1Q2Q3Q4Total I. Investment Costs A. CDP preparation costs Kajo-Keji Per Micro-Project211134,10123,00827,109Terekeka Per Micro-Project5510,45810,458Magwi Per Micro-Project1892,05016,73318,783Torit Per Micro-Project448,3668,366Bor Per Micro-Project336,2756,275Subtotal CDP preparation costs 6,15164,84070,991B. AFDB Parallel Financing Sorghum value chain study Ls313131,15531,155Groundnuts value chain study Ls313131,15531,155Seed sector framework study Ls313131,15531,155Total Investment Costs 93,4656,15164,840164,456II. Recurrent Costs Value Chain Expert Person/month8.8.8.1741.758,2918,3748,45817,69342,817Seed Expert Person/month11.11.11.245811,55811,67311,79024,45759,478Total Recurrent Costs 19,84920,04720,24842,151102,294Total 113,31420,04726,399106,991266,751South Sudan First Year Annual Plan Budget Table 2.1. Investments for increased agriculture production and rural livelihoods Detailed Costs (USD) QuantitiesTotals Including ContingenciesUnitQ1Q2Q3Q4TotalTotalQ1Q2Q3Q4Total I. Investment Costs A. Investment Costs Kajo-Keji Per Micro-Project2111326,0004,02023,00827,028Terekeka Per Micro-Project5510,00010,45810,458Magwi Per Micro-Project18918,0002,01016,73318,743Torit Per Micro-Project448,0008,3668,366Bor Per Micro-Project336,0006,2756,275Total 68,0006,03064,84070,870South Sudan First Year Annual Plan Budget Table 2.2. Productive community infrastructure developed Detailed Costs Expenditures by Financiers(USD) QuantitiesTotals Including ContingenciesUnitQ1Q2Q3Q4TotalQ1Q2Q3Q4TotalGoSSIFAD GRANTIFAD LOANAFDBBeneficiary I. Investment Costs A. 2.2.1 Infrastructure for Soil & Water Conservation (Terraces, Contour bunds, gabions, etc) /a Magwi # hectares272728,23728,2375,08311,5774,6316,946Torit # hectares121212,55012,5502,2595,1452,0583,087Kajo-Keji # hectares292930,32830,3285,45912,4354,9747,461Terekea # hectares171717,77917,7793,2007,2892,9164,374Bor # hectares151515,68715,6872,8246,4322,5733,859Subtotal 2.2.1 Infrastructure for Soil & Water Conservation (Terraces, Contour bunds, gabions, etc) 104,581104,58118,82542,87817,15125,727E. AFDB Parallel Financing Aggregation Centre Infrastructure-EES Ls909518590,45099,352189,80234,164155,637Aggregation Centre Ifrastructure-CES Ls909518590,45099,352189,80234,164155,637Aggregation Centre Infrastructure Fund-Jonglei Ls45479245,22549,15394,37816,98877,390Seed Testing Laboratory Equipments Ls315315329,429329,42959,297270,132Total 226,125681,866907,991163,43842,87817,151658,79725,727 _________________________________\a Includes climate/ environment screening costs\b Includes climate/ environment screening costs 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
28 
South Sudan First Year Annual Plan Budget Table 3.1. Third Party Implementation Arrangements Detailed Costs (USD) QuantitiesTotals Including ContingenciesUnitQ1Q2Q3Q4TotalQ1Q2Q3Q4Total I. Investment Costs A. Knowledge Management, Monitoring and Evaluation 1. Knowledge management Information dissemination through audio-visual methods Ls111142,0102,0302,0504,16310,253Production and dissemination of various extension messages Ls111145,0255,0755,12610,40625,633Subtotal Knowledge management 7,0357,1057,17614,56935,8862. State level -Annual stakeholder workshops Ls339,4129,412Publication and dissemination of workshop proceedings (magazines) Ls3331,37431,374Subtotal State level 40,78640,7863. County level -Annual Stakeholder meetings Ls5526,14526,1454. Monitoring and evaluation Mid term review StudyFinal impact evaluation LsAnnual progress surveys Surveys1121,96221,962Baseline Study1181,40581,405Subtotal Monitoring and evaluation 81,40521,962103,367Subtotal Knowledge Management, Monitoring and Evaluation 88,4407,1057,176103,462206,184B. Third Party fees and costs Quarter1111480,40081,20482,016166,501410,121C. AFDB Parallel Financing Project Cordination and Management 1. Third Party Administration Agency 1,001,9851,001,9852. Baseline study 31,15531,1553. ESMP Study and Monitoring 21,10523,00844,1134. Fiduciary Capacity Development-Financial Management and Procurement 15,07516,73331,808Subtotal AFDB Parallel Financing Project Cordination and Management 1,069,32039,7411,109,061Total 1,238,16088,30989,192309,7041,725,366 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
29 
South Sudan First Year Annual Plan Budget Table 3.2. Build institutional capacities at the state and local government levels Detailed Costs Expenditures by Financiers(USD) QuantitiesTotals Including ContingenciesUnitQ1Q2Q3Q4TotalQ1Q2Q3Q4TotalGoSSIFAD GRANTIFAD LOANAFDB I. Investment Costs A. Contribution to establishment of Single Project Coordination Unit (PCU) 1. Office Equipment Desktop Computer /a Number131313,06513,0652,35210,713Printer /b Number10104,0204,0207243,296Accounting software /c Package1110,05010,0501,8098,241Office furniture /d set13136,5336,5331,1765,357Subtotal Office Equipment 33,66833,6686,06027,6072. Vehicle Double Cabin Vehicle Number1145,22545,2258,14137,0853. Supporting some oversight roles of MAFS National technical Committee meetings Quarterly141011021032085139233684Joint stakeholders meetings Quarterly123,0153,1376,1521,1074,0361,009Implementation support where needed Quarterly123,0153,1376,1521,1074,0361,009Double Cabin Vehicle Number1145,22545,2258,14129,6687,417Subtotal Supporting some oversight roles of MAFS 51,3561021036,48358,04210,44838,0769,519Subtotal Contribution to establishment of Single Project Coordination Unit (PCU) 130,2481021036,483136,93524,64838,0769,51964,692B. Building of other institutional capacities at the state and local government levels 1. Building of other institutional capacity at state and local government level Ls837,732837,73241,887596,884198,961C. Development of the National Cooperatives Policy Frameworks 1. Payment to consultant Professional fees of Lead Consultant Man/day13513556,98456,98410,25735,04511,682Assistant consultant Man/day45454,5234,5238142,781927Desk research, internet, airtime estimated331,5981,598288983328Subtotal Payment to consultant 63,10463,10411,35938,80912,9362. Conducting a cooperatives development stakeholders  validation meetings Venue Man/day15151,5081,508271927309Meals and Refreshment participants13513513,56813,5682,4428,3442,781Transport refund for DGs from States participants606012,06012,0602,1717,4172,472Production of draft docments Copies150150754754136464155Full Board costs for DGs Participants606045,22545,2258,14127,8139,271Organization costs estimated333023025418562Subtotal Conducting a cooperatives development stakeholders  validation meetings 73,41573,41513,21545,15015,0503. Conduct 1st technical review meeting Venue Man/day99905905163556185Meals and refreshments participants30301,8091,8093261,113371Transport refund participants30303,0153,0155431,854618Production of draft documents Copies60603023025418562Organization costs estimated333023025418562Subtotal Conduct 1st technical review meeting 6,3326,3321,1403,8941,2984. Conduct 2nd technical review meeting Venue Man/day66603603109371124Meals and refreshments participants1515603603109371124Transport refund participants15151,5081,508271927309Production of draft documents Copies18189090165619Oragnization costs estimated333023025418562Subtotal Conduct 2nd technical review meeting 3,1053,1055591,9106375. Production of national cooperative development strategic framework document copies Computer design of the document Technical layout331,2061,206217742247Production of document Copies3003003,0153,0155431,854618Packaging Copies3003003773776823277Transportation and distribution Copies3003001,5081,508271927309Subtotal Production of national cooperative development strategic framework document copies 6,1056,1051,0993,7551,2526. Administration, oversight, supervision, monitoring and evaluation Ls15,20715,20776010,8353,612Subtotal Development of the National Cooperatives Policy Frameworks 167,268167,26828,131104,35334,784D. Estimated budget for ESMF Implementation 1. Site-specific ESIAs, ESMPs and environmental license fees Lumpsum50,00030,00080,00050,25031,37481,62414,69266,9322. Mitigation measures Lumpsum70,00040,000110,00070,35041,832112,18220,19391,9893. Monitoring and evaluation purposes (R&D, M&E, Field visits) Lumpsum17,50017,50017,50027,50080,00017,58817,76317,94128,57881,87014,73767,1344. Environmental and social training Lumpsum10,0005,00015,00010,0505,22915,2792,75012,5295. Annual Reviews Lumpsum10,00010,00010,35510,3551,8648,4916. Bi-Annual Audit Lumpsum6,2506,2506,5366,5361,1775,3607. End of Project Audit Lumpsum8. 10% contigency LumpsumSubtotal Estimated budget for ESMF Implementation 148,23817,76317,941123,905307,84755,412252,434E. AFDB Parallel Financing Project Coordination and Management 1. Land Cruiser Hard top Number414141,20541,2057,41733,7882. Pick-up Double Cabin Number393939,19539,1957,05532,1403. Office Furniture-Ministry Number555,0255,0259054,1214. Office Furniture-PIU Number101010,05010,0501,8098,2415. Computers and Printers-Ministry Number444,0204,0207243,2966. Computers and Printers PIU Number888,0408,0401,4476,593Subtotal AFDB Parallel Financing Project Coordination and Management 107,535107,53519,35688,179Total Investment Costs 1,391,02117,86518,044130,3881,557,317169,435991,747243,264152,871II. Recurrent Costs A. Contribution to establishment of Single Project Coordination Unit (PCU) 1. Salary Top-ups for GoSS Staff attached to PCU /e Quarterly11298,658111,040209,698-0167,75941,9402. Vehicle O & M Ls8078318561,4533,94703,1587893. Other O & M costs a. Internet Connectivity /f Quarterly1,8271,8821,9383,4249,0711,0896,3861,597b. Stationery /g Quarterly1122,4362,7425,1786213,645911c. Electricity /h Quarterly6096276461,0942,9763572,095524d. Other Utility  & jonitor work /i Quarterly1,2181,2551,2922,1885,9527144,1911,048Subtotal Other O & M costs 6,0903,7643,8779,44823,1782,78116,3174,079Subtotal Contribution to establishment of Single Project Coordination Unit (PCU) 105,5554,5954,733121,941236,8232,781187,23446,808B. AFDB Parallel Financing Project Coordination and Management 1. National Project Officer-Cordinator Person/month606412460,30066,932127,232127,2322. Monitoring and Evaluation Expert Person/month33366933,16537,64970,81470,8143. Driver Person/month29326129,14533,46662,61162,6114. DSA Professional PER DAYS31346531,15535,55766,71266,7125. DSA Drivers PER DAYS31346531,15535,55766,71266,7126. PIU Vehicles mantenance and spares Lumpsum10102010,05010,45820,5082,46118,0477. PIU Vehicles-Fuel and Lubricants Lumpsum14152914,07015,68729,7573,57126,186Subtotal AFDB Parallel Financing Project Coordination and Management 209,040235,307444,3476,032438,315Total Recurrent Costs 314,5954,5954,733357,248681,1708,813187,23446,808438,315Total 1,705,61522,46022,776487,6362,238,487178,2481,178,980290,073591,185 _________________________________\a Desktop with softwares and antivirus\b 2 for the PCU and 1 each for the 8 Focal Persons\c Should include the software itself, annual license and technical assistance\d 1 set for each Officer. Set consists of a desk, chair, lamp and a file cabinet\e PC (US$ 1,000 p.m); M&E/KM (US$ 800 p.m); FC (US $ 800 p.m); Procurement (US $ 800 p.m); Project Assistant (US $ 300 p.m); Driver (US $ 400 p.m); State Focal Persons (3) (@ US $ 500 p.m); County Focal Persons (5)  @ USD 500 pm\f An annual average of USD 7,200 is assumed\g About USD 200 per month\h About USD 200 per month but IFAD contribution will be on reducing as other development partners come on board\i About USD 400 per month.  IFAD contribution will be on reducing as other development partners come on board 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
VI.  IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENT 
6.1 Overall coordination and Link to the Review and Approval Process 
Project  Year  2021,  being  SSLRP’s  inaugural  implementation  period,  many  of  the 
54. 
Project’s activities during the first few months will mainly be preparatory in nature. The  IA 
and PCU will work to put processes, procedures and structures in place for effective  SSLRP 
implementation.  It  is  expected  that  after  the  inaugural  implementation  period,  the  rate  of 
activity implementation will pick up fast. 
55. 
As the IA and PCU coordinate the different SSLRP activities, due regard will be given 
to the time needed for the different institutions (IFAD and GoSS) to review and approve the 
different  aspects  of  SSLRP  implementation.  This  will  be  important  to  avoid  implementation 
delays.  This  will  be  particularly  important  for  the  procurement  function.  Considering  that 
both  the  IA  and  PCU  will  have  procurement  responsibilities,  they  will  both  have  to  ensure 
that  proper  procedures  with  regard  to  prior  review  are  adhered  to.  The  time  needed  to 
accommodate the review and approval of the different procurements is incorporated in the 
Procurement  Plan.  The  Project  Implementation  Manual  (PIM)  also  provides  guidance  on  all 
aspects  of  SSLRP  implementation.  The  IA  will  have  to  coordinate  with  the  respective  local 
governments  (State,  County,  Payam  and  Boma)  during  the  process  of  activity 
implementation  to  ZPCOs  will  guide  and  oversee  overall  coordination  of  the  Project  at  the 
Zoba  levels,  including  planning,  implementation,  management,  reporting,  monitoring  and 
evaluation. 
56. 
In  order to implement  SSLRP activities effectively, areas  which lack capacity will be 
addressed by providing the relevant capacity that is specific to the identified capacity gaps. 
Capacity  building  is  the  responsibility  of  one  of  SSLRP’s  subcomponents.  Accordingly, 
capacity building programmes have been allowed for in the AWPB. Some of the training will 
be locally provided while, in other cases, international interventions will be needed. 
6.2 Progress Reporting  
57. 
The  IA  and  the  PCU  will  aim  at  providing  informative  progress  reports;  this  is  a 
formal  requirement  stipulated  in  the  Financing  Agreement.  The  six-monthly  and  annual 
reports will be prepared and submitted to IFAD, the GoSS and all collaborating institutions. 
The IA will produce a consolidated report for all project activities apart from Subcomponent 
3.2.  It  would  submit  the  report  to  the  PCU  for  incorporating  implementation  progress 
related  to  Subcomponent  3.2.  The  overall  SSLRP  implementation  progress  report  will  be 
submitted  to  the  oversight  body  (NTC/NAC)  for  review,  comment  and  endorsement.  The 
PCU would address any comments emanating from the NAC before submitting the reports to 
IFAD.  Efforts  will  be  made  to  ensure  a  timely  submission  of  the  reports  to  IFAD.  The 
progress reports will provide: 
a)  a review of implementation progress compared to planned activities, and expenditures 
compared to budgets; 
b)  details of problems encountered during the reporting period and any remedial actions 
taken to resolve the problems; 
c)  an analysis of strength and weaknesses, opportunities and threats; 
d)  a discussion of quantitative and qualitative progress made in achieving the overall 
objectives; and, 
e)  the strategic direction for the next planning cycle. 
In the process of producing progress reports, the IA and PCU will reflect on outputs, 
58. 
evaluate  performance,  and  discover  weaknesses  that  can  be  improved  and  successes  that 
30 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
can  be  up-scaled.  It  is  hoped  that  this  process  would  lead  to  better  plans  and 
implementation in the future. 
6.3 Monitoring and Evaluation & Knowledge Management 
Performance  monitoring  will  be  the  primary  responsibility  of  the  Monitoring  & 
59. 
Evaluation/Knowledge  Management  team  at  the  IA;  they  will  be  supported  by  State  and 
County  focal  points  and  CFs.  The  team  will  ensure  that  there  are  enough  resources  for  all 
entities  involved  in  implementing  project  activities.  These  will  be  assigned  specific  M&E 
duties,  to  enable  them  to  play  an  active  part  in  the  participatory  M&E  process.  Resources 
will be provided for the operational costs related to M&E activities. The essence of the M&E 
system is the ability to supply regular data, to monitor progress towards the achievement of 
set  objectives  and  to  detect  emergence  of  unexpected  developments  and  to  draw  those 
developments to the attention of management. 
60. 
In  situations  where  Project  activities  are  to  be  implemented  by  qualified  Service 
Providers, monitoring responsibilities may be formally agreed between the Service Providers 
as  part  of  the  agreements  to  be  signed  by  the  parties.  Each  of  those  Service 
Providers/Participating  Institutions  will  be  responsible  for  monitoring  the  activities  they 
implement.  Heads  of  the  various  institutions  will  take  the  lead  role  and  responsibility  for 
monitoring,  especially  in  setting  implementation  milestones,  collection  of  the  necessary 
data, and reporting to the  IA.  They will also take the lead role in interpreting outcomes of 
performance and impact M&E in terms of policy adaptations and requirements. To that end, 
the  IA will provide a clear common  framework for planning and progress reporting, and to 
ensure  that  all  parties  have  a  clear  understanding  of  the  tools,  formats,  definition  and 
applicability  of  indicators,  and  the  means  to  conduct  quality  assurance.  The  IA  will  be 
responsible  for  receiving  and  collating  M&E  data  from  the  different  institutions  and 
producing  consolidated  progress  reports.  Results  of  M&E  will  be  shared  with  other 
implementing  partners  during  the  M&E  and  national  planning  and  review  workshops.  The 
focus will be to ensure a continuous process of feedback to stakeholders and management 
to enhance timely responses. 
61. 
During  the  course  of  2021,  a  baseline  survey  will  be  conducted  to  provide 
information  about  verifiable  indicators  as  a  benchmark  for  assessing  impact  of  SSLRP 
interventions  in  line  with  the  Project's  goal,  objectives  and  activities  as  contained  in  the 
logical framework. Such benchmarks will be developed as a reference point when organising 
repeat  surveys  and  or  when  conducting  project  Mid-term  Review  and  end-of-project 
evaluation. 
It is planned that supervision/monitoring exercises will be jointly undertaken by IFAD 
62. 
and the GoSS at least once every year. This will, however, depend on the prevailing security 
situation in the country. In the event that the security situation is not conducive to fielding 
IFAD  supervision  and  implementation  support  missions,  IFAD  would  engage  locally-based 
the  supervision  and,  when  needed,  provide 
institutions/individuals 
implementation support. This would be done in collaboration with MAFS. In addition, under 
this  scenario,  IFAD  would  endeavour  to  use  remote  supervision  provisions  for  continuous 
monitoring of performance; this would follow IFAD’s Guidance Note on Remote Supervision. 
to  undertake 
63.  With  regard  to  Knowledge  Management  (KM),  the  focus  of  this  first  year  AWPB  will 
be on the preparation of SSLRP’s KM action plan whose objectives would be to: a) identify 
knowledge gaps and prioritization of knowledge products to be developed; b) systematically 
document methods to ease the up-scaling of best practices in South Sudan or repackaging 
of  innovative  approaches  developed  elsewhere;  c)  disseminate  knowledge  using  various 
communication tools (MAFS newsletter, brochures, websites, radio, etc.). The dissemination 
31 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
will serve as an avenue for sharing relevant information among implementing partners and 
other stakeholders. 
6.4 Procurement, Disbursements, Accounts and Finance Management 
SSLRP  will  be  implemented  by  an  IA,  except  for  Subcomponent  3.2.  For  financial 
64. 
management,  this  will  involve  budgeting,  receipt  of  funds,  procurement,  making  of 
payments,  justification,  generating  withdrawal  applications  and  reporting  on  all  activities 
implemented by the IA. The IA will establish a sound financial management system for the 
project,  consistent  with  the  requirements  of  IFAD  Guidelines  on  Financial  Management 
covering the financial management cycle from project start-up to financing closing including 
budgeting,  accounting  and  financial  reporting;  establishing  internal  controls  with  internal 
audit  arrangements;  funds  flow  management  including  disbursements;  and  statutory  audit 
throughout the project cycle. 
65. 
The  authority  to  incur  expenditure  is  the  approval  of  the  AWPB  with  expenditure 
incurred  outside  the  approved  AWPB  declared  ineligible  for  financing  from  the  loan  and 
grant funds. 
66. 
Regarding the PCU’s Financial Management, the focus for 2021 is going to be on the 
availing of Technical Assistance to help put in place an appropriate control framework and to 
ensure  that  financial  management  capacity  at  the  PCU  is  built  up  to  the  necessary  level 
through training. 
67. 
Regarding  procurement,  and  considering  that  the  national  systems  do  not  meet 
international standards for fair and transparent procurement processes, the full adoption of 
IFAD’s Procurement Handbook and Standard Bidding Documents will be used by the IA and 
the  Government  PCU.  Both  the  IA  and  the  PCU will  be  supported by  IFAD  through  TA  to 
ensure compliance with IFAD procurement processes and procedures and international best 
practice in procurement. Each contract to be financed by proceeds of IFAD’s investment will 
be included in the Project Procurement Plan (PPP) prepared by the IA, certified by the PCU 
and receiving No Objection from IFAD. The IA will establish a procurement unit in charge of, 
inter  alia,  procurement  planning,  handling  of  the  bidding  process,  conducting  bid  openings 
and  evaluations  of  bids,  and  contract  monitoring.  A  Procurement  Committee  will  be 
established  at  the  IA  and  the  PCU  would  be  expected  to  review  and  certify  the  following 
documents  or  actions:  procurement  plan,  draft  advertisements  and  bidding  documents, 
evaluation  reports  and  contract  award  recommendations,  rejection  of  bids,  contracts  or 
contract amendments above pre-defined thresholds. 
68. 
For 2021, there is a plan to procure some goods and services; these are contained in 
the  SSLRP’s  Procurement  Plan.  It  should  be  noted  that  this  being  the  inaugural  year  of 
SSLRP  implementation,  the  Procurement  Plan  was  prepared  by  a  consultant.  In  the 
subsequent years, the  Procurement Plan will be prepared from  a consolidated list of goods 
and services for the different cost centres. 
VII.  EXPECTED BENEFITS AND BENEFICIARIES 
69. 
The  planned  period  (2021)  being  the  inaugural  year  of  a  6-year  implementation 
period,  the  focus  is  expected  to  be  on  putting  in  place  processes  and  procedures  to  help 
guide SSLRP implementation for the rest of the project period. Therefore, it is assumed that 
the  number  of  beneficiaries  to  be  reached  will  be  less  than  in  subsequent  years.  This  is 
consistent with SSLRP’s projected disbursement by semester which is expected to be low at 
the beginning of the project and will increase in subsequent years.  
32 
South Sudan: Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Consolidated Annual Work Plan and Budget 2021 
70.  With  regard  to  benefits,  SSLRP  will  promote  climate  sensitive  agricultural 
technologies  or  practices  and  these  are  expected  to  increase  productivity,  enhance 
resilience and reduce carbon emissions. However, there will also be non-quantifiable benefits 
to accrue to different institutions and/or individuals and these will likely be immediate. The 
different scenarios are presented hereunder: 
a)  There  will  be  more  capacity  to  coordinate  and  oversee  effective  project 
implementation; 
b)  The  watershed  management  approach  being  adopted  for  SSLRP  will  lead  to  longer 
term  environmental  rejuvenation  and  returns  on  improved  soil  and  sustainable 
access to water; and 
c)  There  are  other  non-tangible  benefits,  such  as  employment  creation  from  off  farm 
activities  and  an  overall  contribution  to  the  stability/livelihood  improvement  of  the 
target communities. 
VIII.  CONSTRAINTS, RISKS AND MITIGANTS 
71. 
Presented in the below table are the possible constraints and risks that may hamper 
the  implementation  of  the  SSLRP  2021  AWPB.  The  table  also  provides  the  suggested 
mitigation measures. 
Table 6: Possible Constraints and Risks and Suggested Mitigation Measures 
Risk 
Risk Mitigation Measures 
1.  Delay  by  IA  in  mobilising 
  Ensuring close follow up and monitoring of the 
Project Team  
2.  Delay 
in 
resulting 
implementation. 
in 
procurement 
in 
delay 
mobilisation process 
  Ensure the application/use of efficient procurement 
planning. 
3.  Delay 
in  disbursement  of 
funds  resulting  in  delay  in 
implementation. 
  Follow proper financial management procedures and 
ensure submission of all supporting documentation 
when asking for replenishments. 
4.  Delayed 
receipt 
Objection 
resulting 
implementation. 
in 
from 
of  No 
IFAD 
in 
delay 
  Ensure proper planning that gives adequate time for 
receipt of requisite approvals. 
33 
South Sudan
South Sudan Livelihoods Resilience Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Mission Dates:
20 August to 6 December 2020
Document Date:
01/03/2021
Project No.
2000002869
Report No.
5643-SS
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Guidance Note
Guidance Note
Guidance Note
Guidance Note
Procurement Plan SUMMARY
Country:
South Sudan
South Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project 
(SSLRP)
Project Name:
Project ID:
Version
1.0
Version Date
01-Dec-20
Prepared by:
Nelson Oluoch
Approved by:
Bernadette Mukonyora
Procurement 
Category
Plan
Actual
Currency
USD
USD
Goods
Works
Consulting 
Services
TOTAL
195 049.00 
-
740 777.00 
#########
-
-
-
-
Prior Review Thresholds
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Thresholds
Goods
Works
Non-Consulting 
Services
Firms - 
Consulting 
Services
Prior Review
All Direct Contracting and Single-Source Procurements are  Prior Review  (in alignment with IFAD Procurement Handbook).
> US$100,000.00> US$ 10,000.00
> US$ 20,000.00
> US$ 10,000.00
Individuals - 
Consulting 
Services
> US$ 10,000.00
Procurement Method Thresholds
Goods
Works 
Non-Consulting 
Services
Shopping
< US$ 20,000.00
< US$50,000.00
< US$10,000.00
NCB
> 
US$20,000.00 
to < US$ 
> 
US$50,000.00 
to < US$ 
> US$ 
10,000.00 to < 
US$ 
100,000.00
ICB
> US$ 200,000.00
> US$ 700,000.00
> US$ 100,000.00
ICS/CQS
LCS
QCBS
Individuals
Firms
< US10,000.00
< US10,000.00
> 
US$10,000.00 
to < US$ 
> 
US$10,000.00 
to < US$ 
> US$50,000.00
> US$50,000.00
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 5 of 9
Printed on: 19/01/2021
Procurement Plan - Goods
South Sudan
South Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)
Project ID: 
Version
AWPB/Component Ref
1.0
№
1-Dec-20
Description
Funding
Lot №/Description
Project Area
Plan vs. Actual
Pre-or Post 
Qualification
Prior or Post Review
Procurement 
Method
Envelopes
Amount
(USD)
Amount
Plan vs. Actual
Submission of 
PreQual Docs
No Objection Date
PreQual Invitation 
Date
PreQual Closing Date
Submission of 
PreQual Report
No Objection 
Date
Submission of 
PR by user
Submission of BD
No-objection
Date
Bid Invitation Date
Bid Closing-Opening
Submission
Tech Eval Rpt
No-objection
Date
Submission
Combined Eval Rpt*
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
Date
Contract
Award
Basic Data
Pre-Qualification
Bidding Process
Bid Evaluation
Contract Award & Signature
Total Amount
USD
195 049.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Plan
Actual
Procurement Methods
NS: National Shopping 
IS: International Shopping 
NCB: National Competitive Bidding 
ICB: International Competitive Bidding 
LIB: Limited (International) Bidding 
DC: Direct Contracting
1
2
3
4
5
6
IEC Materials for Gender & Nutrition 
Messaging
IFAD
Procurement of Agricultural 
Materials (tools, seeds and planting 
materials)
IFAD
Procurement of oxen and ploughs
IFAD
Production and dissemination of 
various extension messages through 
Audio visual methods
Publication and dissemination of 
workshop proceedings (magazines)
Double Cabin Vehicle
IFAD
1
2
1
1
1
All Areas
All Areas
All Areas
All Areas
All Areas
PCU
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
1
1
1
1
1
1
5 589.00 
35 870.00 
35 000.00
35 886.00 
31 374.00 
45 225.00 
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Feb-21
N/A
2-Feb-21
16-Feb-21
N/A
N/A
23-Feb-21
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Feb-21
8-Feb-21
10-Feb-21
27-Mar-21
N/A
N/A
10-Apr-21
17-Apr-21
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Feb-21
22-Feb-21
24-Feb-21
10-Apr-21
N/A
N/A
24-Apr-21
1-May-21
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Feb-21
22-Feb-21
24-Feb-21
10-Apr-21
N/A
N/A
24-Apr-21
1-May-21
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Feb-21
22-Feb-21
24-Feb-21
10-Apr-21
N/A
N/A
24-Apr-21
1-May-21
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Enter Date
N/A
N/A
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
23-Feb-21
25-Feb-21
Date
Contract
Signature
27-Feb-21
29-Apr-21
6-May-21
8-May-21
13-May-21
20-May-21
22-May-21
13-May-21
20-May-21
22-May-21
13-May-21
20-May-21
22-May-21
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 6 of 9
Printed on: 19/01/2021
Procurement Plan - Goods
South Sudan
South Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)
Project ID: 
Approved by: Bernadette Mukonyora
Prepared by: Nelson Oluoch
Version
1.0
1-Dec-20
AWPB/Componen
t Ref
№
Total Amount
USD
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Plan
Actual
Procurement Methods
NS: National Shopping 
IS: International Shopping 
NCB: National Competitive Bidding 
ICB: International Competitive Bidding 
LIB: Limited (International) Bidding 
DC: Direct Contracting
Description
Funding
Lot №/Description
Project Area
Plan vs. Actual
Pre-or Post 
Qualification
Prior or Post Review
Procurement 
Method
Envelopes
Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Submission of 
PreQual Docs
No Objection Date
PreQual Invitation 
Date
PreQual Closing Date
Submission of 
PreQual Report
No Objection Date
Submission of PR by 
user
Submission of BD
No-objection
Date
Bid Invitation Date
Bid Closing-Opening
Submission
Tech Eval Rpt
No-objection
Date
Submission
Combined Eval Rpt*
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
Date
Contract
Award
Date
Contract
Signature
Basic Data
Pre-Qualification
Bidding Process
Bid Evaluation
Contract Award & Signature
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1-Oct-20
15-Oct-20
2-Jul-20
7-Jul-20
3-Jun-20
5-Jun-20
1-Jul-20
7-Jul-20
Plan
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 7 of 9
Printed on: 19/01/2021
Procurement Plan - Consulting
South Sudan
South Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP)
Project ID: 
Approved by: Nelson Oluoch
Prepared by: Nelson Oluoch
Version
1.0
8-Jan-34
AWPB/Comp
onent Ref
№
Total Amount
USD
LCU
740 777.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Plan
Actual
Selection Methods
QCBS: Quality and Cost-Based Selection
QBS: Quality-Based Selection
CQS: Selection by Consultants' Qualifications 
LCS: Least-Cost Selection
FBS Fixed Budget Selection
ICS: Individual Consultants Selection
SSS: Sole Source Selection
Description*
Funding
Project Area
Plan vs. Actual
Shortlist
(Yes|No)
Prior or Post 
Review
Procurement 
Method
Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Submission of 
REOI
No Objection 
Date
REOI Launch Date
EOI Submission 
Deadline
Submission of 
Shortlist Report
No Objection 
Date
Submission of 
RFP/RCQ
No-objection
Date
RFP/RCQ Launch 
Date
Proposal 
submission 
deadline
Submission of 
TER
No-objection
Date
Submission of 
CER
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. 
Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
Negotiations 
completed
Submission of 
Draft Contract 
and MoN
No-objection
Date
Date
Contract
Award
Date
Contract
Signature
Basic Data
EOI  Shortlist Procedure
Proposal Process
Evaluation
Contract Award & Signature
1
2
2
3
4
5
6
7
Consultant on GALS Methodology
IFAD
TA to support CBOs development 
process
IFAD
TA to support CDP Preparation Process
IFAD
Consultant to develop CDP groups
IFAD
Assessment of Rural Roads
IFAD
Assessment of Water Supply Options
IFAD
All Areas
All Areas
All Areas
All Areas
All Areas
All Areas
Assessment of Post Harvest 
Infrustructure
IFAD
All Areas
Consultants Develeopment of National 
Cooperatives Policy Frameworks 
IFAD
Baseline Survey
IFAD
All Areas
All Areas
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
No
Prior Review
LCS
10 254.00 
-
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
165 825.00 
-
No
Prior Review
QCBS
70 991.00 
-
No
Post Review
ICS
1 200.00 
-
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
100 000.00 
-
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
200 000.00 
-
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
50 000.00 
-
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
61 507.00 
-
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
81 000.00 
-
-
-
-
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
2-Jan-21
9-Jan-21
11-Jan-21
5-Feb-21
19-Feb-21
26-Feb-21
12-Mar-21
19-Mar-21
15-Feb-21
22-Feb-21
24-Feb-21
17-Mar-21
31-Mar-21
7-Apr-21
11-Apr-21
18-Apr-21
20-Apr-21
4-Jun-21
18-Jun-21
25-Jun-21
9-Jul-21
16-Jul-21
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Feb-21
22-Feb-21
24-Feb-21
10-Apr-21
24-Apr-21
1-May-21
15-May-21
22-May-21
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Feb-21
N/A
17-Feb-21
10-Mar-21
24-Mar-21
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Feb-21
8-Feb-21
10-Feb-21
3-Mar-21
17-Mar-21
24-Mar-21
28-Mar-21
4-Apr-21
6-Apr-21
21-May-21
4-Jun-21
11-Jun-21
25-Jun-21
2-Jul-21
1-Feb-21
8-Feb-21
10-Feb-21
3-Mar-21
17-Mar-21
24-Mar-21
28-Mar-21
4-Apr-21
6-Apr-21
21-May-21
4-Jun-21
11-Jun-21
25-Jun-21
2-Jul-21
1-Feb-21
8-Feb-21
10-Feb-21
3-Mar-21
17-Mar-21
24-Mar-21
28-Mar-21
4-Apr-21
6-Apr-21
21-May-21
4-Jun-21
11-Jun-21
25-Jun-21
2-Jul-21
15-Feb-21
22-Feb-21
24-Feb-21
17-Mar-21
31-Mar-21
7-Apr-21
11-Apr-21
18-Apr-21
20-Apr-21
4-Jun-21
18-Jun-21
25-Jun-21
9-Jul-21
16-Jul-21
1-Feb-21
8-Feb-21
10-Feb-21
3-Mar-21
17-Mar-21
24-Mar-21
28-Mar-21
4-Apr-21
6-Apr-21
21-May-21
4-Jun-21
11-Jun-21
25-Jun-21
2-Jul-21
31-Mar-21
21-Apr-21
25-Apr-21
2-May-21
4-May-21
11-May-21
28-Jul-21
18-Aug-21
22-Aug-21
29-Aug-21
31-Aug-21
7-Sep-21
3-Jun-21
24-Jun-21
28-Jun-21
5-Jul-21
7-Jul-21
14-Jul-21
5-Apr-21
19-Apr-21
23-Apr-21
N/A
25-Apr-21
2-May-21
14-Jul-21
4-Aug-21
8-Aug-21
15-Aug-21
17-Aug-21
24-Aug-21
14-Jul-21
4-Aug-21
8-Aug-21
15-Aug-21
17-Aug-21
24-Aug-21
14-Jul-21
4-Aug-21
8-Aug-21
15-Aug-21
17-Aug-21
24-Aug-21
28-Jul-21
18-Aug-21
22-Aug-21
29-Aug-21
31-Aug-21
7-Sep-21
14-Jul-21
4-Aug-21
8-Aug-21
15-Aug-21
17-Aug-21
24-Aug-21
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 8 of 9
Printed on: 19/01/2021
Day Ranges These tables provide estimated timelines by procurement methods, based on experience and guidance in the Procurement Handbook where specified.
The approximate number of days are used in the default Procurement Plan Formulas. Timelines in the Approx fields/Formulas  are not prescriptive, and may be modified by the project.
Approx figures entered will be highlighted/flagged, if below the Minimun number of days. Zero indicates steps that are not applicable to the method, and are indicated as N/A in the Formulas.
Goods & Works
Procurement Method
Single Envelope
RFQ/Shopping (NS/IS)
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Direct Contracting
Two Envelope
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Services
Submission of PreQual docs
No Objection Date
PreQual Invitation Date
PreQual Closing Date
Submission of PreQual Report
No Objection Date
Submission of BD
No-objection
Date
Bid Invitation Date
Bid Closing-Opening
Submission
Tech Eval Rpt
No-objection
Date
Submission
Combined Eval Rpt/Bid Evaluation Report
No-objection
Date
Issue of NOITA & Standstill
Date
Contract
Award
Date
Contract
Signature
Totals
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
4
4
4
0
0
0
0
4
4
4
0
0
0
0
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
0
0
0
0
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
0
0
0
0
7
7
5
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
7
7
7
14
14
14
3
7
7
7
14
14
14
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
10
10
10
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
5
30
45
45
30
45
45
7
30
45
45
30
45
45
21
45
70
70
45
70
70
30
45
70
70
45
70
70
14
45
45
45
45
45
45
14
45
45
45
45
45
45
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
21
21
14
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
1
3
3
3
7
7
7
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
7
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
14
21
21
14
21
21
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
11
11
11
11
11
11
0
11
11
11
11
11
11
0
15
15
15
15
15
15
0
15
15
15
15
15
15
0
12
12
12
12
12
12
0
12
12
12
12
12
12
1
7
7
7
1
1
1
7
7
7
7
1
1
1
3
14
14
14
5
5
5
14
14
14
14
5
5
5
2
7
7
7
5
5
5
7
7
7
7
5
5
5
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
24
68
83
83
110
125
123
34
78
93
93
120
135
135
60
130
155
155
206
231
231
96
147
172
172
223
247
247
40
96
103
103
164
171
171
45
99
117
117
178
185
185
Approx 
Months/Days
1m 9d 
3m 5d 
3m 12d 
3m 12d 
5m 12d 
5m 19d 
5m 19d 
1m 14d 
3m 8d 
3m 26d 
3m 26d 
5m 26d 
6m 3d 
6m 3d 
Selection Method
Submission of REOI
No Objection Date
REOI Launch Date
EOI Submission Deadline
Submission of Shortlist Report
No Objection Date
Submission of RFP/RCQ
No-objection
Date
RFP/RCQ Launch Date
Proposal submission deadline
Submission of TER
No-objection
Date
Submission of CER
No-objection
Date
Issue of NOITA & Standstill
Negotiations completed
Submission of Draft Contract and MoN
No-objection
Date
Date Contract Award
Date
Contract
Signature
Totals
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx Min Max Approx Min Max Approx
QCBS (w/Shortlist)
FBS (w/Shortlist)
LCS (w/Shortlist)
QBS (w/Shortlist)
CQS (w/Shortlist)
ICS (w/Shortlist)
QCBS (noShortlist)
FBS (noShortlist)
LCS (noShortlist)
QBS (noShortlist)
CQS (noShortlist)
ICS (noShortlist)
SSS
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
4
4
4
4
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
3
3
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
7
7
7
7
5
5
7
5
7
7
5
5
7
4
4
4
4
4
4
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
45
45
45
21
14
14
45
14
21
21
14
14
7
60
60
60
60
30
30
60
30
30
60
30
30
30
45
45
45
45
21
21
45
21
25
45
21
21
30
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
7
7
14
14
14
0
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
0
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
7
14
14
14
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
21
14
14
14
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
14
7
7
7
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
7
10
10
10
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
10
7
7
7
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
7
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
0
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
0
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
0
14
14
14
14
7
7
14
14
14
14
7
7
7
21
21
21
21
14
14
21
21
21
21
14
14
21
21
21
21
21
14
14
21
21
21
21
14
14
21
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
170
170
170
132
118
118
126
88
95
88
74
74
49
283
283
283
259
220
220
205
173
175
181
142
142
136
204
204
204
183
152
152
149
125
129
128
97
97
101
Approx 
Months/Days
6m 22d 
6m 22d 
6m 22d 
6m 1d 
4m 31d 
4m 31d 
4m 28d 
4m 4d 
4m 8d 
4m 7d 
3m 6d 
3m 6d 
3m 10d 
NOTE
1. Some procurement methods for low-value processes might require No Objections based on the Prior Review Thresholds. Where they do not require, No Objection number of days should be zero.
2. RFP: Request for Proposals: standard procurement document used for Services.
3. RCQ: Requests for Consultants Qualifications: Procurement document used for CQS and LCS. The RFP is used for all other procurement methods
4. Consulting services and Good/Works methods could either be used for Non-Consulting Services
5. All days are calendar days
9
South Sudan
South Sudan Livelihoods Resilience Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Mission Dates:
20 August to 6 December 2020
Document Date:
01/03/2021
Project No.
2000002869
Report No.
5643-SS
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION MANUAL (PIM) 
1 
Overview of the Project Implementation Manual 
PART I: FRAMEWORK AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
PART II: DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES 
PART III: PROJECT PROCEDURES 
PART IV: ANNEXES 
9 
12 
14 
16 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Detailed Table of Contents 
Overview of the Project Implementation Manual 
Detailed Table of Contents 
List of Figures 
List of Tables 
Abbreviations and Acronyms 
PART I: FRAMEWORK AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
I.1: Definitions 
I.2: Project Overview 
I.3: Targeting Strategies 
Geographical targeting and project intervention area 
Target group(s) 
Targeting Mechanisms 
Strategy /approach for gender and youth mainstreaming, social 
inclusion, and nutrition 
I.4: Climate and Environment 
I.5: Institutional Arrangements and Responsibilities 
I.5.1: Implementing Agency (IA) 
I.5.2: Project Coordination Unit 
I.5.3: Partnerships 
PART II: DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES 
II.1: Start-up 
II.2: Component 1: Community Driven Development Planning 
II.2.1: Subcomponent 1.1: Build Strong and Inclusive Community 
Based Organizations (CBOs) 
II.2.2: Subcomponent 1.2: Development of Community-Driven 
Development Plans (CDPs) 
II.3: Component 2: Agriculture Production and Livelihood Support 
II.3.1: Subcomponent 2.2: Community Productive and Climate 
Resilient Infrastructure Investments 
Implementation Procedures and Processes 
a) 
b) 
Infrastructure for Soil and Water Conservation 
Borehole Water Supply Systems 
2 
3 
5 
5 
6 
8 
8 
11 
13 
13 
16 
17 
23 
27 
27 
28 
32 
37 
40 
40 
41 
43 
43 
44 
49 
50 
50 
51 
3 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
c)  Water Supply System Based on a Rainwater Harvesting 
Structure Such as a Valley Tank 
d) 
e) 
Implementation of Postharvest Infrastructure 
Implementation of Feeder Roads Improvement Works 
II.4: Component 3: Project Support and Capacity Building 
52 
53 
53 
54 
II.4.1: Subcomponent 3.2: Institutional Capacity Building and Policy 
Support 
54 
II.5: Annual Supervision 
II.6: Mid-term review (MTR) 
II.7: Project Completion 
PART III: Project Procedures 
III.1: Planning and AWPB Development 
III.2: Monitoring and Evaluation 
III.3: Knowledge Management, Learning and Communication 
III.4: Financial Management 
III.5: Procurement 
A. 
Procurement and Contract Management 
PART IV: ANNEXES 
Annex 1: Scope of Work for the Implementing Agency 
Annex 2: Responsibility and Accountability Matrices of the SSLRP 
Stakeholders 
Annex 3: Terms of Reference for IA staff 
Annex 4: Terms of Reference for PCU staff 
Annex 5: Conflict Analysis in South Sudan 
55 
56 
56 
57 
57 
59 
62 
63 
74 
74 
81 
82 
85 
95 
107 
114 
Annex 6: Terms of Reference for GALS Consultant/Service Provider  116 
Annex 7:  Terms of Reference for Providing Various Professional 
Services During the Implementation of the Infrastructure 
Annex 8: Terms of Reference for County Profiles Study 
Annex 9: Terms of Reference for Community Facilitators 
118 
129 
132 
Annex 10:  Guidelines for Preparation of Annual Work Plan and Budget 
and Progress Reports 
134 
4 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
List of Figures  
Figure 1: SSLRP Implementation Structure 
Figure 2: CDD Process 
Figure 3: Diagrammatic Representation of Subcomponent 2.1 
Figure 4: SSLRP Funds Flow Chart and Reporting Lines 
List of Tables 
Table 1: Demographic Characteristics 
Table 2: Target population 
Table 3: Main Livelihoods of Households 
Table 4: Process of Selecting Payams 
Table 5: Enterprise Selection Criteria 
Table 6: Assessment Criteria for Community-Based Organisations 
Table 7: List of the Preselected International Non-Government Organisations 
Table 8: Potential SSLRP Collaboration Partners 
Table 9: Start-up Activities 
Table 10: Indicative Menu of Investments 
Table 11: IHISP Livelihood Business Plan Cycle 
Table 12: Annual Work Plan and Budget Preparation and Approval Schedule 
Table 13: Characteristics of Procurement Methods 
5 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Abbreviations and Acronyms 
AfDB 
AWPB 
BIA 
CAMP 
CAP 
CBM&E 
CDC 
CDD 
CoE 
COSOP 
COVID-19 
CSN 
CSO 
DRC 
EA 
EIRR 
ENRM 
ESMF 
FAO 
FDI 
FM 
GAM 
GAP 
GBV 
GDI 
GDP 
GNI 
GoSS 
GRM 
HDI 
IDMP 
IDP 
IFI 
KM 
LIPWs 
LTB/R 
MAD 
MAFS 
M&E 
MFI 
MTR 
NBS 
NALEP 
NGO 
NPV 
PCP 
PCR 
PCRRDP 
PDO 
PDR 
PFM 
PIM 
African Development Bank 
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Beneficiary Impact Assessment 
Comprehensive Agriculture Master Plan 
Community Action Plan 
Community-Based Monitoring and Evaluation 
County Development Committee 
Community-Driven Development 
Council of Elders 
Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 
Corona Virus Disease of 2019 
Country Strategy Note 
Civil Society Organisation 
Democratic Republic of Congo 
Environmental Assessment 
Economic Internal Rate of Return 
Environmental and Natural Resources Management 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations 
Foreign Direct Investment 
Financial Management 
Global Acute Malnutrition 
Good Agricultural Practices 
Gender Based Violence 
Gender Development Index 
Gross Domestic Product 
Gross National Income 
Government of South Sudan 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
Human Development Index 
Irrigation Development Master Plan 
Internally Displaced Person 
International Financing Institution 
Knowledge Management 
Labour Intensive Public Works 
Letter to the Borrower/Letter to the Recipient 
Minimum Acceptable Diet 
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Micro-Finance Institution 
Mid-Term Review 
National Bureau of Statistics 
National Agriculture and Livestock Extension Policy 
Non-Governmental Organisation 
Net Present Value 
Public Consultation Plan 
Project Completion Review 
Post-Crisis Rural Recovery and Development Programme 
Project Development Objective 
Project Design Report 
Public Financial Management 
Project Implementation Manual  
6 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Procurement Plan 
Rome-Based Agencies 
Savings and Credit Cooperative Organization 
Sustainable Development Goal 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
Subject Matter Specialists 
Strategic Objective 
South Sudan Development Initiative 
South Sudan Development Plan 
South Sudan Livelihood Development Project 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project 
South Sudan National Bureau of Statistics 
South Sudan Pound 
Short-Term Regional Emergence Response Project 
Scaling Up Nutrition 
Soil and Water Conservation 
Technical Assistance 
Theory of Change 
United Nations Development Programme 
United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund 
United States Dollar 
Village Development Committees 
Village Savings and Loan Association 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene  
Without Project  
With Project  
PP 
RBAs 
SACCO 
SDG 
SECAP 
SMS 
SO 
SSDI 
SSDP 
SSLDP 
SSLRP 
SSNBS 
SSP 
STRERP 
SUN 
SWC 
TA 
ToC 
UNDP 
UNICEF 
USD 
VDC 
VSLA 
WASH 
WOP 
WP 
7 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
PART I: FRAMEWORK AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
I.1: Definitions  
Agro-pastoral  Field  School  (AFS)  approach  –  It  is  an  adaptation  of  the 
1. 
innovative, participatory and interactive learning approach from the Farmer Field Schools 
(FFS), for pastoralist and agro-pastoralist (as known from Uganda, Ethiopia, Kenya). 
Community-driven Development Plan (CDP) – Is the product of a technically 
2. 
guided facilitation process in which CBOs members - with interests in development within 
the menu  of the project’s activities  - undergo, to articulate, prioritise and participate in 
defining  the  pathways  they  will  take  to  implement  the  action  plans.  CDPs  are  effective 
demands arrived at under guided facilitation that can be implemented by the groups as 
subprojects.    The  various  activities  prioritised  are  then  consolidated  into  an  actionable 
plan, both immediate and medium term, costed and approved by the County Development 
Committees.  The approved CDPs become subprojects that are named and managed by 
the project management committee selected by the CBOs.  
3. 
Community-Based Organisation (CBO) – Community-based organisation in this 
project  refers  to  groups  of  individual  household  members  -  women  and/or  men,  or 
volunteer  and/or  governing  organisations/entities  like    Associations,  Elders  and  Village 
Development Committees - that have either social or political responsibilities to specified 
constituencies.    CBOs,  on  the  one  hand,  as  community  groups  are  formed  based  on 
interests or connectedness with some intentions of working together to address common 
and  demand  driven  interests  like  resolving  household  food  insecurity  through  food 
production  and/or  trade.    In  the  circumstance,  they  elect  Committees  to  manage  their 
CDPs.  On another hand, CBOs may be already organised volunteers service providers with 
defined constituencies like is the case of Associations and Elders.  They normally execute 
their social or political roles, which are public roles and responsibilities in this project on 
behalf of their members.  
4. 
Community facilitation - is both a process and a tool that will be moderated by 
trained female and male Community Facilitators [CFs]. As a process, it walks communities 
through their needs and challenges, enables them to articulate the issues and to prioritise 
them. And with the support of subject matter specialists, communities will translate these 
concerns into actionable community development plans [CDPs] that will be managed by 
them. As a tool, however, it is used to inform all areas of decisions by ensuring that every 
category of the beneficiaries are consulted [inclusiveness] and that new ideas and themes 
inform  the  CDPs,  are  integrated  and/or  mainstreamed  into  the  CDPs  -  including  all  the 
core themes of IFAD and government on gender, inclusivity, climate change, etc..  
5. 
Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) – Comprises the actions needed to transform 
and  reorient  agricultural  systems  to  effectively  support  development  and  ensure  food 
security  under  a  changing  climate.  It  aims  at  sustainably  increasing  agricultural 
productivity and incomes and adapting and building resilience to climate change. The term 
covers practices such as: a) Conservation Agriculture (CA), water and soil management, 
integrated  production  systems  with  efficient  use  of  resources  and  less  external  inputs, 
diversification to increase resilience, etc.  
6. 
Conservation Agriculture (CA) – Conservation agriculture is the combination of 
minimum  soil  disturbance,  continuous  soil  cover  and  crop  rotation.  Conservation 
agriculture has three principles: a) Continuous minimum mechanical soil disturbance; b) 
permanent organic soil cover; and c) diversification of crop species grown in sequences 
and/or  association.  When  these  three  “principles”  are  implemented  together  and  are 
associated with supportive agronomic measures, CA has the potential to reduce losses in 
soil organic matter associated with traditional tillage, raise fertility levels, improve rainfall 
infiltration and water use efficiency, reduce erosion, and improve biodiversity in the soil.  
7. 
Farmer Field School (FFS) approach – It is a methodology originally developed 
by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) as a participatory approach for people-
8 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
centred learning. Practical field exercises using direct observation, discussion and decision 
making encourage learning-by-doing and participants can exchange knowledge in a risk-
free environment. Local knowledge and outside scientific insights are tested, validated and 
integrated  directly  in  farmers’  gardens,  under  their  localized  ecosystems  and  socio-
economic settings. 
8. 
Livelihood zones -define geographic areas of a country where people generally 
share similar options for obtaining food and income - that is, grow similar types of crops 
and rear similar types of livestock - and have similar access to markets. The Project area 
are categorised in the following zones: 
a)  Ironstone Plateau Agro-pastoralism - Terekeka County falls in this zone. The zone 
is predominantly agro-pastoral. Cereal and legume crop production and cattle and 
small livestock drive the local economy. It is a moderately productive zone. It an 
area with unimodal rainfall - from April to October - ranging from 950-1,300 mm.  
The climate is suitable for cattle, cereals, pulses and the small ruminants - which 
are  the  lifeline  of  the  local  economy.  The  area  is  moderately  productive  and 
sparsely populated.  
b)  Equatoria  maize  and  cassava  zones  -  comprises  Kajo  Keji  and  part  of  Magwi 
Counties,  which  are  situated  in  the  Greenbelt  agro-ecological  zones  -  with  the 
livelihood  patterns  dominated  by  crop  production  and  supplemented  by  some 
livestock, fisheries, hunting, etc. Households in the zone practice mixed farming 
and their wealth is measured by the size of the area cultivated in feddans. These 
areas  are  very  productive  and  are  recognised  for  surplus  production  for  the 
country.  It is a bimodal rainfall with precipitation ranging from 1,100-1,600 mm 
and with very rich soils. 
c)  Highland forest and Sorghum zones - The southern part of Magwi County and Torit 
fall under this livelihood system, which is predominantly a cereal economy with 
low  livestock  numbers.    The  local  economy  is  dependent  on  rainfed  agriculture 
cultivation with less reliance on livestock. A complementary source of livelihoods 
includes exploitation of forest products, labor and trade activities. In a typical year, 
all wealth groups depend chiefly on their own crop production, supplemented by 
wild foods, dry fish, and market purchase for the poor. It is a cereal deficient area 
because  of  low  production  and  low  rainfall.  It  is  also  a  unimodal  rainfall  area 
stretching from April to November but with plantain period ending in July. 
d)  Eastern  plains  sorghum  and  cattle  zone  -  This  covers  central  Jonglei  and  the 
northern part of Eastern Equatoria.  Local livelihoods are rain-fed agro-pastoralism 
- cultivation of crops and livestock rearing, supplemented by fishing, hunting, and 
gathering of a large range of wild foods and bush products. This is a known deficit 
production area, however, abundant in fish and livestock products. It is a unimodal 
rainfall pattern, precipitation is 800-900 mm per annum. There are two distinct 
seasons:  the  rainy  season  from  May  to  November  and  the  dry  season  from 
December to April.  
Food Insecurity – It is the inability to obtain sufficient food (in terms of calories) 
9. 
and other essential goods and services to lead a healthy life. 
10. 
Guided facilitation - Refers to a deliberate attempt by CFs to balance between 
open-ended  processes  and  one  that  is  development  oriented  especially  in  the  present 
context,  but  without  suppressing  the  actual  needs  of  the  beneficiaries.    By  bringing 
technical  support  on  board  at  all  moments  of  guidance,  the  CFs  ensure  that  the 
development of the CDFs not only conform to what are eligible expenditure lines [effective 
demand].  It  also  ensures  that  funding  of  the  CDPs  will  only  proceed  after  all  the  other 
constraints that would impede a development approach are addressed.  
11. 
Implementing  Agency  (IA)  –  It  is  the  agency  assigned  the  responsibility  of 
implementation  of  the  project.  It  leads  the  participatory  process  preparing  the  Annual 
9 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Work  Plan  and  Budget  (AWPB)  and  receives  funding  to  support  implementation  of  the 
approved activities. 
12. 
Letter to the Borrower (LtB):  
13. 
Nutrition-related  Knowledge,  Attitude  and  Practices  (KAP)  survey  –  It 
assess  and  explore  peoples’  KAP  relating  to  nutrition,  diet,  foods  and  closely  related 
hygiene  and  health  issues.  KAP  studies  are  mainly  used  to:  a)  collect  key  information 
during  a  situation  analysis,  feeding into  the  design  of  nutrition interventions;  and  b)  to 
evaluate nutrition education interventions.  
14. 
Para-vets  –  These  are  community-based  extension  workers  who  have  received 
simple training in veterinary services. They are private service providers who move around 
in the communities. They charge ‘reasonable’ fees for the services rendered, such as: a)  
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) – It is an annex to the Project Design 
15. 
Report  (PDR).  It  provides  practical  guidance  to  Project 
implementers  on  key 
implementation aspects. It describes in detail how the Project components and activities 
outlined  in  the  PDR  are  intended  to  be  implemented.  The  PIM  outlines  the  detailed 
mechanisms, processes and procedures, formats, eligibility criteria, etc. which will ensure 
efficient Project implementation and achievement of the envisaged results. The PIM is a 
living document and may be updated at any time, as needs arise, during implementation.  
16. 
Project  Management  Committee  or  Subproject  Management  Committee 
(PMC or SPMC) - These are elected members of a group that has undergone a facilitation 
process  and  after  clearly  defining  their  CDPs,  elect  members  who  will  help  them  in 
managing the affairs of the subproject. SPMC continues to liaise with members to SSLRP 
and other stakeholders 
17. 
Time and Labour Saving Technologies (TLST) and practices – These are tools 
and  equipment  that  reduce  the  drudgery  and/or  improve  the  efficiency  of  performing 
various  farming,  off-farm  and  household  activities.  These  may  include:  a)  the  use  of 
draught animals for land preparation, planting, weeding and rural transport; b) cooking 
on fuel efficient stoves; c) harvesting roof water for domestic purposes, agro processing 
and value addition, etc. 
18.  Watershed – It is a hydrological unit that discharges rainfall runoff to an outlet in 
the downstream. It has been described and used as a physical-biological unit that could 
be easily monitored using objectively verifiable indicators and also, on many occasions, as 
a socio-economic-political unit for planning and management of natural resources. 
19.  Watershed Management Plans (WMPs) are consolidated overviews of a given 
watershed,  identifying  geographical  features  of  the  watershed,  of  the  main  economic 
activities,  in  particular  farming  and  livestock,  as  well  as  the  local  communities.  They 
represent a holistic planning approach for project site selection. They are finalized upon 
site selection and technical assessment of proposed project activities.  
20.  Water Users Association (WUA) – It is a local institution established with the 
objective  of  supporting  the  construction  of  water-related  schemes  and  managing  them 
after completion. Its major roles include a) creating an enabling environment (including 
community  contribution/mobilization)  during  construction;  b)  ensure  proper  distribution 
of  water  after  construction;  c)  managing  water  conflicts  as  well  as  carrying  out  the 
operation  and  maintenance.  This  could  be  an  irrigation  scheme,  a  multipurpose  water 
point, etc. 
21. 
Crisis Modifiers – refers to innovative risk management tools that rely on greater 
flexibility in the development – humanitarian nexus, allowing for development funding to 
address urgent humanitarian needs that may prevent longer-term engagement, and erode 
the benefits from long-term development. 
10 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
I.2: Project Overview  
22. 
SSLRP was jointly designed by GoSS and IFAD. The project’s rationale is premised 
on the fact that, despite the formation of the Government of National Unity, the context 
remains fragile with localised inter-community conflict driven by competition for natural 
resources, adverse weather conditions and flooding, as well as the risk of a perpetuated 
humanitarian crisis if the returnees and the general population are not integrated into the 
economy.  The main risk is the resumption of national scale instability, if the peace deal 
fails. It is therefore critical that efforts towards re-integration of the rural population into 
viable  livelihood  opportunities  are  given  priority,  as  an  important  strategy  towards  the 
sustenance of the peace agreement. There is strong evidence on the role of sustainable 
human  development  in  discouraging  people  (including  young  people)  from  engaging  in 
acts of violence25. 
23. 
SSLRP’s  goal  is  to  contribute  to  improved  and  resilient  livelihoods  among  the 
targeted  rural  communities.  The  Project  Development  Objective  is  to  empower 
communities  to  participate  in  decision-making  processes  that  will  recover  agriculture 
livelihoods, build household resilience and promote stability. 
24. 
The project will be implemented with particular emphasis on the following themes: 
  Gender  -  South  Sudan  has  a  Gender  Development  Index  (GII)  of  0.839.  The 
country has a patriarchal society that keeps strict gender norms and rigid gender 
roles. The main obstacles to women’s meaningful participation are cultural norms 
which  limit  access  to,  and  control  of  primary  resources,  affordable  credit, 
knowledge,  information,  and  agriculture  inputs.  Women’s  poverty  is  exacerbated 
by gender-based discrimination and violence. Women’s empowerment is hindered 
by cultural and traditional practices, such as early marriage, or forced girl-school-
drop out; 
  Youth - South Sudanese youth account for over 70% of the population but with a 
literacy rate of 27%. Their levels of human capital are extremely low with 94% of 
young persons entering the labour force with less than primary education. Youth 
employment is dominated by low-productivity, unremunerated work concentrated 
in  the  agriculture  sector  with  60%  of  them  employed  in,  primarily,  subsistence 
farming  and  88%  in  non-wage  work.  An  exceptionally  large  share  of  the  active 
population is found in non-wage, low-productivity employment concentrated in the 
agriculture sector; 
  Food and Nutrition Security – South Sudan continues to experience high levels of 
food insecurity with 69.2% of households across the country affected. These levels 
remain elevated due to persistent poor macroeconomic conditions and the impact 
of  flooding  on  livelihoods.  High  prices  of  food  commodities  and  sustained 
depreciation  of  the  South  Sudanese  pound  against  the  United  States  Dollar  has 
reduced  the  purchasing  power  of  vulnerable  households  who  are  dependent  on 
markets to meet their food and other basic needs. At the same time, Global Acute 
Malnutrition (GAM) at national level is at 12.6%; 2.4 percentage points short of the 
critical  phase  (15  percent)  of  malnutrition.  This  situation  is  aggravated  by  high 
morbidity rates, poor quality of diet and flooding that contribute to displacements 
and  disruption  of  households’  livelihoods  and  water.  Nutrition  mainstreaming  will 
promote  diversification  and  sustainable  intensification  of  food  production  to 
improve  the  availability,  affordability,  stability,  and  consumption  of  diverse  foods 
and promote healthy, nutritional and sustainable diets for all, in an environment of 
increased climate resilience; 
  Fragility  –  South  Sudan  is  a  very  fragile  state.  It  remains  the  third  most  fragile 
state in the world, after Yemen and Somalia, resulting from a long drawn conflict 
driven by historical, political, social and economic marginalization. Because of the 
fragility situation, people tend to be more degrading of the farmlands and forests 
11 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
leading  to  the  population  becoming  extremely  vulnerable  to  the  impacts  of 
increased warming as well as unpredictable and reduced rainfall. 
25. 
Project Components – SSLRP’s development objective will be achieved through the 
effective implementation of two technical components: a) Community Driven Development 
Planning and b) Agriculture Production and Rural Livelihood Support. The third component, 
Project  Support  and  Capacity  Building,  will  seek  to  ensure  that  SSLRP  is  effectively 
implemented, including the provision of capacity building to selected GoSS institutions at 
the  central  and  local  levels  and  supporting  the  development  of  key  policies  (i.e. 
Cooperatives Policy Framework and Rural Financial Policy Framework). Capacity building 
activities will not only contribute to effective project implementation but will also increase 
the likelihood of sustaining successful project interventions. Lastly, the fourth component, 
Disaster  Risk  Reduction  and  Management,  will  provide  a  timely  response  to  adverse 
conditions (e.g. weather extremities, pest attack, localised conflict, COVID-19 pandemic, 
etc.). 
26. 
Component 1: Community Driven Development Planning– the objectives are 
to: a) build strong and inclusive Community Based Organizations (CBOs) that will serve 
as  promoters  and  managers  of  socio-economic  change;  b)work  with  CBOs  to  develop 
climate and gender responsive Community Development Plans (CDPs), that respond to the 
priorities  identified  by  communities,  women  and  the  youth;  and  c)  identify  strategic 
infrastructure  investments  that  will  complement  and  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  the 
CDPs.  The  CDD  process  will  be  underpinned  by  County  Profiles,  which  will  assist  in 
identifying  key  opportunities  and  constraints,  including  market  dynamics,  infrastructure 
gaps,  and  context  for  IFAD’s  mainstreaming  themes  (gender,  youth,  nutrition, 
environment), which will inform the preparation of the CDP guidelines. SSLRP foresees a 
process  of  guided  facilitation,  by  external  specialists  who  will  work  with  CBOs  in  the 
elaboration of CDPS. Households and communities will engage in a participatory process 
of problem analysis, opportunity identification and prioritization and development of the 
CDP  that  responds  to  household  and  community  development  needs.  The  expected 
outcome would be ‘communities empowered to plan and implement investments that build 
household and community assets’. 
27. 
Component  2:  Agriculture  Production  and  Rural  Livelihood  Support  –  the 
objectives  are  to:  a)  improve  household’s  food  and  nutrition  security  through  well 
facilitated  investments  in  smallholder  agriculture  production  and  off-farm  activities;  b) 
stabilise food consumption of households returning from refugee and displacement camps 
in the Project area, and to strengthen the resilience of female-headed households and the 
youth  by  providing  cash  for  intensive  labour-based  work  that  create  supportive  and 
productive community assets for livelihood investments; and c) improve rural access and 
services  through  investments  in  climate  resilient  community  infrastructure  that  are 
strategic and aligned to households’ livelihoods support identified under Component 1. The 
specific activities to be funded include all CDPs generated under Component 1 and other 
strategic investments identified through the County Profile studies, and these include: a) 
increased  smallholder  agriculture  production  and  productivity;  b)  income  generation 
activities  through  non-farm  activities  -may  include  enhancing  productivity  of  local 
employments, improving skills for the youth, improving poor access to local markets by 
targeting  improvement  in  rural  infrastructure,  reducing  post-harvest  losses,  promoting 
market linkages,  etc.;  and c)  support a mix of machine and labour-based rehabilitation 
and/or construction of climate resilience community infrastructure that are fully aligned to 
investments in rural livelihood CDPs supported. Strategic investments could include water 
for  production  and  ecological  (green)  infrastructure  and  improvements  to  community 
access  roads.  The  outcome  for  Component  2  would  be  ‘improved  access  to  productive 
assets, services and climate resilient infrastructure’. 
Component 3: Project Support and Capacity Building– will support effective 
28. 
implementation  of  the  CDD  approach  and  addressing  systemic  capacity  gaps  identified 
through  a  Systems  and  Capacity  Needs  Assessment.  Component  3  will  also  strengthen 
12 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
capacities of GoSS staff at the national, State and County levels, to facilitate participatory 
planning and development processes and support the development of a Cooperative Policy 
Framework. 
Component 0. Disaster Risk Reduction and Management – The objective of 
29. 
this component is to ensure that in the event of a disaster, whether environmental or man-
made, SSLRP can adequately respond to safeguard the developmental gains of the project. 
This component can only be triggered after the declaration of an emergency situation by 
GoSS, and/or in agreement with GoSS. It will facilitate ‘crisis modifiers’, to enable early 
action and rapid response to crises that manifest in project areas, to finance activities that 
are not foreseen but deemed critical to prevent the sustain resilience and strengthen the 
maturity  of  resilience  outcomes  attainable  over  the  lifecycle  of  SSLRP.  Funds  would  be 
reallocated  from  other  components  to  support  crisis  modifiers,  as  well  as  continuous 
resource mobilization with Development Partners for possible grant funds to support the 
‘crisis modification’. 
I.3: Targeting Strategies  
Geographical targeting and project intervention area 
30. 
Geographical  Coverage  –  SSLRP  will  be  implemented  in  three  States  and  five 
counties: Eastern Equatoria State (Magwi and Torit); Central Equatoria State (Kajo Keji 
and  Terekeka)  and  Jonglei  State  (Bor).  The  target  areas  were  jointly  selected  by  GoSS 
and IFAD. Considering that the vulnerability status in South Sudan in terms of poverty, 
food insecurity, education level and malnutrition is almost homogenous across all regions,   
The following criteria were therefore applied to select the project area: a) food production 
corridors (Greater  Equatoria accounts for 40 percent of the country’s  cereal production, 
while Jonglei has the highest livestock numbers and high levels of fishing activities); b) 
States that are hosting high numbers of returnees (the 3 selected States account for the 
highest  concentration of returnees); c) potential to build on previous IFAD investments 
of SSLDP in Eastern and Central Equatoria and other development partners; d) stability 
and low risk of future conflict; and e) accessibility due to infrastructure gaps. See table 1 
for a demographic characteristics of each state.  
Table 1: Demographic Characteristics 
State 
Poverty 
Index 
County 
Population   %  Farming 
Households 
HH Cultivated 
area (Hectare) 
Returnees 
Central 
Equatoria 
Eastern 
Equatoria 
76 
Kajo Keji 
105 783 
Terekeka 
162 289 
93 
Magwi 
185 028 
Torit 
154 976 
Jonglei 
98 
Bor South 
239 320 
90 
90 
90 
90 
87 
847 396 
1.54  
1.27 
- 
60 139 
- 
88 518 
340 
1716 
130 225 
County  Characteristics:  The  three  States  comprise  a  total  of  847,396  food 
31. 
insecure people out of which 550,807 (65%)1 are classified as being in critical situation 
according to IPC classification. They host a combined total of 130,255 returnees with 67% 
of them being in Eastern Equatoria, 30% in Central Equatoria and the least in Jonglei with 
less than 5%. The number of persons with disabilities based on a national average of 15% 
is 94,962. This will however have to be verified before commencement of project activities 
as  localised  estimates  were  not  available  at  the  time  of  design.  Agricultural  households 
account for over 90% in Eastern Equatoria and Jonglei and 76% in Central Equatoria where 
wages and salaries are also significant source of livelihood. Fisheries is also a prominent 
livelihood activity in Jonglei thanks to the  Blue Nile. Women headed  households among 
1 IPC South Sudan April 2020 
13 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
host  population  is  24%  and  63%  among  the  returnees.  Women  account  for  51%  while 
youth (15-35) 70%2 of the total population. The table below gives characteristics of the 
target population by County; it also gives Payams by County.  
Table 2: Characteristics of the Target population 
Selection of Payams – The project will operate in 15 out of 34 of payams across 
32. 
the 3 counties. Within each county, 3 priority  payams will be selected, informed by the 
County Profiles, in consultation with county administration and will follow the geographical 
criteria above in addition to: 
  being easily accessible to allow regular access to the project team; 
  Payams  from  the  previous  SSLDP  and  where  complementary  soft  and  hard 
infrastructure  exist  (principally  to  draw  synergies  with  AfDB  –  Agricultural  Markets, 
Value Addition and Trade Development Project (AMVAT), which will be implemented in 
the same geographic sites as SSLRP, as well as WFP, FAO); 
  ethnic balance; 
  Payams  should  be  adjacent  to  each  other  to  increase  the  project’s  impact, 
effectiveness, and efficiency and project monitoring; 
2 South Sudan National Bureau of Statistics 2010 
14 
State /County PayamBomas in Payam (#)Popn% CountyPopn in RuralPopn in Agric and Liv% Poverty MPIReturnees PWD#Hhlds  to be TargetedTarget Population% of population Women 60% Youth 70%PWDReturneesCE60139Kajo Keji66%56%76%3968115%35%Kangapo I 52411923%15918891412034904718057174161249729132081457Kangapo II 52877327%1899010634143571079321538564965297934752481738Lire 51692516%1117162568445634912675042920175220441461022Liwolo 52359022%15569871911770884917667024070244228492041425Nyepo 51237712%8169457461754643926368213512811495107747Total2510578369817390983141839681791731471825217%10951127769136388CE00Terekeka0,6656%0,756000Gameiza 584395%5570311942116322521460876102273Mun 52028613%133897498101221518605351021062457176Nyori 5126598%835546796316947378219013141533110Reggo 52223414%146748218110941664663384723082693192Rijong 599006%65343659494074129517131028119986Tali 53408121%22493125961700525511017589735384128295Terekeka 52337014%154248637116611749697404424262831202Tindilo51752711%11568647887451312523303318202123152Tombek590886%5998335945356802711573944110179Mangala North548693%32131799242936414584250559042Total501622899939955663810571215948462810917%168651967614050EE8851800Magwi0,8986%0,925480025%Lobone 5144328%128451104611881690417827334252255129772131063Magwi 54551725%405103483937472217755621231213411804793886713353Mugali 52793915%24866213852300113366345014198232493957624122058Nimule 54163123%370523186534273199175141211512266736085866133067Pageri 53219517%28653246422650415402397616359486569266404742371Pajok 52331413%20749178441919311153287911846869412148083431717Total30185028164675141620152324885182284993995451729%3271038162272613629EE3400,370Torit0,8986%93%0,2190,2%Bur 52092214%186201601417224462584106361643699431530812Himodonge 5123988%110349489102072715316303653219225571837Hiyala 53285521%292412514727048724057166996805808677648419Ifwotu 5120888%10758925299522714936143562213724931787Imurok 596096%8552735479102111874882831169919821426Kudo 51487810%1324111387122483318377564384263030682199Torit 55222734%464823997442996115644926531538892331077276931Total351549761379291186191275843401913878734566229%2739731963228391JONGLEI94%98%4948215%0,37Bor South17161%Anyidi5270430,1132542121353247851943718152988715322620944489Baidit5557620,23352416440295110540076663154182911097412803915183Bor5667700,279627645272261195479917937762190213141153311095219Jalle5145990,061137231152713380105200782647892873335223948Kolnyang5433170,181407183420339700311595524501420985259946710142Makuach5318300,133299202513329172228437618001044162647308522104Total30239320224961188967219337171632901135357850033%47100549503925785TOTAL84739606967805439676117201302559496238800225 04027%1350241575281125220894 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
  menu of enterprises have potential for drawing interest and being developed; 
  Climate vulnerability assessment for Payams with low to no adaptive capacity. 
An  elaborate  community  mobilisation  and  engagement  plan  will  be  developed  to 
33. 
ensure social inclusion and full participation of the target beneficiaries.  
34. 
Vulnerability  to  climate  change:  The  assessment  looked  at  exposure, 
sensitivity, and adaptive capacity of the population to climate risks target regions using 
GIS  based  modelling.  Bor,  Torit  and  Kajokeji  counties  are  highly  vulnerable  to  climate 
change with no adaptive capacity while Terekeka and Magwi are moderately vulnerable. 
The assessment has been used for development of resource allocation matrix for the five 
counties  and  will  be  applied  for  selection  of  payams  and  bomas.  Detailed  climate 
vulnerability  assessment  data  will  be  used  to  guide  the  selection  of  target  areas  for 
component 2. 
35. 
Food Insecure smallholder Households: These households rely on subsistence 
farming  and  cultivate  between  1.5  to  1.9  fedans  and  are  highly  dependent  on  natural 
resources  for  their  livelihoods.  A  significant  proportion  of  these  households  are  women 
headed3. Their livelihoods are greatly affected by the deterioration in the status of natural 
resources with households facing food insecurity for 5-6 months a year arising from low 
agricultural  productivity  and  lack  of  storage  infrastructure.  Furthermore,  households  in 
these counties apply various coping mechanisms including reliance on traditional safety 
nets  such  as  humanitarian  assistance,  coping  strategies  such  as  substitution  of  less 
preferred and cheaper alternatives and non-diversified diets, selling of productive assets, 
debt, withdrawing children from school and forced migration. Emergency livelihood coping 
strategies  are  also  common.  Table  3  represents  the  main  livelihoods  by  state.  The 
smallholder producers are either agro-pastoralists or pastoralists.  
Table 3: Main Livelihoods of Households 
Counties 
Agriculture and 
Livestock (%) 
Crop Farming 
(%) 
Animal 
Husbandry (%) 
Wages and 
Salary (%) 
Central Equatoria 
Eastern Equatoria 
Jonglei 
76 
93 
98 
54 
75 
72 
1 
11 
11 
26 
7 
9 
Process of selection of payams: the selection of the payams will be based on 
36. 
the criteria above mentioned.  
Activity 
Responsibility 
Outputs 
Table 4: Process of Selecting Payams 
Preparation of county 
profiles  
IP in consultation with the 
GoSS and Payam leadership 
Selection of Payams and 
bomas 
AI in consultation with Goss 
and County/Payam leadership 
including Payam Development 
committees and Boma 
Development committees 
5 county profiles containing poverty, 
food security, climate change 
vulnerability, livelihood types 
developed  
3 Payams per county and Bomas 
selected based on the outlined 
criteria 
3 Women headed households refer to: women left by the husbands; women in polygamous households who are 
no longer supported; widows; single women responsible for dependents; married women whose husbands are 
incapable of functioning as income earners; married women abandoned by their husbands for any reason. 
15 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Target group(s)  
37. 
Target groups: SSLRP will be implemented in 3 counties and reaching a total of 
38,800  households  and  225,504  food  insecure  households  with  an  average  of  5.8 
households4. Target group will be mainly women 60% and Youth 70%. SSLRP’s principal 
target  group  will  be  poor  households  engaged  in  agriculture  along  various  value  chains 
including crop, livestock, fisheries and mixed farming. The project will give priority to the 
poorest and most disadvantaged socio-economic categories like women, women headed 
household youth, persons with disabilities and returnees. The characteristics of the target 
groups as follows:  
38. 
Pastoralists:  They  rely  on  livestock  for  their  livelihoods  and  keep  mixed  herds 
including sheep, cattle, and goats. Cattle is the most common. Among the target counties, 
the highest number of livestock are found in Jonglei. Livestock serves as a source of milk 
and meat products as well as a means of securing household's financial capital. Livestock 
rearing households face many challenges such as incidence of pests and diseases, lack of 
veterinary services, limited access to markets, cattle raiding, lack of grazing pastures and 
limited  access  to  markets.  Cattle  raiding  is  more  prevalent  in  Eastern  Equatoria  (46.7 
percent),  Jonglei  (41.6  percent)5.  Women  in  pastoralist  households  perform  all  the 
household tasks including collection of water,  which is one of the most time-consuming 
tasks. They are also responsible for the caring for livestock, especially small ruminants. 
39. 
Agro-pastoralist:  They  have  both  land  on  which  they  cultivate  crops  and  own 
some livestock and account for at least 60%6. Agro pastoralists are highly dependent on 
farmland, water resources as well as rangeland. Their livelihoods are greatly affected by 
the  degradation  and  shrinking  of  the  rangelands  and  blocking  of  stock  routes.  For  food 
security they depend mainly on livestock income in addition to some farming. They face 
similar constraints in livestock as the pastoralists. Around 40% of SSLRP's target group 
will be agro-pastoralist households. 
About 225,504 Food insecure smallholder producers will be targeted. Out of 
40. 
these  60%  are  women,  70%  youth.  The  smallholder  producers  are  divided  into  three 
livelihood types; crop farmers, agro-pastoralists, pastoralists and fisher folks. SSLRP will 
improve the livelihoods of the smallholder producers by enhancing productivity (soil and 
water  conservation,  water  for  production  and  inputs),  value  addition  (postharvest 
infrastructure),  improved  access  to  markets  and  inputs.  The  smallholder  producers  will 
organise  themselves  into  CBOs  with  common  interests  (both  private  and  public  good). 
While most nutrition benefits are directed at pregnant and lactating women, smallholder 
producers  will  also  benefit  from  an  increased  production  of  diversified  foods  of  high 
nutritional level through the CDPs and nutrition education targeting both men and women.  
41. 
An estimated 135,302 women. These include 24% Women and women headed 
households. Within this group will be 10% returnees and PWDs. SSLRP strategy for the 
inclusion of women is geared towards women's collective agency. This implies improving 
the women’s access and control of resources, welfare, and nutrition. SSLRP will promote 
women  leadership  and  their  representation  in  decision-making  roles  in  community 
institutions, put in place a specific quotas and ensure 30 percent of all grants are awarded 
to women only groups by, use of gender sensitive approaches to trainings and community 
mobilisation, create awareness on Gender-based violence. The Village Savings and Loan 
Associations (VSLAs) have about 90% women membership and will be considered as CBOs 
in  the  CDD  process.  Potential  benefits  for  women  would  include  investments  vegetable 
gardening, small livestock and processing, employment through LIPW. Technical support 
will  be  provided  at  the  beginning  of  the  project  to  the  entire  implementation  team, 
including implementing agencies, to develop a gender operational plan that will incorporate 
measures and approaches to support this. Pregnant and lactating women (1164 HH) will 
4 WFP Crop and Food Security Assessment Mission May 2020; 
5 FAO/WFP Crop Food Security Assessment and Monitoring to the Republic of South Sudan 2020 
6 ibid 
16 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
be  provided  with  nutrition  support  including training  and  awareness  about  nutrition, 
mentoring and support with Integrated Homestead Food Production (IHFP) production to 
increase dietary diversity, and focus on nutrient rich foods such as legumes, fish, dairy, 
meat and poultry.  
42. 
Approximately  157,835  rural  youth  (60%  women)  aged  between  15  and  35 
years, living in rural areas, unemployed and with low educational levels (Central Equatoria 
32,453, Eastern Equatoria 70,125, Jonglei 54,950) will benefit from the project. This target 
group  will  include  returnees  (10%)  and  PWDs  (5%).  The  youth  will  be  provided  with 
second chance learning opportunities and job relevant skills to support start-up farming 
activities and service provision. Main interventions include: a) capacity building through 
entrepreneurship training, business skills and formal courses in Good Agricultural Practices 
(GAP);  b)  access  to  capital  through  investment  grants;  c)  cash  injection  through 
participation in the Labour-Intensive Public Works (see Subcomponent 2.1 for details) and 
d)  voice  through  representation  on  decision-making  and  coordination  bodies,  such  as 
community  committees.  A  selection  criterion  will  be  defined  in  the  CDP  and  other 
guidelines to ensure that youth make up 60% of the CDP funded plans and 50% of CDP 
and GALs facilitators. All youth including those below 15 years (in the labour market) will 
be  trained  on  life  skills,  including  conflict  resolution.  SSLRP  will  include  actions  to 
contribute to the elimination of child labour by coordinating with child protection agencies, 
such as United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF) and enforcing 
no child labour policy within the project target areas. The policy will be informed by county 
profile assessment that will be conducted to determine activities that are carried out by 
children among other things. 
A  total  of  16,331  returnees  (Central  Equatoria  15%,  Eastern  Equatoria 
43. 
25%, Jonglei 1%) are targeted by the project – This will include 60% women and 70% 
youth. Although 90 percent own land with no major access barrier, they lack the productive 
assets  (seeds  and  tools).  They  lack  reliable  livelihood  opportunities  and  are  involved  in 
menial jobs mainly in providing farm labour. They will benefit through agriculture livelihood 
development (component 2) and labour intensive public works for short term employment 
gains. At least 10% of the CBO members will be drawn from the returnee’s community. 
Women headed households will be included in the women target group. 
About  Persons  Living  with  Disabilities  (proportion)-  The  project's  targeting 
44. 
strategy  will  therefore  consider  disability,  with  the  aim  of  supporting  the  initiatives  and 
actions  of  persons  with  disabilities  to  improve  their  living  conditions  and  the 
implementation of their fundamental rights.  They will be targeted through training and 
capacity  building  activities  linked  to  service  provision,  income-generation  and  off-farm 
income  opportunities.  The  PWDs  will  also  be  directly  targeted  for  project  activities 
depending  on  the  nature  of  their  disability-  for  example  community  facilitators,  agro-
processing,  labour  intensive  public  works.  SSLRP  will  define  safe  spaces  (separate 
consultations) to enable them to voice their needs and concerns to be considered in the 
CDP development.   
Targeting Mechanisms 
Targeting Approach: The targeting strategy for the project to reach beneficiary 
45. 
population will be based on the following targeting mechanisms:  
46. 
Direct  Targeting:  Direct  targeting  through  quotas  will  be  used  to  ensure  social 
inclusion of women, youth and vulnerable groups (returnees and persons with disabilities) 
in project activities.  
Self-targeting  will  be  driven  by  self  identification  (call  for  project  proposals)  of 
47. 
groups/organisations for specific enterprises that will be organised into CBOs. 
  use  VSLAs,  which  are  usually  composed  of  women,  to  ensure  self-selection  and 
inclusion of women; 
17 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
 
 
 
focus  on  mechanisms  and  activities  that  have  greater  involvement  of  target 
households; 
follow a demand driven approach for the selection of subprojects within the confines 
of the menu of potential enterprises; 
such process will allow the support of subprojects that  can generate reasonable returns 
and  enable higher inclusion of target households who have limited resources. 
Community-based Targeting – Community targeting will be applied in selection 
48. 
of CBOs and will hinge on an inclusive community participation. Once the target payams 
and  bomas  have  been  identified,  the  implementing  agency  will  work  with  the  local 
leadership in the selected bomas, CFs and target communities to help communities identify 
their  most  pressing  priorities.  This  will  be  part  of  the  CCDP  development  process.  The 
following steps will be followed: 
  Community mobilisation and engagement – SSLRP is anchored on CDD approach and 
as such the dynamism of targeting will be dependent on the community mobilisation 
and engagement under component 1.   The combination of Social inclusion strategy, 
beneficiary selection criteria and community engagement technique will ensure that all 
views  are  given  due  consideration.  SSLRP  will  ensure  that  the  process  is  culturally, 
socially, and politically inclusive; 
  The  IA  and  CFs  will  work  with  community  members  and  associations  including 
representatives  from  Payam  development  committees  (PDCs),  Boma  development 
committees  (BDCs),  inform  them  about  the  project  activities  and  fix  a  date  for  a 
meeting with the target community members; 
  Boma Orientations – hold orientation sessions in villages to inform the communities 
about the objectives and criteria for participation; 
o  Seek community consensus about the relevance of the planned activities and 
ascertain their interest in participating in the different interventions; 
o  Hold  separate  consultations  with  different  target  groups,  including  returnees, 
women, youth and persons with disabilities.  
 
Identify  key  issues  and  determine  how  the  concerns  will  be  addressed  through  the 
various project components; 
facilitators,  beneficiary 
49. 
The project will put several measures in place to ensure that the risk of elite capture 
in  minimized.  This  will  be  achieved  through  close  supervision  and  monitoring  through 
community 
feedback  and  a  grievance  redress  system. 
Furthermore,  the  economic  homogeneity  of  members  and  conflict  resolution  skills  will 
provide  insulation  against  elite  capture.  Additional  measures  will  include  rotation  of 
leadership to ensure the village poor are equally represented in leadership positions. The 
GALS approach which gives individuals a strong sense of agency and empowerment will 
further  help  to  mitigate  against  this  risk.  The  ToRs  for  the  recruitment  of  the  GALS 
consultant are attached as an annex. 
Implementation of the targeting approaches 
50. 
Guidelines to the Selection of Target Groups – In general, selection of target 
groups  will  be  done  based  on  average  land  size  and  the  level  of  income  per  household 
member. The SSLRPP target group will comprise: 
 
rural households with land available for cultivation (at least 1.5  fedans); 
  households with unemployed rural youth, returnees, or persons with disabilities; and 
  poor women headed households in rural areas. 
18 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
51. 
Only  one  member  per  household  will  be  eligible  for  direct  project  support  in  the 
areas of enterprise package and employment through public works (refer Component  1 
and 2 for details). 
Targeting Survey – Following the county profile and selection of payams, SSLRP 
52. 
will  conduct  a  targeting  survey  to  identify  the  bomas/communities  with  higher 
concentrations  of  the  potential  target  households  and  to  specify  the  suitable  pro-poor 
products/services  from  the  project  supported  agricultural  sub-sectors,  taking  into 
consideration their prevailing market demand. While for the LIPW, community watershed 
approach will be used (as detailed in subcomponent 2.2) to identify type and  locations for 
infrastructural support . The interventions envisaged will be  determined based on PRAs 
to assess the likely pattern of demand from different social strata in the communities.  
The  targeting  survey  to  guide  the  project  team  in  the  identification  of  poverty 
53. 
pockets and to identify where to focus on outreach. The survey will identify/confirm the 
potential  needy  areas  and  the  target  groups  including  assessing  gender  and  youth 
dynamics  in  designated  communities.  The  survey  will  incorporate  experiences  from  the 
previous SSLDP project.  
54. 
The survey will also involve: 
  a)  consultations  with  key  actors,  such  as  county/payam/boma  leaders,  traditional 
leaders of the local communities, and other organisations/ active in the project area; 
 
identification of the broad geographical areas and potential organisations  with higher 
concentration of the target households; 
  validation visits to these geographical areas and community organisations; 
  preparation of a verified list of the community pockets and organisations with higher 
concentration of target households; and 
 
identification  of  suitable  enterprises  from  the  menu  of  potential  agricultural 
subprojects, taking into consideration their prevailing market demand. 
55. 
Pre-Selection CBOs – The project will promote high value agricultural production 
and allied services suitable for integrating the target group into the value chain and the 
final market. The products will be characterised by high market demand, high productivity, 
high  returns,  and  utilisation  of  family  labour.  These  will  be  selected  from  the  following 
menu: 
  Crops including vegetables; 
  Fisheries; 
  Livestock/dairy; 
  bee keeping/honey production; and 
  Non-timber forest products 
56. 
Although the final selection of enterprises will be left to the CBOs and their CDPs, 
the project will pre-select suitable pro-poor enterprises during the targeting phase based 
on  the  clusters  identified.  In  view  of  market  conditions,  the  potential  impact 
(negative/positive) of introducing new crops for small farmers and the risk of increasing 
poverty  will  be  assessed  at  an  initial  stage  and  will  be  further  monitored  during 
implementation. 
57. 
In  addition  to  the  cost  sharing  mechanisms,  the  sustainability  of  the  youth 
involvement  will  be  ensured  based  on  the  strict  selection  of  the  enterprises  that 
demonstrate their strategic labour force requirement for the medium term. Enterprise pre-
selection could be based on the following principles: 
19 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Criteria 
Indicators 
Table 5: Enterprise Selection Criteria 
Relevance to target 
group(s) 
Large numbers of the target group involved (farmers, women, 
poor HH, youth)  
• Labour intensive activities  
• Equal distribution of enterprise activities across the 
communities (ethnic balance) 
Prop target group 
growth potential 
• Good market potential/opportunities  
• Low entry barriers  
Intervention 
potential/ feasibility 
Other factors 
• Potential for value-added activities 
No overlapping risks with other projects/ 
Potential synergies  
• In line with government priorities 
Enterprise activities have minimal negative environmental 
impact as determined by environmental social screening as 
outlined in the ESMF 
• Potential interventions will particularly benefit women and 
other vulnerable categories 
Assessment  of  CBOs  –  Existing  CBOs  will  be  assessed  and  selected  based  on 
58. 
agreed criteria that will include:  
 
 
At least 15 members from the target group households; and 
The  CBOs’  activities  of  focus  have  outreach  to  a  wide  base  of  the  poor  in  target 
communities. 
59. 
The table below provides the detailed criteria for assessing CBOs. The criteria could 
also  be  used  as  an  assessment/monitoring  tool  for  the  CDPs  that  will  be  selected.  The 
criteria  could  be  revised,  if  need  be,  to  incorporate  new  information  that  could  be 
considered necessary before the commencement of implementation of activities. 
20 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Table 6: Assessment Criteria for Community-Based Organisations 
Criteria 
Description 
Score 
Comments 
Relevance to 
the target 
community 
Gender and 
Youth 
Sensitivity 
Inclusion of 
returnees 
and/ PwD 
Pro target 
group growth 
potential 
Intervention 
feasibility/ 
Potential 
Numbers of the poor 
target group involved 
(farmers, women, 
poor, youth) 
Potential interventions 
will benefit women and 
youth  
Group formation 
includes members 
from returnee or PwD 
households 
40 
10 
10 
Maximum 15 members each 
representing a household 
Groups/Interventions, high share 
of women & youth 
Membership has at least 2 
members from returnee and PwD 
Growth trends over the 
last years 
20 
Has the membership grown since 
the group was established?  
Good market potential  
and opportunities 
Potential for value 
added interventions 
Is the focus within the pre- 
selected menu of enterprises? 
Is it newly formed? 
In line with the 
government priorities 
10 
Does the CBO have any 
established market channels? 
Involvement in value 
chain 
Intervention areas 
match with project 
objectives 
Does the enterprise respond to 
community priorities? 
Is it aligned to government 
strategy (e.g CAMP) 
Total Score 
100 
Household Selection Criteria – Household targeting will allow the programme to 
60. 
proactively  mobilize  all target  households.  These  households  will  be identified  based  on 
wealth  ranking  involving  women  and  men  from  the  target  communities  after  the 
community entry process (project has presented its objectives and targeting criteria). This 
will be followed by household visits to validate the community selection. Selection criteria: 
This will be based on criteria specified by the project as well as that set by the community 
during PRA exercise. The criteria for selection of households will include the following: 
 
 
 
women headed households; 
returnee households; and 
households with persons with disabilities. 
Empowerment and Capacity Building Measures – Rural community institution 
61. 
building activities will include: 
 
 
Mobilisation  and  group  strengthening  of  youth  and  women,  amongst  others,  to 
enable participatory demand driven service provision;  
Sensitisation of leaders at grassroots levels in understanding and overcoming gender 
and youth issues that hinder development; 
21 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
 
 
Functional literacy training for women through CDD; 
Application  of  minimum  quotas  for  women  (50%)  and  youth  (70%)  to  serve  on 
project  decision-making  bodies  including  the  village  committees  involved  in 
development planning. 
62. 
These will be monitored and assessed through surveys with indicators in the Logical 
Framework  to  measure  progress  including:  a)  Percentage  of  households  reporting  they 
can influence decision-making of local authorities and project-supported service providers; 
and b) Percentage of households satisfied with project supported services. 
63. 
Enabling  measures:  Empowering  measures  will  include:  a)  information  and 
mobilisation campaigns using local information meetings; b) inclusive CDD process; c) a 
broad  range  of  skills  training  activities;  and  d)  monitoring  of  inclusiveness  of  women, 
youth, and vulnerable groups. (e) capacity building of technical service providers on group 
strengthening,  markets,  business  skills,  and  climate  adaptation  measures  through 
refresher  training  of  trainer  courses  with  a  strong  focus  on  gender,  youth  and  social 
inclusion;  and  (f)  developing  strategic  partnerships  with  for  instance  AfDB  (and  key 
organisations working on rural development) to ensure a  convergence of resources and 
support to communities and g) adopting a conflict sensitive approach across all levels of 
the    interventions  by  implementing    context  specific  actions.  This  will  entail  a  detailed 
analysis of the drivers of conflict in the project area and identification of mitigation actions 
to be mainstreamed in the project.  These empowering and capacity building programmes 
will provide the women, youth and poor smallholder farmer households with the necessary 
knowledge,  skills  and  assets  necessary  to  recover  from  years  of  recurring  drought  and 
improve their livelihoods. 
64. 
Community based targeting: Community targeting will be applied in selection of 
CBOs and will hinge on an inclusive community participation. Once the target payams and 
bomas have been identified, the implementing agency will conduct exploratory visit in the 
selected bomas to identifying local village contacts as well as what community members 
see as their most pressing priorities. This targeting mechanism will be used to select CBOs 
through  which  community  development  priorities  and possible  sub  projects  will  be 
identified and developed in to CDPs.  
65. 
Community  mobilisation  and  engagement:  SSLRP  is  anchored  on  CCD  approach 
and as such the dynamism of targeting will be dependent on the community mobilisation 
and  engagement  under  component  1.    The  combination  of  Social  inclusion  strategy, 
beneficiary  selection  criteria  and  community  engagement  technique  will  ensure  that  all 
views are given due consideration. SSLRP will ensure that the process is culturally, socially, 
and  politically  inclusive.  The  IA  together  with  Community  Facilitators  will  work  with 
community members and associations including representatives from Payam development 
committees  (PDCs),  Boma  development  committees  (BDCs),  inform  them  about  the 
project activities and fix a date for a meeting with majority of the community members.  
66. 
Mobilization  will  involve  meeting  members  of  the  community  at  large  to  inform 
them about the project activities, seek community consensus about the relevance of the 
planned activities and ascertain their interest in participating in the different interventions. 
Separate  consultations  will  be  held  with  different  target  groups  including  returnees, 
women,  youth  and  persons  with  disabilities.  The  social  inclusion  officer  and  community 
facilitators  will  be  responsible  for  facilitating  the  mobilisation  and  consultation  with 
communities.  These  consultations  should  identify  key  issues  and  determine  how  the 
concerns will be addressed through the various project components. Due to the remote 
nature  of  the  design,  the  County  Profiles  will  ensure  adequate  consultations  with 
beneficiaries in the determination of strategic priorities for investments. While the project 
will not address all the issues identified, it will utilise this information to design an effective 
facilitation process for the development of CDPs. 
22 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
facilitators,  beneficiary 
67. 
The project will put several measures in place to ensure that the risk of elite capture 
in  minimized.  This  will  be  achieved  through  close  supervision  and  monitoring  through 
community 
feedback  and  a  grievance  redress  system. 
Furthermore,  the  economic  homogeneity  of  members  and  conflict  resolution  skills  will 
provide  insulation  against  elite  capture.  Additional  measures  will  include  rotation  of 
leadership  to  ensure  the  village  poor  are  equally  represented  leadership  positions.  The 
GALS approach which gives individuals a strong sense of agency and empowerment will 
further help to mitigate against this risk. 
Strategy /approach for gender and youth mainstreaming, social inclusion, and 
nutrition 
68.  Women empowerment and gender equality: To contribute to tackle constraints 
faced by rural women, the project will adopt an inclusive approach to ensure that women 
and  men  equally  benefit  from  the  project's  interventions.  The   IA  will  follow  selection 
criteria  provided  and  ensure  that  the  project's  approach  to  gender  mainstreaming  will 
achieve the following objectives which align to IFAD gender policy: 
  Ensure that women and men have equal access to capacity building, training and 
productive assets and specific services and training will target women on a 60% or 
100% basis (i.e. literacy, GALS and nutrition). 
  Economic  empowerment  for  enhanced  access  to  production  and  value  addition 
systems by encouraging young women into non-traditional aspects of value chains, 
access and control of productive resources, finance, and services. At least, 30 per 
cent of the CBOs supported will be women only organisations that will subsequently 
receive at least 30 percent of grants provided under component 2.         
  Access to information, knowledge and extension services will be promoted through 
business skills training. Women will receive 50 percent of the training in business 
skills. 
  Balanced workloads due to increased resilient crop yields through use of labour and 
time-saving technologies to encourage shifts towards equitable sharing of workload 
burden within the households. 
  Support to women’s voice in decision-making power at household and community 
level will be implemented through leadership training and mentorship of women in 
farmer associations and organisations and enforcing 50% representation of women 
in committees. Women will be facilitated to form groups and their leadership and 
negotiation skills will be strengthened to enable them to make informed decisions 
during the community planning process. Gender-awareness training, including both 
women  and  men,  will  be  carried  out  at  both  household  and  community  levels, 
including village leaders. 
  Other gender related interventions such as awareness raising on issues related to 
prevention of early marriage and GBV, importance of adolescent girls' education, 
will be integrated through the GALS methodology. 
  Develop skills to improve the well-being of women and other family members: with 
this  purpose,  nutrition  education  will  be  provided  at  both  household  and  groups 
level.  The  training  will  include  training  in  nutrition,  kitchen  gardening,  dietary 
knowledge.  Specific  attention  will  be  given  to  PLW  and  adolescent  girls,  persons 
with disabilities and returnees. 
69. 
Gender  Mainstreaming  Approach:  The  project  will  implement  an  inclusive 
approach to ensure that women and men benefit from the project equally. For CDD project 
like this one, the social inclusion and targeting strategy will depend on a strong community 
mobilisation and engagement that will be conducted at the beginning of the project and 
support identification of the target groups from across  and all socio-economic categories. 
The  IA  will  follow  selection  criteria  provided  and  ensure  that  the  project's  approach  to 
23 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
gender  mainstreaming  will  achieve  the  following  objectives  which  align  to  IFAD  gender 
policy: 
a)  Increase women’s access to skills and knowledge: Women will be 70% beneficiaries 
for  the  trainings  in  literacy,  life  skills  and  nutrition  (including  young  women). 
Furthermore,  women  will  be  30%  beneficiaries  of  CDP  where  they  will  be  able  to 
acquire  practical  knowledge  for  climate  resilience  livelihood  improvement.  They  will 
benefit from training package under component 1including useful themes on climate 
resilient irrigation technologies, Improved soil and water conservation practices, water 
management. 
b)  Increase women’s voice in decision-making at the household and community level. As 
part of literacy and life skills, leadership training will also be included. Women will be 
trained to form groups and their leadership and negotiation skills will be strengthened 
to enable them to make informed decisions during the community planning process. It 
is expected that women in representative position (committees) will be 50%. Gender-
awareness trainings, including both women and men, will be carried out at household, 
group and community levels, including village leaders. 
c)  Ensure  that  women  and  men  have  equal  access  to  capacity  building,  training  and 
productive assets. Average of women participation in trainings promoted by the project 
goes from 40% to 50%. Furthermore, specific services and trainings will target women 
on a 70% or 100% basis (i.e. literacy and nutrition).  
d)  Develop  skills  to  improve  the  well-being  of  women  and  other  family members:  with 
this purpose, nutrition education will be provided at both household and groups level. 
The  training  will  include  training  in  nutrition,  kitchen  gardening,  dietary  knowledge. 
Specific attention will be given to PLW and young women, including also women from 
returnees households.  
e)  Train project staff and service providers, contractors on gender-related issues. It will 
ensure  that  training  modules  include  specific  sections  related  to  gender  sensitive 
topics, including GBV. The IA will produce/adapt and oversee the training modules and 
curricula that will be delivered to targeted communities/ households and the work of 
Community  Facilitators.  ToRs  for  the  Social  and  Environmental  Safeguard  expert 
includes  points  related  to  gender  sensitivity  and  ensure  that  gender  issues  are  all 
captured and minimize.  
f)  The M&E and knowledge management systems of the Programme will be sex- and age 
disaggregated and will enable lessons to be learned on how to support women’s and 
youth’s social and economic empowerment 
70. 
Youth Empowerment: Similarly, there is a strong focus on providing youth with: 
(i) capacity building through entrepreneurship training, business skills and formal courses 
in  climate  smart  agriculture;  (ii)  access  to  capital  through  matching  grants;  (iii)  voice 
through  representation  on  decision-making  and  coordination  bodies  such  as  multi-
stakeholder forums and project. 
  Youth  empowerment  through  entrepreneurship.  SSLRP  will  encourage 
creation of jobs for young people through a market approach: SSLRP will encourage 
participation  of  young  people  as  seed  producers,  fish  smallholder  farmers, 
technicians in LIPW, processors and other stakeholders in the value chains. Young 
people  will  be  encouraged  to  work  as  marketers  linking  smallholder  farmers  to 
secure markets for smallholder farmers’ produce.  
  Capacity  building  on  entrepreneurship  and  business  development  training, 
business  skills  and  technical  courses  in  GAPs  equipping  youth  with  tools  and 
confidence to make sound financial management and marketing decision, in turn 
enabling  them  to  manage  enterprises  and  helping  them  work  towards  mindset 
shifts will be key. Planned interventions will seek to enhance capacity in youth lead 
24 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
smallholder  farmers,  agri-business  development,  climate-sensitive  agriculture, 
value addition, infrastructure development (LIPW) and marketing services.  
  Access to finances- Youth will access financial support through matching grant 
for  development  of  agricultural  livelihood  enterprises.  The  project  will  finance  at 
least 60% of enterprises from youth-led business ideas. 
 
In line with the project approach to attract and support youth entrepreneurship, 
SSLRP will develop and apply specific eligibility criteria for youth interested by the 
project. Key criteria will include targeting the poorest young people with community 
participation to ensure equal opportunities for all male and female youth, including 
unemployed rural youth and not attending schools in the targeted areas. 
71.  Operational  Measures:  The  implementing  agencies  will  be  responsible  for 
mainstreaming  gender  and  social inclusion  related  issues  across  all intervention  and  all 
components.  They  will  exhibit  a  clear  commitment  to  gender  and  socially  inclusive 
approaches,  youth  engagement  and  their  capacity  ensure  that  adequate  knowledge  of 
relevant gender and youth issues are properly addressed during project implementation. 
Gender and social development related responsibilities will be distributed across relevant 
IAs staff (from county to district and village level) and also to the Social and Environmental 
Safeguard Specialist 7to ensure that the planned activities are in line with the project social 
inclusion  strategy  and  expected  outcomes.  This  person  will    also  oversee  monitoring 
actions to prevent GBV, Child labour and enforce GRM. 
  Prevention of  gender based violence (GBV): the project will contribute to 
reducing  any  harmful  act  based  on  gender  through:  (i)  sensitization  on  the  
importance  of  addressing  GBV,  application  of  IFAD's  no  tolerance  for  Sexual 
Harassment  (SH)  /Sexual  Exploitation  and  Abuse  (SEA)  for  project  staff  and 
project's  activities  and  operations;.  (ii)  design  of  coordination  and  results 
monitoring  systems  that  promote  “no  harm”  and  apply  GBV  lens  to  data 
collection, analysis, and reporting.  (iii) have GBV risks adequately reflected in 
all safeguards instruments, contracts with suppliers and other third parties to 
be funded with IFAD funds. 
  Preventing Child labour: SSLRP will Promote use of strategies that prevent 
unfavourable  conditions  in  labour  market  that  rely  on  child  labour.  This  will 
include  enhanced  productivity  in  agriculture  to  release  the  pressure  on  child 
labour. Additionally SSLRP will  actively strive to reduce risks  of child labour 
through:  (i)  Increase  awareness  on  legislation  by  training  to  project  staff    to 
ensure    compliance  with  regulations  (ii)  sensitization  on  the  importance  of 
addressing  child  labour  issues  within  the  community,  iii)  encourage  the 
enrolment  of  children  in  schools  by  sensitizing  community  leaders,  elders, 
parents,  and  especially  the  girls  on  the  merits  of  education.  (iv)  Child  labour 
related    risks  will  be  adequately  reflected  in  all  safeguards  instruments, 
contracts with suppliers and other third parties to be funded with IFAD funds. 
  Grievance  Redress  Mechanism  (GRM):  An  adequate  grievance  redress 
mechanism  (GRM)  will  be  established  to  ensure  beneficiaries  voice  their 
concerns related to  intervention  activities either with the relevant focal point 
at the local level or with IA at central level. This mechanism will be publicized 
at  the  local  level  and  in  the  local  language.    The  SSLRPP  GRM  will  follow 
established practices, and will provide multiple access points that are feasible 
to  the  context.  The  SSLRP  program  Coordinator  will  have  the  overall 
responsibility  to  address  concerns  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  focal  point 
regarding  any  environmental  and/or  social  impacts  due  to  intervention. 
Complaints  received  by  the  implementing  agency  shall  be  recorded  and 
documented in and included in progress report including the number and type 
of complaints and the results of their resolution. 
7Recruited on a retainer contract  
25 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
72. 
Nutrition  strategy  –  SSLRP  is   designed  within  the  framework  of  nutrition-
sensitive  investments  and  will  influence  nutrition  through  the  following  pathways:  (i) 
production of nutritious foods, including quality protein cereals, legumes and other pulses, 
and  fish  species  (ii)  promote  household  consumption  of  safe  and  nutritious  food;  (iii) 
support processing and marketing of agricultural produce (iv) providing opportunities for 
income diversification; and (iv) women economic empowerment to access more profitable 
markets  and  improved  decision  making.  This  will  be  achieved  through:  Support  for  the 
establishment and maintenance successful farming businesses that ensure livelihoods that 
will  increase  household  income  through  diversified  agricultural  production.  Through  the 
LIPW, SSLRP will improve market and transport infrastructure that will enable year-round 
and/or seasonal availability of diverse foods. This will be complemented by an elaborate 
SBC  and  social  marketing  strategy  that  will  sensitise  communities  and  households  on 
healthy feeding practices. Vulnerable pregnant and lactating women will also be provided 
with  nutrition  support  including  training  and  awareness  about  nutrition,  mentoring  and 
support  with  homestead  production  to  increase  dietary  diversity,  and  focus  on  nutrient 
rich foods such as legumes, fish, dairy, meat and poultry. Appropriate inputs to grow these 
diverse    foods  will  be  provided  to  ensure  the  availability.  Furthermore,  the  project  will 
engage women and include interventions to protect and promote their nutritional status, 
decision making and overall empowerment.  
The Social Inclusion officer will coordinate the SSLRP implementation of nutrition 
73. 
interventions.  This  includes  working  closely  with  the  CDP  nutrition  experts  to  create 
awareness  on  nutrition  for  consideration  in  the  CDPs,  especially  those  related  to  food 
production and processing and to inform the choice of infrastructure. Implementation of 
nutrition interventions at the community level will be the responsibility of partner NGOs. 
The capacity of government workers will also be developed to provide SBC messaging and 
extension services to the establishment of home gardens. 
74. 
Social  Accountability  –  Social  accountability  will  be  taken  into  consideration 
through: a) the ability of beneficiaries to voice complaints and provide feedback through 
well-established GRMs; b) dissemination of information about SSLRP to the relevant target 
communities; and c) the IA/ PCU field monitoring activities.  
75. 
Procedural  Measures:  Transparency  and  clarity  in  procedures  for  decision-
making will be promoted. Through mentoring of the poorest and internal social support 
arrangements, all members of groups will be encouraged to participate in their business 
ventures.  
76.  Monitoring Targeting Performance – A participatory monitoring and evaluation 
system  will  be  developed  to  check  on  targeting  performance  and  to  reflect  gender  and 
youth perspectives of impact. Data collected will be disaggregated by sex and age based 
on the participation of women, youth, returnees, and persons with disabilities. The M&E 
system  will  collect  and  analyse  information  about  project  outreach  effectiveness  of  the 
targeting  strategy  and  specific  benefits  for  women  and  youth.  Impact  will  be  assessed 
based  on  methodologically  gender  sensitive  baseline,  mid-term  and  completion  surveys 
which will use key indicators to measure  
Impacts and Benefits – The main expected impact from the Project is the resilient 
77. 
and inclusive agriculture livelihoods to be improved among the targeted rural communities. 
This will result primarily from enhanced productivity ( Soil and Water Conservation, Water 
for  Production),  value  addition  (  establishment  of  ppostharvest  Infrastructure)  and 
improved access to  markets and inputs (through road infrastructure). Additional impacts 
include  enhanced  women’s  economic  empowerment  through  access  to  and  control  over 
increased physical assets.  
78. 
Gender  Action  Learning  System  –  SSLRP  will  implement  the  Gender  Action 
Learning System (GALS) methodology to foster a community-led value chain development. 
GALS  takes  a  gender  transformational  approach.  This  approach  aims  at  addressing  the 
root causes rather than symptoms of inequality and disempowerment, and change power 
26 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
relations  with  a  focus  on  sustainability.  GALS  will  promote  pro-poor  development,  and 
social and youth inclusion.  It promotes participation of all groups of women (literate and 
non-literate  women  and  men)  to  identify  challenges  and  opportunities  using  simple 
mapping  and  diagram  tools.  GALS  helps  to  improve  gender  relationships  at  household, 
group, and community levels, strengthen communication and win-win collaboration, and 
build networks and peer learning structures. The process brings results in attitudes and 
behaviour at different levels through individual and collective activities such as property 
rights and gender-based violence. This will be done by a consultant; ToRs to be used in 
recruiting the consultant are attached as Annex 6. 
79. 
Household  level.  Family  dynamics  have  substantial  implications  for  individual 
motivation and well-being, as well as productivity and investments in agriculture. In the 
South  Sudan,  women  and  men  in  the  same  household  are  engaged  in  different  value 
chains.  Women  are  largely  on  engaged  in  rearing  of  small  ruminants  and  vegetable 
production. GALS will facilitate intra-household negotiations over the sharing of household 
responsibilities, which is expected to bring about changes in the gender division of labour 
(e.g.  husbands  contributing  more  to  farming  activities  and  household-related  tasks, 
thereby enhancing household productivity and income).  
80. 
GALS is facilitated as an inclusive process, with the poorest and most vulnerable 
community  members  included  from  the  beginning  as  facilitators.  Furthermore,  the 
approach  enables  and  encourages  people  who  traditionally  have  less  voice  and  power, 
including youth, to actively participate in planning, implementation and decision-making 
of project activities and gain the confidence to speak in public.  
I.4: Climate and Environment 
81. 
SSLRP  is  adhered  to  SECAP  requirements  in  which  it  is  categorized  as  “B”  for 
Environmental  and  Social  consideration  and  the  climate  classification  is  “Moderate”. 
Accordingly, Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Basic Climate 
Risk Analysis are prepared.  
82. 
The ESMF is a framework that provides guidance on how environmental and social 
issues should be addressed during project design, implementation as well as Monitoring 
and Evaluation. The ESMF should be mainstreamed in each and every components of the 
projects  and  awareness  creation/training  should  be  delivered  during  the  preparation  of 
CDP  to  ensure  integration.    The  planning,  design  and  implementation  of  subprojects  at 
county level should also adhere to IFAD’s SECAP as well as available national regulations, 
such  as  screening  of  the  subprojects  and  the  preparation  of  Environmental  and  Social 
Management  Plans  (ESMPs).  The  ESMPs  should  clearly  identify  the  anticipated  positive 
measures  with  their  enhancement  mechanisms,  negative  impacts  with  mitigation 
measures  as  well  as  rough  estimation  of  costs.    In  consultation  with  the  Ministry  of 
Environment  of  the  government  of  South  Sudan,  the  Environment  and  Climate  Change 
consultant (to be recruited by the IA as and when needed) will prepare the ESMPs for the 
subprojects.  
83. 
The  basic  Climate  Risk  Analysis  (CRA)  is  prepared  based  on  the  Climate 
Vulnerability Assessment tool and dashboard prepared for SSLRP. The CRA tries to see the 
trends  and  impacts  of  some  vulnerability  variables  in  all  counties  and  identifies  basic 
climate adaptation options. Thus, as for the ESMF, the CRA together with IFAD’s climate 
adaptation  framework,  should  be  considered  and  adequately  addressed  during  the  CDP 
preparation.  
I.5: Institutional Arrangements and Responsibilities  
The  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Food  Security  (MAFS)  will  be  the  lead  executing 
84. 
agency  for the  Project.  Building on the lessons learnt and ongoing developments in the 
country, SSLRP will be implemented through tailored implementation arrangements where 
27 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
the core technical components will be implemented by a Third Party Implementing Agency 
(IA),  under  the  oversight  of  a  Government-led  Project  Coordination  Unit  (PCU).  To 
gradually build capacities of the MAFS to implement projects, the PCU will implement the 
capacity development activities under subcomponent 3.2. The contract between GoSS and 
the IA will only be signed after the approval of SSLRP by IFAD’s Executive Board in April 
2021, and signature of the Financing Agreement.  
85. 
 The  IA  will  be  responsible  for  implementing  the  core  technical  components  (i.e. 
Component 1, Component 2 and Component 4 (if needed) and will be responsible for the 
following: a) preparing and executing the AWPBs, implementation progress and financial 
reports  for  submission  to  the  PCU  (for  review,  comment  and  onward  forwarding  to  the 
oversight body (NTC and NAC); b) have adequate M&E, fiduciary and procurement systems 
and  capacities  and  undertake  all  project-related  fiduciary  functions  in  compliance  with 
IFAD Guidelines; c) undertake all procurement activities for the relevant components an 
submit  procurement  packages  to  the  PCU  for  onward  transmission  to  IFAD  for  No 
Objection, d) work closely with the PCU and the target States and Counties during activity 
planning  and  implementation  to  ensure  consistency  with  existent  State  and  County 
development agendas. The IA will use government frontline extension agents, where they 
exist, with the dual objective of strengthening their capacity and also serve as part of the 
exit strategy at project completion. The IA may also work with other local partners and 
service  providers  in  the  implementation  of  the  project.  A  complete  set  of  the  IA’s 
responsibilities will be presented in a detailed ToRs that will form part of the agreement 
that will be signed with GoSS. 
86. 
The IA will hire a Project Management Team (PMT) with sufficient time allocation 
(full  and/or  part-time),  skills  and  experience  to  coordinate  and  oversee  SSLRP 
implementation. The following is an indicative composition of the PMT: a) Project Manager; 
b) Technical Officers (Components 1 and 2); c) Monitoring, Evaluation and KM Officer; d) 
Financial Management Officer; and e) Procurement Officer. The IA will also ensure that it 
effectively implements the mainstreaming themes of gender, youth, nutrition and climate 
change. The IA will also develop a MoU with AFDB to adequately align the SSLRP activities 
to the market infrastructure supported by the Bank. 
87. 
 SSLRP’s implementation structure is presented in Figure 1 below while the scope 
of  the  IA’s  work  is  attached  as  Annex  1.  In  addition,  a  Responsibilities  Matrix  and  an 
Accountability Matrix are also attached as Annex 2. 
I.5.1: Implementing Agency (IA)  
88. 
SSLRP will be implemented by a Third Party Implementing Agency (IA) recruited 
by GoSS, and comprised of a consortium of NGO’s led by VSF-Germany. The consortium 
was established by GoSS, by combining the collective strengths of the initial list of INGOs 
shortlisted  for  a  competitive  selection  process.  This  approach  was  proposed  to  reduce 
potential delays and to tap into the comparative advantages of the three NGOs that have 
all had prior experience working with GoSS, and also based on the following criteria: a) 
relevance of their portfolios to SSLRP; b) prior and successful experience with the GoSS 
in implementing projects, c) coverage of the geographic target areas of SSLRP, and their 
ability and willingness to work in collaboration with Government and capacity to integrate 
decentralised  structures  into  implementation.  All  the  members  of  the  consortium  have 
provided co-financing towards the implementation of SSLRP, with a total collective value 
of 10 percent of the IFAD investments. Below is a summary presentation of each of the 
three INGOs that form the implementing consortium of SSLRP: 
a)  VSF-Germany:  VSF  will  be  the  lead  implementing  agency  for  Component  1  and  2. 
VSF is an International Non-Governmental Organization (INGO) founded in 1992.The 
organization  has  over  20  years  experience  in  implementing  short  and  long-term 
projects  in  pastoral  and  agro-pastoral  areas  in  Africa.  Its  main  impact  has  been  on 
disease control through effective animal health services, livestock and agricultural 
28 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
production, value chain development and support to marketing systems, food 
hygiene and food safety, livelihoods diversification and income generation. The 
organization has for a long time been involved in disaster responses such as conflict 
and climate (drought and floods) induced emergencies in the drylands of Kenya, South 
Sudan, Sudan, Somalia, Ethiopia and Uganda. Key target groups of VSF interventions 
include vulnerable small holder framers (pastoralists and agro-pastoralists) and fisher 
folks  whose  livelihood  opportunities  have  been  increasingly  diminished  by  climate 
change, population growth and armed  conflicts. Key donors include EU, UNICEF, UN 
FAO, Diakonie, GIZ, BMZ and USAID/OFDA. 
VSF  Germany  is  governed  by  the  General  Assembly  (membership  of  164),  Board  of 
Directors and Senior Management Team (SMT) led by the Managing Director (MD). The 
Organization  manages  its  programs  and  operations  through  four  distinct  offices; 
Headquarter Office based in Berlin, Germany, and headed by the Managing Director, 
Regional Office situated in Nairobi and headed by the Regional Director (RD), 5 Country 
Program  Offices  headed  the  respective  Country  Directors  (CDs)  and  Field  Offices 
headed  by  Program  Managers  /  Coordinators.  The  RD  at  the  Regional  Office  Nairobi 
(RON) is assisted by the Regional Heads of Finance, Internal Audit, Programs, Logistics 
and  Procurement  and  HR/  Admin.  Country  Offices  are  managed  by  Country 
Management  Teams  (CMT)  that  comprise  of  the  CDs,  Finance  and  Administration 
Managers,  Country  Program  Managers  and  Operations/Logistics  Managers.  CMTs 
oversee field offices.  
b)  Save the Children: Globally, Save the Children is currently implementing a portfolio 
of more than 50 resilience-related projects and programmes valued at more than USD 
300 million. This includes projects and programmes with explicit objectives to reduce 
climate and disaster risks and improve disaster management, as well as to increase 
adaptive capacity and speed recovery from shocks and stresses (this does not include 
our humanitarian intervention funding). Save the Children (SC) has been operational 
in South Sudan for nearly 30 years, providing support to children through development 
and  humanitarian  programs.  SC  operates  in  seven  of  the  10  states  of  South  Sudan 
with 10 field offices across the country. SC has global, regional and country technical 
expertise in health, nutrition, gender, food security and livelihoods, child protection, 
and education - including youth empowerment, WASH, child rights governance and 
advocacy.  SC’s  program  delivery  for  quality  programming  is  bolstered  by  a  team  of 
expert  technical  advisors  designing  programmes  for  both  development  and 
humanitarian  contexts.  SC  maintains  a  strong  relationship  with  the  Government  of 
South Sudan and offers humanitarian services through projects funded by a wide range 
of donors including UNHCR, UNICEF, WFP, FAO, UNOCHA, ECHO, OFDA, DFID, ECHO, 
BPRM,  NORAD,  BMZ,  DANIDA  and  DRA  among  others.  SC  responds  to  diverse 
emergencies  such  as  refugee  influx,  drought  or  floods,  disease  outbreaks,  and 
population displacement due to armed conflict implemented through 38 awards, with 
an average annual value of USD 40 million. This, coupled with a network of 35 national 
NGO  partners,  ensures  the  Country  Office  has  a  strong  foundation  upon  which  to 
implement  and  scale  its  response  quickly  and  effectively.  Save  the  Children  has 
successfully collaborated with IFAD in the past for an $1.7m award granted for child 
poverty project in Malawi: 
c)  Action  Against  Hunger  (AAH):  Launched  over  30  years  ago,  AAH  South  Sudan 
programme  is  the  largest  of  the  country  programmes  and  is  uniquely  known  for  its 
community-centred approach to supporting refugees, stayees, returnees, and host 
communities recover from the effects of war through humanitarian and development 
interventions. The programme runs projects in primary health care services, food and 
income  security,  education,  water,  hygiene  and  sanitation  and  capacity  building  for 
peace  and  reintegration.  It  has  a  vast  experience  implementing  the  safety  net  and 
skills  development  project  financed  by  the  World  Bank.  Its  core  programmes  are  in 
29 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Food Security and Livelihoods, Health and Education. AAH has a strong experience in 
labour  intensive  public  works  which  provide  an  opportunity  for  poor  vulnerable 
households  to  access  temporary  employment  and  income.  AAH  is  also  working  on 
promoting context-appropriate and diversified agricultural practices, encouraging the 
adoption  of  non-farm  income  generating  initiatives,  encouraging  the  refugee 
communities  to  participate  in  environmental  protection  activities  which  promote  the 
sustainable  use  of  natural  resources  and,  supporting 
increased  access  to 
sustainable/renewable energy. 
89. 
Elements of the SSLRP Consortium Framework. VSF will lead the consortium, 
and will enter into contractual agreements with Save the Children and AAH, premised on 
the  Consortium  Framework  which  will  be  further  elaborated  before  the  respective 
agreements are signed. The Framework will take into account the respective comparative 
advantages of the consortium members, and the following  roles and responsibilities are 
envisaged:  i)  VSF  as  the  lead  Implementing  Agency  (IA)  responsible  for  procurement, 
financial management, M&E, and all reporting requirements (see details below), as well as 
the implementation of component 2, ii) AAH will work on Component 1 on the community 
development to establish and strengthen the groups, and support the elaboration of CDPs, 
as well as implementation of the LIPW, Save the Children will focus on the cross-cutting 
themes including gender, youth empowerment, and nutrition.   
30 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Implementation Arrangements  
Figure 1: SSLRP Implementation Structure 
31 
 National Technical Committee National Advisory Committee  States’ Development Committees Counties Development Committee IFAD Country Office CBOs and Communities in the selected Bomas Payam Development Committees Boma Development Committees   Official relationship Supervision of project Implementation levels Direct support to beneficiaries Beneficiaries of the project Technical support to project implementation Policy level  Day to day engagement  
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
The  IA  will  have  a  Project  Management  Team  (PMT)  consisting  of  at  least  the 
90. 
following key personnel. Detailed Terms of Reference are presented in Annex 3: 
Key Personnel 
Project  Manager:  She/he  should  have  a  Masters’  degree  in  social  science,  Rural 
Development or any other relevant field with experience of not less than five years. 
Procurement  Officer:  She/He  should  have  a  first  degree  in,  Law,  Economics, 
Supply  Management,  Engineering  or  equivalent,  in  addition  to  a  professional 
qualification  (CIPS  or  equivalent)  with  5  years’  experience  in  management  of 
procurement  and  familiarity  with  multilateral  development  bank  procurement 
procedures.  
Financial Management Officer: She/He should be a Professional Accountant (CA, 
ACCA, CPA, etc.) Minimum of 10 years post qualification experience of which 5 years 
should have been with Multilateral funded projects. 
Monitoring and Evaluation & Knowledge Management Officer: She/he should 
hold  a  Master’s  Degree  in  Monitoring  and  Evaluation,  Statistics,  Economics,  Rural 
Development or any relevant field with at least 7 years’ experience in M&E and KM&L, 
3  years  of  relevant  experiences  in  information  management,  data  processing  and 
analysis, experience in conducting household surveys and impact evaluations. 
Civil  Engineer/Public  Works  Specialist:  She/he  should  have  a  first  or  second 
Degree in civil engineering or any related field with the experience of at least three 
years.  
Community  and  Rural  Development  Specialist:  She/he  should  have  a  first  or 
masters’  degree  in  agriculture,  social  science,  economics  or  any  relevant  field.  
Strong  multi-sectoral  background  with  more  than  5  years  of  practical  experience 
with  communities  in  post  conflict  context.  Experience  of  participatory  appraisal 
techniques is essential. 
91.  While the above PMT positions have been specified, they are not exhaustive. The 
IA will hire short/medium term  staff/consultants as needed to  ensure  mainstreaming of 
gender, youth, other vulnerable groups, nutrition, and climate change across all project 
activities.  
I.5.2: Project Coordination Unit 
In  liaison  with  other  development  partners,  the  project  will  support  the 
92. 
establishment and capacity building of a national Project Coordination Unit (PCU). This is 
an initiative of MAFS and its long-term objective is to create a PCU that would work across 
all development partners implementing projects through MAFS. Support will be given to 
strengthen the capacities and systems of the PCU to be able to implement development 
projects in the future. The PCU will: 
  Oversee project coordination, monitoring, contracting and supervision of the IA; 
  Overall engagement with IFAD and submission of documents for No Objection once 
endorsed by the project oversight body (National Advisory Committee (NAC); 
  Coordinate the engagement of GoSS technical experts in project implementation; 
  Liaise with the IA and capture the generated knowledge and facilitate its 
dissemination nationally and regionally; 
32 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
  Ensure linkages with other relevant projects/programmes being implemented in the 
project area and the country that seek to address similar or related constraints; 
 
Identify and build technical and operational partnerships with stakeholders within the 
government to advance operational/coordination issues related to the project; 
  Backstop the SSLRP State and County Focal Persons; 
  Participate in periodic monitoring of the project in the field; 
  Communication with states and local governments;  
  Lead responsibility for implementation of Subcomponent 3.2. 
The following are the foreseen staff composition of the PCU: a) Project Coordinator; 
93. 
b) Monitoring, Evaluation and Knowledge Management Officer; c) Financial Management 
Officer; d) Procurement Officer; e) Project Assistant; and f) Driver. The respective draft 
ToRs are presented in Annex 4. 
Decentralised  Structures  and  Communities  –  Considering  that  SSLRP  is  a  CDD 
94. 
project, implementation will also employ a community-based participatory approach, at all 
levels, with the objective of ensuring transparency, accountability, instilling ownership and 
increasing the likelihood of sustaining the project’s successful interventions. Communities, 
through their organisations/groups, will be fully involved in the planning, implementation 
and monitoring of project activities. The decentralised local government structure will play 
a key role at all stages of SSLRP implementation (planning, implementation, monitoring 
and  evaluation  and  reporting).  The  structure  is  inclusive  of  the  County  Development 
Committees, Payam Development Committees and Boma Development Committees. The 
central role of the decentralised structures will be to support targeting – identification of 
locations  and  beneficiaries,  awareness  raising  of  communities  and  overall  conflict 
sensitivity and social risk management.  Following hereunder is a brief presentation of the 
expected  roles  of  some  of  the  local  government  structures;  additional  information  is 
contained in the Responsibilities Matrix and an Accountability Matrix which are attached 
as Annex 2. 
95. 
County  Development  Committees  (CDCs)  –  these  are  County  level  structures 
responsible  for  overseeing  development  activities  at  the  County  level.  This  involves:  a) 
setting up County development agenda for a specific timeframe; b) source for resources 
to  fund  the  development  agenda;  c)  coordinate  implementation  of  the  different 
development activities to ensure efficient use of resources, etc.  They are led by the County 
Executive Director. For SSLRP, CDCs are expected to play the following roles: 
  provide inputs and validate County Profiles before finalization;  
  provide inputs and validate the targeting strategy;  
 
supports in the selection process of the Community Facilitators (CFs) in collaboration 
with the States and the IA; 
  ensure availability of technical staff to support the CFs; 
  work with the PCU and IA to ensure linkages with organizations implementing 
similar/related projects for synergies;  
 
review and provide technical inputs to project documents;  
  membership in evaluation committee (1 representative); 
  monitoring project compliance with SECAP requirements; 
 
identify local experts to be trained in Operation and Maintenance (O&M) for the 
infrastructure to be supported under Subcomponent 2.2; 
 
report to the PCU and the State on the progress of project; 
33 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
 
 
support the IA in the implementation of the cross-cutting issues and liaise with the 
State and MAFS; and 
support the IA in the monitoring of the Project, especially the Community-Based 
Monitoring and Evaluation efforts. 
96. 
Payam Development Committees (PDC) – like CDCs, PDCs overall responsibility is 
to plan and oversee development activities at Payam level. They are under the leadership 
of the Payam Administrator. The following are  their expected responsibilities during the 
course of SSLRP implementation: 
review and approve CDPs; 
In liaison with BDCs, identify CFs from the communities for selection; 
facilitate the wok of CFs whenever called upon; 
facilitate the process of awareness creation; and 
 
 
 
 
  participation in training on O&M. 
Boma  Development  Committees  (BDCs)  –  Bomas  are  the  lowest  formal 
97. 
administrative  structure  of  the  Government.  Under  the  leadership  of  a  Boma  Chief,  the 
BDC  plays  a  significant  role  in  the  development  process  considering  that  they  interface 
directly with the target/beneficiary communities. Accordingly, BDCs will be critical to the 
success  and,  especially,  sustainability  of  SSLRP  interventions.  Following  below  is  an 
indicative summary of their expected involvement in SSLRP implementation: 
 
 
conduct the participatory needs assessment, with the support of the service provider, 
to identify community resources, productive and social needs, and potential productive 
activities; 
support the formation of CBOs and lead the screening process through organizing boma 
meetings facilitated by the IA;  
  ensure maximum participation of the poor and vulnerable in the planning process and 
make sure that they are the main recipients of project support;  
  participate  in  the  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  project  interventions  in  their 
communities; and  
  participate  in  mediation  of  local  conflicts  through  their  representatives  (e.g.  boma 
chiefs, village chiefs, and cattle camp leaders, etc.). 
98. 
Community-Based Organisations (CBOs) – these will serve as the medium through 
which the target households/communities will participate in, and benefit from, the project. 
The project will work with existing CBOs and, where necessary, support the formation of 
new  ones  following  set  procedures  (refer  to  Subcomponent  1.1).  Their  expected 
responsibilities under SSLRP are summarised hereunder: 
  work with BDCs to develop community development plans for approval by PDCs and 
CDCs; 
 
 
support the work of the CFs in group member mobilization; 
form the primary community oversight and monitoring contact points for the project;  
  procure input and manage subproject activities;  
  manage  the  in-kind  support  received  from  the  members  for  developing  community 
enterprises; 
  ensure  that  members  receiving  technical  training  transfer  the  knowledge  to  the 
remaining members of the group; 
  maintain accurate and updated records about their community enterprises; and 
  provide Operation and Maintenance (O&M) function for the infrastructure established 
by the project. 
34 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
I.5.3: Project Governance Structures  
99. 
The National Advisory Committee (NAC) – This is an existing structure at the 
national level chaired by the Ministry of Agriculture and co-chaired by Ministry of Finance 
and  Economic  Planning.  NAC’s  core  responsibility  will  be  to  provide  overall  policy  and 
strategic  guidance  and  advice  to  the  project  for  effective  smooth  and  accountable 
implementation. More specific activities will include: 
  providing overall policy and strategic guidance and advice to the IA and NTC; 
 
coordinating with senior management of other government ministries and development 
partners at all levels on all issues related to related to the project; 
  updating respective senior management within their ministries on strategic and policy 
related issues of project developments; 
  providing strategic and policy advice on quarterly and annual project progress reports 
and work plans; and 
 
facilitating  strategic  partnerships  with  high  level  senior  stakeholders  within  the 
government. 
100.  The  National  Technical  Committee  (NTC)  –  NTC  will  also  be  part  of  the 
governance structure, chaired by the Director General of Agriculture and co-chaired by the 
Director of Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning. The NTC’s responsibility are to: 
  provide technical guidance of the project; 
  update the NAC on technical and operational issues related to the project; 
 
facilitate  technical  and  operational  partnerships  with  stakeholders  within  the 
government to advance operational/coordination issues related to the project; 
 
coordinate with technical counterparts of other government agents; 
  update their undersecretaries on any progress and challenges and plans of the project; 
provide technical and operational guidance to  project quarterly and annual progress 
reports and work plans; and 
  participate in periodic monitoring of the project.  
101.  Coordination  with  Government  Ministries  –  SSLRP  will  also  work  with  the 
following key Ministries: a) Ministry of Environment and Forestry on the implementation 
of the SECAP; b) Ministry of Gender, Social Welfare and Religious Affairs; and c) Ministry 
of Animal Resources and Fisheries, whose technical experts and resources will be mobilised 
to support the implementation of SSLRP.A summary of the expected  ministries’  roles is 
presented below. 
102.  Ministry of Environment and Forestry: 
  oversee implementation of the SECAP and ensure compliance; 
  guide  the  project  in  accordance  with  Environmental  and  Social  Management 
 
Framework (ESMF) and Basic Climate Risk Analysis; 
support and guide the planning, design and implementation of subprojects to adhere 
to available national regulations on environment; 
  approve the Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) as needed; 
 
conduct the screening of the subprojects and support the preparation of Environmental 
and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) in accordance with national requirements; and  
review plans and reports in accordance with compliance to national environmental laws 
and standards. 
 
35 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
103.  Ministry of Gender, Child and Social Welfare: 
 
coordinate,  facilitate,  monitor  and  evaluate  gender  equality,  women  empowerment, 
the rights of children, persons with disabilities and other vulnerable groups within the 
activities of SSLRP. 
104.  Ministry of Animal Resources and Fisheries: 
  validate  the  fisheries  and  livestock  related  packages  being  selected  by  the  CBOs  as 
 
 
subprojects under Subcomponent 2.1; 
liaise  with  the  IA  in  monitoring  implementation  progress  of  fisheries  and  livestock 
interventions as they relate to productivity, marketable surplus and food security; 
support and monitor the livestock and fisheries-related technical planning, training and 
advice that the IA provides to the CBOs; and 
  participate  in  the  selection  of  the  civil  service  staff  at  the  county  level  who  will  be 
involved in supporting the IA on livestock and fisheries related interventions. 
105.  Coordination with AfDB – By the time of SSLRP design, AfDB was also finalizing 
the  design  of  the  Agricultural  Markets,  Value  Addition  and  Trade  Development  Project 
(AMVAT) in South Sudan; the total cost of AMVAT is estimated at USD 13.7 million. Given 
that both projects will be implemented in the same Counties, the IFAD and AfDB Project 
Design Teams collaborated at the time of design and identified potential activities funded 
by  one  agency,  but  which  could  benefit  beneficiaries  of  the  other  agency’s  target 
interventions.  Overall,  IFAD  identified  AMVAT  activities  totaling  to  USD  5.6  million  that 
would benefit SSLRP target groups.    
106.  The  collaboration  between  IFAD  and  AfDB  will  be  formalized  by  a  project  level 
Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MoU)  to  be  signed  between  the  respective  projects  - 
SSLRP  and  AMVAT.  The  MoU  will  detail  the  collaboration  modalities,  including  areas  of 
synergies at activity level.   
107.  The  collaboration  will  be  actualized  at  the  AWPB  preparation  stage  where  the 
respective implementing agencies would need to liaise and agree on who is doing what, 
where and when. At the time of activity planning, it will also be important to agree on the 
monitoring plan during the course of implementing approved activities. Flexibility will need 
to be exercised to maximise effectiveness and efficiency of resource use 
108.  From  the  Technical  point  of  view,  the  following  complementarity  is  expected 
between the SSLRP and AMVAT:  
  SSLRP’s  CDP  subprojects  (enterprises)  and  infrastructure  activities  will 
the  AMVAT  proposed  aggregation  centres  and  market 
complement 
infrastructure  that  will  be  developed.  Thus,  SSLRP  beneficiaries  in  Eastern 
Equatoria (Magwi and Torit) will be linked to aggregation business centres, seed 
enterprise  groups,  business  producer  organizations  being  targeted  by  the 
AMVAT; 
  The Value chain studies proposed by AMVAT will complement the SSLRP County 
Profiles. The process of conducting value chain studies will also benefit from the 
robust local level government structures, including extension agents, that would 
be strengthened as part of SSLRP implementation; 
  SSLRP and AMVAT will both provide support for the PCU in MAFS; 
  The  projects  will  hold  annual  consultative  meetings  to  elaborate  AWPBs  and 
promote  regular  exchange  of  information  and  knowledge  during  the 
implementation of both SSLRP and AMVAT;  
36 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
  The two projects will seek to share project equipment and, where possible, field 
level office space, through their respective implementing agencies; and 
  The projects will also seek to harmonise the Knowledge Management function.  
I.5.3: Partnerships 
109.  SSLRP implementation will seek to coordinate and harmonize with ongoing and/or 
planned  projects  financed  by  various  development  partners  that  support  SSLRP-related 
thematic areas. The objective will be to: a) take advantage of existent synergies and avoid 
duplications; and b) explore the possibility for co-financing and/or parallel financing. While 
some potential partners have been listed hereunder, the list is, by no means exhaustive 
and  SSLRP  stakeholders  will  be  on  the  lookout  for  others  during  the  course  of 
implementation.  The list of potential partners for collaboration is presented below: 
Table 8: Potential SSLRP Collaboration Partners 
Donor 
African 
Development 
 Bank (AfDB) 
(see above) 
Project (existing or planned) 
AfDB was, at the time of SSLRP design, 
preparing an investment (Agricultural 
Markets, Value Addition and Trade 
Development Project (AMVAT)) in the 
amount of USD 13.7 million. 
Potential Areas of Collaboration 
  SSLRP has mobilised USD 5.6 
million parallel co-financing from 
AMVAT. SSLRP will benefit from the 
following AFDB investments in 
Central and Eastern Equatoria and 
Jonglei i.e. i) Seed Testing 
Laboratory Equipment, ii) 
Aggregation Centres, iii) Value chain 
studies (Sorghum, Groundnut), 
Seed Sector Framework Study, and 
iv) capacity development support to 
the Government-led PCU.  
  AfDB and IFAD plan to work in the 
same Payams and Bomas to ensure 
alignment of the 
production/productivity 
interventions of SSLRP to the 
aggregation centres (markets) 
supported by AFDB. The value chain 
studies will feed into the County 
Profiles and determination of priority 
value chains. 
World Bank (WB)  The Resilient Agriculture and Livelihood 
  RALP and SSLRP will jointly support 
Development Project (RALP)  
South Sudan – Emergency Locust 
Response Project (SS-ELRP) 
South Sudan Safety Net Project 
(SSSNP) – under implementation 
World Food  
Programme 
(WFP) 
 
Food and Nutrition Assistance for 
Relief and Recovery; 
37 
MAFS to build capacities, systems 
and policies.  RALP support will 
focus on strengthening MAFS 
capacities to implement Bank 
projects i.e. technical training, 
extension, advisory and project 
management.  
IFAD and World bank will therefore 
harmonise the capacity building 
interventions to avoid duplication 
and ensure effectiveness; 
 
  Synergies with SSSNP will include; 
intervention co-location: While 
SSSNP focuses on emergency cash 
transfers, SSLRP will support the 
SSNP beneficiaries with sustainable 
livelihood options 
Learn from accumulated experience 
in storage facilities and access road 
construction, rehabilitation, 
 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Donor 
Project (existing or planned) 
  Smallholder Agriculture Market 
Support (SAMS) project. 
Potential Areas of Collaboration 
maintenance efforts; cooperation on 
support and operating the “road 
gang” concept in road maintenance 
in Eastern Equatorial 
  SSLRP will collaborate with SAMS to 
identify groups and households that 
are ready to take up SSLRP 
interventions i.e. groups already 
strengthened, or households 
graduated from humanitarian 
assistance   
  SSLRP beneficiaries will be linked to 
the SAM interventions i.e. 
community aggregation centres to 
resolve the challenges of post-
harvest handling. 
  SSLRP will benefit from the annual 
Vulnerability Analysis and Mapping 
(VAM) conducted by WFP 
Of strategic interest to IFAD are the 
following FAO Projects initiatives where 
synergies will be forged with SSLRP 
components and subcomponents. 
 
Linkage to existing farmer groups 
already benefiting or have benefited 
from FAO mobilization or already 
receiving free seeds from FAO 
  Making use of FAO Extension 
methodologies and manuals for 
adoption for capacity building of 
farmer groups and fisher folks e.g. 
FFS etc. 
Extensive studies and analysis of 
the Food Security system – SSLRP 
could benefit from studies such as 
annual crop yield assessment 
reports etc. 
IFAD is in discussion with the 
Netherlands for potential co-
financing of SSLRP  
 
 
 
 
 
 
FAO seed systems support/seed 
distribution and seed local 
production; 
FAO is the biggest stakeholder in 
the seed sector of South Sudan. 
FAO procures annually about 
8000MT of assorted seeds for 
distribution to farmers, until 
recently over 90 percent were 
imported.  
FAO works with community-based 
animal health workers to improve 
livestock health in South Sudan. 
FAO conducts extensive livestock 
vaccination campaign across the 
entire country.  
Their areas of interest include 
nutrition, sustainable use of 
farmland, crop productivity and 
income enhancement. Specific 
projects being supported include: 
Food and 
Agriculture 
Organization 
(FAO) 
Embassy of the  
Kingdom of the  
Netherlands 
International 
Labour 
Organization 
(ILO) 
  Water for Eastern Equatoria – 
Torit; 
  South Sudan Agribusiness 
Development Project – Terekeka; 
  Seed Systems Development for 
South Sudan – EES, CES, WES 
Potential interventions: 
 
  National Cooperatives Development 
 
Policy Framework; 
  National Rural Financial Policy 
Framework 
ILO has commissioned a study to 
assess cooperative development in 
South Sudan. SSLRP  will build on 
this work and support the 
development of the National 
Cooperatives Development Policy 
Framework, and the National Rural 
Financial Policy Framework in 
partnership with ILO  
38 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
 
Potential Areas of Collaboration 
  UNHCR’s beneficiary profiles could 
help to identify SSLRP beneficiaries 
that are ready to take up more 
sustainable livelihoods in the target 
counties 
Exchanges on the UNHCR Quick 
Impact Projects (activities) which 
could possibly contribute towards 
the pipeline of CDP activities for 
SSLRP   
Potential collaboration at the CDP 
implementation stage i.e. CDPs 
requiring humanitarian type 
assistance could be implemented by 
UNHCR through its partners. 
Information exchange on conflict 
dynamics in the target Counties, 
Payams. This will assist in scenario-
based planning through a conflict 
sensitive lens. 
 
  SSLRP aligns with the PfRR 
outcomes to rebuild productive 
capacities and rebuild trust in 
people and institutions  
Donor 
UNHCR 
Project (existing or planned) 
 
IFADs engagement with UNHCR in 
the context of the South Sudan 
Livelihood and Resilience Project 
(SSLRP) is particularly on the 
strengthening of the humanitarian 
development nexus.  
The IFAD investment in South 
Sudan, has the objective of 
empowering communities to 
determine their priority 
interventions  which will be 
articulated through Community 
Development Plans (CDPs) 
Conflict 
Sensitivity  
Resource Facility  
(CSRF) 
Conflict Sensitivity Resource Facility 
(CSRF) supports the use of conflict 
sensitivity in donor strategies and 
programmes in South Sudan. 
Partnership for  
Recovery and 
Resilience (the  
Partnership or 
PfRR) 
Partnership for Recovery and Resilience 
(the Partnership or PfRR) is an 
inclusive group of donors, UN Agencies 
and NGOs who are committed to 
promoting local ownership and working 
together to reduce vulnerability and 
increase the resilience of people, 
communities and institutions in South 
Sudan on their way to achieving the 
Sustainable Development Goals. 
39 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
PART II: DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES 
II.1: Start-up  
110.  The  IA  is  expected  to  have  been  selected  by  the  time  the  IFAD  Executive  Board 
(EB) approves the project. Accordingly, MAFS will work with the IA to develop a workplan 
for  preparatory  activities  and  liaise  with  IFAD  to  organize  a  start-up  workshop.  Such 
preparatory activities could include: 
Table 9: Start-up Activities 
Action 
Selection of the Implementing Agency 
Negotiate financing agreement 
Appointment of PCU staff and Implementing Agency 
Project Management Team 
Open Designated Accounts and identify signatories (ID 
and signature specimen) 
Sign the financing agreement (following IFAD board 
approval in April 2021) 
Sign MoUs with other line Ministries, and sign 
Performance Contract with IA 
Review draft PIM and finalise it 
Introduce Project to the NAC/NTC and agree on how to 
proceed with the provision of the oversight function 
(frequency of meetings) 
Establish project field teams in the target States and 
Counties 
PCU and IA meeting to chart working programme 
including review and internalisation of 1st AWPB and 
Procurement Plan 
Procurement and installation of an off the shelf accounting 
software at the PCU and IA and the chart of accounts 
coded to the detail possible 
Official project start and start-up workshop  
Orientation of PCU/NAC/NTC/IA 
Recruit Community Facilitators 
Undertake County Profiles 
Conduct baseline survey 
Conduct awareness creation on project objectives and 
implementation arrangements 
Undertake a capacity and system’s needs assessment to 
elaborate capacity building plan  
Review and finalise the targeting strategy for the selection 
of  Payams,  Bomas  and 
the  specific  beneficiary 
communities.  Proceed  with  the  selection  exercise  for 
Payams, Bomas and the specific beneficiary communities. 
Completion 
Date 
(tentative) 
April 2021 
June 2021 
July  2021 
Who 
GoSS 
IFAD/GoSS 
GoSS/IA 
August 2021 
GoSS/IA 
August 2021 
GoSS/IFAD 
September 
2021 
1 month after 
EB approval 
1 month after 
EB approval 
1 month after 
EB approval 
1 month after 
EB approval 
GoSS/IA 
PCU/IA 
MAFS 
MAFS/States
/Counties 
PCU/IA 
1 month after 
EB approval 
PCU/IA 
2 months after 
EB approval 
3 months after 
EB approval 
4 months after 
EB approval 
4 months after 
EB approval 
5 months after 
EB approval 
5 months after 
EB approval 
5 months after 
EB approval 
MAFS/IFAD/I
A 
States/Coun
ties/IA 
PCU/IA 
PCU/IA 
PCU/IA 
PCU/Consult
ant 
PCU/States/
Counties/IA 
40 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
II.2: Component 1: Community Driven Development Planning 
111.  Component  1  seeks  to  target  and  empower  socially  and  economically  diverse 
communities in the 5 Counties, to articulate their needs, prioritise their development needs 
in a gender sensitive, climate and environmentally focused or responsive  manner.  Two 
outputs,  namely:  a)  County  profiles  are  compiled;  and  b)  CBOs  established  or 
strengthened. 
Figure 2: CDD Process 
Targeting of 
CBOs and 
Communities 
and design of 
sub-projects 
Phase [1 -2 
months] 
Stage 1 
Introductory 
meetings at the 
local levels 
Stage 2: 
First meeting with 
targeted CBOs or 
Communities for 
mobilisation 
Stage 3: 
Developing baseline, 
CDPs and costing 
them for reviews by 
IAs and technical 
experts  
Sub-projects 
approval 
Phase [2 
weeks] 
Stage 4: 
Desk review of the CDPs by 
the IAs and County Agric. 
Representatives and 
submitting to public vetting 
Stage 5: 
IAs and Project Committees 
incorporate agreements and 
actions for approval of the 
CDCs 
t
o
c
o
m
m
i
t
t
e
e
s
h
a
n
d
n
g
i
o
f
p
r
o
j
e
c
t
s
p
r
o
j
e
c
t
s
a
n
d
L
a
u
n
c
h
o
f
s
u
b
-
S
t
a
g
e
6
:
Phase and Steps 
Activity 
Responsibility 
centre 
Max. 
duration 
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
f
i
t
n
e
d
i
y
t
i
n
u
m
m
o
C
e
s
a
h
P
1 
Introduction 
into  communities: 
Local leaders to mobilize all categories 
of  HHs  in  the  targeted  villages  to 
participate  in  the  first  meeting  of  the 
CFs;  Clarifying  objectives,  access 
criteria  &  implementation  modalities 
by  AIs  and  the  CFs;  Encouraging 
stakeholder  participation;  Inspiring  & 
creating  local  village  contacts  from 
targeted areas to work with CFs in the 
target population by Payam or Bomas 
chiefs; 
strategic 
interventions in the area 
Identification  of 
d
n
a
s
F
C
/
s
A
I
/
s
T
P
s
’
y
t
n
u
o
C
s
C
D
B
/
s
C
D
P
1
-
2
m
o
n
t
h
s
41 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
2 
3 
Initiate  community  meetings:  The 
local  focal  person  or  the  Public  CBOs 
and  the  CFs  mobilise  HHs  from  the 
targeted villages on specific dates and 
the  SSLRP 
time  and  clarify  on 
explaining 
from 
participants  in  the  villages;.  First 
priority will be given to villages that did 
not  benefit  from  SSLDP  or  with  other 
similar programs. 
the  requirements 
Formation  of  CBOs  or  working 
groups:  Generating  baseline  data  of 
the  community  or  CBOs;  Identifying, 
prioritizing  &  planning  for  community 
needs  with  help  of  technical  team; 
resources  & 
Identifying  existing 
Preparing 
gaps; 
resource 
comprehensive  community  business 
plans;  Defining  who  the  beneficiaries 
are;  Formation  of  CBOs 
through 
wellbeing  ranking,  public  vetting,  and 
existing policies. 
4  Desk review of CDPs developed by 
IAs  /CFs/  SMS;  Public  vetting  and 
approval of business plans subprojects 
at village level: Checking eligibilities of 
areas  for  funding,  completeness  of 
costing; 
possible 
Identifying 
procurement  challenges;  Generate 
recommendations  for  public  vetting, 
including  guidelines  for  selection  of 
SPCs,  follow-ups  and  preparation  of 
community-based M&E. 
5  Desk preparation of approved 
CDPs by communities: Finalising 
the CDPs for CDCs’ approval by AIs 
and the sub-project committees 
selected 
?
s
C
P
S
/
s
A
I
s
A
I
/
s
F
C
/
s
C
D
C
/
s
C
D
P
/
S
M
S
/
s
I
A
/
s
F
C
s
t
r
e
p
x
e
y
t
n
u
o
C
d
n
a
s
A
I
s
F
C
/
6 
Launch of sub-projects and handing 
over by CFs to sub-project 
committees: On approval of the 
project, the SPCs take charge, work 
with CFs/IAs to finalise CBM&E, 
procurement plans and trainings 
identified in the CDPs 
U
M
P
/
s
C
P
S
/
s
A
I
42 
d
n
a
n
o
i
t
a
r
a
p
e
r
p
t
c
e
j
o
r
p
b
u
s
n
a
l
p
s
s
e
n
i
s
u
b
d
o
o
h
i
l
e
v
i
L
e
s
a
h
p
l
a
v
o
r
p
p
a
s
k
e
e
w
2
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
II.2.1: Subcomponent 1.1: Build Strong and Inclusive Community Based 
Organizations (CBOs) 
112.  There are two key activities under the subcomponent 1.1: a) geographical targeting 
of the lower government levels, to identify Payams and Bomas; and b) selection of existing 
CBOs  and  formation  of  new  ones,  both  through  guided  facilitation  processes  that  will 
ensure that selected CBOs conform to the guidelines of the Project. This process will take 
a maximum of 3 weeks.  The CDCs, IA and the CFs will be responsible for the process. 
Activity 
Phase 
and 
Steps 
1 
2 
d
n
a
y
t
i
n
u
m
m
o
c
s
r
e
n
t
r
a
p
f
o
n
o
i
t
c
e
l
e
S
e
s
a
h
P
s
O
B
C
Geographic targeting to identify target Payams, 
Bomas and CBOs: CDCs and AIs will use Project 
Targeting Guidelines, County profiles and other 
relevant information for geographical area 
targeting within the Counties; The CFs will 
identify the vulnerable, prepare engagements 
with Payams, Bomas and with existing CBOs and 
facilitate formation of new and inclusive ones.  
Targeting existing & formation of CIGs and public 
CBOs in targeted communities: The CFs and local 
leaders will generate baseline data on the 
community, their institutions and CBOs; 
identifying, prioritizing & planning for capacity 
needs; identifying new groups of vulnerable 
community and profiling them for actions; 
targeted public CBOs and private CBOs based on 
memberships 
Responsibil
ity centre 
Max. 
Duratio
n 
IAs/CDCs  
CFs / IAs / 
CDCs  
s
k
e
e
w
3
II.2.2: Subcomponent 1.2: Development of Community-Driven Development 
Plans (CDPs) 
113.  This sub-component is an outcome of guided facilitation by CFs and with inputs of 
technical  support  from  livelihood  experts,  social  inclusive  and  climate  change  experts.  
CDPs  will  respond  to  local  production  and  accessibility  issues.  They  are  responses  and 
priorities identified through a guided process  with the help of technical experts and are 
owned by the CBOs that were developed in sub-component 1.1.  
Phase 
and Steps 
t
n
e
m
p
o
l
e
v
e
d
s
P
D
C
e
s
a
h
P
3 
Activities 
Identification of opportunities and preparation of 
business plan by CBOs: The activities within the 
menu; Defining the capacity needs by each CBOs; 
Including capacity activities in the CDPs; 
Undertake GALS, climate change, ESMF/FPIC 
analyses; Prepare business plans for training of 
CIGs/CBOs; Discussing and preparation of 
business plan subprojects by CIGs/CBOs; Review 
of CDPs by IAs; Approval of CDPs by CDCs after 
public vetting by communities. 
Max. 
Period 
Responsibility 
Center 
IAs  / CFs / 
Consultants 
s
h
t
n
o
m
6
43 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
4 
Group training and adherence to regular meetings 
and savings: CIGs and public CBOs will receive 
tailor made training in group management and 
procurement; Training in gender and 
environmental issues; Adhere to regular 
meetings, regular savings, proper book keeping 
and stick to their group by-laws 
IAs/ SPCs? 
/CFs 
114.  Potential  activities  are  services  and  investments  as  further  discussed  under 
Component 2 and can include: a) promotion of climate resilient agricultural practices to 
increase productivity; b) increasing access to quality inputs, including seed and planting 
materials;  c)  promoting  value  addition  and  agro-processing;  and  d)  support  to  a  small 
livestock production for protein provision such as poultry, goats sheep. This will involve 
provision of improved husbandry and animal health services and other services required 
by  the  beneficiaries  including  entrepreneurship,  financial  literacy  and  value  addition. 
Findings  of  the  Climate  and  Vulnerability  Assessment  and  Environmental  and  Social 
Management  Framework  (ESMF)  for  SSLRP  and  IFAD’  Adaptation  framework  will  be 
considered during the community driven development plan preparation.  
II.3: Component 2: Agriculture Production and Livelihood Support  
115.  Component 2 builds on the developments from Component 1 and largely with two 
core objectives: a]. To support and stabilize, in the short-run, household food consumption 
and to improve household resilience for those families that are voluntarily relocating from 
different camps to resettle in their homesteads within the Payams SSLRP will be working 
within  the  5  Counties;  and  b].  To  improve  household’s  food  security  and  nutrition  of 
targeted  households  -  including  the  beneficiaries  of  the  safety  nets,  through  improved 
household incomes that will come from diverse sources, including smallholder on farm and 
off-farm activities. The on-farm activities include smallholder agriculture - crops, livestock 
and  fisheries.    The  off-farm  activities  include  supporting  value  addition  and  agro-
processing and other innovations that can benefit them.  
II.3.1: Subcomponent 2.1: Investments for Increased Agriculture Production and 
Rural Livelihoods 
 Outputs from the subcomponent include: a) increased physical access to markets, 
116. 
processing  and  storage  facilities;  b)  Increased  access  to  marketing,  processing  and 
storage  facilities; c) Strengthened  environmental sustainability and climate  resilience  of 
poor  rural  people’s  economic  activities;  d)  Land  brought  under  climate-resilient 
management; and e) Communities receive nutrition support.  
44 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Figure 3: Diagrammatic Representation of Subcomponent 2.1 
Subcomponent 2.1 a): Labour Intensive Public Work’s CDPs Process 
CDPs 
Types 
Activity 
1 
2 
s
k
r
o
W
c
i
l
b
u
P
d
e
s
a
b
-
r
u
o
b
a
L
Geographic and individual targeting: Areas in Kajo 
Keji, Bor, Magwi, Torit where HHs are returning to 
ancestral homestead will be targeted.  Also, in 
other areas female HHs and the youth desirous 
of stability in their nutrition and seasonal needs 
that could erode productive assets can be 
targeted in the short-run.  
Menu  of  activities:  LIPW  seeks  to  build  or  repair 
rural  access  roads,  establish  and  manage  tree 
promote 
nurseries, 
afforestation,  construct  different  soil  and  water 
conservation  (SWC)  mechanisms,  flood  control 
structures,  build  community  ponds,  valley  tanks, 
hand-dug  wells,  or  spring  developments,  develop 
mechanisms 
rainwater  harvesting,  and 
rehabilitate or construct market shelters 
seedlings 
plant 
for 
or 
Responsibil
ity centre 
Max. 
Duratio
n 
IAs/CDCs 
IAs / CDCs  
1
r
a
e
Y
45 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
CDPs 
Types 
Activity 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Planned activities - (i) transfers of US$ 63 per HHs 
for  the  beneficiaries  participating  in  the  LIPW 
activities;  and  (ii)  hand  tools  and  equipment, 
labor  needed  to 
materials,  and  semi-skilled 
implement the LIPW to the required standard and 
quality; production of infrastructure in 2 above 
Targets: Existing CIGs in targeted Payams or 
Communities and returning households  – to be 
facilitated in line with guidelines; targeting new 
vulnerable groups like returnees, women or youth 
with land their formation into CIGs, covering the 
5 Counties. Also targeting MHHs and FHHs. 
Strategies:  target activities of the poor like 
agriculture, livestock and fisheries but also skill 
training for youth and value addition and value 
chain interventions.  
Group training and adherence to regular meetings 
and savings: CIGs and public CBOs will receive 
tailor made training in group management and 
dynamics, procurement; Training in gender and 
environmental issues; Adhere to regular 
meetings, modern farm practices, regular 
savings, proper book keeping and stick to their 
group by-laws 
Targeted  activities:  Livelihoods  support  including 
smallholder  farming  targeting  both  existing  and 
new  family  enterprises  –  increasing  or  expansion 
of  livelihood  options  through  investments  in 
fisheries,  and  agro-
agriculture, 
processing.  Support  including  training  and  the 
provision of a grant, and in business management 
skills 
financial  management  and 
marketing).  
(including 
livestock, 
h
g
u
o
r
h
t
s
t
e
s
s
A
e
v
i
t
c
u
d
o
r
P
d
n
a
e
m
o
c
n
I
l
d
o
h
e
s
u
o
H
d
e
v
o
r
p
m
I
s
P
D
C
s
’
m
r
a
f
f
f
o
d
n
a
e
r
u
t
l
u
c
i
r
g
a
r
e
d
o
h
l
l
l
a
m
S
Responsibil
ity centre 
IAs / CDCs 
Max. 
Duratio
n 
IAs  / CFs / 
BDCs 
s
h
t
n
o
m
6
IAs/ SPCs? 
/CFs 
NTC/IAs/ 
Consultants 
117.  Subproject  2.1  b:  Improved  Household  Income  Support  Activities  -  The 
Fund will support activities leading to increase in income generated by the beneficiaries 
over and above the portion for own consumption, to increase household incomes and their 
productive assets.  Agricultural production activities for instance, will target all ranges of 
beneficiaries: returning households, CIGs and female headed HHs who are all considered 
poor  and  vulnerable  households  in  5  Counties.  The  LIS  is  comprised  of  an  Improved 
Household Income Support Program (IHISP) and a Sustainable Agricultural Production and 
Productivity  (SAPP).  The  IHISP  incorporates  key  lessons  from  previous  experience  to 
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the component but also experience from other 
projects implemented by the ministry. The SAPP aims to increase areas under cultivation 
and to improve yield per area of land brought under cultivation.  
46 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Table 10: Indicative Menu of Investments 
Type of investment 
Possible investments 
Agricultural production 
Value addition/ 
agribusiness 
Non-fundable list 
Improved goat rearing 
Animal Traction 
Local heifer dairy 
Bee-keeping 
Fruit/Tree nursery operation 
Cereals and root crops production 
Vegetable production e.g. Onions 
Honey processing and packaging 
Cassava chips 
Postharvest handling- e.g. rice hulling; groundnut shelling, 
Maize/millet grinding 
Maize/Millet flour packaging 
Purchase of large-scale equipment e.g. big tractors 
Purchase of Hydraform brick/block making machines 
Emergency assistance/relief  
Products and services which will have negative 
environmental and social impact examples include alcohol 
brewing and selling, charcoal making  
118.  IHISP project cycle approach for systematic implementation: The IHISP will 
be implemented through distinct project cycle. Each project cycle will be of one year, and 
will comprise  of three phases  – preparatory phase (2 months); livelihood business plan 
subproject  generation  and  approval  phase  (4  months);  and  livelihood  business  plan 
subproject implementation, follow up mentoring and commissioning phase (6 months)  – 
details presented in Process diagram below.  
Table 11: IHISP Livelihood Business Plan Cycle 
Phase and 
Steps 
Activity 
1 
2 
e
s
a
h
p
y
r
o
t
a
r
a
p
e
r
P
CDCs and guidance: Orientation and 
sensitization of County, Payam and Boma level 
stakeholders regarding the IHISP activities. 
Formation of technical and implementation 
support teams at County and Payam level. 
Capacity building of the County and Payam 
implementation support teams (IST). 
Geographic targeting to identify target 
Bomas: Counties will define how many villages 
they can target and how many groups they can 
support based on available resources and 
guided by key poverty and other socio-
economic criteria. First priority will be given to 
villages who have not benefited from SSLRP or 
other similar programs.  
Max. 
duration 
s
h
t
n
o
m
2
Responsibilit
y centre 
CDC staff, 
consultants, 
partner 
agencies for 
capacity 
building 
CEO, NDO, 
County and 
Payam 
political and 
technical 
leadership 
47 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Phase and 
Steps 
Activity 
e
s
a
h
p
l
a
v
o
r
p
p
a
d
n
a
n
o
i
t
a
r
a
p
e
r
p
t
c
e
j
o
r
p
b
u
s
n
a
p
l
s
s
e
n
i
s
u
b
d
o
o
h
i
l
e
v
L
i
Community mobilization & sensitization in 
target villages by CFs: Mobilizing all 
households in targeted villages to participate, 
Clarifying objectives, access criteria & 
implementation modalities, Encouraging 
stakeholder participation, Inspiring & creating 
determination among the target population. 
Targeting & formation of CIGs in selected 
communities: Generating baseline data on the 
community; identifying, prioritizing & planning 
for community needs; identifying existing 
resources & resource gaps; preparing 
community action plans; selection of 
beneficiaries and formation of CIGs through 
wellbeing ranking, public vetting, and subject 
to requirements of LICF. 
Identification of livelihood activities – 
Undertake ESMF/FPIC, GALS and Climate 
change analyses and preparation of livelihood 
business plan by CIGs: Orientation about 
livelihood activity menu and viability of 
livelihood activities, Selection of livelihood 
activity by CIGs, Business plan training for 
CIGs, preparation of livelihood business plan 
CDPs by CIGs 
Desk appraisal of livelihood business plan 
subprojects at Payam level: Checking 
completeness of documentation, checking 
conformity with sector standards & norms, 
checking conformity with project guidelines, 
checking appropriateness of budgets 
Approval of livelihood business plan subprojects 
at the County level: Reviewing livelihood 
business plan subproject documentation, 
Ascertaining conformity with sector norms & 
standards, Ascertaining compliance with project 
guidelines 
Group training and adherence to regular 
meetings and savings: CIGs will receive group 
management training, Adhere to regular 
meetings, regular savings, proper book keeping 
and stick to their group by-laws 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8a 
Max. 
duration 
Responsibilit
y centre 
CDO, Boma 
Chief, LC1 
members, 
Community 
facilitators 
Community 
committees 
supported 
by Payam 
IST8  
CIGs 
supported 
by 
community 
facilitators, 
Boma Chiefs 
CDOs, 
subject 
matter 
specialists 
CFs/IA/Cons
ultants 
s
h
t
n
o
m
4
CDC  
Community 
facilitators 
with support 
from 
partners 
8 The Payam Implementation Support Team is led by CDO and comprised of Boma Chiefs and 
representatives from LC1 
48 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Phase and 
Steps 
Activity 
Technical training in chosen livelihood activity. 
CIGs will also receive relevant technical 
training to support members in their chosen 
livelihood activity. 
Provision of livelihood grants and procurement 
of assets: Reviewing livelihood business plan 
subproject approval process, Checking 
compliance with subproject budget ceilings, 
Singing of financing agreements, Providing 
basic training to subproject management 
committees, Transfer of funds to PMC  
Implementation of livelihood business plan 
subprojects by CIGs: Livelihood business plan 
subproject launch, Implementation of approved 
livelihoods business plans, Provision of 
technical support to CIGs 
Supervision, monitoring and continuous 
implementation support and follow up 
mentoring: Field visits to livelihood subproject 
sites, Providing technical support & guidance to 
implementers, Review of implementation 
reports, Reviewing implementation of previous 
recommendations, Documenting and reporting 
progress in implementation, Tracking progress 
towards meeting the livelihood subproject 
activities 
Commissioning and process review: Receipt of 
subproject completion reports, Issuing 
subproject completion certificates to the 
community, Formal handover of subproject 
assets to the beneficiaries, Inauguration of 
O&M committees, Conducting process review, 
Consolidate learnings, and inform 
implementation in the next IHISP cycle  
8b 
9 
10 
11 
12 
t
r
o
p
p
u
s
g
n
i
r
o
t
n
e
m
p
u
w
o
l
l
o
f
,
g
n
i
r
o
t
i
n
o
m
,
n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
m
e
p
m
l
i
t
c
e
j
o
r
p
b
u
s
n
a
p
l
s
s
e
n
i
s
u
b
d
o
o
h
e
s
a
h
p
i
g
n
n
o
i
s
s
i
m
m
o
c
d
n
a
i
l
e
v
L
i
Max. 
duration 
Responsibilit
y centre 
Community 
facilitators 
with support 
from County 
and Payam 
IA/CDC, 
CPMCs,  
s
h
t
n
o
m
6
CIG 
supported 
by IA, 
community 
facilitators, 
Boma 
chiefs, 
CDOs,  
 CIG 
supported 
by 
community 
facilitators, 
Boma 
chiefs, 
CDOs, NDOs 
and County 
Commercial 
Officers 
Community 
facilitators, 
Boma 
chiefs, 
CDOs, NDOs  
II.3.1: Subcomponent 2.2: Community Productive and Climate Resilient 
Infrastructure Investments 
119.  During the Planning Process envisaged under Component 1, the community will be 
facilitated to focus on infrastructure that will improve production of both crops, fisheries 
and  livestock.  As  a  result  of  this  facilitated  process,  the  communities  are  expected  to 
49 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
develop plans containing requests for support for investments in: infrastructure to improve 
production of both crops and livestock; infrastructure to reduce postharvest losses as well 
as postharvest processing; and infrastructure to improve access to inputs and markets. 
communities 
120.  With 
investments/subprojects, the following steps will be taken: 
having 
thus 
the 
selected 
their 
preferred 
  assess  the  feasible  technical  options  to  deliver  the  subprojects.  For  instance,  if  a 
community in a given Payam/Boma requests for a water for irrigation subproject, an 
assessment  will  be  done  to  determine  the  most  appropriate/feasible  water  supply 
option; 
to carry out this assessment, the IA will engage the services of consultants who will 
then carryout the assessments resulting in the most feasible technological option for 
the subproject; 
 
  next,  the  consultants  will  carry  out  the  technical  engineering  designs  of  the  specific 
subprojects including the bills of quantities and tender documents; 
the IA would then carryout the tender for construction of the infrastructure. 
 
121.  A similar process would be followed for the other categories of infrastructure. For 
access  roads, however, the assessment will be to determine what sections of the roads 
will be improved and what the improvements will consist of. The consultants undertaking 
the assessments and designs will also be expected to supervise the construction on a day 
to day basis. 
122.  The expected outputs for the different categories of infrastructure, spread across 
all the five target Counties, are estimates based on the available budget and an assumed 
unit cost. These are presented hereunder: 
●  Soil and Water Conservation - assuming a budget of USD 475,000 and a unit cost 
of USD 1,000/ha, it is expected that these activities will be implemented in an area 
of 475 hectares; 
●  Water for Production - budget availability is assumed to be USD 1.9 million and an 
average unit cost  of USD 50,000 per facility. This implies  that the project  would 
support development of 38 facilities; 
●  Postharvest Infrastructure - assuming a budget of USD 475,000  and an average 
investment cost of USD 10,000 per structure, it is expected that the project would 
fund a total 48 facilities; and 
● 
Improved Access to Inputs and Markets - assuming a budget of USD 950,000, it 
expected  that  the  project  would  support  spot  improvements  of  road  sections 
totalling 95 kilometres. 
123.  Given that implementation of the SSLRP is community driven, it is expected that 
formation of the CBOs and the selection of the subprojects would take place during the 
first year of implementation. This means that the assessments of the technological options 
and the engineering designs and tendering would take place in the second year with actual 
construction taking place from the third year. The detailed implementation process for the 
different infrastructure categories will be as outlined in the following sections. 
Implementation Procedures and Processes 
a)  Infrastructure for Soil and Water Conservation 
124. 
 The activities under this section will support the improvement of land husbandry 
technologies  and  practices  as  well  as  farm  level  rainwater  harvesting  technologies. 
Implementation of activities in this subcomponent will be driven by technical officers (TO) 
among  the  IA’s  staff.  A  Climate  and  Environment  specialist,  when  required,  could  be 
provided from the relevant government Ministry. If not possible, one would be recruited 
as a short-term consultant.  
50 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
125.  The process of activity implementation will be as follows: 
a)  Land Husbandry 
Activity 
Preparation  of land husbandry guidelines that will be applicable for each of 
the agro climatic zones 
Mobilization of the local authorities, opinion leaders, CBOs and farmers, 
through contacts and awareness meetings 
Refresher course for the land husbandry field technicians and local leaders of 
on land husbandry technologies and their implementation 
Production of a detailed and farmer-friendly manual on trees/shrub, 
grass/legume and fruit trees management as well as a selection of crops 
suitable for the zone including the crop husbandry. 
Training the communities  on land husbandry technologies implementation, 
management and maintenance 
Establishing tree/shrub, grass/legume seed multiplication and fruits nurseries 
with seed and equipment stores as recommended at least one per project site 
Establishing nurseries for other agro forestry trees 
Operation and maintenance of land husbandry infrastructure 
Continuous monitoring of operation, maintenance and sustainability of land 
husbandry infrastructures 
Preparation  of land husbandry guidelines that will be applicable for each of 
the agro climatic zones 
Responsible 
IA/TO 
IA/TO 
IA/TO 
IA/TO 
IA/TO 
IA/TO 
Community 
community 
PDC/BDC/CBOs 
IA/TO 
b)  Demonstration Farm Level Rainwater Harvesting Systems 
Activity 
Mobilization of the local authorities, opinion leaders, farmers, through 
contacts and awareness meetings 
Identification of the farmers that will be supported to implement the farm 
ponds in target Bomas and local artisans to be trained in the technology 
Training local artisans on the rainwater harvesting technology including: 
·     construction of the ponds 
·     the rainwater harvesting system (from the farm runoff as well as 
from roofs in the homestead including gutter installation); 
·     connection to farm ponds; 
·     the system for pumping water from the pond to the elevated storage 
tank; 
·     Gravity-fed system to the drip system on the farm; and, 
·     protection of the pond (fencing and shade net roofing) 
Providing the materials for pond construction (dam liner, roofing metallic 
structure, roofing net,  shading, drip kit, pump and tanks) 
Construction of farm ponds in the various farms 
Supervision of the construction works 
Operations and maintenance 
Continuous monitoring of operation, maintenance and sustainability of 
ponds and irrigation systems 
Responsible 
IA/TO 
TO/county agriculture 
officer(s) 
SP 
IA/TO 
TO/Artisans/Farmers 
IA Engineer 
Farmers 
PDC/BDC/CBOs 
b)  Borehole Water Supply Systems 
126.  Development of a borehole-based water supply system entails a number of steps 
and processes. For each of the sites that will have been selected, a hydro-geological study 
will first be carried out. This study is meant to establish the possibility of striking ground 
water at that particular site as well as establishing an estimate of the water the borehole 
is likely to produce. This study is carried out by a hydro-geological professional. It is on 
the  basis  of  the  results  of  this  study  that  an  estimate  for  the  costs  of  drilling  will  be 
established and be used in preparation of tender documents. 
127.  The  next  step  is  the  actual  drilling  of  the  borehole  which  is  undertaken  by  the 
contractor with the appropriate drilling equipment, primarily a rotary drilling rig with the 
51 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
necessary equipment. When the hole is drilled to the  recommended depth and water is 
struck, then the casings will be installed still with the rig, gravel pack installed, and the 
hole developed/cleaned and protected. The drilling equipment is then demobilized and on 
a later date a test-pumping unit is mobilized to establish the yield of the borehole. The 
borehole yield and the depth that will be established with the pump testing is what will 
determine the size of the pump in combination with the height at which the storage tanks 
will be mounted. 
  The next step will be the equipping of the borehole. In SSLRP the proposal is to 
128. 
equip the boreholes with solar pumping units delivering water to elevated plastic storage 
tanks.  The  size  of  the  pumping  units  and  the  storage  capacity  will  be  determined  as 
observed above by the yield of each of the boreholes.  The final key activity will be the 
construction  of  the  cattle  troughs  and  domestic  water  point(s)  where  there  will  be  no 
distribution system or installation of the water distribution system where feasible. 
129.  The activities will be implemented as follows: 
Drilling & Equipping of Boreholes 
Activity 
Prepare the tender documents including bills of quantity for drilling  and equipping the 
boreholes 
Carry Out the tender process to award of the contract to drill and equip  the boreholes 
Undertaking the consultancy and construction services for the  boreholes development by 
implementing the activities as follows: 
a)  Hydro-geological investigations 
b)  Drilling works 
c)  Pumping test all the boreholes to establish the yields 
Install appropriate submersible solar powered pumps 
d) 
e)  Construct livestock  watering troughs & domestic water point(s) or distribution 
system 
Install Water tanks & associated plumbing systems as necessary. 
f) 
g)  Train WUA in the Organisational and technical aspects of O&M of the infrastructure 
Supervise on a regular basis the all works related to Hydro-geological survey, pumping 
testing, drilling works & equipping of the boreholes 
Responsible 
IA 
IA 
Contractor 
IA/PCU/CBO 
c)  Water  Supply  System  Based  on  a  Rainwater  Harvesting  Structure 
Such as a Valley Tank 
130.  For each of the sites that will have been selected, an assessment will first be done 
to establish the amount of water (either spring or runoff) that the particular site is likely 
to  generate.  This  assessment  is  carried  out  by  a  hydrologist.  Based  on  the  results  of 
assessment,  an  estimate  can  be  made  on  the  likely  volume  of  water  that  can  be 
impounded.  The  IA  will  then  contract  a  SP  to  carry  out  the  design  and  supervise  the 
construction of the water harvesting infrastructure. 
Consultancy Services for Design and Supervision of Construction of the Water Harvesting 
Infrastructure 
Activity 
Prepare the Terms of Reference for the consultancy to design and supervise construction 
of the water harvesting infrastructure 
Carry Out the tender process, up to award of the contract, to design the water harvesting 
infrastructure and prepare the bills of quantities 
Carry out the design including bills of quantity for construction of water harvesting 
infrastructure as follows: 
a)  Hydrological Survey. 
b)  Soil Survey. 
c)  Topographic Survey. 
d)  Design of the water harvesting infrastructure. 
e)  Preparation of the Bills of quantities 
f)  Prepare the tender documents for constructing and equipping water harvesting 
infrastructure 
Responsible 
IA 
IA 
Consultant 
Supervise the consultancy for design the water harvesting infrastructure 
IA 
52 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Construction and Equipping of Water Harvesting Infrastructure 
Activity 
Carry out the tender process up to award of the contract to construct and equip water 
harvesting infrastructure 
Undertaking the construction and equipping the water harvesting infrastructure by 
implementing the activities as follows: 
a)  Preliminary works (site installation and bush clearing) 
b)  Excavation and compaction works 
c)  Construction of Spillway. 
d)  Supply & installation of submersible solar powered pump 
e)  Supply & installation of storage tanks 
f)  Construction of watering troughs and plumbing system 
g)  Construction of fence or planting live fence 
h)  Construction of security guard house and sanitation facilities 
i)  Buffer zone around the harvesting infrastructure 
j)  Train WUA in the technical aspects of O&M of the infrastructure 
Onsite supervision of all water harvesting infrastructure works 
Monitor on a regular basis the all works on construction of the rainwater harvesting 
infrastructure 
Responsible 
IA 
Contractor 
Consultant 
IA/PCU/CBO 
d)  Implementation of Postharvest Infrastructure 
131.  While a number of investments in postharvest infrastructure will be in the form of 
equipment which would be purchased directly, there could be some such as augmentation 
centres or market sheds that will require a design and the engagement of a contractor. 
The  process  will  be  similar  the  water  for  production  infrastructure  whereby  the  IA  will 
engage  a  consultant  to  do  the  design  and  tender  documents;  tender  the  works  as  per 
procedure,  supervision  of  the  construction  by  the  consultants  with  oversight  by  the 
IA/PCU/CBO 
e)  Implementation of Feeder Roads Improvement Works 
Consultancy for the Assessment of the conditions of the road & Design of Improvements 
Activity 
Prepare the Terms of Reference for the consultancy to assess the road conditions, design 
required improvements and supervise construction of the water harvesting infrastructure 
Carry out the tender process, up to award of the contract, to undertake the assessments 
Carry out the assessments & designs including bills of quantity for access roads 
improvement as follows: 
a)  Assessment of the road conditions and required improvements. 
b)  Selection jointly with the IA, County Focal point and CBOs on the sections of the 
Responsible 
IA 
IA 
Consultant 
roads to be improved. 
c)  Carryout the designs of the structures to be improved/constructed. 
d)  Preparation of the Bills of quantities. 
e)  Prepare the tender documents for constructing and equipping water harvesting 
infrastructure 
Supervise the consultancy for design the assessments, & designs for access roads 
improvements 
IA 
Construction Works to Improve of Feeder Roads 
Activity 
Carryout the tender process up to award of the contract for labour-based improvement of 
feeder roads 
Undertaking the labour-based works for improving the access roads activities as follows: 
a)  sections of road surface improvements as necessary 
b)  drainage works as necessary 
c)  alignment, widening & gravelling of existing feeder roads as necessary 
d) 
re-gravelling, grading & reshaping of the road camber as necessary 
e)  Form & train the local road maintenance gangs as the work progresses   
Onsite supervision of all access road improvement works 
Supervise on a regular basis the all works on improvement of access roads 
Responsible 
IA 
Contractor 
Consultant 
IA/PCU/CBO 
53 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
II.4: Component 3: Project Support and Capacity Building 
132.  The objective of the component is twofold: a) to manage SSLRP in an efficient and 
effective  manner  by  providing  overall  coordination, 
including  planning  and 
implementation, financial management and control, procurement support, Monitoring and 
Evaluation, knowledge management, and progress reporting. It will also ensure liaison and 
linkage  with  all  other  relevant  projects/programmes  being  implemented  in  the  country 
that  seek  to  address  similar  or  related  constraints;  this  would  be  aimed  at  taking 
advantage of existent synergies and avoiding duplications; and b) augment the capacity 
of  selected  government  institutions  to  facilitate  participatory  planning  and  development 
processes. Accordingly, the component has two subcomponents: a) Subcomponent 3.1: 
Third  Party  Implementation  Arrangements;  and  b)  Subcomponent  3.2:  Institutional 
Capacity Building and Policy Support. However, subcomponent 3.1 and all aspects related 
to the PCU are covered under Section I 4. Institutional Arrangements and Responsibilities. 
Therefore, only aspects related to institutional capacity building and policy support will be 
considered here. 
II.4.1: Subcomponent 3.2: Institutional Capacity Building and Policy Support  
133.  The objective  of this intervention is to strengthen capacities of government staff 
and  other  non-state  actors,  at  the  national,  State  and  County  levels,  to  facilitate 
participatory  planning  and  development  processes.  The  focus  will  be  on  addressing 
capacity gaps (institutional and policy) as would be identified by a Capacities and Systems 
Needs Assessment. Accordingly, the first step in implementing this activity will be for the 
PCU to consult the relevant institutions at the different levels (national, State and County) 
with  the  objective  of  developing  detailed  ToRs  for  the  capacity  and  systems  needs 
assessment. Implementation of the target activities will have to be coordinated with those 
of GoSS’ other development partners (such as AfDB, WB, etc.) to ensure synergies  and 
efficient use of resources. In general, the following steps will be followed: 
  PCU consults different institutions at the national, State and County levels and develops 
ToRS  for  the  capacity  and  systems  needs  assessment.  The  ToRs  should  require  the 
eventual service provider to use the findings of the assessment to recommend how the 
identified capacity and systems gaps would be addressed; 
  Share the draft ToRs with IFAD for review and provision of No Objection; 
  Competitive  recruitment  a  service  provider  for  the  capacity  and  systems  needs 
assessment  
  Undertake the assessment under the PCU’s supervision. The output of this activity will 
be  a  detailed  report  of  specific  capacity  and  systems  gaps  at  different  levels  of 
government together with recommendations of how to address the gaps; 
  Share the report of the findings with IFAD; 
  Develop ToRs for recruiting the needed Technical Assistance/consultancy (national or 
international) to provide the needed training; 
 
In situations where the capacity gap relates to equipment/goods, develop the needed 
specifications 
user 
in 
departments/units; 
consultation  with 
relevant/respective 
close 
the 
  Undertake  the  needed  procurements  for  goods/services  following  procurement 
procedures as laid down in the Financing Agreement; 
  PCU to supervise and certify the provision of goods and services to ensure compliance 
with the requirements. 
134.  Policy Support – The focus of this intervention will be to facilitate the development 
and/or  review  and  update  of  policies  and  strategies  of  selected  subsectors  for  their 
effective and structured development. The project will support any relevant policy analysis 
54 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
work that will help to strengthen the national policy framework for agriculture and rural 
development. This may involve the development and/or review and update of policies and 
strategies  of  selected  subsectors  for  their  effective  and  structured  development.  While 
more consultations on this issue will be made, preliminary indication suggested the need 
for  the  operationalisation  of  relevant  existing  policies  and  regulations.  A  liaison  with 
existing/planned interventions, in the area of  policy support, will be undertaken to take 
advantage of any existent synergies, such as the work being planned by the International 
Labour Organisation (ILO). Steps to be taken include: 
  Liaison with some of GoSS’ development partners (e.g. ILO) to establish what is being 
done in the policy area; 
  Establish agreement with GoSS’ development partners (e.g. ILO) on the collaborative 
framework related to interventions on the policy area. This would involve identification 
and assignment of specific responsibilities; 
  Competitively recruit consultancy services to undertake a review of current situation 
and identify the existent gaps; 
  Prepare a validation workshop and invite stakeholders to agree on the findings and the 
way forward; 
  Recruit consultancy services to implement the agreed way forward; 
  Prepare a validation workshop and invite stakeholders to discuss the different drafts 
and provide comments/suggestions; 
  Address the comments/suggestions and produce final outputs. 
II.5: Annual Supervision 
135.  Supervision – Supervision arrangements to be put in place will largely be influenced 
by the prevailing security situation in the country. If the security situation allows for the 
fielding of IFAD missions, then the standard IFAD project supervision and implementation 
support procedures would prevail. That is, IFAD would field missions with GoSS to jointly 
assess  achievements  and  lessons  learned  and,  when  required,  provide  implementation 
support with the objective of ensuring effective project implementation and increase the 
likelihood  of  achieving  the  target  objective.  Under  such  a  scenario,  missions  would  be 
fielded  at  least  once  every  twelve  months.  However,  and  depending  on  the  extent  and 
quality of implementation progress, implementation support Missions would be fielded as 
frequently as warranted by conditions on the ground so as to address any emergent issues 
that may have the potential to negatively impact project implementation.  
136.  The composition of the implementation support mission would be influenced by the 
issues identified as needing redress. As part of the annual missions’ objectives, a review 
of  the  effectiveness  of  implementation  arrangements  will  be  undertaken  to  ascertain 
whether any adjustment/restructuring is needed to  ensure optimum performance.  ToRs 
for the supervision missions will be prepared by the IFAD Country Director except those 
for  the  Financial  Management  consultant;  IFAD’s  Financial  Management  Division  (FMD) 
would be responsible for preparing the ToRs and recruitment of the Financial Management 
consultant  for  the  mission.  The  timing  of  the  supervision  missions  will  be  influenced  by 
factors  such  as  the  status  of  AWPB  implementation  coordinated  with  the  production  of 
interim financial statements in accordance with IFAD interim financial reporting guidelines. 
This will enable Supervision Missions to measure the progress at the specific cut-off dates. 
137.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  event  that  the  security  situation  is  not  conducive  to 
fielding  IFAD  supervision  and  implementation  support  missions,  IFAD  would  engage 
locally-based  institutions/individuals  to  undertake  the  supervision  and,  when  needed, 
provide  implementation  support.  This  would  be  done  in  collaboration  with  MoAFS.  In 
addition, under this scenario, IFAD would endeavour to use remote supervision provisions 
55 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
for  continuous  monitoring  of  performance;  this  would  follow  IFAD’s  Guidance  Note  on 
Remote Supervision.  
II.6: Mid-term review (MTR) 
138.  An MTR will be undertaken halfway through project implementation; it will evaluate 
whether the project is on course to achieve the objectives. It will identify any prevailing 
constraints and recommend such re-orientation as may be required to help the project get 
back  on  course  to  achieve  its  objectives.  However,  the  actual  timing  and  nature  of  the 
MTR will, similarly, be influenced by the security situation on the ground. 
139.  There  will  be  four  outputs  of  the  MTR:  a)  an  Aide  Memoire  summarizing  the 
findings; b) MTR report detailing the findings and recommendations on the way forward; 
c) a revised PDR, if necessary, to reflect the mission’s recommendations; and d) a detailed 
project closure plan. This will be accompanied with: a) a revised budget to guide utilization 
of the remaining funds; and b) an updated PIM. The  exercise should be followed up by 
development of a second 3-year plan for project implementation. 
140.  Undertaking  of  the  MTR 
is  the  responsibility  of  government/PCU.  The 
government/PCU  may  consult  IFAD  to  facilitate  the  process,  including  identification  of 
consultants, etc. 
II.7: Project Completion  
141. 
 Undertaking of the Project Completion Review (PCR) exercise at the end of SSLRP 
implementation will be led by GoSS but in close coordination with IFAD. The main purposes 
of  the  completion  review  process  are  to  promote  accountability,  reflect  on  performance 
and  elicit  lessons  learned  to  inform  future  programme/project  design  and  to  define  an 
appropriate post-project strategy. The learning dimension of the completion process will 
be  used  by  both  IFAD  and  GoSS  as  the  foundation  for  improvements  in  future 
programme/project design and implementation. The completion review process will also 
be critical for identifying opportunities for scaling-up best practices. The PCR would need 
to be undertaken after  project completion but before the project closure period but the 
prevailing  security  situation  will  influence  the  timing  of  the  exercise.  As  part  of  the 
completion  activities,  a  Beneficiary  Impact  Assessment  (BIA)  will  be  undertaken  and 
findings used to inform the Project Completion Report. If a detailed project closure plan 
does not get developed at MTR, it should get developed subsequently but, certainly, earlier 
than the last year of implementation. 
142.  Undertaking  of  the  PCR 
is  the  responsibility  of  government/PCU.  The 
government/PCU  may  consult  IFAD  to  facilitate  the  process,  including  identification  of 
consultants, etc. 
56 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
PART III: Project Procedures 
III.1: Planning and AWPB Development 
143.  SSLRP’s planning will follow a bottom-up participatory process. The IA will lead the 
process  by  working  with  the  relevant  local  governments.  The  initial  planning  and 
preparation  of  the  AWPB  will  be  carried  out  at  the  Boma  level  within  the  framework 
established  for  decentralised  administration.  The  Boma  level  plans  will  then  be 
consolidated at the Payam level, then at the County level, State Level and, eventually, at 
the national level. This will form the SSLRP-wide AWPB. 
144.  To enhance the efficiency of planning and preparation of the county AWPB, the IA 
will  provide  the  counties  with  clear  guidance  regarding  multi-annual output  targets  and 
budgetary  planning.  The  Project  will  adopt  a  multi-year  planning,  in  particular  for 
infrastructure-related  interventions,  and  secure  the  required  budget.  It  will  reveal  each 
county and each implementing entity and their contribution towards the PDO. This will be 
developed  as  a  start-up  activity,  covering  the  period  up  to  MTR.  It  will  serve  as  an 
internalization  process  for  the  IA  and  counties  of  the  Project  Design  Report  (PDR)  and 
supporting documents, and forming the basis for the annual work plans to be developed 
subsequently. The first AWPB will be prepared based on the project’s appraisal report while 
subsequent AWPBs will be rely on participatory review and planning processes whereby 
beneficiaries will identify their community needs and resource priorities.  
145.  The AWPB will be critical for ensuring alignment between components and across 
county plans with project objectives. The IA will coordinate the different service providers 
and  counties  and  ensure  that  the  AWPBs  are  realistic,  reasonable  and  results-oriented. 
The AWPB shall be initiated before the fiscal year ends. It shall be consolidated and sent 
to IFAD for review and provision of No-Objection. The Financial Controller and Procurement 
Officer will be part of the entire process. The Procurement Plan and Training plan will be 
prepared together with the AWPB and sent to IFAD for No-Objection 60 days prior to the 
beginning of the new fiscal year. Thus, the AWPB development process for the proceeding 
year will be expected to start in August of the current year, and be submitted to IFAD at 
least 2 months (by 1 November) before the new year starts. 
Table 12: Annual Work Plan and Budget Preparation and Approval Schedule 
Item 
no 
1.   
2.   
3.   
4.   
5.   
6.   
7.   
Activity 
Each cost centre initiates consultation 
process, sets up AWPB preparation team 
Preparation of AWPB by cost centres 
Review of draft AWPBs of cost centres by 
the respective cost centres and agreement 
on draft AWPB 
Receipt, review and consolidation of AWPB 
at the State level 
Presentation of draft State AWPBs at the 
Annual Review Workshop  
IA receives, reviews and prepares the 
draft consolidated AWPB 
PCU receives draft AWPB  from the IA, 
reviews and incorporates its planned 
Time 
schedule 
(tentative) 
2nd week 
June 
July-Mid-
August 
3rd week 
August 
1st week 
September 
2nd week 
September 
3rd week 
September 
4th week 
September 
Responsibility 
Head of cost centre 
Cost Centres 
Cost Centres 
IA State 
representatives  
IA State 
representatives 
IA 
Project Coordinator 
57 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Item 
no 
Activity 
activities and prepares the overall project 
draft consolidated AWPB 
Submission of draft AWPB to NAC/NTC for 
review/endorsement 
NAC/NTC review, comments and 
endorsement 
Preparation of final draft of AWPB 
incorporating NAC/NTC comments 
Submission of AWPB to IFAD for 
expression of no objection 
Review by IFAD, provision of comments if 
any, and expression of no objection 
Preparation of final AWPB by PCU 
incorporating IFAD comments if any 
Finalization of AWPB and distribution to 
implementing institution and agencies 
8.   
9.   
10.  
11.  
12.  
13.  
14.  
Time 
schedule 
(tentative) 
Responsibility 
1st week 
October 
2nd & 3rd 
week 
October 
4th week 
October 
1st week 
November 
End 
November 
1st week 
December 
2nd & 3rd 
week 
December 
Project Coordinator 
Project Coordinator 
Project Coordinator 
Project Coordinator 
IFAD Country 
Director 
Project Coordinator 
Project 
Coordinator/IA 
146.  The Project will have the possibility of revising the AWPB at any time of the year 
and  any  necessary  adjustments  would  be  subjected  to  the  required  approvals  by  both 
government  and  IFAD.  Once  the  AWPB  has  been  approved,  the  various  implementing 
departments  will  be  expected  to  carry  out  Short-term  Activity  Planning  during  which 
detailed activity plans will be prepared to facilitate close supervision and coordination of 
field activities and progress review. These will be done during regular planning meetings 
undertaken  on  a  monthly  basis,  where  decisions  regarding  what  activities  need  to  take 
place during the coming month, when, where and by whom will be made. 
147.  To ensure smooth planning and implementation of the AWPB, the budget estimates 
shall be done based on market  research, particularly for procurement related activities. 
The  Procurement  team  shall  also  ensure  a  realistic  procurement  plan  and  prepare  the 
procurement package (specifications, ToRs, etc.) prior to the start of the new fiscal year. 
Taking  into  account  the  fragility  nature  of  South  Sudan,  special  consideration  shall  be 
made for possible stop-and-start of project implementation which can make learning and 
testing  of  new  techniques  difficult.  Hence,  the  project  shall  tie  project  deliverables  and 
activities to be  carried out to each stage  of project implementation which will help it to 
maintain focus on learning when circumstances require difficult choices. 
148.  Adaptive  Programming  –  SSLRP  implementation  in  the  target  areas  will  be 
influenced by the prevailing security situation and/or other calamities that could befall the 
country. The project will be implemented in a modular approach, enabling activities and 
interventions in different locations to proceed if security is compromised or in the event of 
any  other  calamities.  Features  of  adaptive  programming  include:  a)  encouraging 
implementation  through  a  consortium  with  local  partners;  b)  CDD  approach  that 
contributes  to  community  empowerment  for  O&M  of  infrastructure  and  construction  of 
basic  infrastructure  through  LIPW;  c)  involvement  and  empowerment  of  local 
governments;  d)  make  an  allowance  to  engage  third  party  individuals/organizations  to 
undertake  monitoring  and  supervision  when  missions  cannot  be  fielded;  e)  sourcing  of 
resources locally, to the extent possible; and f) flexibility that allows for adjustment and 
restructuring  of  project  interventions  as  needed.  This  would  allow  for  sustenance  of  a 
58 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
certain degree of activity implementation during some calamities, depending on the nature 
and  extent  of  the  calamity.  For  proper  coordination  and  advance  preparation,  SSLRP 
management will keep close liaison with institutions, such as the Partnership for Recovery 
and Resilience (PfRR), WFP, United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR), and 
other humanitarian agencies that could help provide early warning information. 
149.  Conflict Sensitivity –  Conflicts in South Sudan is attributed to political insurgency 
with  isolated  inter-communal  and  inter-ethnic  clashes  over  cultural  and  dwindling 
resources exacerbated by climate variability and change. The project will be implemented 
within a conflict sensitive approach that will facilitate for adaptive programming and crisis 
modification.  Implicitly,  implementation  will  be  guided  by  scenario  based  planning, 
underpinned by conflict scans, which will inform mission plans, AWPB and sequencing of 
project activities. 
150.  Generally, due attention will be given to conflict avoidance through the provision 
of quality service and public participation. Close liaison with different institutions operating 
in South Sudan will should be used to monitor and mitigate conflicts. Citizen Engagement 
Strategy, including GRM, will ensure the participation of communities in planning, design, 
implementation as well as monitoring and evaluation. Furthermore, it is important to work 
with the government of South Sudan and create a platform for monitoring implementation 
of the revitalization peace agreement. Additional information is provided in Annex 5. 
III.2: Monitoring and Evaluation 
151.  M&E  System  –  The  IA  will  develop  a  results-based  M&E  system  to  support 
decision-making  and  knowledge  management,  grounded  in  lessons  learnt  from  SSLDP. 
The system will be based on: (i) a clear results chain, based on the logical framework and 
economic and financial analyses; (ii) clear profiling (breaking down) of each target to act 
as  an  outcome  prediction  system  based  on  output  monitoring;  (iii)  fine-tuning  of  the 
qualitative  and  quantitative  data  collection  (survey  included),  processing,  digitalization, 
storage  and  information  sharing;  and  (iv)  quantified  analysis  of  project  results  and 
approaches.  The  system  will  be  based  on  automated  Excel  sheets  (using  formulas  and 
cross-referencing),  together  with  an  electronic  library  for  storing  files,  documents, 
progress reports, pictures and others. 
152.  Logical  Framework  –  The  log-frame  includes  Core  Indicators  as  proposed  by 
IFAD;  indicators  which  might  be  aggregated  across  projects  for  corporate  reporting; 
therefore, the COI will ensure that the Project reports on corporate outcomes. As a start-
up activity the logical framework should be reviewed, internalized by all parties, baseline 
and target figures be established if they are not there, and any final modifications may be 
made.  For  subsequent  evaluation  purposes,  the  logframe  indicators,  targets  and 
assumptions  may  be  modified  following  results  of  M&E.  However,  a  No-Objection  from 
IFAD  will  have  to  be  sought  before  effecting  any  such  changes.  Again,  no  changes  are 
allowed for COIs hence, a No Objection for these can never be granted.  
153.  Indicators  –  In  addition,  as  a  start-up  activity,  the  M&E  team  should  review, 
further  develop  and  possibly  add  indicators  useful  for  project  monitoring.  This  includes 
defining  additional  indicators  useful  for  progress  and  results  monitoring.  All  indicators 
should  be  profiled,  ensuring  that  they  are  SMART,  gender  and  age  disaggregated,  that 
clear data collection responsibilities have been assigned and that they are broken down 
per year, per county. This will assist results-based planning. For outcome level indicators, 
the contribution of each of the outputs should be established, so that achievement/non-
achievement can be predicted, based on the output achievement, during each period. In 
terms of community indicators, the changes should be measured to determine if there are 
any  institutional  changes  triggered  by  the  project’s  participatory  approach  to  project 
planning,  implementation,  and  monitoring  and  evaluation.  Since  the  project  will  also 
employ  community  monitoring,  the  M&E  team  should  coordinate  the  processes  of 
facilitating the development of community indicators by the communities. 
59 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
154.  Data  Collection  –  Building  on  the  experiences  of  SSLDP  where  M&E  under-
performed partly due to lack of standardized data collection templates, the IA’s M&E team 
will, in consultation with key stakeholders, design standard data collection templates to be 
used for all agents in the project’s data collection exercises. This will ensure consistency 
in data is recording across all Programme areas. The project will collect data on project 
inputs/activities and the resulting outputs. Data on the project’s intended outcomes will 
be collected annually though annual outcome surveys9. Higher level project outcomes and 
impact data will be collected through outsourced surveys and they will be carried out at 
baseline, mid-line and end-line periods10. The M&E team will also collect, or facilitate the 
collection of, data on mainstreaming themes and grievance redress mechanism. These will 
be incorporated into annual outcome and impact surveys. Data on community indicators 
will  also  be  collected  annually  from  the  second  year  of  project  implementation  through 
community  monitoring  surveys.  GPS  information  will  also  be  used  to  capture  for  both 
beneficiary tracking and infrastructure monitoring. Beneficiary information will be stored 
in the form of biometric data. 
155.  To the extent possible, the project will collect panel data to allow easy tracking of 
changes over time, confirming significant trends and measuring impact hence, data will 
be collected on the same respondents over all periods of time. The data to be collected 
will include quantitative data, to measure the project’s tangible output and outcomes, and 
qualitative data, to complement the quantitative data and capture intangible results of the 
project. 
156.  Data will be collected using survey questionnaires, checklists, forms, registers and 
other  data  collection  templates  for  different  mainstreaming  themes,  grievance  redress 
mechanisms.  Due  to  the  challenges  experienced  with  past  development  projects  with 
regards to using paper-based data collection11, the tools to be used in data collection will 
include smartphones, for survey data collection. 
157.  Progress Reporting – The main source of information for the IA will be progress 
reports produced by the IA’s M&E team. Standardized formats should be developed and 
used consistently. The IA will validate the information and provide a consolidated progress 
report based not only on figures but on detailed, sophisticated analysis, linking the physical 
with  the  financial;  estimating  overall  achievement  of  the  objectives  of  the  project  and 
forecasting  performance.  The  IA  M&E  team  will  produce  consolidated  six-monthly  and 
annual progress reports to be used in-house for planning, and for forwarding to IFAD, not 
later than 60 days after the end of the reporting period. This will feed into the ORMS and 
COSOP M&E reporting exercises. A standardized template, mirroring the AWPB should be 
developed. 
158.  Baseline and Impact Evaluation – The IA will, as a start-up activity, in line with 
the  COI  guidelines  refine  the  impact  evaluation  methodology  of  the  project;  this 
methodology will for example determine the statistic tools to be used, the questions to be 
assessed, the sampling framework (e.g. to be representative at county level), the various 
different target groups to be represented etc. This methodology will form the base for the 
TOR to recruit a company for both the baseline survey, the mid-line survey, and the end-
line (impact) survey. It will be critical to ensure that the methodology is well-developed 
and that all data and analysis is well documented and stored well both on and offline, to 
enable  analysis.  Given  current  IFAD’s  position  to  continuously  apply  Geographical 
Information System (GIS) and Remote sensing applications, it is recommended that the 
baseline and impact evaluations are accompanied by the application of GIS and Remote 
sensing tools. In here, it should be noted that in case the IA does not have standalone GIS 
specialist, the engineer or agronomist can collect the baseline data and analyse it. In case 
9The outcome surveys will be conducted annually after the third year of project implementation. 
10These surveys will be outsourced to avoid conflict of interests in evaluating the project’s performance. 
11The  limitations  include;  its  vulnerability  to  errors  mostly  related  to  skip  questions  and  incompleteness  of 
interviews cine there is no automated mechanism to trace that during data collection while the computer based 
method has the advantage of allowing GPS information, recording interviews and taking photos. 
60 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
technical  support  is  sought,  IFAD’s  GIS  team  will  provide  implementation  support  upon 
request. 
159.  Annual  Outcome  Survey  –  To  supplement  the  outcome  forecasting,  and  to 
monitor  likely  achievement  of  outcomes  prior  to  the  end  line  survey,  annual  outcome 
surveys  will  be  undertaken  after  the  mid-term  review.  These  should  be  quick  surveys, 
asking  only  a  handful  of  questions,  and  be  easy  to  administer.  The  surveys  should  be 
carried out by agricultural officers on ground and be consolidated by M&E officers at the 
counties and IA. It is recommended that a group be selected at random (e.g. 20 individuals 
from each county that is supported) and then followed upon every year, similar to a panel 
method.  The  questions  are  likely  to  be  more  qualitative  in  nature  and,  when  analyzed 
together with the quantitative output monitoring, will give a good indication of the trend 
towards achievement of the project results. 
160.  Integrated Project Risk Management Monitoring Strategy. Risk is not static; 
it  is  rather  dynamic.  New  risks  emerge  while  existing  risks  disappear.  Risks  that  were 
already acknowledged may become more or less frequent, severe or relevant to a project. 
This  calls  for  monitoring  of  the  project’s  identified  risks  as  well  as  their  mitigation 
measures.  SSLRP’s  risk monitoring will  involve  assessing  the  implementation  and 
effectiveness  of the risk mitigation measures identified in the IPRM. The monitoring will 
also  entail  tracking  the  already  identified risks  and  identifying  and  analyzing  new risks 
throughout the project lifecycle.  
161.  The SSLRP monitoring plan will identify the most significant risks likely to have the 
highest cost on the project and its beneficiaries. Some of these were risks identified in the 
EFA and applied in the sensitivity analysis (see table below): a) the risk of the potential 
resumption  of  conflict  and  how  this  could  delay  implementation;  b)  macro-  economic 
issues around inflation and SSP volatility; c) flooding and related climate catastrophes.  
162.  The review will involve providing answers to questions such as:  
1.  How effective is our risk management strategy? 
2.  Are risk mitigations working according to expectation? 
3.  How accurate is the risk assessment process? Are all risks being identified? 
61 
Intergrated risk frameworkIRRNPV (US$)Link with risk analysisRisk categoriesInherent riskResidual risk24%5,4721. Political commitmentSubstantialSubstantial-10%23%4,840Fragility and Security.2. GovernanceHighSubstantial-20%21%3,974-30%20%3,59310%22%4,94720%20%4,422High19%4,44990%9%53980%5%-10470%2%-74810%22%4,94720%20%4,42230%18%3,89710%27%6,54520%29%7,617SubstantialSubstantialSubstantialOutbreak of pandemics like covid-194. Fragility and security4. MacroeconomicFlooding and weather related risks, Inter-community conflicts due to competition natural resourcesRisk probabilityCost IncreaseIncrease of benefits%Low uptake of good practicesAdoption ratesHigh inflation/Macroeconomic fundamentals as exhited by the exchange rate volutility and a stretchin difference between the official rate and black market exchange rateDecrease of Project benefitsSensitivity analysisProject costs2 Delay of benefits16%3,485Base Scenario1 Delay of benefitsHigh inflation/Macroeconomic fundamentals as exhited by the exchange rate volutility and a stretchin difference between the official rate and black market exchange rate 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
4.  Have risk treatment methods improved the performance of the project? 
5.  Are safety procedures being followed? 
163.  Responsibilities and Sources of Information. Analysis of the risks will be the 
responsibility of each mission member, focused on their key technical areas and will be 
included  in  the  mission  ToR.  The  results  from  these  analyses  will  be  triangulated  using 
results from the WB’s risk and crisis monitoring reports. Since the WB’S risk monitoring 
also includes monitoring of systematic risks, these reports will be of particular importance 
in providing risk information for sections or components that are not project specific, such 
as  political,  macroeconomic,  fragility  and  security  contexts.  Apart  from  WB,  SSLRP  will 
also coordinate with other development agencies in South Sudan, e.g. UNHCR, FAO and 
WFP. 
164.  The  PDT  is  also  discussing  with  RIA  on  the  possibility  of  piloting  geo-enabled 
monitoring systems which will be critical to facilitate remote monitoring supervision where 
physical missions cannot take place. World Banks’s South Sudan Geospatial Risk Monitor 
will also be an important source of information on various levels risks. IFAD’s in-country 
proxy liaison consultant will be the “eyes and ears on the ground, with a specific task to 
keep the Fund informed of any emerging risks and to undertake monitoring missions, as 
feasible, and to keep engaged with key Development Partners.  IFAD will also engage Third 
Party  Monitoring  (TPM)  e.g.  FAO-DPI,  taking  advantage  of  the  existing  FAO  logistical 
infrastructure in South Sudan.  
165.  Record-keeping. For ease of tracking the project’s performance with respect to 
different risks, a risk management register will be kept to document progress against each 
risk. An example register format is given in the following table: 
Mitigations tracker 
Risk 
Proposed 
mitigation 
measure 
What should 
have been 
done? 
Who was 
responsible for 
implementing 
the measure? 
Has it be 
done or not 
When was 
it done? 
166.  To  capture  changes  in  the  risk  profile  and  to  capture  new  risks,  an  additional 
example template is included below: 
Risk tracker 
Risk 
Rating 
increased 
Rating 
decreased 
Risk dropped 
Risk added 
167.  Timelines.  Although  the  risks  will  mainly  be  monitored  during  supervision 
missions, the review of some risks will not be limited to these timeframes since some risks 
are  urgent  and  need  to  be  dealt  with  urgency.  SSLRP  already  a  Disaster  Response  and 
Risk Mitigation component to ensure, that in the event of an environmental or man-made 
disaster the project can quickly reallocate resources from the other activities in support of 
the GoSS emergency response.  
III.3: Knowledge Management, Learning and Communication 
168.  Knowledge  –  Knowledge  Management  and  Learning  (KM&L)  and  communication 
will consist of: 
62 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
a)  Knowledge  gap  identification  and  prioritization  of  knowledge  products  to  be 
developed to increase uptake of effective approaches for agricultural development; 
b)  Regular internal experience-sharing and reflection workshops, reviewing the draft 
consolidated progress reports, as well as focus group interviews annually; 
c)  Case  studies  to  ease  the  upscaling  of  best  practices  in  Eritrea  or  repackaging  of 
innovative approaches developed elsewhere; 
d)  Documenting lessons learned for innovations and creativity; 
e)  Dissemination of knowhow based on available communication tools (including video 
documentaries); 
f)  South-South  Triangular  Cooperation  (SSTC)  in  terms  of  exchange  visits  for 
innovations discovering 
g)  Refreshment  and  upgrading  training  to  and  with  Projects  and  training  centres  in 
other countries. 
169.  Communications – Substantive training budget will be required to support training 
on media-related activities, which may be utilized to help the project  gain visibility and 
interest from stakeholders, and to support the knowledge dissemination work. 
170.  Knowledge Topics – The following issues have been identified as critical areas for 
the  knowledge  management  initiatives  to  create  knowledge  and  disseminate  within  the 
Project context and beyond: 
a)  Sector Coordination. The IA will support MAFS to conduct regular sector coordination 
meetings,  e.g.  quarterly  meetings  between  MAFS,  IA  and  relevant  development 
partners. This will be critical since an increasing number of partners have expressed 
willingness to support the agricultural sector in Eritrea. Sector coordination will support 
MAFS to  ensure a coordinated response, both  in terms  of geographical areas and in 
ensuring that consistent approaches are being used. 
b)  County  profiles:  The  IA  will  conduct  county  profiling  which  will  involve  undertaking 
conflict  assessments  and  understanding  the  needs  of  different  counties  in  terms  of 
livelihood  assets  such  as  environment  and  physical  access;  livelihood  status  ,  and 
climate  change  shocks  such  as  floods  or  drought.  The  knowledge  from  the  profiles 
allow understanding of existing capacity gaps at community, county and state levels.  
This will be carried out at project start-up to inform the capacity building support to be 
provided by the project. 
III.4: Financial Management 
171.  The purpose of the module is to ensure that the key players in the SSLRP financial 
management both at PCU/MAFS and IA fulfil their fiduciary responsibility to ensure that 
proceeds  from  the  Loan  and  Grant  and  other  sources  are  used  exclusively  for  intended 
purposes. 
172.  The  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Planning  (MoFP),  as  the  representative  of  the 
recipient/borrower,  will  represent  GoSS  on  all  matters  pertaining  to  SSLRP  financial 
management.  MAFS,  the  Lead  Agency  and  will  ensure  the  overall  oversight  for  the 
implementation  of  Project  at  National  level  through  an  existing  PCU  which  will  also  be 
responsible for implementation of Subcomponent 3.2, Institutional Capacity Building and 
Policy  Support.  IFAD  and  GoSS  have  agreed  to  implement  SSLRP  through  a  third 
party/implementing agency (IA), in the form of a consortium of NGO’s selected by GoSS. 
As  a  disbursement  condition,  a  Project  Finance  Manager  and  an  accountant  must  have 
been  assigned  to  the  project  by  GoSS  and  the  IA  will  be  required  to  have  at  least  two 
financial management staff. IFAD No Objection will be needed to assure the calibre of staff 
assigned. As the PCU staff are full time staff of MAFS/PCU, counterpart funds shall be used 
63 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
to  cover  their  salary  costs  with  the  project  providing  only  top  up  allowances.  Terms  of 
reference of SSLRP Project Finance Manager are attached in the annex. 
173.  A  service  provider  has  been  designated  as  a  key  implementing  agency  for  the 
project,  except  for  Subcomponent  3.2.  For  financial  management,  this  will  involve 
budgeting, receipt of funds, procurement, making of payments, justification, generating 
withdrawal applications and reporting on all activities implemented by the IA. The IA will 
establish  a  sound  financial  management  system  for  the  project,  consistent  with  the 
requirements  of  IFAD  Guidelines  on  Financial  Management  covering  the  financial 
management  cycle  from  project  start-up  to  financing  closing  including  budgeting, 
accounting  and  financial  reporting;  establishing  internal  controls  with  internal  audit 
arrangements;  funds  flow  management  including  disbursements;  and  statutory  audit 
throughout the project cycle. 
174.  Budgeting  and  Budgetary  Control  –  Budgeting  will  be  jointly  done  between  the 
MAFS  and  the  IA,  together  with  other  key  stakeholders  identified  for  project 
implementation.  The  PCU  will  be  responsible  for  consolidation  of  the  AWPB  and 
presentation to NAC for approval/endorsement. 
175.  The authority to incur expenditure is the approval of the AWPB with expenditure 
incurred  outside  the  approved  AWPB  declared  ineligible  for  financing  from  the  loan  and 
grant funds. The detailed cost tables in the PDR are indicative of the costs to be incurred 
over the project period and can be altered during the process of the AWPB. 
176.  Schedule 2 of the financing agreement will specify the disbursement categories of 
the  project.  As  per  the  IFAD  disbursement  handbook,  schedule  2  of  the  financing 
agreement can also be  amended with reasonable justification submitted to  IFAD by the 
GoSS requesting reallocation of funds. It is however difficult to request for a reallocation 
of funds from investing activities to recurrent activities like operation costs and salaries. 
177.  AWPB  shall indicate  the  financing  sources  (IFAD  loan,  IFAD  grant,  Co-financiers, 
parallel financiers, GoSS and beneficiaries) for each activity, every item should be linked 
to  a  proper  cost  category  and  component/subcomponent.  This  is  important  as,  each 
funding  source  will  Finance  expenditure  items  as  per  the  financing  rule  in  the  financing 
agreement which should be reflected in the AWPB. 
178.  Payments to suppliers, contractors and service providers will be made from IFAD 
at 100% net of taxes. 
The processes of preparing the AWPB are described in Part III of this Manual  and are 
further detailed in the IFAD Guidelines for AWPB Preparation and Progress Reporting 
(attached as an Annex to this Manual). The aspects covered hereafter are the budget aspects 
to the extent that they relate to financial management. The critical importance of the AWPB in 
Financial Control 
56. 
During day-to-day financial management will be guided by an approved AWPB, providing 
guidance  on  what  to  do  and  how  to  use  resources.    In  the  context  of  SSLRP  financial 
management, the AWPB will provide the following guidance: 
a)  a commitment of MAFS/PCU and the IA to carry out a set of activities, produce specific 
outputs and achieve certain targets;  
b)  Agreement between GoSS and IFAD and other SSLRP financiers that the planned activities 
are appropriate in light of the SSLRP objectives and approval to spend funds as specified 
in the annual budget; 
c)  GoSS and IFAD will have provided “prior approval” to the IA to spend resources on the 
activities  included  in  the  AWPB.  It  should  be  noted  that  any  expenditure  incurred 
outside the approved AWPB will be declared ineligible for IFAD financing; and 
64 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
d)  The AWBP is also a management tool and performance measure, therefore, SSLRP should 
set challenging but realistic targets. SSLRP’s performance will be assessed, among other 
ratings,  by  the  extent  of  AWPB  execution  while  analysis  of  individual  activity  budget 
variances will guide project management decision making. 
Key Budget Control/Execution Responsibility Centres. 
In the planning and budgeting stage, the project finance personnel at PCU and IA 
179. 
are expected to perform the functions below: 
a)  Avail  budget  holders/responsibility  centres  with  status  of  available  funds  by 
disbursement category and component/subcomponent; 
b)  Provide an analysis of restricting factors that inform realistic budgeting, including funds 
can  be  made  available  in  a  given  period,  linkage  between  procurement  and 
expenditure, exchange rates, disbursement methods, among others; 
c)  Provide support in financial data presentation and consolidation in acceptable formats;  
d)  Develop a treasury plan as disbursements will be based on quarterly forecasts; and 
e)  Ensure that the AWPB  has been  submitted to  IFAD for review  and No Objection, 60 
days before the beginning of the financial year. 
180.  Prior to the start of the AWPB exercise, the Project Finance Manager would obtain 
from  the  Accounting  Software  and  from  IFAD  a  status  of  funds  balances  available  by 
category and component, including up to the major activities. The status of funds available 
should  be  adjusted  by  deducting  commitments,  Withdrawal  Applications  (Was)  in  the 
pipeline and projected expenditure for the remaining part of the current year. The adjusted 
information  about  the  status  of  funds  would  be  provided  to  the  budget  responsibility 
centres so that they are aware of budget ceilings. The AWPB shall be cleared in the context 
of  available  balances  by  category,  otherwise  over-expenditure  on  categories  will not  be 
approved when incurred. This is applicable to both PCU for Subcomponent 3.2 and to the 
IA for the rest of project activities.  
181.  The net available balance should also be broken down according to components, 
subcomponents and major activity headings, so that planners are able to determine the 
relative weights for each component/subcomponent in the AWPB.  
182.  SSLRP accounting and financial reporting – There will be two accounting hubs 
under SSLRP, the PCU and the IA. The PCU will be the consolidation centre for accounting 
data  for  financial  reporting  purposes.  For  generation  of  WAs  however,  each  accounting 
centre will separately generate their withdrawal applications, for submission to MAFS for 
checking  and  MoFP  for  certification.  Under  the  current  World  Bank  funded  projects,  the 
PCU has used MS excel for accounting and financial reporting for the projects. Whereas 
PCU  has  been  able  to  generate  financial  statements  and  submit  WAs,  MS  Excel  has 
limitations  in  the  depth  of  financial  reporting  as  it  is  cumbersome,  prone  to  errors  and 
manipulation, limits production of timely and accurate reports, prone to data loss and does 
not provide audit trail. Accordingly, it will be a requirement to procure and implement an 
off-shelf accounting software that will be set up at the PCU as the accounting consolidation 
centre. Since it has been agreed that the IA will generate own withdrawal applications, the 
IA will also be required to implement the use of an accounting software. 
183.  Some of the suggested attributes of SSLRP accounting package will include: 
a)  FUNCTIONALITY 
STANDARD REQUIREMENT 
a.   User friendly (e.g windows driven) 
b.   Ability  to  account  under  different  bases  of  accounting  (cash,  modified  cash,  modified 
accruals) 
65 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
STANDARD REQUIREMENT 
c.  B Budget Control features including encumbering funds at the point of commitment. 
d.   Capacity to track the following data: 
i.  Actual 
ii.  Budget 
iii.  Life of Project  
e.   Ability to track/link to Physical Performance Indicators (e.g. units of output or contract 
completion status) as required by project) 
f. 
 Ability to track and search by specific transaction references (e.g cheque #’s. P.O. #’s. 
direct payments. Voucher #’s, direct payments, Voucher #’s, etc) 
g.   Dual  charts  of  account  (ability  to  track  in  accordance  with  or  link  to  local  reporting 
systems as well as donor requirements) 
h.   Ability to support in the generation of withdrawal applications, or at least through export 
into Ms excel. 
i. 
 Ability to track and report on parallel multiple funding sources 
b)  REPORTING 
Requirement 
(a)  Ability  to  track  and  report  on  flexible  reporting  cycles  (e.g  month,  quarter,  calendar 
year, fiscal year, project cumulative, etc) 
(b)  Ability to track and report by financier 
(c)  Ability  to  track  and  report  by  grant/loan  disbursement  category-  with  exact  layout  of 
the components, activities and expenditure categories 
(d)  Ability  to  track  and  report  by  project  component  or  activity.  Capacity  to  customize 
reports 
(e)  Ability to generate key Financial Management Review  report formats with a clear audit 
trail (e.g. no additional revisions needed in a spreadsheet which would modify an audit 
trail) 
(f)   Ability to generate reports for previous periods back as 6 years (e.g. lost report) 
c)  SECURITY 
Requirement 
(a)  Internal Security features adequate (e.g. cannot delete posted transactions, controlled 
access, password protection 
(b)  Security includes back-up and system maintenance procedures 
(c)  Security includes self-diagnostic checks to ensure integrity 
d)  SUPPORT 
Requirement 
(a)  Support readily available for: 
i. Technical issues 
ii. Training 
184.  Chart of Accounts – There will be a need to adopt a coding structure (chart of 
accounts) that accommodates IFAD project financial reporting requirements, by financier, 
component/subcomponent,  disbursement  categories,  and  key  activity.  The  coding  once 
66 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
agreed to, shall be used all the way from AWPB presentation fund requisitioning, payment 
vouchers,  posting  the  accounting  system,  etc.  The  coding  structure  will  depend  on  the 
accounting  software  selected.  As  a  critical  start-up  activity,  an  off  the  shelf  accounting 
software will be procured, installed and the chart of accounts coded to the detail possible. 
185.  Justification of expenditure and Payment Documentation – Payments must 
be supported with the minimum set of supporting documentation that should be attached 
to  a  payment/journal  voucher  as  per  requirements  in  the  public  sector.  To  ensure  that 
both  the  PCU  and  the  IA  collect  all  the  supporting  documents,  checklists  are  provided 
hereunder.  These  should  be  ticked-off  carefully  and  attached  to  each  cheque  payment 
voucher to ensure completeness of supporting documents. These documents shall be filed 
for  review  by  the  auditors  (internal  and  external)  and  IFAD  Missions;  they  must  be 
archived over a period of 10 years following the financing closing date. 
SSLRP Document Checklist 
Standard Goods 
(Tick) 
In-Country Workshops 
(Tick) 
1.  Complete Written Voucher, duly 
approved 
2.  Confirmation  by  Procurement 
Officer that the Procurement was 
properly done in accordance with 
GOSS and IFAD procedures 
3.  Attach  Copies  of  relevant  No 
Objections  from  IFAD,  where 
applicable 
4.  Attach Contract Monitoring form 
where applicable 
of 
5.  Availability 
documentation 
a)  Contract 
b)  Invoice 
c)  Evidence of payment 
guarantee, 
d)  Bank 
applicable 
supporting 
where 
e)  Delivery  notes/reports  (Make 
Cross Reference where bulky) 
6.  Fund availability in 
a)  Budget-Ensure 
Vote 
Book has been updated 
b)  Category(ies) 
7.  Accuracy 
Computations/footings 
8.  Reviewed  optimality  of 
disbursement method? 
9.  Banking instructions 
10. Correspondence bank 
11. Percentage of financing 
of 
the 
Workshops- Abroad 
(Tick) 
1.  Invitations  and  related  IFAD’s 
No Objection 
2.  Availability 
of 
supporting 
documentation 
a)   Boarding passes reconciled DSA 
days taken 
b)   Back to Office Reports 
67 
1.  Attendance sheets 
2.  Attendance 
sheets 
should  be  reconciled  to 
DSA paid 
3.  Availability of supporting 
documentation 
a)  Training report 
b)  Hotel  Receipts/  bills  for 
and 
meals 
accommodation(  should 
be 
to 
reconciled 
attendance sheets) 
4.  Procurement  record  on 
the  venue  was 
how 
selected 
5.  Justification  for  any  fuel 
related 
and 
refunds 
support 
6.  Fund availability in 
a)  Budget-Ensure 
Vote  Book  has 
been updated 
b)  Category(ies) 
7.  Accuracy 
of 
Computations/footings 
1.  Time 
Consultancies 
sheets 
comparison  with 
work done;  
in 
the 
(Tick) 
2.  Attach 
Copies 
of 
relevant  No  Objections 
from 
IFAD,  where 
applicable 
of 
3.  An acceptable report  
4.  Availability 
supporting 
documentation 
a)  Contract 
b)  Invoice 
c)  Evidence of payment 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
3.  Fund availability in 
a)  Budget-Ensure  Vote  Book  has 
been updated 
b)  Category(ies) 
4.  Accuracy 
Computations/footings 
of 
d)  Bank  guarantee 
for 
advances 
5.  Fund availability in 
Budget- 
a)  Ensure  Vote  Book  has 
been updated 
b)  Category(ies) 
6.  Accuracy 
of 
Computations/footings 
7.  Banking instructions 
Correspondence bank 
186.  Financial  Reporting  –  Financial  reports  will  constitute  management  reports 
(monthly and quarterly generated for management decision and control), semi-annual and 
annual reports interim and final annual financial reports. Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) 
shall be submitted to IFAD every 45 days following end of the semester with the annual 
financial  statements  for  presentation  to  statutory  auditors  submitted  no  later  than  four 
months following the end of a financial year. The financial reports must be consolidated 
covering both reports by PCU and the IA. 
187.  The  key  tables  in  Financial  Reporting  under  IFAD  recommended  IPSAS  cash/or 
accrual basis include: 
a)  Statement of Receipts and Payments by category by financier; 
b)  Statement of Receipts and Payments by Component by financier; 
c)  Statement of Comparison of Budget and Actual by category by financier; 
d)  Statement of Comparison of Budget and Actual by Component by financier; 
e)  Statement of Designated Accounts Activities; 
f)  Accounts Reconciliations Statement; 
g)  SoE - Withdrawal Application Statement; and 
h)  Explanatory  notes  to  the  financial  statements  including  accounting  policies,  non-
current  assets  schedule,  listing  of  yearly  procurements,  allocation  and  use  of  loan 
funds.  
188.  SSLRP Management Accounting – SSLRP management accounting will depend 
on the information needs. It is not possible to prescribe the tables needed for management 
accounting as this largely depends on judgement of the Project Coordinator and Project 
Finance Manager regarding the information needs at any given time. Management reports 
would include all the tables for financial reporting and in addition would include: 
a)  Budget  Vs  Actual  comparison  up  to  individual  activity  level.  This  would  be  useful 
information for the M & E officer for the detailed AWPB-based progress reporting; 
b)  Treasury  Position  and  cash  flow  forecasts  to  facilitate  cash  transfer  decisions  and 
generation of withdrawal applications; and 
c)  Advance aging Analysis reports to facilitate follow up and other decisions on advances. 
189.  Internal controls – The key controls under SSLRP will include the following: 
a)  Implementation of a well coded  accounting software with budget module for budget 
control,  monthly  reconciliations  of  bank  accounts,  compliance  with  approval  and 
authorization  requirements,  proper  filing  and  adhering  to  financing  agreement  and 
LtB/R and other implementation guidelines. 
b)  Internal audit of SSLRP is the responsibility of the Internal Audit Unit in the MAFS. The 
MoFP will post personnel to the Unit to facilitate audit of the project. GoSS may agree 
with the IA to make use of internal audit reports of the IA. The internal audit unit will 
68 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
review the financial transactions of the project and submit reports which will include 
the: 
  Timeliness and accuracy of the update of the project accounting records; 
  Timeliness and accuracy of the reconciliation of the bank accounts; 
  Accuracy of project expenditure and timeliness of the preparation and submission 
of the WA’s for the replenishment of the designated accounts; 
  Eligibility of Loan/grant expenditure; and 
  Adherence to the approval and authorisation process, internal controls and internal 
checks, including adherence to the Financing Agreement, LtB and PIM. 
190.  Other  SSLRP  internal  control  features  that  SSLRP  should  and  will  put  place  are 
presented hereunder: 
Other SSLRP Key Controls 
Fixed 
Assets 
Fixed Assets Register (FAR): 
a)  SSLRP shall maintain a consolidated fixed Assets Register (FAR) which is a record of 
fixed assets for the project including assets held by PCU and the IA; 
b)  The  SSLRP  register  format  includes  details  of  assets-make,  model,  Specification, 
quality,  rate,  value,  supplier,  receipts,  issues,  balance,  location,  etc.  It  also  has  the 
date of receipt of the asset & the payment voucher reference; 
c)  Each class of assets has a separate page in the FAR. 
d)  Any alteration in the FAR must be dully authorized. 
e)  It will reflect the book balance of a class of assets at any point of time. 
Fixed Assets Issue Register (FAIR) 
a)  While  the  FAR  is  maintained  according  to  class  of  assets,  the  FAIR  is  maintained 
according to the staff member who holds the asset. There will be one folio for each 
staff member who has custody of an asset. 
b)  It will record the date of issue & return of each asset. 
c)  It will bear the signatures of the employee when s/he receives the asset. 
d)  The register has to be periodically reconciled with the FAR. All issues in the FAR should 
be reflected in the FAIR. 
e)  The register helps in locating assets at the time of physical inventory taking. 
SSLRP will follow the following fixed Assets internal controls: 
a)  Tagging & labelling of assets- assets are labelled or tagged so that they can be easily 
identified & their ownership established. 
b)  Insurance of assets- SSLRP will insure all project assets. 
c)  Physical inventory of assets at regular intervals. 
d)  Log books for vehicles,  the log book  records the details of use  vehicles & is usually 
maintained  by  the  driver  and  checked  by  PA.  It  helps  in  identifying  personal use  of 
SSLRP assets. It is also used for calculating fuel consumption appropriateness. 
e)  SSLRP vehicles are  not available as Personal to holder. They should be packed after 
working hours and cannot be used for private use. 
f)  Cross referencing of financial & fixed assets records- done to avoid payment to supplier 
before  assets  are  recorded  in  the  FAR.  For  internal  controls  purposes  it  is  vital  to 
reconcile the financial accounting records with assets records. 
Physical verification of fixed assets. 
a)  Conducted by an inter departmental team ( not only Accounts, include Procurement, 
M&E, etc.) 
b)  Should  be  undertaken  under  the  supervision  of  external  /  internal  auditors  at  least 
once a year. 
c)  Surprise checks during audit/supervision visits. 
d)  Meant to existence, condition & custody of assets. 
e)  Physical balances compared with book balances 
f)  Variances reported 
g)  Variances have to be adjusted in financial records after due authorization. 
Physical Asset Inventory Form (PAIF) 
a)  This is the form used for recording the result of physical asset verification. 
69 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Other SSLRP Key Controls 
b)  PAIF  records  the  asset  code,  book  balance,  physical  balance,  condition,  variance  & 
possible reasons for variance. 
c)  Surplus & shortage are equally serious & need further investigation. 
d)  Should be signed by all members of the verification team. 
e)  Preferably, it should be counter signed by the auditors. 
Cash 
Bank 
and 
a)  Bank reconciliations prepared by the 15th day after month end. 
b)  Bank reconciliations are prepared within Project Accounting Software and not off the 
system. 
c)  Prepared by the Accountant, checked by the Project Finance Manager and approved by 
the Project Coordinator/Coordinator with hard copies formally kept on file. 
Advances 
a)  As described in the module, advances are not expensed they are to be monitored in 
Project Accounting Software in a control account for advance takers 
b)  Advances are aged on a monthly basis and the aging report is provided to the PD on a 
Personnel 
Costs 
monthly basis 
c)  Advances  are retired after expenditure justifications have been submitted, accepted 
and after the journal voucher has been formally approved. 
a)  Formal payrolls are prepared by the Accountant, checked by Project Finance Manager 
and approved by Project Coordinator. 
b)  In preparing the payroll care is taken to recover any outstanding advances 
c)  The  Project  Coordinator  should  ensure  salaries  included  in  payroll  are  as  per  the 
employment contracts. 
d)  Salary adjustments necessarily require IFAD’s No Objection prior to being effective 
e)  Payroll  taxes  are  a  responsibility  of  employees;  these  taxes  are  deducted  from 
employee salaries and remitted to the Tax Authority by SSLRP only acting on agency 
basis 
191.  Disbursement and funds flow – This is depicted in the diagram below:  
Figure 4: SSLRP Funds Flow Chart and Reporting Lines 
Suppliers/ 
Contractors
/Service 
Providers 
IA 
IFAD 
GoSS 
(MAFS) 
Funds flow 
Justification and reporting 
70 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
a)  Project costs and financing: The cost structure of SSLRP is reflective of the Project’s 
components  and  expenditure  categories  as  per  the  PDR  and  financing  agreement. 
SSLRP has three main funding sources – IFAD loan, IFAD grant, and GoSS; 
b)  Ring fenced bank accounts will be opened, both at the MAFS and service provider level, 
one in USD and another in SSP; 
c)  Most transactions entered into both at service provider level and MAFS/PMU level will 
be by direct payments. 
d)  To facilitate implementation of direct payments for SSLRP, consideration be made to 
lower  the  threshold  for  direct  payments  to  an  amount  that  can  facilitate  many 
transactions to be covered under direct payments as shall be specified in the LtR/B. 
e)  Transfers to implementing service provider, to be on the basis of to be on the basis of 
specific activity budgets on a quarterly basis (Based on quarterly budgets) on the basis 
of milestones. 
f) 
 Transactions  shall  be  entered  into  in  USD  and  as  far  as  practicable  aggregate 
procurements to benefit from use of USD for transactions and direct payments. 
g)  Transfers  to  the  SSP  accounts  will  be  limited  to  few  items,  where  expenditure  is 
incurred in small amounts. The loan and the grant will be administered through the 
same  USD  bank  Account.  The  following  minimum  Bank  Accounts  will  be  required  in 
order to facilitate smooth flow of funds: 
Bank Accounts 
A: DESIGNATED BANK ACCOUNTS 
(USD) 
IFAD loan and grant- USD Bank 
Account at MAFS and IFAD loan and 
grant at IA 
B: LOCAL CURRENCY BANK 
ACCOUNTS (SSP) 
Two separate bank accounts – one at 
MAFS and one at IA 
Remarks 
Receive funds disbursed from IFAD loan and grant. 
One account will be administered by MAFS under 
the oversight of the Under Secretary in 
accordance with GoSS arrangements acceptable to 
IFAD.  
The second account will be administered by the IA 
in accordance with the agreement entered into 
between the GoSS and IA 
Two separate accounts, one held at MAFS and 
another at IA receive funds from the foreign 
account for transactions denominated in SSP. 
Limited funds will be transferred to the SSP 
accounts only to the extent of limited transactions 
in SSP. 
192.  Withdrawal  Applications  –  The  IFAD  Disbursement  Handbook  provides  all  the 
guidance  and  forms  needed  for  the  preparation  of  withdrawal  applications  including 
replenishment applications. These have not been reproduced in this module. As stated in 
the  Letter  to  the  Borrower  and  the  Loan  Disbursement  Handbook,  four  standard 
disbursement procedures may be used for withdrawal of financing. 
  Procedure I – Advance withdrawal (using revolving funds with replenishment to 
a designated account held in a Commercial Bank acceptable to IFAD). Funds to the 
account will be transferred on a basis of quarterly cash flow transactions, adjusted 
for  transactions  to  be  paid  using  direct  payment  procedure  for  purposes  of 
implementing  Subcomponent  3.2.  All  transferred  funds  shall  be  treated  as 
advances; 
  Procedure  II:  Direct  Payment  –  This  modality  is  used  for  eligible  project 
expenditure  to  be  paid  directly  by  IFAD  to  the  IA,  service  providers,  contractors 
71 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
and suppliers. A separate bank account shall be opened by the contracted IA for 
this project. The transferred funds will be treated as advances and recognized only 
as  expenditure  only  after  justification  supported  with  relevant  and  adequate 
documentation supporting the expenditure has been availed. For suppliers/service 
providers/contractors paid after delivery of goods/completion of assignment, direct 
payment  withdrawal  application  will  be  supported  by  procurement  documents, 
contract, contract monitoring forms, GRNs/certificates and invoices. This procedure 
is  generally  for  large  contracts,  to  suppliers,  contractors  or  third  parties,  as 
authorised by the borrower over USD 100,000. Given the SSLRP situation however, 
a reasonable minimum will be agreed between IFAD and GoSS and shall be included 
in the LtB/R; 
  Procedure  III:  Reimbursement  –  This  will  be  applicable  when  eligible  project 
expenditures, reimbursable under the financing, have been pre-financed by GoSS 
or  an  IA.  Such  reimbursements  are  expected  to  be  claimed  not  later  than  90 
calendar  days  from  the  date  of  payment  by  the  borrower/IA.  Reimbursements 
should be for activities included in the approved AWPB, supported by documents 
evidencing the transaction and will be done in the currency of the transaction; and 
  Procedure  IV:  Special  Commitment  (under  letter  of  credit)  –  The  special 
commitment  procedure  is  used  for  financing  imports  of  goods  required  by  the 
project  under  a  letter  of  credit  arrangement.  Normally,  the  special  commitment 
procedure  is  used  for  contracts  for  imported  goods,  for  which  the  Fund’s  ‘no 
objection’ has been provided prior to signature of the contract. A letter of credit is 
the mode of payment indicated in the contract for making payments to a foreign 
supplier. It is usually opened by the borrower in a local commercial bank (at times 
referred to as the ‘opening/issuing bank’). Once the letter of credit is opened and 
ready,  the  commercial  bank  advises  (i)  the  borrower;  and  (ii)  the  supplier’s 
negotiating  bank  (at  times  referred  to  as  the  ‘paying  bank’).  The  letter  of  credit 
becomes effective on confirmation of acceptance by the negotiating bank and on 
receipt of the special commitment letter from IFAD. No other action is taken by the 
negotiating bank until such time as it is advised by the IFAD Treasury that all special 
commitment  procedures  are  in  place  and  assurance  of  prompt  payment  is 
confirmed. The Fund does not open letters of credit for the borrower; nor does it 
become a party to a letter of credit between two commercial banks.  
193.  Given the monetary challenges faced by the economy, it is not foreseen that the 
fourth  procedure  (Procedure  IV:  Special  Commitment  (under  letter  of  credit))  will  be 
applied. 
194.  The tools needed in managing a proper treasury unit: 
a)  The  accounting  software  to  manage  the  entire  accounting  data  (production  of  WA, 
AWPB control, Variance analysis etc); 
b)  Regular updating  of the Cash Book (this will prevent SSLRP from going into Overdraft 
which could cause the Project to issue bouncing cheques and expose the Project); 
c)  Monthly Bank reconciliation for all currencies/accounts; 
d)  Regular update of the status of disbursement, commitment and un disbursement  as 
against the global approved fund allocated  by category and component for your project 
(ensure to include commitments);  
e)  Monthly Financial Report for management decision making; 
f)  Regular reconciliation of WA presented to IFAD by SSLRP for reimbursement as against 
the payment made by IFAD to the designated account; and 
g)  Cash & Expenditure forecast. 
195.  Under SSLRP, there will be no fixed authorised allocation. The Project shall submit 
withdrawal  application  for  replenishment  of  the  USD  accounts  based  on  quarterly  cash 
72 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
projections  tagged  to  specific  milestones.  Once  specific  milestones  are  achieved, 
submission  of  milestone  reports  shall  be  accompanied  by  justification  of  funds  applied. 
Similarly,  the  IA  shall  submit  expenditure  justifications  once  the  agreed  milestone  has 
been reached 
196.  While  reconciling  the  bank  accounts,  bank  balances  shall  be  supported  by  bank 
statements. 
197.  SOEs  shall  be  generated  from  the  accounting  software  indicating  individual 
transactions. 
198.  Implementation of IFAD Client Portal (ICP) – IFAD web- based site (ICP) for 
electronic loan/grant information management including online submission, authorization 
and approval of withdrawal applications, access of project documentation, among others 
shall  be  implemented  by  SSLRP.  GoSS  will  ensure  that  approvals  are  done  on  a  timely 
basis  in  order  not  to  affect  the  overall  timeliness  of  disbursement  of  funds.  Withdrawal 
application from both the PMU and IA will be submitted through ICP. The levels of approval 
will be determined by the Ministry of Finance and Planning in consultation with the MAFS. 
Implementation of ICP will be a requirement in the first year of implementation. 
199.  Project completion and Financing Closing – The financing closing (closing of 
the  loan/grant)  will  be  due  six  months  after  the  Project  completion  date.  Both  the 
completion  and  the  closing  dates  of  the  loan/grant  have  financial  implications  on  the 
Project management, such as development and submission of a recovery plan, ensuring 
eligibility of expenditures and  ensuring only feasible activities are included in the AWPB 
and  withdrawals  are  limited  to  financing  required  during  the  period  to  mitigate  risks  of 
refunds of unused funds to IFAD.  
200.  Recovery plan – To ensure that the designated account is completely and timely 
justified;  the  PMU  will  develop  and  submit  to  IFAD  a  recovery  plan  outlining  the 
percentages per withdrawal application that will be recovered and paid respectively. The 
recovery plan will be submitted to the fund around six months before the completion date 
or when the outstanding balance (amount still undisbursed by IFAD) is less than double 
the authorized allocation. As disbursements will be on the revolving fund basis, this will 
apply  to  running  balances  that  will  have  not  been  justified  in  the  last  semester  of 
implementation. 
201.  Statutory External Audits – The financial statements of the project (both at PMU 
and IA) are subject to audit on an annual basis. The Audit Chamber [Auditor General] is 
empowered by the laws of the GoSS, to audit all Government Funds. However, because of 
the human resource constraints, and that the Chamber’s capacity is still being developed, 
a private practice auditor shall be appointed. Use of private audit firm to audit financial 
statements with consideration use of firms in neighboring countries. Consideration of Audit 
Chamber  as  an  auditor  of  the  project  be  done  only  after  an  assessment  of  the  audit 
chamber of their capacity to audit the project is completed over time. 
202.  Standard TOR for audit engagements as spelt out in the IFAD Handbook for auditing 
and financial management for projects shall be used. The prepared TORs are subject to 
IFAD clearance. 
203.  Draft financial statements (consolidated for PMU and IA) for audit to be shared with 
IFAD for clearance together with TOR no later than four months following the end of the 
financial year. 
204. 
In  accordance  with  the  IFAD  General  Conditions  and  the  IFAD  Handbook  for 
auditing  and  financial  management  for  projects,  the  SSLRP  must  have  its  financial 
statements audited. The Audited financial statements shall be sent to IFAD no later than 
6 months after the end of the fiscal year. In addition to the audit report, the independent 
auditor will prepare a management letter. This will include comment and recommendations 
on  the  adequacy  of  the  financial  management  system,  and  on  the  system  of  internal 
73 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
control. The management letter should also include a follow  up section on the status of 
implementation of previous years’ recommendations. 
205.  The detailed instruction regarding project audit are outlined in the IFAD guidelines 
for project audits available at http://www.ifad.org/pub/basic/index.htm 
III.5: Procurement 
A. 
Procurement and Contract Management 
206.  Purpose: This section is intended to give additional advice and assistance to SSLRP 
implementers to help them carry out their own procurement responsibilities using IFAD 
financing. This section does not contain any new policies but rather explains in more detail 
how specific aspects of procurement should be handled consistent with the Guidelines and 
procedures of the Fund.  It is expected that this procurement section will continue to be 
improved and added to with a view to keep it relevant and useful to its users. Any views 
in  this  regard  will  be  welcome  and  may  be  forwarded  to  the  Fund  for  clearance/No 
objection. 
207. 
 The  national  legal  and  regulatory  framework,  systems  and  capacities  remain 
inadequate and do not meet international standards for fair and transparent procurement 
processes.  Thus,  for  SSLRP,  the  full  adoption  of  IFAD’s  Procurement  Handbook  and 
Standard  Procurement  Documents is  recommended  for  procurement  by  the  IA  and  the 
Government PCU. Both the IA and the PCU will be supported by IFAD through TA to ensure 
compliance  with  IFAD  procurement  processes  and  procedures  and  international  best 
practice in procurement. Each contract to be financed by proceeds of IFAD’s investment 
will be included in the Project Procurement Plan (PPP) prepared by the IA, certified by the 
PCU  and  receiving  No  Objection  from  IFAD.  The  IA  will  establish  a  procurement  unit in 
charge of, inter alia, procurement planning, handling of the bidding process, conducting 
bid openings and evaluations of bids, and contract monitoring. A Procurement Committee 
will  be  established  at  the  IA  and  the  PCU  would  be  expected  to  review  and  certify  the 
following  documents  or  actions:  procurement  plan,  draft  advertisements  and  bidding 
documents,  evaluation  reports  and  contract  award  recommendations,  rejection  of  bids, 
contracts or contract amendments above pre-defined thresholds. 
208.  The procurement process under SSLRP will be transparent, competitive and should 
ensure that the goods and services needed to implement Project activities are procured 
with due attention to economy and efficiency. The process will also ensure that the funds 
are used to buy only those goods and services included in the approved AWPB. It should 
be noted that any procurement of goods, services or works outside the AWPB and non-
compliant  with  procurement  guidelines  will  be  treated  as  ineligible  expenditure  and 
rejected for IFAD financing. 
209.  Key Players in SSLRP Procurement – There will be a procurement unit resourced 
with a fulltime procurement specialist at the IA. The unit will be in charge of coordinating 
all administrative work related to procurement, such as preparation of bidding documents, 
Request for Quotations and others, as well as providing technical support to the finance 
department  and  the  users.  In  addition  to  procurement  staff,  a  Permanent  Tender 
committee will be formed to handle items generally requiring Open Competitive Bidding. 
Each  competitive  procurement  package  will  have  an  ad  hoc  Evaluation  Committee 
comprising members skilled in the subject matter at hand. Evaluation committee members 
should not be restricted to only IA and PCU/NAC members, to ensure sufficient skill mix; 
independent external members may also be used. 
210.  IFAD’s  Involvement  –  All  procurements  whose  contract  value  is  above  the 
thresholds set in the Letter to the Borrower, will require the IFAD Country Director prior 
no-objection. Also, IFAD supervision Missions will always intently scrutinize the Project’s 
74 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
procurement processes to obtain reasonable assurance on the efficiency and effectiveness 
of the procurement. 
211.  Procurement  Methods  –  IFAD  has  no  restriction  on  the  use  of  any  of  the 
permissible  procurement  methods.  However,  each  method  used  should  be  justifiable  in 
terms of the cost, technical complexity and the circumstances giving rise to the need for 
the  goods  or  services  concerned.  The  decision  of  a  procurement  method  is  one  of  high 
importance and therefore the procurement specialists should always reflect the method of 
procurement at the planning stage.  
212.  SSLRP will be implemented through a variety of procurement methods according 
to  the  approved  annual  PP  to  which  IFAD  will give  its  No  Objection,  and  any  update  or 
upgrade  thereto.  Procurement  up  to  20 000USD  shall  be  subject  to  national  shopping 
procedures  where  goods,  works  and  services  are  available  locally.  All  procurement 
estimated  above  20 000USD  and  up  to  100 000USD  shall  be  procured  using  national 
competitive  bidding  processes.  Where  services  are  concerned,  Requests  for  Proposals 
(RFPs) shall be issued and advertised nationally. Non-South Sudanese domiciled suppliers 
will  also  be  able  to  participate  in  the  latter.  All  procurement  activities  estimated  above 
100 000USD  shall  be  subject  to  international  competitive  bidding  for  goods  and  works, 
and internationally advertised RFPs for consultancy services. IFAD’s No Objections will be 
required for all items estimated to cost over USD 20,000 for all categories (goods, works 
and services). Both procurement thresholds and prior review thresholds may be reviewed 
from time to time and revisited in line with the project’s risk profile. 
213.  The  table  below  sets  out  the  general  applications  or  circumstances  generally 
thought to be most appropriate to each procurement method, together with an indication 
of  the  time  span  likely  to  be  required.  These  applications  or  circumstances  are  not 
conclusive  and,  therefore,  it  is  strongly  recommended  that  the  procurement  personnel 
should use them together with their own professional judgment in assessing the prevailing 
circumstances. 
75 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Table 13: Characteristics of Procurement Methods 
Basic description 
Suitable applications  Characteristics 
Indicative time range 
For each method 
Procurement 
method 
International 
competitive 
Bidding 
The default process for 
goods and works on 
the international 
market with open 
competition 
Limited 
International 
Bidding 
As per ICB but by 
direct invitation instead 
of open advertising 
National 
Competitive 
Bidding 
Usually the most 
common process used 
on the domestic 
market. 
A full tendering 
process where the 
opportunity to submit 
bids/tenders is only 
announced to the 
national marketplace 
Open advertising 
Domestic 
preference can 
apply 
Public bid opening 
Bids generally in 
‘major’ currencies 
Works with 
prequalification: 
16-20 months 
Works without 
prequalification: 8-
12Months 
 ICB for goods: 8-
10months. 
Goods: 4-6 months. 
No public 
advertising 
Bid list is 
restricted 
No domestic 
preference 
Public Opening 
Goods: 5-6 months 
Advertising 
usually restricted 
to the national 
press 
Bidding 
documents may 
be in the official 
language of the 
borrower/recipien
t country 
Local currency 
generally used for 
evaluation 
Public Opening 
The large value 
contracts for goods 
and works 
Where foreign 
bidders are thought 
likely to want to 
participate 
The subject of the 
procurement (be it 
goods or works) is 
widely available. 
Only a few suppliers 
are known (and in 
such a case all 
should be permitted 
to bid) 
Low value. 
Exceptional 
circumstances, such 
as emergency action 
concerning a major 
natural disaster, 
which may justify 
waiving any 
advertising for 
competitive bids. 
The goods or works 
are available locally 
at prices 
significantly below 
those of the 
international 
marketplace. 
Maybe the most 
efficient and 
economical way of 
procuring goods or 
works that, by their 
nature or scope, are 
unlikely to attract 
foreign competition. 
The likely value of 
the contract is 
below the minimum 
level at which 
foreign bidders wish 
to compete for such 
business, given the 
capability and 
competitiveness of 
local bidders. 
Where works are 
spread 
geographically, or 
over time, in a way 
that upsets the 
economies of scale. 
The costs involved 
in implementing ICB 
are 
disproportionately 
high. 
76 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Procurement 
method 
Basic description 
Suitable applications  Characteristics 
Indicative time range 
For each method 
National 
/International 
Shopping 
Comparison of price 
quotations from at 
least 3 companies. 
Direct 
Contracting 
Contracting to one 
company without 
competition 
Work by Force 
Account12 
Use of the 
Borrower/recipient’s 
own personnel and 
equipment to perform 
construction work 
No advertising 
No public opening 
‘Price Quotations’ 
instead of ‘Bids’ 
Goods: 2-4 months 
 Works: 2-6 months 
 Goods and Works: 
1-3 months 
Price negotiation 
Usage generally 
requires 
Special 
permission 
/waiver due to 
lack of 
competitive 
forces 
Can be hard to 
quantify the value 
of input. 
No competition or 
procurement 
process. 
Goods required are 
readily available off-
the-shelf, or are 
standard 
commodities of a 
relatively low value 
Works, where the 
scope of work is 
simple and 
straightforward. 
Where an extension 
to an existing 
contract for goods 
or works is required 
under 25% in value 
Where the 
equipment required 
is proprietary, there 
is only one source 
and no alternative 
exists. 
There is a need to 
standardize upon 
existing equipment 
and to achieve 
compatibility in 
spare parts. 
Cases of 
emergency, where 
urgent delivery is 
required. 
Where it is difficult 
to define works 
quantities. 
Small, scattered 
works in remote 
locations 
No disruption of on-
going operations 
Emergency 
situations requiring 
rapid reaction 
214.  The  Procurement  Cycle  –  SSLRP  procurement  process  will  involve  fifteen 
sequential but interrelated stages. A typical process from planning to contract performance 
evaluation is illustrated in the steps below: 
  Step  1:  Procurement  Planning  –  is  a  critical  part  of  the  process  that  enables 
objectives and priorities to be set, workloads to be estimated and resources allocated. 
This  will  enable  SSLRP  to  plan,  organise,  forecast  and  schedule  its  procurement 
activities  and  to  identify  potential  areas  for  aggregation  of  needs.  Procurement 
12This method will be used under SSLRP but will have to be fully justified right from procurement planning. In 
addition,  to  the  extent  possible,  significant  equipment  to  be  installed  as  part  of  the  works  will  be  treated  as 
separate procurement packages and procured competitively. Even under the use of Framework contracts, the 
prerequisite IFAD ‘No Objections’ will still be necessary. A complete set of documentation, including MoUs with 
the Government Agency executing the works will be a requirement. 
77 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
planning is not the beginning in itself, before reaching this stage, a number of more 
fundamental  decisions  should  have  been  undertaken.  For  example,  definition  of 
Programme goals and resource availability. It is thus necessary for SSLRP procurement 
planning to be aligned to or integrated with financial budget and Programme activity 
plans as much as practicable. At Programme inception, IFAD requires the NAC and IA 
to prepare an indicative procurement plan covering a period of 18 months. This should 
be finalised and submitted to IFAD within 6 months of the implementation period. For 
subsequent years, 12 months successive plans should be prepared and synchronised 
with the AWPB during implementation period. 
o  Scope  of  the  Plan  –  A  Procurement  plan  should  at  least  include  a  brief 
description  of  each  procurement  activity  to  be  undertaken  during  the  period, 
estimated value of each activity, the method of procurement to be adopted for 
each activity and the method of review IFAD will undertake for each activity. 
The  standard  templates  for  the  procurement  plan  are  contained  in  the  IFAD 
procurement Handbook. Please see Module E of the Procurement Handbook for 
further guidance; 
o  Review of Procurement Plans – Once the initial plan has been approved and 
cleared by IFAD, it should form the basis of all the procurement activity of the 
Programme. It is important that the procurement plan is reviewed at least once 
every quarter and necessary amendments are made promptly. Any amendment 
requires a No Objection to be sought from IFAD. 
  Step  2:  Procurement  Requisition  –  Once  the  procurement  plan  is  in  place, 
procurement activities will only commence upon receipt of the relevant procurement 
requisition from user departments ; 
  Step 3: Confirmation of Availability of Funds – The Programme Coordinator will 
first  direct  any  procurement  requisitions  to  the  Financial  Controller  (FC)  to  check 
availability of funds.   This will take into account any outstanding commitments and, 
specifically the FC should confirm that the contract amount is covered by the amount 
stated in the budget and that there is (or will there be) enough money in the bank to 
pay  the  planned  invoices  as  per  the  payment  schedule.  Strictly,  any  procurement 
should be stopped at this point if no funds are confirmed; 
  Step  4: Review of Specifications, Terms of Reference and  Scope of Works  – 
This will be done by the Permanent Tender Committee/ad hoc Evaluation Committee, 
procurement specialist or procurement officer at IA and NAC level, depending on the 
package type to be procured. The results of the analysis will determine the method of 
procurement to be used and also result in the preparation of solicitation documents. 
The  team  will  make  use  of  IFAD’s  Standard  Procurement  Documents  for  all 
procurement activities.; 
  Step 5: Approval of Procurement Documents – Except for contracts falling under 
shopping  procurement  method,  solicitation  documents  must  be  approved  by  the 
Permanent Tender Committee or Ad-hoc Evaluation Committee, depending on the type 
of procurement. For all items subject to a prior review threshold, IFAD’s No Objection 
on the solicitation documents will be required; 
  Step 6: Advertising/Issuance of Bidding Documents – This should be in such a 
way  to  allow  an  opportunity  to  all  potential  bidders  to  participate.  The  issuance  of 
solicitation documentations under open bidding will comply with the following: 
o  Arrange publication of the advertisement (open competitive bidding only). This 
can be via the local, regional and international newspapers, depending on the 
procurement method; 
78 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
o  Documents must be dispatched promptly to those who respond to any notice.  
If documents are being sold, they must be dispatched immediately on receipt 
of the request or payment of the fee, whichever is later; 
o  A register must be kept of all bidders issued with a document. This will be used 
to contact bidders if a bid clarification or extension needs to be issued; and 
In all cases, bidders must be required to confirm receipt of the document. 
o 
The issuance of solicitation documentations under restricted bidding will comply with 
the following: 
o  Where documents are being issued to bidders on a shortlist or pre-qualified list, 
the documents must be dispatched to all bidders at the same time; and 
o  A record must be kept of the issuance of documents. 
Pre-bid conferences or site visits will be crucial for some procurements. This will be a 
useful  technique  because  some  of  the  procurements  are  highly  technical.  Through 
these  site  visits,  a  significant  number  of  requests  for  clarification  are  likely  to  be 
received and knowledge of the site will be very important to tender preparation. This 
will,  however,  have  to  be  included  in  the  procurement  plans  and  bid  documents;  it 
cannot be arranged hurriedly or on an ad hoc basis. 
The Tender Committee will undertake the following after the completion of the pre-bid 
conference site visits: 
o  Prepare  authorised  Minutes  of  the  proceedings  which  will  be  sent  to  all 
organisations that have been issued with solicitation documents; 
o  Determine whether it is necessary to issue a formal bid clarification in addition 
to the Minutes in which case Permanent Tender Committee (PTC) approval will 
be required; 
o  Determine  whether  it  is  necessary  to  amend  the  tender  closing  date  as  a 
consequence  of the bid clarifications. The decision to extend the  closing date 
should be made quickly but will also require approval of the PTC. It will save 
time and work if it is issued with the bid clarification. 
Even without a pre-bid conference or in cases where site visits may not be mandatory, 
the  Permanent  Tender  Committee  will  ensure  to  provide  clarifications  from  bidders. 
Importantly, any clarification provided must be copied to all bidders that were issued 
with the bidding documents. 
215.  Step  7:  Receipt  and  Opening  of  Bids  –  Bidders  will  deliver  their  bids  to  the 
location and official stated in the invitation document. The selected officer will ensure that 
the bids submitted are kept under key and lock. The committee will issue a receipt to the 
bidders confirming the date and time of delivery as proof of delivery prior to the deadline 
for submission. Bids submitted past the deadline should be rejected. For open competitive 
bidding procurement methods, the opening date should be communicated in advance to 
the applicants and opened in their presence; 
216.  Step 8: Evaluation  of Bids – Basically the purpose  of Bid Evaluation will be to 
decide on the most economically advantageous Bid for Contracting with SSLRP. Evaluation 
of bids should be done systematically following certain procedures, as any error made at 
this stage can have significant cost implications to SSLRP. It is important that evaluation 
criteria  is  directly  relevant  to  the  package  for  which  bidding  is  carried  out  and  neither 
should it be seen as favouring particular bidders. The committee doing the evaluation will 
follow the stages of a good evaluation process which include: 
a)  Preliminary examination – to eliminate tenders that do not meet the basic 
requirements  of  the  invitation  document  and  bids  that  do  not  meet  the 
mandatory eligibility requirements; 
79 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
b)  Assessing  responsiveness  and  undertaking  detailed 
technical  and 
commercial requirements of the invitation documents. This includes seeking 
clarification from bidders where necessary; 
c)  Financial  evaluation  –  to  compare  costs  of  the  responsive  tenders  and 
determine which is the successful bidder and should be recommended for 
award of contracts; and 
d)  Post qualification – this will be done to verify if the best evaluated bidder 
has  the  capacity  and  resources  to  execute  the  contract  if  awarded.  The 
criteria  for  post  qualification  should  be  specified  in  the  solicitation 
documents.  Post  qualification  should  be  done  where  pre-qualification  was 
not carried out prior to bidding. If prequalification was carried out prior to 
bidding,  the  evaluators  need  to  satisfy  themselves  that  the  information 
provided  for  in  the  prequalification  is  still  valid  before  recommending  a 
contract award. 
217.  Step  9  –  To  ensure  that  the  evaluation  of  bids  has  been  properly  done,  an 
independent person/committee will review the evaluation report. For procurement subject 
to prior review, the evaluation report will be submitted to IFAD for No Objection; 
218.  Steps  10  and  11:  Contract  Award  and  Signature  –  SSLRP  procurement 
committee  will  award  the  contract  to  the  lowest  evaluated  bid  as  per  the  reviewed 
evaluation report. The terms of the contract should be clear and are expected to be in line 
with  the  initial  user  requirements  stated.  To  uphold  the  principles  of  transparency  and 
responsiveness  applicable  in  good  public  procurement,  it  is  important  that  appropriate 
communication  is  made  to  both  successful  and  unsuccessful  bidders.  Provisions  for 
issuance of a NOITA are contained in and should  be followed in accordance with IFAD’s 
Procurement Handbook. Both draft and signed contract must be  submitted to IFAD for its 
No Objection where applicable; 
219.  Steps 12 and 13: Contract Management and Performance Evaluation – This 
will  be  the  last  stage  in  SSLRP  procurement  process.  This  step  is  a  critical  part  of  the 
process as it focuses on the outcomes rather than anything else. Contract management 
strives for continuous improvement, value preservation and additional value creation, risk 
mitigation, quality assurance and compliance with the terms and conditions. The contract 
administration  procedures  are  largely  determined  by  the  terms  and  conditions  of  each 
individual contract and the description of requirements for the goods, works or services. 
The IFAD Contract Monitoring Tool (CMT), in the IFAD Client Portal shall be used to register 
all contracts entered into by SSLRP and shall be updated regularly. The CMT will be used 
to monitor all contracts and ensure that: 
e)  the supplier/service provider performs the contract in accordance with the 
terms and conditions specified in the contract; 
f)  SSLRP fulfils its obligations and duties under the contract; and 
g)  Swift remedial or preventative action is taken when problems arise or are 
foreseen. 
220.  The  detailed  contract  administration  tasks  are  outlined  in  IFAD’s  Procurement 
Handbook and therefore have not been reproduced in this PIM.  
80 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
PART IV: ANNEXES 
81 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 1: Scope of Work for the Implementing Agency 
1.  The  Implementing  Agency  (IA)  will  be  responsible  for  the  overall  implementation, 
coordination,  and  monitoring  of  progress  of  the  project.  In  doing  so,  it  will  work  very 
closely  with  the  target  communities,  frontline  extension  agents  and  other  relevant 
stakeholders, to mobilize and empower target communities and identify beneficiaries. It 
will provide coordination and technical support throughout the life of the project, including 
submission  of  project  reports.  All  these  will  be  done  in  a  manner  that  will  significantly 
benefit target beneficiaries. Generally, the IA will provide the following services: 
  Coordinate the project throughout the life of the project to ensure that the project 
is technically and properly implemented;  
  Provide strategic, programmatic and technical support to the Project;  
  Engage with external stakeholders and attend strategic meetings;  
  Be responsible for day to day management and M&E of the project ensuring that 
targets and milestones are met; 
  Develop  AWPBs  and 
the  associated  Procurement  Plans 
following  IFAD 
requirements; 
  Mobilize,  sensitize,  empower,  and  orient  the  target  beneficiaries/communities  to 
secure their active involvement and participation in project activities; 
  Establish  and  manage  sound  budgeting,  accounting  and  internal  control  and 
financial  reporting  systems  for  the  project  and  ensure  that  all  expenditures  and 
related supporting documents are properly and physically archived for review and 
auditing  purposes  by  government  and  independent  Auditors  in  accordance  with 
IFAD project audit requirements; 
  Ensure the efficient and effective management of the project resources, including 
opening of a dedicated Project Account at the IA level, and ensure achievement of 
Value for Money; 
  Produce  project  reports  (technical  and  financial)  in  accordance  to  reporting 
templates availed by IFAD to monitor and manage progress towards achieving set 
project targets; 
 
  Provide  community-based  coordination  and  information-sharing  platforms  to 
ensure inclusion of target beneficiaries in decision making, particularly of women 
and marginalized groups; 
In collaboration with the respective County Development Committees, and using a 
targeting strategy approved by the PCU, identify target locations and beneficiary 
communities.  The  selected  target  locations  and  beneficiary  communities  would 
need  to  be  endorsed  by  project’s  oversight  body  (National  Advisory  Committee 
(NAC)  and  National  Technical  Committee  (NTC).  The  process  should  ensure  that 
60%  of  target  beneficiaries  are  women,  as  per  guidance  in  the  Project 
Implementation Manual. This will be informed by overall project targeting strategy;  
  Together  with  the  SSLRP  Community  Facilitators,  and  in  collaboration  with  the 
communities: 
o  Organize eligible beneficiaries into Community-Based Groups (CBOs) and, 
where relevant, provide needed support to existing CBOs and facilitate their 
meaningful participation in all community-based interventions; 
o  Develop and implement a framework for Community Driven Development 
with the relevant processes, which aligns with the SSLRP project goal and 
development objective;   
o  Develop and implement a criterion for the assessment and identification of 
strategic  community  infrastructure  needs  with  particular  emphasis  on 
labour-intensive approaches where communities have vested interest in the 
activities to be carried out;  
o  Ensure  Gender  and  Nutrition  mainstreaming  across  all  the  components 
82 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
including Monitoring and Evaluation; 
o  Ensure  full  compliance  with  IFAD’s  Social,  Environmental  and  Climate 
Assessment  Procedures  (SECAP)  and  relevant  National  guidelines  for  the 
assessment  of  environmental  and  social  impact  of  all  agreed  activities, 
determining mitigation measures for negative impacts, and duly implement 
environmental and social safeguards, as per the project Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF), where relevant; 
o  Follow the preparation of, if need be prepare, project specific Environmental 
and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for the infrastructure development;  
o  Ensure that infrastructure development are accompanied by the preparation 
of plans for water and soil management/conservation activities (watershed 
management in the upper stream). These activities should be accompanied 
with  the  collection  of  baseline  data  using  the  application  of  GIS/RS 
applications; 
o  Ensure that climate and environment issues are mainstreamed/considered 
other 
the 
during 
training/awareness/capacity building programs;  
development 
CDP 
also 
and 
all 
of 
o  Devise a non-cost incentive mechanisms for payment for ecosystem service 
practices,  so  that  farmers  are  motivated  to  engage  in  soil  and  water 
conservation 
include 
Non-cost 
awareness/training, certification, etc.;     
incentives  may 
activities. 
o  Develop and implement a monitoring and evaluation framework and ensure 
relevant and appropriate systems are in place, ensuring quality control and 
that implementation is executed as stipulated in the Project Implementation 
Manual; 
o  Develop  a  Grievance  Redress  Mechanism  to  ensure  that  grievances  and 
to  activity 
complaints  by  beneficiaries  and  communities 
implementation  can  be  addressed  to  ensure  participatory  approaches, 
fairness,  neutrality,  accountability,  and  transparency.  One  part  of  the 
system is to ensure that Grievance Point Person that will serve as a bridge 
between the complainant and the government/project owner, are assigned 
at county/payam level and awareness creation, to all beneficiaries, on how 
to direct complaints/grievances; and 
related 
o  Produce training materials for all infrastructure covering the operation and 
management  and  operation  and  maintenance,  with  the  aim  of  building 
capacities through guidance, training, and a supported ‘learning-by-doing’ 
approach; 
  Prepare  regular  reports  and  updates  on  the  progress  of  implementation  of  the 
project within the agreed time-frame and submit to the relevant stakeholders. 
2.  Other responsibilities of the IA, upon signature of the contract, shall include: 
  Put  in  place  a  sound  financial  management  system,  including  a  good  system  of 
bookkeeping  and  financial  accounting.  The  system  should  comply  with  IFAD’s 
minimum  requirements  for  project  financial  management,  where  reports  should 
reflect financiers, project components and disbursement categories;  
  Allocate  the  money  to  activities  and  suppliers  in  a  transparent  and  accountable 
manner;  
  Fulfil all formalities required for operating in South Sudan;  
  Have  an  efficient  management  system,  with  a  transparent  arrangement  for 
decision-making and reporting and procedures for internal and external information 
exchange;  
  Equip  the  project  implementation  and  monitoring  the  work  of  on-going  activities 
and other third parties;  
83 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
  Have  a  well-established  Procurement  Management  System  that  has  transparent 
procedures  for  planning  of  purchases,  including  tenders,  which  guarantee  high 
quality and proper use of products, sufficient supplies of high-quality products to 
the end consumer within a provided term;  
  Have evidence of routine preparation of reports of all the purchases and supplies;  
  Put in place a fully functioning M&E system (with proven capacity and experience 
for  the  collection,  recording  and  storing  of  the  data  related  to  the  project 
implementation and quality control); 
  Administer the entire funds of the SSLRP and disburse accordingly to the relevant 
service providers.  
84 
Annex 2: Responsibility and Accountability Matrices of the SSLRP Stakeholders  
Responsibilities Matrix - GOSS & Implementation Agency (tbc) 
SSLRP 
GOSS/PCU  
IA 
Formal engagement/communication with the Financier (IFAD) 
Coordination & Oversight  
Project coordination, oversight and monitoring 
Contract & supervise the implementing Agency  
Secretariat to oversight body – NAC and NTC & ensure compliance with GOSS policies, 
strategies and guidelines  
Coordinate technical engagement of GOSS in the project – MAFS, Livestock, Environment 
etc. – CDD Guidelines, County Profiles, Technical Specs,  
Planning 
 
 
 
 
 
Finalise the Project Implementation Manual (PIM) and submit to IFAD for No Objection  
 (review, endorse 
and send to IFAD) 
Coordinate preparation & deliver on the AWPB and Procurement Plan (Comp 1 & 2) 
Consolidate the final AWPB (including sub-comp 3.2) and Procurement Plan and transmit 
to NAC for endorsement before submission to IFAD for No Objection  
 
Preparation of key technical/strategic documents – County Profile, CDD Guidelines , 
Criteria for selection of CDPS Targeting and Social Inclusion Strategy  
Review & endorsement of key technical/strategic documents – County Profile, CDD 
Guidelines, Criteria for selection of CDPs, Targeting and Social Inclusion Strategy etc. & 
submission to IFAD for No Objection  
 
 
 
 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Selection of Payams, Bomas, beneficiaries using the targeting & social inclusion Strategy 
included in the PIM 
  (endorsement of 
final outcome) 
Selection of Community Facilitators based on a pre-determined criteria (in the PIM), and 
technical backstopping  
Implementation of CDPs  
Technical design & execution of CDPs in line with the approved PIM 
Monitoring performance of CDPs & compliance with IFAD and GOSS   
Hand-over of works & Exit Strategy – Training on O&M & preparing 
communities/beneficiaries for hand-over 
Progress & Achievements Reporting Requirements  
Coordinate preparation of the 6 month & Annual Progress Reports, Mid-year Review & 
Completion Report  
Technical Review of Progress Reports,  Mid-Term Report & Completion Report & 
transmission to Oversight Bodies & to IFAD   
Procurement  
Overall lead responsibility for Procurement – Preparation of Bidding Documents, 
Management of bidding processes (in line with IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines)    
Lead responsibility for Procurement under Component 3.2.   
Validation of procurement processes & submission to IFAD for No Objection  
Financial Management  
Preparation of Annual Financial Statements & Audits  
Transmittal of Annual Financial Statements & Audits to IFAD  
 
 
 
 
 
Submission of Withdrawal Applications to IFAD  
 (sub-comp 3.2) 
Monitoring & Evaluation  
Compliance with SECAP, Social Inclusion & Grievance Redress Mechanism  
 
86 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Design the M&E system for the project  
Monitor progress & achievements  
IFAD Supervision missions  
Coordinate technical participation of GOSS in IFAD missions as and when they are 
undertaken 
 
 
 
With IA’s 
participation. 
 
87 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Accountability Matrix for Selected SSLRP Stakeholders 
Implementation arrangements for SSLRP 
Responsibilities 
and Tasks 
Implementing 
Agency 
National/MAFS 
team 
State Project 
Committee/Focal 
Point 
Project Coordination Unit  
County 
Development 
Committee/Focal 
Point 
Payam 
Development 
Committee 
Communities 
Supports CDCs 
Counterparts to IA  Clients 
Clients 
Responsible  for 
Project 
administration 
Engagement 
with Oversight 
organs & 
coordination 
Project 
Administration 
Planning Stage  
Finalize the 
Project 
Implementation 
Manual (PIM) 
Prepare annual 
plans and 
budgets for 
project 
all 
Prepares 
implementation 
and 
plans 
budgets 
for 
project  
Overall 
responsibility  
Technical review 
and final 
endorsement  
Contribute 
relevant inputs  
-Contribute to the 
plans by 
articulating the 
PDCs needs 
including from the 
State and PCU 
Approve 
Community 
Development 
Plans (CDPs); 
contribute to 
project plan to 
IA 
Develop CDPs 
for approval 
by CDCs 
-Participate in 
the planning 
cycle including 
workshops and 
provide inputs. 
-Planning for 
sub-component 
3.2 
-Reviews and 
endorses draft 
AWPB before 
sending it to 
IFAD for No 
Objection   
Approves 
methodology 
88 
Development 
/validation of the 
Responsible for 
the 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Responsibilities 
and Tasks 
Implementing 
Agency 
CDD 
methodology   
establishment 
of methodology 
and its 
appropriate 
implementation 
Development of 
County Profiles  
Selection of 
payams, bomas, 
beneficiaries in 
line with IFAD’s 
targeting strategy  
Ensure quality 
recruitment of 
Overall 
preparation of 
the County 
Profile, 
including the 
assessments 
for the feasible 
infrastructure 
options  
Overall 
responsibility in 
the 
development of 
a targeting & 
social 
inclusion 
strategy  
Leads in the 
selection of 
National/MAFS 
team 
when PIM is 
finalised, review 
implementation 
through reports 
and study, 
consults with 
the States and 
Counties on 
methodology as 
its mandate as 
MAFS.   
Review, provide 
inputs  
Review, provide 
inputs and 
endorse the 
Targeting and 
Social 
Inclusion 
Strategy 
Review ToRs 
developed and 
State Project 
Committee/Focal 
Point 
Project Coordination Unit  
County 
Development 
Committee/Focal 
Point 
Payam 
Development 
Committee 
Communities 
Provide inputs & 
endorse County 
Profiles before 
finalization  
Provide relevant 
inputs and work 
with the IA on 
implementing 
Targeting and 
Social Inclusion 
Strategy 
Work with the 
IA on 
implementing 
the Targeting 
and Social 
Inclusion 
Strategy 
Provide 
backstopping 
where necessary 
Supports in the 
selection process 
of the CFs 
Identify CFs 
from the 
Provides the 
CFs based on 
ToRs 
89 
Communities 
Payam 
Development 
Committee 
communities 
for selection 
Facilitate the 
CFs in case 
they need 
help 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Responsibilities 
and Tasks 
Implementing 
Agency 
National/MAFS 
team 
State Project 
Committee/Focal 
Point 
Project Coordination Unit  
County 
Development 
Committee/Focal 
Point 
Community 
Facilitators per 
Payams 
Supervise the 
work of CFs, 
provide trainings 
and provide 
backstopping in 
their work 
Policy and  
Institutional 
Capacity 
Development  
(ref. 3.2) 
identified CFs 
by LGs 
approves when 
PIM is finalized  
Supervises, 
provides 
technical 
backstopping 
and ensures 
quality 
facilitation 
processes and 
outcomes  
Periodic 
monitoring  and 
provide relevant 
best practice 
and experience  
Backstop the 
County Team and 
liaise with PCU 
Ensure availability 
of technical staff to 
support the CFs, 
ensure linkages 
with other 
organizations, and 
liaises with PCU 
and SPDT 
-Contribute to the 
Needs Assessment 
& validate the plan 
-Contribute to the 
Needs Assessment 
& validate the plan  
-Lead 
responsibility in 
preparing the 
Capacity 
Needs 
Assessment 
with inputs from 
stakeholders 
and local 
Government 
structures  & 
implementing 
the sub-
component; 
-Execution of 
the sub-
component, 
particularly at 
90 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Responsibilities 
and Tasks 
Implementing 
Agency 
Implementation 
of CDPs 
Technical design 
of community 
infrastructure, 
enterprises & 
services 
preparation of 
BOQs, bidding 
documents etc.  
Management of 
relevant 
procurement 
processes 
Preparation of 
ToRs, BOQs, 
bidding 
documents, 
etc. Lead in 
selection of 
technical 
experts, 
procurement of 
goods and 
services  
Overall lead in 
procurement  
Supervision of 
works and 
enterprise 
development  
Supervision of 
works & 
enterprise 
development  
National/MAFS 
team 
the State and 
County Levels  
Provide 
technical inputs 
and endorse 
decisions made 
and transmit to 
IFAD for review 
and provision of 
No Objection.  
- Endorse 
decisions made 
and transmit to 
IFAD for review 
and provision of 
No Objection. 
- Lead in 
procurement for 
sub-component 
3.2 
State Project 
Committee/Focal 
Point 
Project Coordination Unit  
County 
Development 
Committee/Focal 
Point 
Payam 
Development 
Committee 
Communities 
Review and 
provide technical 
input 
Procure and 
manage sub-
project 
activities 
-Community 
oversight & 
monitoring  
-Community 
contribution 
(materials) 
Periodic monitoring 
and ensure 
compliance with 
stated procedures, 
including SECAP  
91 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Responsibilities 
and Tasks 
Implementing 
Agency 
National/MAFS 
team 
State Project 
Committee/Focal 
Point 
Project Coordination Unit  
County 
Development 
Committee/Focal 
Point 
Payam 
Development 
Committee 
Communities 
Handover of 
Works /Exit 
Strategy for 
Enterprises (to be 
discussed with 
GOSS) 
Fiduciary  
Responsible for 
the fiduciary – 
finance and 
procurement in 
the project 
Training 
communities in 
O&M and 
preparing them 
for taking over 
Responsible for 
fiduciary in line 
with IFAD’s 
procedures  
Produce regular 
progress reports 
including financial 
and technical 
reports  
Responsible for 
generating 
regular reports 
on the progress 
of 
implementation 
-Review reports 
and provide 
feedback to IAs 
and IFAD during 
missions , and 
transmit 
relevant 
documents to 
IFAD for No 
Objection  
-Fiduciary for 
sub-component 
3.2  
Review reports 
from IA, provide 
feedback to IA, 
endorse and 
submit reports 
to IFAD for 
-Community 
contracting 
(labour) 
Identify local 
experts to be 
trained in O&M 
Awareness 
and 
participation 
in training on 
O&M 
Report to PCU and 
the State on the 
progress of project 
from their 
locations 
92 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Responsibilities 
and Tasks 
Implementing 
Agency 
National/MAFS 
team 
State Project 
Committee/Focal 
Point 
Project Coordination Unit  
County 
Development 
Committee/Focal 
Point 
Payam 
Development 
Committee 
Communities 
Other areas  
M&E System with 
County level 
dashboards (as 
part sub-
component 3.2 to 
inform policy and 
agriculture 
development) 
Policy/legislative 
issues - 
registration of  
Community 
Groups (as 
required) etc.  
Ensure that 
climate and 
gender are 
mainstreamed in 
project 
Monitoring the 
implementation 
of project 
based on 
agreed 
templates  
review and 
provision of No 
Objection 
Overall lead 
responsibility  
Development of 
Technical 
Specifications  
Input Data 
into County 
Dashboard  
Input data 
into the 
County 
Dashboard 
Overall lead 
responsibility 
Lead responsibility 
(as relevant) 
Work with 
communities to 
Implement 
guidelines and 
ensure their 
compliance 
Responsible for 
reporting to 
IFAD and GoSS 
on the progress 
of the project 
through regular 
Oversight 
through reports 
from States and 
IA and provide 
feedback to IA 
and the 
State/Counties.  
Review reports 
and provide 
feedback, 
undertake 
scheduled 
monitoring visits 
Support the CPDTs   Supports the IA in 
the 
implementation of 
the cross-cutting 
issues and liaise 
with the State and 
MAFS 
Supports the IA in 
the monitoring of 
the Project in their 
areas. Supports 
Project 
Provide 
backstopping to 
County Teams and 
provide feedback 
93 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Responsibilities 
and Tasks 
Implementing 
Agency 
National/MAFS 
team 
State Project 
Committee/Focal 
Point 
Project Coordination Unit  
County 
Development 
Committee/Focal 
Point 
Payam 
Development 
Committee 
Communities 
reports 
following 
guidelines  
in liaison with 
States and IAs 
Committees with 
CBM&Es 
94 
Annex 3: Terms of Reference for IA staff 
I.  A4.1: Project Manager 
1. 
The Project Manager will have the overall responsibility for the day-to-day activities 
of  the  project.  He/she  will  coordinate  implementation  of  activities  with  other  projects 
engaged in support for similar/related themes.  
2. 
Specific Responsibilities: 
a)  Overall  responsibility  for  an  efficient  implementation  of  the  project  and  in 
accordance with IFAD/government procedures; 
b)  Lead  the  process  of  preparing  SSLRP  AWPBs  and  procurement  plans  for 
approval by the project’s oversight body;  
c)  In liaison with the Procurement Officer,  ensure that contractors are meeting 
their obligations and are paid only for agreed deliverables; 
d)  Liaise with other institutions  for all aspects  related to the  project,  especially 
the development and  maintenance of partnerships with related programmes 
and projects; 
e)  final accountability for operation of project bank accounts; 
f)  Provide overall strategic guidance to other project staff related to all aspects 
of SSLRP implementation; 
g)  Coordinate and supervise functions and activities of the project staff, ensuring 
that work disciplines and ethics are adhered to; 
h)  Coordinate  and  follow  up  on  the  activities  of  the  officers  responsible  for 
implementation of Project technical components to ensure effective delivery of 
Project activities; 
i)  Ensure timely and appropriate reporting on progress and problems of project 
implementation and submit progress reports to MAFS on agreed deadlines; 
j)  Providing leadership, guidance, enthusiasm and catalytic input to all levels of 
Project participants and activities, whenever appropriate;  
k)  Ensure that the IA staff and all consultants and contractors engaged by comply 
with the project’s gender and targeting strategies;  
l)  Approve all procurement and accounting transactions performed by the IA that 
are  within  the  authorised  threshold,  and  facilitate  disbursement  of  project 
funds needed for the implementation of SSLRP; and 
m) Undertake  any  other  responsibility  that  will  ensure  smooth  and  effective 
implementation of the project. 
3. 
Qualifications and experience: 
a)  The Project Manager  will have at least  10 years of work experience in planning, 
management, administration and implementation of rural livelihood improvement, 
agricultural or rural development Projects in the public, private or NGO sectors and 
specific  exposure  to  commercial/private  sector  practice  in  service  contracting, 
performance monitoring and financing;  
b)  He/she  must  have  a  Master’s  degree  in  Agricultural  Science,  Agricultural 
Economics, Economics, Development Studies, or any equivalent qualification; 
c)  Post qualification in Project Management will be an added advantage; 
d)  Should have at least 2 years’ experience working in South Sudan. 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
II.  A4.2: Financial Management Officer 
a)  Job  Purpose:    The  Project  Finance  Manager  will  be  required  to  design  and 
implement the necessary accounting and financial management systems to address 
the Project’s needs in responding to the objectives. The systems to be designed, 
should focus on but should not be limited to budgeting, accounting, internal control, 
reporting and external auditing.  
b)  Key responsibilities:  
  Develop,  implement,  modify,  and  document  record-keeping  and  accounting 
systems,  making  use  of  the  accounting  software  -  implement  the  accounting 
software; 
  Prepare, examine, and analyze accounting records; 
  Perform  or  ensure  regular  reconciliations  are  prepared  for  relevant  account 
balances for review and endorsement by the Project Coordinator; 
  Prepare  examine,  and  analyze  monthly,  quarterly  (Quarterly  Interim  Financial 
Reports) and annual financial reports; 
  Analyze  operations,  trends,  costs, 
financial  commitments,  and 
obligations, so as to prepare Project and provide advice to the Project Coordinator 
accordingly; 
incomes, 
  Develop, maintain, and analyze budgets comparing budgeted costs to actual costs 
on periodic basis; 
  Prepare  or  update  existing  forms  and  manuals  for  accounting  and  bookkeeping 
personnel, and direct their work activities; 
  Ensure and maintain a proper filing system for Project accounting records; 
  Ensure compliance with relevant financial procedures, guidelines and standards; 
 
Initiate or conduct inventories and other relevant controls on assets; 
  Supervise the work of Accountants or any other accounting staff assigned to the 
Project; 
  Compile and consolidate SOEs for the PCU and review SOEs for the IA for approval; 
  Liaising  with  the  Accountants  and  Procurement  officers  at  PCU  and  IA  to  ensure 
that SOEs withdrawal applications are prepared on time; 
  Survey operations to ascertain accounting needs and to recommend, develop, and 
provide solutions to financial problems;  
  Advise  Project  management  about  issues  such  as  resource  utilization  and  other 
matters pertaining to financial management; 
  Prepare the Project for external audits within the stipulated time-frames; 
  Help build SSLRP’s capacity in accounting and financial management.   
c)  Reporting.   
The Project Finance Manager shall be a member of the Project coordination team and shall 
report to the Project Coordinator.  
d)  Qualification and Experience:   
  A Bachelor’s Degree in Accounting from a recognized university; 
  Additional professional qualification such as CPA, ACCA, etc are a requirement; 
96 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
  Must  possess  at  least  7  years  of  experience  in  accounting  and  financial 
management  of which at least 5  years must be working experience with donor-
funded Projects/projects; 
  Must  be  computer  literate  with  demonstrable  proficiency  in  Microsoft  Word  and 
Excel and any other relevant application including accounting software; 
  Must  have  excellent  writing,  presentation  and  interpersonal  skills,  excellent 
analytical  skills  and  ability  to  effectively  communicate  with  a  broad  range  of 
audiences 
97 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
III.  A4.3 Civil Engineer/Public Works Specialist 
a)  Key responsibilities: Reporting to the Project Manager (PM), the SSLRP Project 
Engineer (PE) will be responsible for the full implementation Sub-component 2.2 
and provide inputs in the implementation of sub-component 2.1 as well as in the 
implementation of the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
as necessary. Specifically, the PE will be expected to: 
  Participate in the Annual Work Planning & Budgeting of the Project and produce 
the infrastructure sub-component plans & budgets; 
  Lead the implementation of the infrastructure plans, inter alia: 
  developing  the  Terms  of  Reference  (ToRs)  for  the  consultants  who  will  be 
contracted to design & supervise the infrastructure sub-projects; 
 
 Manage the contracting & supervision of the consultants; 
  Review the consultants design reports to ensure completeness and compliance 
with policies, guidelines & standards; 
  Verify and approve consultants’ invoices; 
  Manage  the  contracting  process  for  the  construction  contracts  for  the 
infrastructure sub-projects; 
  Monitor  the  construction  progress:  ensure  the  supervising  consultants  are 
performing  as  expected,  receive  and  review  construction  progress  reports, 
participate in monthly site meetings, verify & approve  contractors’ payments 
certificates, etc; 
 
In  consultation  with  the  Community  Development  Expert  (CDE),  manage  the 
design & implementation of the capacity building programs for the committees 
responsible for the operation and maintenance (O&M) of the infrastructure sub-
projects. While the organization & management aspects of the capacity will be 
similar across the sub-projects, the PE will identify the required operations and 
maintenance training for the different categories of technologies employed for 
the different sub-projects and contract qualified service providers and supervise 
the delivery of the capacity building as necessary; 
  Participate in stakeholder meetings and workshops that are of interest to  the 
implementation of infrastructure sub-projects; 
  Produce scheduled progress reports on the implementation of the infrastructure 
sub-projects; and, 
  Any other functions as the PM may assign. 
b)  Key Qualifications: 
  Hold  at  least  a  Bachelors’  Degree  or  its  equivalent  in  Civil  or  Agricultural 
Engineering and be familiar with hydro-agricultural developments in the region; 
  Have  a  minimum  of  five  (5)  years  relevant  professional  experience  in 
program/project design & management, broad knowledge of all rural infrastructure, 
water/agriculture  sub-sectors,  with  specific  experience  in  implementation  and 
management of community based rural infrastructure projects; 
  Previous experience working in rural infrastructure projects, and performing such 
roles as project preparation, appraising, supervising or implementing donor funded 
projects; 
98 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
  Proven planning & organizational skills, with ability to think strategically and rapidly 
analyze and integrate diverse information from varied sources into conclusions and 
recommendations; 
  Previous experience in developing and implementing community capacity building 
in organization and management as well as operations and maintenance; 
  Familiar with Project planning and design software ; 
  Proven ability to interact competently with Government, NGOs and donor agencies 
on issues relating to rural infrastructure development; and, 
  A  Team  player  with  proven  ability  to  work  in  a  team  and  in  a  multicultural 
environment. 
99 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
IV.  A4.4: Community and Rural Development Specialist 
This will be part of the core team within the Implementing Agency.  She/he will  provide 
leadership in the implementation of the Component 1 and 2 of the Project, with particular 
emphasis  on  Component  1  and  Subcomponent  2.1.    Specifically,  s/he  will  ensure 
implementation of all guidelines relating to CDD implementation, to ensure that  all sub-
projects  developed  are  in  line  with  IFAD/GoSS  policy  guideline.    S/he  will  lead  in  the 
development of relationships with other actors in the 5 counties that are involved in similar 
activities  to  IFAD.  S/he  will  work  closely  with  County  Development  and  Payam 
Development Committees, to ensure that there is harmonies in the implementation of the 
CDD in the area. 
Key Responsible: includes, leading on the implementation of the CDD and ensuring that 
the methodology and the guidelines developed for implementation are practice and further 
developed in line with lessons from the ground. S/he will lead the IA in the implementation 
of  Component  1  and  2  and  ensure  that  the  quality  of  the  facilitation  process  and  the 
identified  sub-projects  meet  the  standard  set  in  the  design.  S/he  will  supervise  the 
Community Facilitators and any other organisation that will be working on behalf of the IA 
in the implementation of the CDD, ensure their training and re-training in line with local 
experiences;  S/he  will  provide  backstopping  to  CFs  in  sourcing  for  technical  experts, 
linking them to sources of additional skills and knowledge that are desirable for production 
of quality CDPs and sub-projects; Ensure that CFs and the Committees of the sub-project 
are trained and delivering on the ToRs for the IA;  
Reporting:  S/he  will  report  to  the  Manager  and  working  closely  with  the  M&E  and  the 
Public Works experts.  He will also represent the Manager in most Payam’s activities that 
are related to the project.  
Qualifications: S/he should be a holder of first degree or master degree in agriculture, 
social science, economics or any relevant field.  Strong multi-sectoral background with 
not less than 5 years of practical work with communities in post conflict context, using 
participatory appraisal techniques is essential. 
100 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
V.  A4.5: Social Inclusion (SI) Specialist (to be recruited as a Consultant as 
and when needed).  
The Social Inclusion Officer (SI) works to provide technical support in the  planning and 
implementation of a gender, socially inclusive SSLRP programming. They will also oversee 
the implementation of the nutrition sensitive interventions across the various components. 
The SI officer will be guided by IFAD Gender and Targeting guidelines, nutrition strategy 
and GOSS community engagement methodology and  work closely with  component leads 
with overall responsibility for ensuring planning, monitoring, and reporting of the project. 
Key Responsibilities 
1.  Gender and Targeting strategy 
Under  the  guidance  of  the  Project  Coordinator,  serving  as  focal  point  facilitate  the 
project to follow the targeting strategy for mainstreaming of the poor, women, youth 
in  project  activities.  SI  officer  will  support 
and  marginalized  communities 
implementation  of  the  strategy  for  mainstreaming  gender  and  social  inclusion  in 
programme  activities  and  develop  action-plan  for  implementing  the  strategy.  This 
strategy will inform the identification and engagement of beneficiaries in the project 
(from  Payam  to  Boma  level).  This  strategy  will  be  informed  by  the  IFAD  targeting 
guidelines set forth in the PIM). 
2.  Nutrition Strategy 
SI  specialist  will  oversee  the  implementation  of  the  nutrition  strategy  by  working 
closely with the community facilitators and CDP experts to ensure due consideration  
of nutrition actions in the CDPs. 
3.  Beneficiary selection and Participation  
Ensuring  that  staff  understand  the  rationale  and  the  targeting  strategy  for 
mainstreaming  of  the  poor,  women,  youth  and  marginalized  communities  in  the 
project,  and  their  specific  role  and  responsibility  in  implementing  it.  They  will  thus 
strengthen  and  promote  community  engagement  processes  in  the  project  areas, 
particularly  identifying  project  beneficiaries  (focus  on  youth),  assessing  their  needs, 
and  addressing  community  issues.  SI  officer  will  guide  the  identification  of    project 
beneficiaries  .  They  will  communicate  the  eligibility  criteria  and  use  a  range  of 
mechanisms  in    identifying  households  or  individuals  who  are  defined  as  eligible  for 
project  activities.  Eligibility  criteria  will  be  informed  by  targeting  strategy  for 
components 1 and 2 and inclusion of vulnerable population groups (Women, Returnees, 
Persons with Disabilities).  
4.  Technical Support and backstopping  
SI  officer  will  closely  collaborate  with  component  leads  and  ensure  the  working 
documents of every component have SI elements integrated and a strong women and 
youth  participation.  Furthermore,  they  will  orient  and  train  project  staff  on  gender 
integration, youth inclusion and nutrition sensitivity and approaches for SSLRP. They 
will provide regular technical assistance to ensure that gender and social inclusion is 
influencing  their  planning  and  activities  and  budgets.  Additionally,  they  will  build 
capacity of CBOs and government to plan and implement project activities on nutrition 
,gender  and  social  inclusion.  Provide  necessary  orientation  and  advise  to  all  the 
implementing agencies on  gender and social inclusion issues and policies. 
5.  Gender Action and Learning System 
Overseeing  and  monitoring  the  implementation  of  GALS  including  contracting 
consultants  or  service  providers  for  technical  assistance,  reviewing  the  TOR  and 
coordination. 
101 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
6.  Monitoring , Evaluation and Learning 
SI officer will coordinate with and support the Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) team 
to  establish  and  implement  SI  –  sensitive  monitoring,  evaluation,  and  reporting 
systems, including working with the M&E team to ensure data is sex, age, civil status, 
and disability dis-aggregated and analysed regularly. They will also conduct SI audits, 
contribute to the  development of annual work plans, performance monitoring systems 
and  tools,  and  write  progress,  and  final  program.  This  will  include  Collecting, 
documenting, and reporting of good practices in SI. 
7.  Partnerships 
SI officer will maintain awareness of and relationships  with civil society organizations 
and  development partners also working in areas of gender and social inclusion. They 
will network and liaise with members of  civil society organizations (especially disabled 
people’s  organizations  and  women’s  groups,  returnees),  international  and  national 
NGOs.  
8.  Grievance Redress Mechanism 
Oversee the set up and implementation of the project’s grievance redress mechanism 
including  beneficiary  feedback  system  that  is  accessible  to  all  segments  of  the 
population. 
Qualifications and Experience 
  A minimum of ten years of progressive experience, with at least eight in gender 
and in implementation of social inclusion program  in rural development project. 
  Knowledge and experience of Participatory Rural Appraisal techniques 
  Knowledge of the Graduation Approach and Household Methodologies 
especially GALS (will be valued- but not essential) 
  Demonstrated knowledge of South Sudanese context  
  Demonstrated experience and proficiency in managing programs that 
mainstream gender and social inclusion. 
  Demonstrated experience in addressing issues related to safeguarding. 
  Oversee the set up and implementation of the project’s grievance redress 
mechanism. 
102 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
VI.  A4.6: Monitoring & Evaluation and Knowledge Management Officer 
The  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  and  Knowledge  Management  Officer  will  be 
1. 
responsible  for  all  planning,  monitoring  and  evaluation,  knowledge  management  and 
communication. He/she will directly report to the Project Manager.  
2.  Specific Responsibilities: 
a)  Oversee the development of, and manage the M&E system taking into account 
the  Government  monitoring  frameworks,  IFAD’s  Core  Indicators  and  SSLRP 
objectives; 
b)  Develop and implement Knowledge Management  and Communication Strategy 
to  ensure  systematic,  continuous  learning,  improvement  and  knowledge 
sharing; 
c)  Oversee  preparation  of  and  consolidate  inputs  to  the  AWPBs,  including 
arranging stakeholder review workshops; 
d)  Facilitate SSLRP’s annual review workshops, outcome assessment studies, Mid 
Term  Review  and  completion  review.  Establish  the  timings  and  agendas  for 
annual  participatory  monitoring  workshops,  including  arrangements  for 
ensuring adequate representation of all participants, the target groups including 
women and youths; 
e)  Develop  a  M&E  service  pack  (reporting  formats  for  data  and  narrative)  for 
service providers, and assess and develop trainings in data collection tools as 
needed, to ensure that appropriate measures are established and implemented 
by  service  providers  to  provide  sufficient  basis  for  review  of  SSLRP 
implementation and for monitoring changes seen on the ground; 
f)  Coordinate reports from service providers for quarterly, semi-annual and annual 
reports; 
g)  Manage  special  studies  to  be  undertaken,  including  preparation  of  ToRs  and 
overseeing the work of the consultants; 
h)  Liaise with the financial controller to link physical and financial progress data;  
i)  Monitor  implementation  processes  and  performance,  and  assess  outputs  and 
outcomes.  He/she  will  ensure  that  all  M&E  indicators  are  gender  and  age 
disaggregated, and that SSLRP reports identify separately the number of male, 
female and youth beneficiaries, the nature of their participation and the ways 
in which they have benefited from the Project;  
j)  Prepare  and  submit  routine  and  ad-hoc  progress  reports  to  MAFS  and  IFAD; 
and 
k)  Carry out any other activities that are assigned by the Project Manager. 
3. 
Qualifications and experience: 
a)  A  minimum  of  a  Bachelor’s  degree  in  Agricultural  economics,  economics  or 
equivalent management qualification and specific training in M&E; 
b)  At least eight years of work experience, including at least four years working with 
knowledge management, planning, M&E and/or MIS in government/donor projects 
or large institutions, with knowledge of logical framework projects and participatory 
systems;  
103 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
c)  Ability  to  set  up  and  follow  through  on  a  monitoring  system  in  a  complex 
environment, and capacity to design and carry out relevant field level verification 
and other data validation tools;  
4. 
Competencies: 
a)  Computer-literate  and  well-versed  in  the  use  of  Word,  Excel  and  statistical 
programmes, such as SPSS, Stata, etc..; 
b)  Excellent oral and written communication skills in English; 
c)  Excellent analytical skills; 
d)  Self-motivated,  with  demonstrated  ability  to  take  initiatives  and  work  under  a 
minimum of supervision, but also to work effectively as a member of a team; and 
e)  Strong managerial skills and demonstrated capacity to manage people and interact 
with  a  wide  range  of  private  sector  partners,  public  sector  representatives,  and 
development partners. 
104 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
VII.  A4.5: Procurement Officer 
1. The Procurement Officer will be responsible for all procurement under the Project and 
for  maintaining  all  procurement  documentation  in  good  order,  except  those  related  to 
Subcomponent 3.2.   
2. Specific responsibilities: 
a)  Installation of appropriate procurement systems and procedures for effective planning 
and monitoring of procurements under the Project; 
b)  Communicate to all implementing entities and service providers their responsibilities 
and requirements with respect to procurement in keeping with IFAD requirements and 
the prevailing government practices that are acceptable to IFAD; 
c)  Preparation and consolidation of the annual Procurement Plan; 
d)  Monitor  implementation  of  contracts:  report  status  and  problems  to  the  Project 
Manager, and intervene to address problem upon request by the Project Manager; 
e)  Maintain all procurement records in a form appropriate for regular auditing;  
f)  Ensure that goods and services financed have been procured in accordance with the 
grant/loan agreement; 
g)  Coordinate preparation of ToRs for consultancy services and technical specifications 
for all procurements, in conjunction with the relevant technical government personnel; 
h)  Undertake  local  shopping  for  goods  and  services  where  this  falls  within  the 
procurement guidelines; 
i)  Prepare tender documents in the required format and advertising or inviting bids from 
qualified (or pre-qualified) suppliers; 
j)  Convene and support bid evaluation committees to undertake technical evaluation of 
bids or proposals for supply of goods and services. Ensure that Evaluation Committees 
have people with appropriate expertise; 
k)  Approve  progressive  payments  to  contractors  against  the  agreed  milestones  or 
outputs; 
l)  Maintain a register of approved suppliers for smaller items procured locally; 
m) Prepare  quarterly  and  annual  reports  of  progress  with  implementation  of  the 
Procurement  Plan,  and  regularly  inform  the  Project  Manager  of  problems  and  make 
proposals to overcome bottlenecks; and 
n)  Carry out any other activities that are assigned by the Project Manager. 
3. Qualifications and experience: 
a)  A Master’s degree in purchasing and supply, economics, finance or law; or equivalent 
management  qualification  with  significant  training  and  practical  experience  in 
procurement  within  government  projects  supported  by 
financial 
institutions;  
international 
b)  He/she  will  have  a  sound  understanding  of  procurement  within  the  South  Sudanese 
environment  and  the  protocols  and  procedures  applying  to  internationally  financed  
programmes  and projects in the country; 
c)  He/she would have at least 8 years of work experience in procurement and contracting 
preferably; and  
d)  The job holder must possess advanced working knowledge and skills of MS Office (MS 
Word, MS Excel and MS Access). 
105 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
4. Competencies: 
a)  Ability to work well in teams and to interact with a wide range of private sector partners 
and government representatives; 
b)  Knowledge of work planning and reporting; 
c)  Excellent analytical skills; 
d)  Honesty and Integrity; 
e)  Strong written and oral communication skills in English; and 
f)  Able to work independently, with limited supervision. 
106 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 4: Terms of Reference for PCU staff 
Project Coordinator 
Duties and reporting lines 
The Project Coordinator (PC) reports directly to the Director of PCU and will directly 
report to the Minister of Agriculture and Food Security. The PC serves as secretary of 
the National Technical Committee (NTC) and is also the Chairperson of the National 
Advisory Committee (NAC). 
Tasks and responsibilities  
  Responsible for overall coordination, planning, management, reporting, 
monitoring and evaluation of the Project;  
  Ensure that Project implementation is results oriented, efficient and in 
compliance with relevant documents (financing agreement, project design 
report, project implementation manual, annual workplan and budget and other 
related documents);  
  Coordinating and supervising the review and endorsement of annual work plan 
and budgets (AWPBs) and their timely submission to IFAD for No Objection;  
  Mobilizing the required international and national technical assistance and 
overseeing their work;  
  Coordinating the review of all project reports submitted by the Implementing 
Agency produced reports 
  Ensuring recommendations of supervision missions are implemented and 
maintaining the general relationship with IFAD;  
  Providing technical support to the state, payams, counties and other 
implementing agencies;  
  Continuously assessing viability, profitability and targeting efficiency of the 
activities proposed by the project;  
  Managing the PCU staff on a day to day basis.  
Qualifications and Experience 
  A Minimum of Master’s Degree in Economics, Agricultural Economics or a 
similar degree from a recognized university;  
  At least 10 years work experience in managing agricultural or rural 
development projects;  
  Knowledge of Programme Management cycles with emphasis on results-based 
work planning and budgeting;  
  User efficiency of the Microsoft Office package (Word, Power Point, Excel);  
  Fluent in English (written and oral) and good report writing skills;  
  Demonstrated advocacy, communications and negotiations skills and ability to 
work both as a team member and as a team leader;  
  Working knowledge of GoSS policies, operations and reforms;  
  Experience of working with a multilateral partner an added advantage.  
107 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Project Monitoring, Evaluation Knowledge and Management Officer 
Duties and reporting lines 
SSLRP  will  develop  a  results-based  M&E  system  embedded  into  IA,  state  and  county 
levels, for decision-making and learning. The M&E system will track, store, process and 
analyze  the  data  related  to  implementation  in  order  to  measure  the  progress  of  the 
programmed activities and provide with useful information for the project management. 
The  M&E  functions  will  also  include  the  following  cross  cutting  issues:  KM,  social 
inclusion, capacity building, environment, and nutrition.    
Under  the  supervision  of  the  SSLRP  Coordinator,  the  M&E  Senior  Officer  will  be 
responsible for: (i) M&E tools development, (ii) implementation of planning, targeting, 
monitoring, evaluation and reporting related activities, (iii) training and coaching of the 
team  in  charge  of  M&E,  (iv)  mainstreaming  of  cross  cutting  issues,  (v)  field  visits  to 
check on result achievement. 
Tasks and responsibilities  
The M&E officer will lead the planning and monitoring interventions of the Project, 
including managing the staff involved in these activities at both State, payam and 
county levels. S/He will also ensure timely and results-oriented planning and 
implementation of the Project. S/He will perform the following specific tasks: 
  Promote the adoption of a results-based management: streamline approaches 
and tools and provide training and coaching to M&E team; 
  Ensure the alignment and contribution of the M&E system to the GoSS and 
IFAD requirements (DSP monitoring system, ORMS, COSOP M&E, etc.) 
  Orient and support the integration of cross cutting issues activities (KM, social 
inclusion, capacity building, environment, and nutrition) into project’s 
interventions  
  Design baseline, mid-term and end-line assessment methodologies, including 
data capture at outcome and impact levels 
  Fine-tune and simplify into Excel-sheets the project result forecast (rule of 
indicator calculation) developed in the theory of change, logical framework, 
COSTAB, and EFA  
  Develop and standardize templates for activity tracking as well as result 
consolidation and reporting based on the SSLRP logical framework indicators; 
and train implementers in their use 
  Ensure the information flow from local implementers, Counties, up to the 
SSLRP Coordination  
  Take the necessary measures to ensure that the M&E will be participatory and 
the indicators disaggregated as much as possible by gender and age 
  Manage the AWPB preparation process and annual targets setting 
  Guide the process of project progress and performance assessment, evaluate 
the relevant indicators and ratios of effectiveness and efficiency, match and 
follow-up the financial disbursement against the output and outcome 
achievement, adjust certain targets if required 
Identify capacity-building needs; implement training and coaching of key M&E 
staffs and implementers, including the beneficiaries especially for the 
participatory aspects (stakeholders’ feedback) 
 
  Organize consultancy missions to support technically the M&E team in term of 
tools development, training, and project result trend analysis  
  Draft progress, results, and closing reports; and provide the necessary and 
essential information to the steering committee, MAFS, MoF, IFAD, counties, 
producer organizations, and other partners. 
Qualifications and Experience 
  Master’s Degree in statistics, or economics, agronomy, veterinary. 
  At least, 7 years of experience in M&E, KM&L, and capacity building 
108 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
  Experience in conducting participatory M&E 
  3 years of relevant experiences in terms of information management, data 
processing and analysis 
  Excel and IT skills  
  Result focused, planner, organizer, and good writer 
  Must possess excellent communication skills, both written and oral in English 
language 
109 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Financial Management Officer 
Duties and reporting lines 
Under the overall supervision of the Project Coordinator, the Financial Management 
Officer will be the principal actor in routine financial management of Project activities, 
responsible for the smooth flow and proper accounting of use of funds. 
Tasks and responsibilities  
  Establishing the financial and administrative systems, formats and procedures, 
including those for service contracting, budgeting and accounts and audit; 
  The liaison function for Project related activities, vis-a-vis financial 
management and control;  
  Liaise with the IA and other service providers their financial responsibilities, the 
funds available and how to access it, and the requirements of reporting and 
record keeping in accordance with prevailing Government practices which are 
acceptable to IFAD 
In liaison with the IA, address financial aspects of preparation of the Project 
AWPBs; 
 
  Operation of special and operational accounts in accordance with IFAD 
procedures. 
  Process documentation and follow up on disbursements from the Government 
and IFAD to ensure that releases are not delayed; 
  Liaise with IA to prepare and submit regular withdrawal applications to IFAD 
and follow up to ensure that the Project does not run short of liquidity; 
  Follow up on all Project funds released to implementing entities and technical 
partners for timely retirement and proper utilization; 
  Ensure compliance by contractors of all financial management related aspects; 
  Preparation and submission of routine and ad-hoc financial reviews and reports 
as needed; 
  Act as a counter-signatory to Project fund releases as required for Project 
financial transactions and also sign as witness to contracts for aspects related 
to Subcomponent 3.2;  
  Maintain all accounting records in a form appropriate for regular auditing; 
  Arranging, participating in and monitoring the conduct of all audits and reviews, 
and preparing the necessary reports; and 
  Carry out any other activities that are assigned by the Project Coordinator. 
Qualifications and Experience 
  Must possess a professional qualification such as ACCA or equivalent; 
  A university degree in finance, accounting, business administration or 
economics would be an added advantage; 
  The Financial Management Officer will have at least 8 years of work experience 
in the financial and administrative management of Projects or businesses with 
similar funding budgets and contractual complements similar to those under 
SSLRP.  This experience may have been in the public, private or NGO sectors, 
but specific private sector/commercial accountability and experience would be a 
pre-requisite for selection;  
  The job holder must possess advanced working knowledge and skills of MS 
Office (MS Word, MS Excel and MS Access) and Knowledge of accounting 
packages (e.g. Accpac, Pastel, SUN Systems). 
110 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Procurement Officer 
Job Purpose 
The Procurement Officer has liaison responsibility for Procurement issues between 
the Implementing Agency and the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries (MAFS). Specific 
responsibilities include ensuring that all procurement activities done at the IA are in line 
with  the  approved  Procurement  plan  and  agreed  on  by  the  Ministry.  The  Procurement 
Officer  works  in  close  collaboration  with  the  Procurement  Officer  at  the  IA,  the  project 
team members and the PCU members under MAFS.  
Key Responsibilities 
  Ensure the all procurement plans are done based on the AWPB and the Programme 
needs/requirements in terms of procurements. 
  Serve as a member of the Procurement Committee and evaluation committees. 
  Ensure  that  IFAD  ICP  and  NOTUS  systems  are  used  by  the  IA  and  ensure  all 
procurements are updated in the system on a timely basis. 
  Support in the preparation of bidding documents and related advertisements. 
  Review  all  terms  of  reference  and  technical  specifications  prepared  by  technical 
staff.  
  Briefing the ministry of all matters related to procurement on the project. 
  Organize the bid opening, evaluation and selection processes and ensure minutes 
are done on a timely manner; 
  Ensure  reports  are  compiled  and  confidentially  keep  reports,  documents,  and 
records of all project procurement activities for transparency and ease of reference; 
maintain procurement files. 
  Ensure the contract’s registry is updated on a regular basis. 
  Help  prepare  periodic  reports  on  the  status  of  procurement  for  the  project  and 
submit to PCU.  
  Any other duties as may be assigned by the Project coordinator from time to time. 
Technical/Functional competencies  
 
Innovative  Performer  able  to  generate  innovative  solutions,  assess  risk,  make 
decisions and take accountability for his/her actions. 
  Leader able to combine strong management, organizational and leadership skills 
with insight, seeking continual improvement and collaborative engagement within 
the  team;  able  to  achieve  results  through  motivating  people  and  influencing 
partners.  
  Planner/organizer able to meet tight deadlines in a high-pressure and high-energy 
environment; flexible and able to multi-task.  
  Strong analytical skills.  
  Strong verbal and written communication skills.   
Reporting 
  The procurement officer will report to the Project Coordinator. 
Qualification and Experience. 
Education:  A  degree  in  Economics,  Logistics,  Supply  Chain  Management,  Operations 
Management, Finance or Engineering, Mathematics, or Statistics. 
Professional Qualifications: CIPS or any other professional qualification in procurement 
is desirable.   
Experience: Minimum of 5 years working experience in procurement within Government 
and/or donor 
111 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Project Assistant 
Duties and reporting lines 
Under the overall supervision of the Project Coordinator, the Project 
Assistant/Secretary will be responsible for providing Project management and 
administration support to the PCU. 
Tasks and responsibilities  
  To effectively and efficiently provide secretarial services to PCU; 
  Assisting the Project Coordinator with all Project communication issues, 
including the preparation and dissemination of the Project Publications 
Newsletter, and maintenance of the Project Website; 
  Organizing, preparing and keeping records of proceedings of, and participating 
in Project meetings, which include Project Steering Committee Meetings, PCU 
Meetings and Annual Project Meetings; The minutes or records so prepared by 
the Project Assistant would have to be reviewed and sanctioned by the Project 
Coordinator prior to circulation; 
  Assisting the Project Coordinator with following up implementation of 
recommendations of IFAD Supervision Missions; 
  Making internal and external travel and accommodation arrangements as and 
when required  for the PCU staff;  
  Ensuring that all pieces of office equipment under the PCU are in good working 
condition through regular maintenance, and appropriate repairs; 
  Keeping track of all utility bills and ensuring that these bills are paid on time; 
  Establishing and maintaining both manual and electronic filing systems for 
safekeeping of Project records, contracts, personnel documents, etc. 
  Managing office supplies; 
  Managing incoming and outgoing correspondence; 
  Maintaining the PCU Petty Cash; 
  Monitoring motor vehicle usage through analysis of mileage and fuel usage; 
  Preparing and maintaining an updated database on Project staff vacation and 
other forms of leave; 
  Supervising the Project Driver,; and 
  Carrying out any other Project tasks as may be assigned from time to time by 
Project Coordinator. 
Qualifications and Experience 
  The job holder must possess a Grade 12 Full Certificate with at least credit or 
better in English; 
  He/she must have a Diploma in Business Administration, Public Administration, 
Office Management, Project Management, or a relevant field with appropriate 
experience; 
  Bachelor’s Degree in Business Administration, Public Administration, 
Economics, Project Management or a relevant field will be added advantage; 
  Have a minimum of 3 years of work experience in a similar position (e.g., 
Project Assistant, Project Assistant or Administrator); 
  Have computer experience in Microsoft word, power point, excel and access, 
and electronic mailing; 
  Be fluent in English with excellent writing skills; and 
  Although project experience is not a critical requirement, experience in a 
similar or administrative position with donor or government funded projects, 
web site maintenance, and any relevant additional project management 
training will be added advantages. 
112 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Driver 
Duties and reporting lines 
The   Project   driver   will report   to   the Finance   Officer. A secondary  reporting  
line  exists  to  the  Planning Assistant. 
Tasks and responsibilities  
  Drive official vehicles of the SSLRP 
  Keep his/her driving license valid and conform to the traffic code and meet 
 
requirements for driving motor vehicles driven by him/her 
-In case his/her vehicle is involved in accident, ensure that he necessary steps 
confirming to rules and regulations are taken 
  Responsible for the day to day maintenance and cleanliness of the vehicle in 
 
 
his/her charge 
-Keep informed the line managers of any irregular happening to the project 
vehicles and suggest the necessary steps 
Inspect the vehicles’ documentation, such as licensing, insurance, and inform 
the line managers as needed 
  Keeps records/logbook as required of the performance and cost of upkeep of 
the vehicle assigned to him/her 
  Assist in identifying and purchasing necessary spare parts for office vehicles  
  Undertakes minor repair of vehicles under the administrative custody of the 
project and obtain appraisals on cost of vehicle repairs 
  Transports official passengers/visitors and facilitates immigration and customs 
formalities as necessary 
  Support as messenger and responsible for safe carrying of pouches, mail or any 
documents, parcels or other articles entrusted to him/her for transporting as 
assigned by line managers 
  Assists in logistic work process as necessary, and flexibility in working hours 
and over the weekend 
  Performs official errands as required, and performs any their tasks as 
appropriately assigned 
Qualifications and Experience 
  Completion of secondary education 
  Fluency in at least one local South Sudanese language and basic English 
communication (written and spoken) 
  Knowledge of driving rules and regulations 
  Basic elementary knowledge of motor machines and a valid driver’s license 
  Ability to undertake minor vehicle repairs 
  Minimum of four years’ driving experience with safe driving record 
  Experiences working with National and or international Projects 
  Ability to travel to the project’s target areas 
113 
Annex 5: Conflict Analysis in South Sudan 
Conflict  has  long  been  one  of  the  social  challenges  in  South  Sudan.  The  country  has  been  experiencing  armed  conflict  since  2013  that 
caused  death  and  immigration  and  migration  of  South  Sudanese  as  well  as  economic  and  social  destructions.  As  far  as  this  project  is 
concerned, conflict will be seen in two perspectives (i) political/armed conflict that will hamper project implementation as well as (ii) project 
induced conflicts. The following table is a snapshot of causes for conflict in South Sudan.  
Table: Conflict Analysis- SSLRP 
Cause  
Description  
Consequence  
Rating   Mitigation measure 
of 
Type 
conflict 
Project led 
Site selection  
Bomas 
-Payam, 
and 
watershed  selection  may 
cause 
intercommunal 
conflict  
lead 
-Biased  selection  of  HHs 
conflict 
may 
among 
local 
communities and IA  
to 
the 
Beneficiary 
selection  
Construction 
of 
infrastructures 
(CDD)  
Medium  
Medium  
-negative 
impression 
towards the project and lose 
of trust on the government, 
IA, IFAD etc. 
-may cause project delay  
- 
-negative 
impression 
towards the project and lose 
of trust on the government, 
IA, IFAD etc 
-may cause project delay  
- 
IFAD’s 
targeting  strategy, 
-Apply 
available selection criteria  in the country  
-intensive consultation with local communities and 
administrators 
-Use climate vulnerability Assessment, if applicable 
including 
made 
-Apply  IFAD’s  targeting  strategy  particularly  the 
women, 
on 
analysis 
youth, 
malnutrition/nutrition, 
including  available 
IDP 
selection criteria  in the country  
-intensive consultation with local communities and 
administrators 
-delay implementation  
-conflict 
communities 
- 
among 
local 
Medium  
-put in place Grievance Redress Mechanism  
-Public consultation  
-effect compensation timely 
-apply quality construction practices   
of 
Construction 
infrastructure may  
-require land acquisitions  
flow  to 
-reduce  water 
dawn 
stream 
communities  (in  case  of 
irrigation schemes) 
activities 
-construction 
may  have  occupational 
health and safety concern 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
in 
between 
which  in  turn  causes  to 
conflict 
the 
contractor/project  owner 
and 
employees/local 
communities. 
job 
Furthermore 
opportunities 
the 
implementation  of  sub-
cause 
projects  may 
conflict  among  the  local 
communities  and  also 
with the contractor 
in  armed 
-SS,  being 
conflict  since  2013,  this 
could  be  continues  even 
after 
revitalization 
the 
peace agreement.  
-depending 
limited/common 
cause 
resources  may 
conflict 
use 
resource 
among  interested  parties 
such  as  IDP  and  local 
communities 
on 
Politically 
induced  
Armed  conflict 
between 
IDP 
and 
indigenous 
people/native 
people 
-delay 
implementation  
project 
High  
-Carryout periodic conflict analysis  
- Monitor progress with the with the government of 
SS and  NGO forum 
Conflict  resolution  strategy  and  plan,  in  consultation  with  various  stakeholders,  and  plan  will  be  prepared  and  annexed  in  the  ESMF. 
Generally, due attention should be given to conflict avoidance through the provision of quality service and public participation. Synergy 
with all INGO operating in South Sudan will use to monitor and mitigate conflicts. Citizen Engagement Strategy, including GRM, will ensure 
the  participation  of  communities  in  planning,  design,  implementation  as  well  as  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  (M&E).  Furthermore,  it  is 
important to work with the government of South Sudan and create a platform for monitoring implementation of the revitalization peace 
agreement.  
115 
Annex 6: Terms of Reference for GALS Consultant/Service 
Provider 
GALS (Gender Action Learning System) is a community-led empowerment methodology 
that  uses  principles  of  inclusion  to  improve  income,  food  and  nutrition  security  of 
vulnerable people in a gender-equitable way. It positions poor women and men as drivers 
of  their  own  development  rather  than  victims,  identifying  and  dismantling  obstacles  in 
their environment, challenging service providers and private actors. It has proven to be 
effective for changing gender inequalities that have existed for generations, strengthening 
negotiation power of marginalized stakeholders and promoting collaboration, equity, and 
respect between value chain actors.8 The project will use GALS to increase the intrinsic, 
instrumental, and collective agency of project beneficiaries recognizing that gender justice 
is critical to positive economic, social and nutritional outcomes. GALS will assist ultra-poor 
households, smallholder women and men farmers and young women and men (including 
PWD) to engage in the value chains more effectively. The IA may contract a consultant/ 
service  provider  to  implement  the  GALS  subcomponent  at  household  level:  The  GALS 
consultants /service provider (SP)will be responsible for the following: 
i.  Adapt and prepare GALS manuals adapted to include Nutrition and Climate 
Change Adaptation for training community/ household facilitators 
ii.  Design  the methodology  for  documenting  and monitoring  GALS  in  the 
field and train  Supervisors and TOT participants in the methodology. This will 
include developing simple formats for households to document their progress 
in a standard format in their record books. They will also implement and design 
a  short  survey  in  consultation  with  the  Social  Inclusion  Specialist  and  M&E 
Specialist to help the community facilitators capture information on uptake of 
the methodology. 
iii.  Design and Deliver TOT (1): The first round of  2 TOTs (5 days each) will be 
delivered  in  each  county  (Year  2)  to  train  household  facilitators,  community 
facilitators, supervisors, County Officials in basic tools for GALS: These include 
but may not be limited to Vision Road Journey, Gender balance tree, Challenge 
Action Tree and Social Empowerment Maps. 
iv. 
Supervision and Quality Assurance (Round 1): The SI specialist will spend 
7 to 10 days in each county observing the household mentors train women and 
men in the field over a period of 6 months. Field visits will be undertaken with 
the Supervisors of the household mentors. The Consultant will provide feedback 
on the quality of the training and train the Senior Supervisors during the field 
visits with a checklist to help them monitor the performance of the mentors in 
future. 
v.  Design  and  Deliver  TOT  for  GALS  Champions:  The  consultant/  service 
provider will design and deliver a TOT for individuals (women, men and youth) 
who have used the GALS training to transform their lives. A TOT will be held in 
each county to train 15 GALS Champions. The consultants / service provider for 
GALS will supervise the mentors through onsite visits with supervisors during 
this 6 month period. 
vi. 
Supervision  and  Quality  Assurance  (Round  2)  The  third  TOT  will  be 
followed by another round of Supervision with the Senior Supervisors to provide 
feedback on the quality of training and assess any challenges in the field that 
need to be addressed as GALS champions share tools with other women and 
men.  
vii. 
The  Social  Inclusion  specialist  will  be  responsible  for  submitting  works  plans, 
manuals, reports on the TOT, Supervisions and for preparing an end of project 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
report, highlighting achievements and challenges. The report will also capture 
case studies from each county. 
Qualifications 
A minimum of 5 years’ experience in training and designing TOTs 
Demonstrated familiarity with a range of participatory and interactive training techniques 
A minimum of 5 years of experience of working with GALS in rural 
communities 
i. 
117 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 7:  Terms of Reference for Providing Various Professional 
Services During the Implementation of the Infrastructure 
ToR FOR THE HYDROGEOLOGIST - HYDROGEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE 
PROPOSED SITES 
A.   Background 
1. 
The events that have happened in South Sudan especially the inter ethic internal 
fighting resulted in protracted conflict, violence and massive cross-border displacements, 
of significant proportion of the population. As a result, there was a breakdown of the social 
structure of the population and disruption of community structures and institutions which 
negatively affected the livelihoods of the people. With the signing of the peace agreement 
and  the  formation  of  the  Government  of  National  Unity,  there  is  a  desire  across  the 
population to get their lives back to normal. However, because of the prolonged conflict, 
the country is still fragile  and food insecurity remains a main challenge. Because of the 
fragility of the people, they continue to degrade the farmlands and forests leading to the 
population becoming extremely vulnerable to the impacts of increased warming as well as 
unpredictable and reduced rainfall.  
2. 
It  is  against  this  background  that  IFAD  is  joining  other  development  partners  in 
supporting the country’s recovery. Towards this end the IFAD proposes to avail funding 
for the South Sudan Livelihoods Resilience Programme (SSLRP). The goal of the SSLRP is 
to  “contribute  to  improved  and  resilient  livelihoods  for  South  Sudan  rural  smallholders” 
The Development Objective is to “Empower communities to participate in decision making 
processes that will result in sustainable and resilient agricultural livelihoods”. 
3. 
While improving reliance and livelihoods requires a multiplicity of interventions, it 
is recognized that infrastructure investments at strategic touch points in the Project would 
be a prerequisite. The infrastructure is provided for under sub-component 2.2 “Community 
Infrastructure to Support Production and Marketing”. The SSLRP is designed as Community 
Driven  Development  (CDD)  project,  thus  it  is  expected  that  the  investments  in 
infrastructure  will  be  decided  by  the  communities,  through  the  community  planning 
process.  However,  given  that  the  Project’s  objective  includes  resilient  agricultural 
livelihoods,  water  for  production  would  be  among  the  requests  expected  from  the 
communities.  It is foreseen that the provision of water for production would be through 
different technologies, among them being boreholes. These terms of reference are for the 
consultancy  to  carry  out  the  hydrogeological  surveys  to  identify  the  sites  where  the 
boreholes will be drilled as well as supervise the drilling operations. 
B.   Objective of the hydrogeological Survey 
4. 
The purpose of this assignment is to support the SSLRP implementing Agency (IA) 
with  expertise  related  to  hydrogeological  investigations  to  determine  the  most  suitable 
boreholes sites in a given Watershed/Payam in a certain County.  In consultation with the 
IA and the County/Payam Development Committees, the Consultant will explore possible 
borehole  sites  and  make  a  recommendation  on  the  sites  recommended  for  borehole 
drilling,  as  well  as  recommend  the  most  appropriate  drilling  methodology  in  order  to 
develop boreholes with the maximum available yield. 
C.   Proposed Approach & Deliverables 
5. 
follows: 
The  hydrogeologist  will  undertake  the  assignment  in  a  multi-step  approach  as 
a.  Desk Study including a review of existing relevant background information/data 
and previous studies and borehole investigations, geological reports, etc.; 
118 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
b.  Hydrogeological and Geophysical Investigations including carrying out field 
investigations on geological, geomorphological and structural features of the target 
areas, inspection of existing boreholes, verification of existing data and findings 
combined with geophysical measurements at selected potential locations; c) 
conduct weather/climate analysis particularly history and trends/scenario of rainfall 
in the area to ensure adequate infiltration/availability of water.  
c.  Analysis of the geophysical data generated from the measurements; 
d.  Compilation, analysis and evaluation of the gathered data and information; 
e.  Indentifying and properly pegging the sites that offer plausible chances of 
successful drilling. Also, suggest on the possible water quality and expected 
borehole potential; and, 
f.  Compile and deliver the Hydrogeological Report for each borehole site. 
D.   Qualifications and professional experience. 
Academic: University Degree in Hydrogeology, Groundwater hydrology, 
A  suitable  consultant  for  the  assignment  should  have  Bachelors  degree  in  any 
6. 
related  field  of  hydrogeology,  hydrology,  engineering,  environment,  physical,  or  earth 
science with proven technical and field experience. A Masters degree in the above fields 
would be an added advantage. Besides having a good experience of working in this sector, 
the consultant must also be registered as professional in his or her field of study and have: 
E.   Skills and Experience: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Performed consultancies in the last 5 years especially on hydrogeological 
surveys and drilling operations; 
Proof of availability the required equipment and personnel and ability to 
mobilize them on short notice; 
Experience and professional training in geological and geophysical methods; 
Proven ability to deal with multiple tasks in a courteous and service-oriented 
manner in a demanding working conditions and short deadlines; 
Ability to coordinate a range of diverse actors and drillings activities to 
achieve a common objective in the area of groundwater development and 
production. 
Ability towards analytical and creative thinking for rapid technical/mechanical 
solutions 
Good communicator with strong interpersonal and negotiations skills to deal 
with persons of various cultural and educational backgrounds. 
Strive to live up to high ethical and professional standards. 
Proficiency in computer software such as Ground water modeling, MS Excel, 
Word, GIS. 
Excellent technical reporting skills. 
119 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
ToR FOR ASSESSMENT AND DESIGN RURAL ACCESS ROADS 
A.   Background 
1. 
The events that have happened in South Sudan especially the inter ethic internal 
fighting resulted in protracted conflict, violence and massive cross-border displacements, 
of significant proportion of the population. As a result, there was a breakdown of the social 
structure of the population and disruption of community structures and institutions which 
negatively affected the livelihoods of the people. With the signing of the peace agreement 
and  the  formation  of  the  Government  of  National  Unity,  there  is  a  desire  across  the 
population to get their lives back to normal. However, because of the prolonged conflict, 
the country is still fragile and food insecurity remains a main challenge. Because of the 
fragility of the people, they continue to degrade the farmlands and forests leading to the 
population becoming extremely vulnerable to the impacts of increased warming as well as 
unpredictable and reduced rainfall.  
It  is  against  this  background  that  IFAD  is  joining  other  development  partners  in 
2. 
supporting the country’s recovery. Towards this end the IFAD proposes to avail funding 
for the South Sudan Livelihoods Resilience Programme (SSLRP). The goal of the SSLRP is 
to  “contribute  to  improved  and  resilient  livelihoods  for  South  Sudan  rural  smallholders” 
The Development Objective is to “Empower communities to participate in decision making 
processes that will result in sustainable and resilient agricultural livelihoods”. 
3. 
While improving reliance and livelihoods requires a multiplicity of interventions, it 
is recognized that infrastructure investments at strategic touch points in the Project would 
be a prerequisite. The infrastructure is provided for under sub-component 2.2 “Community 
Infrastructure to Support Production and Marketing”. The SSLRP is designed as Community 
Driven  Development  (CDD)  project,  thus  it  is  expected  that  the  investments  in 
infrastructure  will  be  decided  by  the  communities,  through  the  community  planning 
process.  An  expected  outcome  of  this  process  is  different  communities  coming  up  with 
sub-projects intended to support production as well as post harvest infrastructure.  Even 
as the SSLRP supports these investments an already identified constraint is the poor state 
of access roads in the target areas. The deplorable state in which the access roads are in 
makes it difficult for the farmers to access inputs or take their produce to the markets. For 
this reason SSLRP has purposed to strategically invest in access roads rehabilitation. This 
ToR is for a Consultancy to assess the conditions of  of the roads leading into the areas 
where the infrastructure sub-projects will be implemented as well as carryout the design 
of the required improvements. 
B.   Objective of the Assignment 
The purpose of this assignment is to support the SSLRP implementing Agency (IA) 
4. 
with expertise related to assessing the conditions of the roads leading into the areas where 
the infrastructure sub-projects will be implemented. In consultation with the IA and the 
County/Payam Development Committees, the Consultant will indentify the roads that link 
the  sub-projects  to  the  markets,  assess  the  required  improvements  and  undertake 
technical  designs  of  the  road  sections/spots  as  necessary.  After  indentifying  the 
spots/sections  of  the  roads  that  require  rehabilitation/improvement,  the  Consultant  will 
also carry out the design of the required improvements. 
C.   Proposed Approach & Deliverables 
5. 
The  Consultant will undertake the assignment in a multi-step approach as follows: 
a.  Desk Study including a review of existing relevant background information/data 
Collection and Review of Existing Data and Documents on existing access roads in 
the target Payams/Bomas; 
120 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
b.  Carrying out of field investigations and activities including, but not limited to: 
· 
A rapid assessment of the  conditions of the identified roads with a view to 
making a determination of the rehabilitation/improvements that will be 
required along the different road sections and structures; 
Carrying out any topographic Surveys that will be required 
Undertaking geo-technical survey as necessary; 
Hydraulic assessment for drainage where applicable; and, 
Construction materials investigation/survey. 
· 
· 
· 
· 
c.  Detailed engineering design and drawings of the different roads sections/structures 
identified for rehabilitation/improvement; 
d.  Provide engineering specifications covering all aspects of the proposed works. The 
technical specifications shall comply with industry design standards and shall 
include the descriptions of the work items, material requirements, construction 
requirements and methods as well as the methods of measurements. The 
sampling, testing and inspection requirements, and production and delivery 
requirements, shall be included in the specifications of applicable work items. 
e.  Liaising with the IA to ensure compliance with the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework. 
D.   Qualifications and professional experience 
For this assignment, the Consulting Firm would field a Team Leader who would be 
6. 
a consultant with at least a Bachelor’s Degree in Civil Engineering, and at least 10 years 
of experience in the planning, designing, and overseeing construction and maintenance of 
rural  roads  and  facilities.  The  Team  Leader  would  also  be  registered  as  a  professional 
Engineer with any of the registration boards in East Africa. 
E.   Skills and Experience: 
· 
· 
· 
· 
· 
· 
· 
· 
Performed consultancies with at least 5 years experience as a Team Leader 
including supervision of construction and/or rehabilitation works of road 
infrastructure and associated drainage.; 
Proven ability to deal with multiple tasks in a courteous and service-oriented 
manner in a demanding working conditions and short deadlines; 
Ability to coordinate a range of diverse actors and activities to achieve a 
common objective in the area of rural feeder roads design and development; 
Ability towards analytical and creative thinking for rapid technical/mechanical 
solutions; 
Good communicator with strong interpersonal and negotiations skills to deal 
with persons of various cultural and educational backgrounds. 
Strive to live up to high ethical and professional standards. 
Proficiency in computer software such as GIS, MS Excel, Word, GIS. 
Excellent technical reporting skills. 
121 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
ToR FOR ASSESSMENT AND DESIGN OF WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS 
A.   Background 
The events that have happened in South Sudan especially the inter ethic internal 
1. 
fighting resulted in protracted conflict, violence and massive cross-border displacements, 
of significant proportion of the population. As a result, there was a breakdown of the social 
structure of the population and disruption of community structures and institutions which 
negatively affected the livelihoods of the people. With the signing of the peace agreement 
and  the  formation  of  the  Government  of  National  Unity,  there  is  a  desire  across  the 
population to get their lives back to normal. However, because of the prolonged conflict, 
the country is still fragile and food insecurity remains a main challenge. Because of the 
fragility of the people, they continue to degrade the farmlands and forests leading to the 
population becoming extremely vulnerable to the impacts of increased warming as well as 
unpredictable and reduced rainfall.  
2. 
It  is  against  this  background  that  IFAD  is  joining  other  development  partners  in 
supporting the country’s recovery. Towards this end the IFAD proposes to avail funding 
for the South Sudan Livelihoods Resilience Programme (SSLRP). The goal of the SSLRP is 
to  “contribute  to  improved  and  resilient  livelihoods  for  South  Sudan  rural  smallholders” 
The Development Objective is to “Empower communities to participate in decision making 
processes that will result in sustainable and resilient agricultural livelihoods”. 
3. 
While improving reliance and livelihoods requires a multiplicity of interventions, it 
is recognized that infrastructure investments at strategic touch points in the Project would 
be a prerequisite. The infrastructure is provided for under sub-component 2.2 “Community 
Infrastructure to Support Production and Marketing”. The SSLRP is designed as Community 
Driven  Development  (CDD)  project,  thus  it  is  expected  that  the  investments  in 
infrastructure  will  be  decided  by  the  communities,  through  the  community  planning 
process.  An  expected  outcome  of  this  process  is  different  communities  coming  up  with 
sub-projects on water supply for production or multiuse.  It is foreseen that the provision 
of water for production would be through different technologies, among them being: water 
harvesting  infrastructure  (pans/haffirs,  valley  tanks  etc,)  river/spring  abstraction  and 
distribution,  boreholes  equipped  with  solar  pumping  systems,  and  so  forth.  In  order  to 
decide on the option that would best respond to the different community demands, it is 
will be necessary to make an assessment in the different watersheds and recommend the 
most  feasible  water  supply  option.  These  terms  of  reference  are  for  the  consultancy  to 
carry out the assessment of the water supply options in the watersheds. 
B.   Objective of the Assessments 
4. 
The purpose of this assignment is to support the SSLRP implementing Agency (IA) 
with  expertise  related  to  assessment  of  the  most  feasible  water  supply  options  in  the 
different watersheds in which the SSLRP is being implemented.  In consultation with the 
IA and the County/Payam Development Committees, the Consultant will explore possible 
different water supply options to meet the demand for water in the target Payams/Bomas.  
The  assessments  would  result  in  a  recommendation  on  the  most  feasible  water  supply 
options for the different proposed sub-projects. 
C.   Proposed Approach & Deliverables 
5. 
The  Consultant will undertake the assignment in a multi-step approach as follows: 
a)  Desk Study including a review of existing relevant background information/data 
and previous studies on water supplies in the target area including: rivers/springs 
hydrological data, borehole investigations, geological reports, rainwater 
harvesting systems, etc.; 
b)  Carrying out of field investigations on hydrological, and runoff features of 
rivers/springs as well as the hydrogeological features of the target areas. 
122 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Inspection of already existing water supply projects  existing boreholes, 
verification of existing data and findings combined with hydrological 
measurements at selected potential locations if necessary; 
c)  Analysis of the data generated from the investigations and measurements; 
d)  Compilation, analysis and evaluation of the gathered data and information leading 
to a listing of possible water supply sources in the target areas and they 
capacities; 
e)  Generating a listing of possible options of water sources for each of the proposed 
sub-projects including a comparative cost estimate; and, 
f)  Compile and deliver the report with recommendations on the most suitable water 
supply option for each of the proposed sub-projects. 
 D.   Design of the Selected Water Supply Sub-Project 
When  the  suitable  water  supply  options  are  selected  for  implementation,  the 
6. 
Consultant depending on the performance during the assessment would be assigned the 
design phase of the assignment. However, should the performance during the assessments 
have been below par, the IA would tender the design phase anew. When the go ahead for 
the design phase is given, the Consultant would carry out the design along the following 
lines: 
a.  Carrying out of field investigations and activities for the specific sub-project 
including, but not limited to: 
· 
· 
· 
A rapid assessment of the  conditions of the proposed site with a view to 
validating  the proposed source/s and suggested delivery systems; 
Carrying out any topographic Surveys that will be required 
Undertaking geo-technical surveys as necessary; 
b.  Detailed engineering design and drawings of the different fixtures: intake works, 
embankments spillways, delivery systems, storage, distributions systems, including 
required fixtures and appurtenances, as necessary; 
c.  Provide engineering specifications covering all aspects of the proposed works. The 
technical specifications shall comply with industry design standards and shall 
include the descriptions of the work items, material requirements, construction 
requirements and methods as well as the methods of measurements. The 
sampling, testing and inspection requirements, and production and delivery 
requirements, shall be included in the specifications of applicable work items. 
d.  Liaising with the IA to ensure compliance with the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework. 
E.   Qualifications and professional experience 
7. 
For this assignment the Consulting Firm would field a Team Leader who would be 
a consultant having at least Bachelors degree and 10 years experience in any related field 
of water engineering, hydrogeology, hydrology. A Masters degree in the above fields would 
be an added advantage. The Team Leader would also be registered as a professional in 
his field of expertise with any of the registration boards in East Africa. 
F.    Skills and Experience: 
Besides  having  a  good  experience  of  working  in  the  water  supply  sector,  the 
8. 
consultant must also have: 
123 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Performed consultancies as a Team Leader in the last 5 years especially on 
community water supply design and construction; 
Experience and professional training in hydraulic networks designs 
hydrological, geological and geophysical methods; 
Proven ability to deal with multiple tasks in a courteous and service-oriented 
manner in a demanding working conditions and short deadlines; 
Ability to coordinate a range of diverse actors and activities to achieve a 
common objective in the area of water supply design and development; 
Ability towards analytical and creative thinking for rapid technical/mechanical 
solutions; 
Good communicator with strong interpersonal and negotiations skills to deal 
with persons of various cultural and educational backgrounds. 
Strive to live up to high ethical and professional standards. 
Proficiency in computer software such as GIS, ground water and hydrological 
modeling, MS Excel, Word, GIS. 
Excellent technical reporting skills. 
124 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR SUPERVISION OF CONSTRUCTION OF 
INFRASTRUCTURE13 
A.   Background 
1. 
The events that have happened in South Sudan especially the inter ethic internal 
fighting resulted in protracted conflict, violence and massive cross-border displacements, 
of significant proportion of the population. As a result, there was a breakdown of the social 
structure of the population and disruption of community structures and institutions which 
negatively affected the livelihoods of the people. With the signing of the peace agreement 
and  the  formation  of  the  Government  of  National  Unity,  there  is  a  desire  across  the 
population to get their lives back to normal. However, because of the prolonged conflict, 
the country is still fragile and food insecurity remains a main challenge. Because of the 
fragility of the people, they continue to degrade the farmlands and forests leading to the 
population becoming extremely vulnerable to the impacts of increased warming as well as 
unpredictable and reduced rainfall.  
2. 
It  is  against  this  background  that  IFAD  is  joining  other  development  partners  in 
supporting the country’s recovery. Towards this end the IFAD proposes to avail funding 
for the South Sudan Livelihoods Resilience Programme (SSLRP). The goal of the SSLRP is 
to  “contribute  to  improved  and  resilient  livelihoods  for  South  Sudan  rural  smallholders” 
The Development Objective is to “Empower communities to participate in decision making 
processes that will result in sustainable and resilient agricultural livelihoods”. 
While improving reliance and livelihoods requires a multiplicity of interventions, it 
3. 
is recognized that infrastructure investments at strategic touch points in the Project would 
be a prerequisite. The infrastructure is provided for under sub-component 2.2 “Community 
Infrastructure to Support Production and Marketing”. The SSLRP is designed as Community 
Driven  Development  (CDD)  project,  thus  it  is  expected  that  the  investments  in 
infrastructure  will  be  decided  by  the  communities,  through  the  community  planning 
process.  An  expected  outcome  of  this  process  is  different  communities  coming  up  with 
sub-projects intended to support production as well as post harvest infrastructure.  Even 
as the SSLRP supports these investments an already identified constraint is the poor state 
of access roads in the target areas. The deplorable state in which the access roads are in 
makes it difficult for the farmers to access inputs or take their produce to the markets. For 
this reason SSLRP has purposed to strategically invest in access roads rehabilitation. 
has 
The 
SSLRP 
require 
4. 
rehabilitation/improvements and had designs of the improvements/rehabilitation carried 
out as well as awarded the construction tender. The IA is therefore seeking to engage a 
consultancy  firm  to  supervise  the  construction  works  and  these  ToR  outlines  the 
consultancy services required. 
identified 
already 
roads 
that 
the 
B.   Objective of the Assignment. 
5. 
The purpose of this assignment is to provide the SSLRP implementing Agency (IA) 
with  Project  Manager  and  Team  to  manage  the  day-to-day  supervision  of  construction 
works on rural access roads rehabilitation/improvement. The supervision team is expected 
to provide professional inputs, advice and support to IA as well as providing the required 
inputs for the day-to-day supervision of the contractor in the execution of the works. 
13This ToR is for supervision of feeder roads but supervision of different categories of infrastructure would take 
the same form and structure. 
125 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
C.   Proposed Approach & Deliverables 
On  engagement,  the  Consultant  will  undertake  pre-construction  activities,  which 
6. 
should include, among others: 
a.  An assessment of the conditions of the site as of the start of construction  to 
generate  a report on the constructability and to ensure that any new or 
emerging issues are considered and the necessary adjustments, including in the 
design if necessary,  made prior to the start of Works; 
b.  Provide the Contractor with the necessary designs, revisions, details or 
information to adequately carry out the works of the contract; 
c.  Supply the Contractor with working drawings, schedules, specifications, BoQs 
and other contract /construction documents to allow the preparation of a 
construction schedule and to review and/or revise such schedule upon receipt as 
well as periodically during the execution of the Works; 
d.  Ensure that benchmarks and other survey information are used to properly set 
out 
While  the  overall  responsibility  for  the  supervision  lies  on  the  Project  Manager, 
7. 
during the implementation period, representation on site shall be in the form of a qualified 
Clerk of Works to provide, among others: 
a.  Adequate supervision and enforcement of quality control, environmental 
management, health & safety; 
b.  Ensure that the contractor has a site diary and that it is kept up to date and is 
accessible to all visitors; 
c.  Issue necessary instructions to the Contractor and record these in the Site 
Record Book/Site Diary; 
d.  Preparation of weekly progress reports for the Project Manager documenting 
project progress in accordance with the Contract; 
e.  Certification of the payroll documentation provided by the Contractor and 
conduct random interviews of Contractor employees to determine if the 
Contractor is in conformance with SSLRP’s and the GoSS’s labor compliance 
policies; 
8. 
During the implementation of the Works, the Project Manager shall: 
a.  Ensure that issues arising on site which impact the progress of the works (to 
include but not be limited to the certification of payments, adjustments to 
design and issuing of site instructions, etc.) where they arise are addressed  and 
the response given within the agreed upon period;  
b.  When necessary, prepare and supply to the Contractor variation orders with 
revisions to contract drawings, additional specifications or details that may be 
required for the proper execution of the Works, after having received approval 
from the IA for those variations; 
c.  Periodically review of Contractor’s schedules and method statements for 
reasonability and compliance with contract requirements, as well as perform 
delay analysis on extension of time requests; 
d.  Assess and make recommendations on the price and/or contract cost 
adjustments for reasonableness, value for money and relativity to market price; 
126 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
e.  Review and approve request for Extension of Time after approval from the IA to 
grant extension of time. The Project Manager must present to the Employer, the 
details of an Extension of Time request within agreed period of receiving a 
request for Extension of Time Claim from the Contractor; 
f.  If the Contractor ceases to perform works as required by the terms of the 
Construction agreement, the Manager must advise the IA and make relevant 
recommendations including termination, if deemed necessary; 
g.  If the Contractor is terminated the Manager must provide the IA with a detailed 
report comprising i) complete inventory of materials on site; ii) an estimated 
value of the reported inventory; iii) photographs of the inventory and state of 
the incomplete works; iv) statement on the state of the incomplete works; v) 
details of the work done to the date of termination; and, vi) details of what is 
required to complete the works. 
A  key  deliverable  during  construction  is  the  Monthly  Progress  Reports  to  include 
9. 
information on: 
a.  Progress of the Construction Works; 
b.  Results of any test that are carried; 
c.  Site safety and environmental performance; 
d.  Claims assessment and recommendations; 
e.  Cost assessment/analysis and recommendations; 
f.  Time assessment/analysis and recommendations; 
g.  Excerpts/copies of site diary; 
h.  Copy of contractor’s claims; and, 
i.  Minutes of Site Meetings, etc 
10. 
During construction, the Consultant should ensure that their activities and those of 
the Contractor are guided by SSLRP guidelines regarding Gender Equality, Environmental 
and  Social,  workplace  codes  and  standards  to  continually  maintain  the  highest  level  of 
professional and industry best practices. 
On  Substantial/Practical  Completion  of  the  construction,  the  Consultant  will 
11. 
undertake post-construction activities, which should include, among others: 
a.  Carry out inspections including practical completion “walk through” with the IA, 
State Government and the County Focal Persons to identify and prepare a  
“Check List of defects” and “incomplete works”  with an expected date of 
rectification/completion – the defects liability period as per the Construction 
Contract; 
b.  Provide the “As-Constructed/Built Drawings” showing the works as-constructed 
by the Contractor, including final pay quantities; 
c.  Preparation of Final Pay Estimate by submitting relevant supporting documents 
(invoices, reports etc.) to assist IA in determining final pay quantities as per 
work contract; 
d.  Prepare the final materials documentation for closing the project; and, 
e.  Submit all relevant technical documents, logs, certificates, warranties and 
manuals. 
12. 
On Final Completion/ Defects Liability Period the Consultant shall: 
127 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
a.  Arrange and attend the Final Completion Meeting at the agreed upon time 
before the end of the defects liability period; 
b.  Carry out final site inspection and verify that all defects have been attended to 
as required by the specifications/contract, and are approved of by the IA and 
Local Governments; 
c.  Ensure that all other matters identified in the Final Completion Meeting have 
been adequately addressed; and,  
d.  Issue a Certificate of Final Completion 
 D.   Qualifications and professional experience 
13. 
 For this assignment, the Consulting Firm would field a Team Leader who would be 
a consultant with at least a Bachelor’s Degree in Civil Engineering, and at least 10 years 
of experience in the planning, designing, and overseeing construction and maintenance of 
rural  roads  and  facilities.  The  Team  Leader  would  also  be  registered  as  a  professional 
engineer  with  any  of  the  registration  boards  in  East  Africa.  The  Firm  would  also  field  a 
Clerk of Works with at least a Diploma in Civil Engineering and at least 5 years experience 
in supervision of road works. 
E.   Skills and Experience: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Performed consultancies with at least 5 years experience as a Team Leader 
including supervision of construction and/or rehabilitation works of road 
infrastructure and associated drainage.; 
Proven ability to deal with multiple tasks in a courteous and service-oriented 
manner in a demanding working conditions and short deadlines; 
Ability to coordinate a range of diverse actors and activities to achieve a 
common objective in the area of rural feeder roads design and development; 
Ability towards analytical and creative thinking for rapid technical/mechanical 
solutions; 
Good communicator with strong interpersonal and negotiations skills to deal 
with persons of various cultural and educational backgrounds. 
Strive to live up to high ethical and professional standards. 
Proficiency in computer software such as GIS, MS Excel, Word, GIS. 
Excellent technical reporting skills. 
128 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 8: Terms of Reference for County Profiles Study 
Introduction 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project [SSLRP] is a US$9.8 million Project, funded 
by IFAD. SSLDP seeks to work with five County Authorities in the Bor, in Jonglei State, 
Terekeka and Kajo Keji in Central Equatoria State and Magwi and Torit in Eastern Equatoria 
States.  The Project seeks to empower targeted household members, to identify, select, 
prioritise and implement livelihoods options that respond to their short and medium-term 
development  objectives.    To  achieve  this,  the  Project  will  hire  trained  Community 
Facilitators, female and male, who will guide the process of selection and prioritisation of 
the livelihood activities.  Livelihoods options will range from agriculture [crops, livestock, 
fisheries]  and  off-farm  activities  like  employment  [Road  Maintenance  Group],  agro-
processing,  and  value  addition.    All  these  activities  aim  to  benefit  individuals  and  the 
business  plans  generated  under  guided  facilitation  will  be  gender  sensitive,  climate 
responsive and environmentally sound.  
SSLRP approach underpins processes and technical guidance by Subject Matter Specialists, 
who will influence the decisions of the beneficiaries in line with principles for sustainable 
development.    As  a  principle,  all  analytical  work  and  description  of  observations  in  the 
Project should be contextualised in terms of how gender, environment and climate change 
are  responsive  they  are.  This  is  because  the  Project  implementation  seeks  to  introduce 
these  themes  as  the  new  norms  in  the  transition  from  humanitarian  to  development 
context.  To link household’s livelihoods to markets, supportive community infrastructure 
like  small-scale  irrigation,  storage  facilities,  feeder  roads  would  be  required  and  these 
investments will be anchored on the activities of the vulnerable households.. Conversely, 
partnerships with specialised actors including with LGs, NGOs working with communities 
in  these  locations  and  national  donors  will  be  one  of  the  cornerstones  of  the  SSLRP 
activities.   
The Purpose of the County Profile 
SSLRP plans to undertake County profile studies covering the five counties that have been 
targeted.  The County Profile [CP] studies will provide additional information for the design 
of  the  SSLRP  and  for  the  start  up  of  its  implementation.    It  will  assess  whether  the 
pertaining environment within the selected Counties is conducive for  use  of Community 
Driven Development approach in the transition from the largely humanitarian setting to 
one  that  promotes  household-led  development  with  a  focus  on  livelihoods.  To  this  end, 
this  descriptive  and  analytical  study  will  use  both  secondary  and  primary  data  [Key 
Informant Interviews] to analyse data and come out with recommendations that will guide 
the  targeting  of  the  lower  local  government  areas  within  the  Counties.  The  key 
questions for the study are: 
a].  Which  Payams  in  each  of  the  Counties  have  better  potentials  for  SSLDP 
interventions?  How so? How do LGs, Cultural Leaders and other institutions relate 
with the different categories of the beneficiaries? Why so? 
b] What are the main development needs of the SSLRP beneficiaries in the different 
Bomas in each of the County? Who are working with them, to realise their dreams? 
What  approaches  are  they  using  to  engage  with  the  beneficiaries?  How  are  the 
community, the youth and the women engaged? 
129 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
c]  Who  are  the  poor  in  each  of  the  locations?  How  is  poverty  perceived 
disaggregated by leaders and the different categories of community groups? How 
does food security and nutrition feature in the definition? 
Proposed Approach 
The  study  will  combine  both  desk  reviews  of  existing  information  and  some  targeted 
interviews administered by the Implementing Agent or a Consultant with NGOs, LGs and 
Local  Leaders  from  the  areas.    Primary  information  could  be  easily  collected  tby 
administering  structured  questionnaires  that  would  require  the  Boma,  Payam  and 
County chiefs and Development Committees to fill and are forwarded to the County Level 
SSLRP focal point persons, for further analysis and compilations.  Specifically, the study 
will: 
1.  Contextualising the readiness of Payams and Bomas. Provide matrix analysis 
of  each  County  in  which  the  Payams,  Bomas,  and  Villages  are  contextualised  to 
inform the targeting of Payams and within the Payams, the Bomas and villages. The 
information required will include accessibility, LGs structures, their staffing, plans, 
skills  mixed,  their  relevance,  and  readiness  of  the  key  sectors  to  support  SSLRP 
implementations  in  the  areas  of  gender,  environment,  food  and  nutrition  security 
and rural infrastructure.  The analysis will highlight existing capacity gaps towards 
the support of SSLRP; 
2.  Development  needs  at  the  household  and  community  levels  –  Through 
secondary and primary information, determine the core development needs at the 
community,  bomas,  payams  and  county  levels.  Identify  the  key  actors  supporting 
the Counties, their interests, their commitments and core activities in the Counties, 
level of operations, etc. How is food security and nutrition ranked in the priorities of 
LGs and communities? 
3.  Social  and  economic  Infrastructure.  Identify  through  secondary  and  primary 
data  sources,  existing  community  infrastructures  -  their  usability  and  general 
Investigate  years  of  construction,  maintenance  systems  and 
conditions. 
responsibilities, ownerships and whether communities had any contributions towards 
the identification and implementation of the same.  Determine if these infrastructure 
like  storage  facilities,  roads,  etc.  are  in  usable  conditions  to  support  SSLRP 
implementation over the next 6 years. Identify if there are actors in the sector and 
whether there are plans by LGs or donors to support additional infrastructure in the 
locations. 
4.   Status  of  food,  nutrition  security  and  natural  resource  base.    Use  both 
secondary and primary data to describe the general environment in the County in 
regards  to  development:  the  status  of  food  and  nutrition  security  in  the  different 
governing levels, identifying the categories of  HHs that are most affected and the 
reasons thereof. Identify the key actors working on food and nutrition securities in 
these areas – how long they have worked are areas of focus, their competitive and 
comparative advantages, the approaches and methodologies of their work. Status of 
natural  resource  base  such  as  type,  abundance  and  diversity  of  resources, 
130 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
development  challenges,  opportunities.  The  study  should  advise  SSLRP  whether 
these actors may be good partners and in what specific areas. 
5.  Formal  and  informal  institutions  and  their  relationships  with  community 
groups.  List, evaluate and comment on existing formal and informal structures at 
the different levels of governance, how and in what specific activities, do they relate 
with  the  communities?  What  type  of  relationship:  collaborating,  competing, 
supporting  and  in  what  specific  areas.  Identify  if  there  are  institutions  that  are 
working  with  children,  youth  and  women,  their  activities  and  impact,  if  available. 
Investigate how they can work with SSLRP in supporting the communities; 
6.  Existing  CBOs  and  NGOs.  Through  secondary  and  targeted  key  informant 
interviews, identify key groups in the communities, their affiliations, memberships, 
periods of existence, core activities and the livelihood’s activities they are engaged 
in.    Identify  the  different  categories  of  community  groups,  their  understanding  of 
poverty and how they define the poor and the rich in accordance with local context 
and  understanding?  Determine  whether  there  are  IDPs,  returnees,  ex-combatants 
and all categories of people in the locations; Determine who are considered the most 
vulnerable  by  community  leaders  and  why?  Child  labour  (Identify  key  sectors/ 
activities  that  children  are  predominantly  labourers)  and  how  the  community 
perceives working children. 
7.  Review  the  conditions  and  current  activities  of  both  the  formal  and  informal 
organisations and institutions that work with communities, to understand whether 
they drivers or not of local development and what can be done to enable them do 
their mandates; 
131 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 9: Terms of Reference for Community Facilitators 
Introduction 
SSLRP is a community driven project. As part of its operational strategy, SSLRP will recruit 
and train 2 Community Facilitators [CFs] per Payam that it will operate in. CFs will as much 
as possible be gender balanced or at least 35% of all the  CFs will be female.  They will 
provide the lead in facilitation of the communities to come out with their business plans 
for support. To this end, Community Facilitators [CFs] will be selected by their communities 
on the basis of the qualifications required for the job. However, the final choice of CFs will 
be vested in the Implementing Agency, who will be charged with the quality of the Project. 
To this end, CFs will lead in the provision of knowledge about the Project, what it intends 
to achieve, and in linking communities to Local Authorities and all experts, who can inform 
the planning processes and the outcome of the Plans.  SSLRP will invest substantially in 
the training and retraining of CFs, who are expected to be independent moderators of the 
development process, bring on board experts, local leaders and civil servants during the 
process  of  problem  identification,  opportunity  selection  and  prioritisation  and  in  the 
development of the Community Development Plans.  CFs will also ensure that Sub-project 
Management  Committees  for  each  CDPs  are  selected  and  trained  before  they  exit  to 
another activity.  
Key qualification and responsibilities of CFs in the Project 
To ensure that the communities take ownership of the outcomes of the Project activities, 
SSLRP plans to work with CFs as the key link between the Implementing Agency, Local 
Leaders and the local people.  Only Payams where SSLRP will be working will participate 
in the selection of CFs.  In order for them to fulfil their roles, the Implementing Agency 
will  be  responsible  for  the  final  selection  and  appointment  of  qualified  CFs  from  the 
suggested  pools  that  local  leaders  have  provided.    This  will  enable  local  leaders  and 
communities to associate with the choices made by the IA.  The CFs are expected to have 
strong  background  in  community  works,  interested  in  working  with  the  poor  in  their 
locations and are best acknowledged by their communities as good listeners rather than 
outspoken  individuals.  They  should  be  analytical,  able  to  probe  issues  raised  by 
communities, and to guide the dialogue with the help of the technical experts. Excellent 
knowledge of local situations and their communities, fluency in written and spoken local 
languages  and  English  are  required.    Teaching  professions,  social  workers  or  skilled 
extension  workers  from  all  fields,  as  long  as  they  are  not  the  dominating  types,  have 
strong  chances  of  being  selected.    They  should  have  a  strong  desire  to  work  with  all 
partners that have interest in working with their communities.  Their key function will be: 
●  Leading the process - CFs will set up a series of meetings, some targeting specific 
categories of the community. They would ensure that all these engagements and 
processes lead to identification of sub-projects, which are fully quantified and the 
budgets  are  validated  in  public  meetings  and  approved  by  County  Development 
Committees.  
●  Moderator of dialogues - they broker dialogue between the CBOs/communities 
on one hand, and on the other hand, the IA, LGs and other actors, ensuring that 
the  intentions    and  processes,  which  are  guided  by  a  facilitation  handbook,  are 
achieved and in good quality.  To this end, CFs need to be good people with good 
personalities. 
●  Facilitator of knowledge - empowers communities with what the Project offers, 
explaining the guidelines and implications of these to the formation of groups and 
132 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
selection of activities that can be funded by the Project. Ensures that selection of 
options  and  their  budgeting  are  all  well informed  by  policies,  technical  facts  and 
local  context.    To  this  end,  the  CFs  will  need  to  bring  on  board  experts  in  the 
different areas of decision making by the communities, covering conflict mitigation, 
nutrition, climate change, agriculture, etc., to inform the discussion and decision 
making; 
●  Support  the  Implementing  Agency,  engage  Community  Leaders  and  Local 
Authorities in the area on all matters related to the Project, including the selection 
of areas of operation, disseminating information on the Project, etc. 
●  Empowering the beneficiaries - Ensure that the beneficiaries and local leaders 
are  knowledgeable  about  the  purpose  of  the  activities  and  how  they  can  access 
them.  S/he  will  be  apolitical  and  Project  oriented,  to  ensure  that  the  proposed 
content of the Project is realised.  To this end, the CFs will work closely with the IA 
and will be supervised by the 
133 
Republic of South Sudan 
South Sudan Livelihood and Resilience Project (SSLRP) 
Project Implementation Manual 
Annex 10:  Guidelines for Preparation of Annual Work Plan and Budget and 
Progress Reports 
134 
GUIDELINES 
FOR PREPARATION OF ANNUAL WORK PLANS & BUDGETS  
AND PROGRESS REPORTS 
Eastern and Southern Africa Division 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
April 2005 
GUIDELINES  
FOR PREPARATION OF ANNUAL WORK PLANS & BUDGETS  
AND PROGRESS REPORTS 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
ABBREVIATIONS & ACRONYMS 
PREFACE 
I. 
INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................................... 1 
II. 
PLANNING................................................................................................................................ 2 
A.  PLANNING PRINCIPLES ................................................................................................................ 2 
B.  THREE LEVELS OF PLANNING...................................................................................................... 2 
C.  PARTICIPATORY PLANNING PROCESS ......................................................................................... 3 
D.  LOGICAL FRAMEWORK APPROACH ............................................................................................. 4 
E.  STAGES IN AWPB PREPARATION................................................................................................ 6 
III.  THE ANNUAL WORK PLAN AND BUDGET ..................................................................... 8 
A.  AWPB OUTLINE.......................................................................................................................... 8 
B.  AWPB BASIC STANDARDS........................................................................................................ 16 
IV.  REPORTING........................................................................................................................... 17 
A.  REPORTING PRINCIPLES............................................................................................................. 17 
B. 
IFAD’S RESULTS MANAGEMENT SYSTEM ................................................................................ 18 
C.  TYPES OF PROGRESS REPORTS .................................................................................................. 19 
V. 
THE ANNUAL REPORT....................................................................................................... 20 
A.  ANNUAL REPORT OUTLINE ....................................................................................................... 20 
B.  ANNUAL REPORT BASIC STANDARDS ....................................................................................... 33 
APPENDIX A. SAMPLE ANNUAL WORK PLAN & BUDGET 
APPENDIX B. SAMPLE ANNUAL REPORT 
ABBREVIATIONS & ACRONYMS 
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome 
Authority to Incur Expenditure 
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Belgian Franc 
Belgian Survival Fund 
Cooperating Institution 
Central Kenya Dry Area Smallholder and Community Services Project 
Government of the Republic of Kenya 
Human Immune-deficiency Virus 
International Competitive Bidding 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
Kenya Shilling 
Local Shopping 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Means of Verification 
Non Governmental Organization 
Objectively Verifiable Indicator 
Project Management Unit 
Participatory Rural Appraisal 
Project Year 
Results and Impact Monitoring System 
Special Drawing Rights 
United Nations Office for Project Services 
United States Dollars 
AIDS 
AIE 
AWPB   
BEF 
BSF 
CI 
CKDAP 
GOK 
HIV 
ICB 
IFAD 
KSH 
LS 
M&E 
MOV 
NGO 
OVI 
PMU 
PRA 
PY 
RIMS 
SDR 
UNOPS 
USD 
PREFACE 
Projects  and  programmes  assisted  by  IFAD  are  the  main  vehicle  for  working  with  member 
countries  towards  enabling  rural  communities  and  poor  people  to  overcome  their  poverty.  
Activity  planning,  progress  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  impact  are  important  elements  of 
effective and responsive project/programme management.  
The Guidelines for Preparation of Annual Work Plans & Budgets and Progress Reports has been 
prepared  with  the  aim  to  enhance  programme  planning  and  preparation,  as  well  as  progress 
reporting.  The document is meant to provide an initial framework (adjusted according to specific 
country or programme contexts) for the preparation of Annual Work Plans & Budgets, as well as 
Progress Reports by programme implementers.  It is also intended to serve as a standard guide 
for  IFAD  and  its  Cooperating  Institutions,  especially  the  United  Nations  Office  for  Project 
Services,  in  the  exercise  of  their  implementation  oversight  responsibilities.  In  effect,  the 
expectation  is  that  the  Guidelines  would  save  programme  implementers  and  supervisors  alike 
from  having  to  “re-invent”  the  wheel  in  search  of  formats  for  work  planning  and  progress 
reporting, while also improving the quality of tangible outputs.    It is my hope that you will find 
the document useful and practical.   
Joseph Yayock 
Acting Director 
Eastern and Southern Africa Division, IFAD 
GUIDELINES FOR PREPARATION OF 
ANNUAL WORK PLANS & BUDGETS AND PROGRESS REPORTS 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
This  document  has  been  prepared  primarily  for  managers  of  IFAD-supported  projects1. 
1. 
Managers is used in a broad sense, including Project Coordinators, Monitoring and Evaluation Officers, 
Financial  Controllers,  other  members  of  a  Project  Management  Unit2  (PMU),  and  Heads  of 
Departments  or  Institutions  responsible  for  implementing  parts  of  a  project.  What  people  in  these 
positions  have  in  common  is  managerial  responsibility,  which  includes  planning  of  project  activities, 
control over project resources, monitoring of progress and results, and reporting on all these aspects. 
The main objective of this document is to assist project managers to carry out two of their most 
2. 
critical duties, which require  much attention each year: (a) annual planning and the preparation of an 
Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  (AWPB);  and  (b)  assessment  of  implementation  performance  and  the 
preparation of progress reports. 
3. 
The planning function is critical. During day-to-day implementation, an approved AWPB is the 
most important document in a project, and the principal guide on what to do and how to use resources. 
The quality of the annual planning process that leads to an AWPB can greatly influence the quality of 
implementation and project results. This process should not be a  mechanical  one that leads to simply 
doing more of the same activities that were done last year. The appraisal report should not be used as a 
blueprint, which could lead to simply doing what that document  states should be done in a particular 
year.  Instead,  what  is  needed  is  a  creative  planning process,  which  identifies  the  best  way  to  achieve 
project objectives and the most efficient way to use project resources from year to year. 
4. 
Performance assessment is equally critical. Project management needs to continuously compare 
actual implementation progress with what was planned, and actual expenditure with what was budgeted. 
Progress  reports  play  a  central  role  in  this.  Implementation  in  a  large  project  area  and  by  many 
implementers,  means  that  an  elaborate  system  to  collect  data  is  required,  which  is  then  compiled  in 
progress reports. These reports should be used by management to identify and solve problems, as well 
as identify and replicate successes. In addition, progress reports have a strategic management function: 
they  should  contain  analysis  of  project  performance  and  changes  in  the  project  environment  that  can 
then be used during planning for the following year and to modify project approaches and strategies. 
5. 
This  document  has  been  prepared  to  address  a  felt  need  among  IFAD-supported  projects:  the 
need for better and consistent guidance on how to prepare the AWPB and progress reports. The purpose 
of  this  document  is  to  provide  a  common  starting  point  for  this,  but not  to  establish  a  rigid  standard, 
because  the  different  characteristics  of  different  projects  and  countries,  as  well  as  government 
requirements, call for certain flexibility. The aim is to provide generally acceptable basic standards, that 
can be expanded on and modified (for example, in accordance with government system) as needed, but 
that would nevertheless ensure that certain essential information is always included. Two fundamental 
questions  regarding  the  AWPB  and  progress  reports  are  addressed:  (a)  what  should  be  included:  the 
type of information; and (b) how should it be presented: suggestions on the report structure and format. 
6. 
These  questions  will  be  addressed  in  two  ways:  by  providing  guidelines  and  by  presenting 
samples. In Chapter II, the process of preparing an AWPB is discussed. Chapter III deals with AWPB 
content: what should be included as a minimum. Suggestions on how to present the information are also 
included.  In  Chapter  IV,  the  different  types  of  progress  reports  and  their  preparation  are  covered. 
Chapter V deals with the content and structure of the Annual Report. 
1 “Project” is used to refer to both projects and programmes. 
2 Almost all projects have some sort of Project Management, Coordination or Facilitation Unit, although their size, 
composition, and level of autonomy may vary. In this document, they are all referred to as PMU. 
1
7. 
Guidelines, such as those presented in Chapter III and V, tend to be rather abstract when they 
suggest  what  should  be  done  but  don’t  show  how  it  can  be  done.  Therefore,  a  sample  AWPB  and  a 
sample  Annual  Report  are  presented  in  Appendix  A  and  Appendix  B,  using  data  from  the  Central 
Kenya  Dry  Area  Smallholder  and  Community  Services  Project  (CKDAP).  These  samples  are 
considered to be in line with basic standards, and can be used as an initial framework for the layout of 
the  AWPB  and  Annual  Report,  to  be  modified  and  improved  to  meet  the  specific  characteristics  and 
requirements of a particular project and country. It should be noted that the contents of this document 
and the samples are not some new invention, but represent current “good practice” based on analysis 
and  discussion  of  AWPBs  and  progress  reports  produced  by  some  25  projects  in  the  region  in  recent 
years. 
II. 
PLANNING 
A.   Planning Principles 
8. 
Many  IFAD-supported  projects  have  several  major  components  and  a  range  of  implementing 
agencies. Activities under each component and by the various implementing agencies should reinforce 
each  other  and  jointly  lead  to  achieving  the  objectives  of  the  project.  Successful  implementation, 
therefore, will require appropriate strategies and clear annual work plans, which will help to integrate 
the different activities, and to coordinate the efforts of different implementing agencies. To achieve this, 
a number of principles should be kept in mind: 
•  planning is a continuous process that takes place at different levels; 
•  planning should include a consultative, participatory process involving stakeholders; and 
•  planning should be objective-oriented, using a Logical Framework Approach.  
B.   Three Levels of Planning 
9. 
Planning entails more than just preparing an AWPB. Throughout the life of a project, planning 
should  take  place  at  three  levels:  (a)  strategic  planning;  (b)  annual  work  planning;  and  (c)  short-term 
activity planning. 
10. 
Strategic Planning. An implementation strategy describes the approach that will be followed 
under the project, including basic principles, typical activities that will be implemented, and milestones 
that will generally be achieved along the way. For community infrastructure development, for example, 
basic  principles  could  include:  participatory  planning;  affordable  technologies  and  low  maintenance 
requirements;  community  contribution;  and  community  responsibility  for  operation  and  maintenance. 
Typical activities would include: regular progress meetings with local project committees and training 
them.  Milestones  would  include:  signing  an  implementation  agreement,  and  formal  handing  over  of 
completed structures. A good strategy or logical model is one critical element for a project to succeed 
(Figure 1). 
Figure 1. The need for a good project strategy or logical model (IFAD M&E Guide)
11. 
An  initial  project  strategy  for  each  component  is  normally  outlined  in  the  appraisal  report. 
Ideally,  project  management  will  increasingly  use  analysis  of  the  external  environment,  needs 
assessment,  participatory  planning  and  actual  implementation  experience  to  complement  the  project 
design.  To  facilitate  this  process,  a  strategic  review  should  take  place  at  least  once  a  year,  before 
planning  and  budgeting  for  next  year  starts.  During  such  a  review,  actual  implementation  experience 
and performance evaluation would be used to decide what works and what does not work, to determine 
2
if the project indeed appears to be heading towards achieving its objectives and whether new directions 
are needed.  
12. 
Review of the project logic is an important aspect of strategic planning. Do the outputs that the 
project  is  producing  lead  to  project  outcomes  as  expected,  or  is  something  missing?  If  necessary, 
modifications could be made to the project strategy and approaches, which may result in deviation from 
the appraisal report and modifications to the logical framework.  
13. 
Annual  Planning.  The  project  design  and  strategies  only  provide  general  guidance.  IFAD-
supported projects are implemented based on an approved AWPB, and annual planning therefore is the 
most important planning activity. Annual planning is expected to do four things: 
take local needs and priorities on board;  
review and where needed adjust the project strategy;  
set realistic targets for the year in line with implementation capacity; and 
• 
• 
• 
•  produce a practical, user-friendly tool, the AWPB, that can direct implementation by multiple 
implementers and facilitate progress monitoring. 
14. 
The AWPB is more than a guideline. It represents:  
• 
• 
a  commitment  of  project  management  and  implementing  agencies  to  carry  out  a  set  of 
activities, produce specific outputs and achieve certain targets; and 
agreement by government and donors that the planned activities are appropriate in light of the 
project  objectives,  and  approval  to  spend  the  necessary  money  as  specified  in  the  annual 
budget. 
15.  Modification  of  the  activities  that  are  described  in  the  original  project  design  can  be  done  if 
needed,  as  long  as  such  modifications  are  in  accordance  with  the  project  objectives  and  the  loan 
agreement.  Any  proposed  changes  to  the  original  project  activities,  and  amendment  of  the  project 
strategy and implementation approaches, should be clearly described and justified in the AWPB.  
16. 
Short-term  Activity  Planning.  The  AWPB  will  only  define  project  activities  that  are  to  be 
carried out in general terms. It may indicate, for example, that the primary school in Machele Village 
will be rehabilitated between March and November 2003, or that conservation training for five resource 
management committees in Sanga District will be carried out during July. For each of these activities, 
an  overall  cost  indication  will  be  included.  However,  the  AWPB  will  not  provide  details  about  the 
number  of  bags  of  cement  to  be  bought  for  school  rehabilitation,  or  how  exactly  the  community  will 
contribute,  or  who  will  be  contracted  as  supervisor.  Nor  will  the  AWPB  indicate  which  committee 
members  are  to  be  trained,  what  the  venue  of  the  training  will  be,  and  what  training  materials  are 
required. In general, the AWPB does not contain operational details of planned activities. 
Therefore,  work  planning  does  not  stop  with  an  annual  plan:  more  is  needed  to  achieve 
17. 
effective  project  implementation.  Each  implementing  agency  should  use  the  approved  AWPB  as  a 
starting point for detailed activity planning; close supervision and coordination of field activities; and 
progress  review.  This  would  be  done during  regular  planning  meetings,  typically  weekly  or  monthly, 
where it is decided exactly what activities need to take place during the coming month, when, where 
and by whom. Individual work planning should be considered as part of this process, because it allows 
for realistic planning based on the time a person actually has available for the project. 
C.   Participatory Planning Process 
18. 
Although  it  is  not  strictly  part  of  the  annual  planning  process,  needs  assessment  often  takes 
place during the initial stages of project implementation and will be directly linked to planning. Needs 
assessment provides information about local  social  and economic conditions, problems, priorities and 
possible  interventions.  These  exercises  will  inform  implementing  agencies  about  what  is  important 
3
under each component for specific geographical areas, and as such will contribute to strategic planning. 
The findings will also be an important source of information for annual planning. 
19.  Most projects use some sort of decentralized or bottom-up planning process, starting from the 
community or beneficiary level, which contributes to the AWPB in varying degrees. This is important, 
but not easy to do well. The people involved are normally project staff who have had some training in 
how to facilitate the planning process. Annual planning workshops are commonly used to discuss and 
harmonize work plans among different implementing agencies. 
There  is  scope  for  improving  the  quality  of  these  processes.  Needs  assessment  using 
20. 
Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA), as a way to identify what communities want, should be properly 
balanced with technical and financial evaluation of proposed problems and solutions. Dam construction 
is a typical first demand by a community in response to water shortages at the end of a dry season; but 
when these shortages are caused by environmental degradation, micro-catchment rehabilitation may be 
more  appropriate.  There  may  also  be  alternative  technical  solutions  that  are  more  cost  effective  than 
constructing a dam. 
21. 
PRAs can be time-consuming and costly, also for communities. Care should be taken to avoid 
excessive repetition of such exercises from year to year. An aspect that requires particular attention is 
training  of  facilitators  who  have  the  capacity  to  use  participatory  methods  effectively  and  make  the 
participatory process a meaningful one.  
D.   Logical Framework Approach 
The  use  of  objective-oriented  planning  or  a  Logical  Framework  Approach  is  not  always  well 
22. 
integrated in projects. It is common that at the start of annual planning, a project is explained in terms 
of, for example, having a certain amount of money to spend in order to distribute a certain number of 
cattle to farmers - because that is what the appraisal report says. The discussion then focuses on who 
should be given animals and how to select and train the beneficiaries. In fact, the project is aiming for a 
certain  output,  for  example:  capacity  for  land  preparation  restored  to  pre-drought  levels.  Restocking 
cattle  for  animal  traction  was  identified  as  the  means  to  achieve  this  output  during  project  design. 
However, there may be a better solution than distributing cattle to individual farmers, and the discussion 
during annual planning should focus on how best to achieve that output: capacity for land preparation 
restored to pre-drought levels. 
23. 
Use  of  a  Logical  Framework  Approach  in  annual  planning  can  be  a  good  way  to  avoid  a 
blueprint  approach  based  on  an  appraisal  report.  However,  in  many  projects,  there  is  a  weak 
understanding of the project objectives and design among staff and implementing agencies, which leads 
to  mechanical  planning,  late  submission  of  work  plans,  and  activities  that  are  not  clearly  linked  to 
objectives. Using the logical framework could improve annual planning, but it is not a very easy tool. 
Its effective use would require that:  
• 
• 
• 
a limited number of clear, general outputs have been defined under each component or specific 
objective, and a good output-to-outcome logic has been defined; 
the  project  logic  has  been  reviewed,  understood,  revised  as  needed  and  accepted  by  key 
implementing partners as a good summary of the project design;  
the logical framework is presented in a user-friendly manner, a planning tool that is more easy 
to use during annual planning than the 4x4 matrix (as shown in Figure 2); and 
•  project staff have been trained in using a Logical Framework Approach. 
24. 
 The most striking feature of a Logical Framework Matrix is its hierarchy of objectives (the first 
column).  Various  documents  and  development  agencies  use  different  terminologies,  but  most 
commonly  used  may  be  the  following:  an  objective  is  a  general  term  for  anything  a  project  tries  to 
achieve, a result is a general term for what is actually achieved. More specific terms for objectives and 
results at different levels of the Logical Framework are shown in Figure 2. 
4
Figure 2. Logical Framework Matrix and hierarchy of objectives and results 
Narrative Summary  
(hierarchy of objectives) 
Objectively 
Verifiable 
Indicators 
Means of 
Verification 
Assumptions 
Trying to contribute to a Goal (overall objective) leads to 
Impact - a little, or a lot. 
Trying to achieve a Purpose (project development 
objective) leads to an Outcome. 
Trying to produce an Output leads to Output Delivery - 
or not. 
Implementing an Activity leads to successful Activity 
Completion - on time, within budget - or not. 
25. 
Accountability of a project will be primarily at the bottom two levels of the logical framework 
(Figure 3): to carry out planned activities; deliver the outputs; and use resources efficiently while doing 
so. The process of preparing the AWPB therefore also concentrates on these two levels of the logical 
framework, and involves defining: (a) activities to be carried out in order to produce outputs; and (b) 
resources required to implement activities, including people, facilities, equipment, funds. 
26. 
The  hierarchy of  objectives  provides  the  link  between  day-to-day project  implementation,  for 
example  conducting  a  farmer  training  in  fertilizer/manure  application  under  dryland  conditions,  and 
the overall goal of a project, for example improved food security and nutrition for smallholders in semi-
arid areas. 
Figure 3. The focus of annual planning
 27. 
How this works is illustrated below. 
•  Under 
an 
train 
farmers 
development 
agricultural 
component, a project uses funds, equipment 
and  staff  (inputs) 
in 
to 
fertilizer/manure application under dryland 
conditions (activity). This leads to a specific 
result: 
o  30 farmers in Maji Moto village trained 
fertilizer/manure 
in 
application  under  dryland  conditions 
(after one such training); and 
appropriate 
o  3,560 
in 
farmers 
the  project  area 
trained  in  appropriate  fertilizer/manure 
application  under  dryland  conditions 
(after four years of implementation). 
Contributing to an Overall 
Goal: achieving Project Impact
o
s   t
                                      ... often as one
                    part of the efforts by various
d
a
                  projects and programmes in 
      a sector that are trying to contribute 
to more or less the same goal.
h  l e
w h i c
Achieving a Project Purpose: the 
Outcome of a component
                             ... if the 
project design and strategy
 are good, in particular the 
  output-to-outcome logic,
    and in the absence of un-
      expected adverse factors 
        in the project environment.
l
i
e
c
a
h
h
d
w
s
t
o
Delivering Project Outputs 
and meeting targets
plan to
achieve
this...
This is 
what a 
project
can control
and is
account-
able for
This is 
what 
annual 
planning 
and the 
AWPB 
are about
leads  to
•  This  particular  result  at  the  activity  level 
leads  to  the  project  delivering  an  output: 
technical  capacity  of  smallholders 
to 
successfully  produce  dryland  crops  has 
increased. This output may not be due only 
to 
appropriate 
fertilizer/manure application but may also be due to other activities, for example: introduction 
of  improved  varieties  of  drought  tolerant  crops;  and  training  in  soil  &  water  conservation 
techniques. 
Carrying out Activities and 
using project resources
training 
...by
doing
this
the 
in 
•  This  particular  output,  maybe  together  with  another  output  at  the  same  level  (for  example: 
improved  access  to  farm  inputs),  may  result  in  achieving  the  purpose  (objective)  of  this 
component and producing an anticipated outcome: increased crop yields and reduced incidence 
of crop failure. 
5
•  This  Outcome  may  in  turn  contribute  to  achieving  an  overall  goal  and  achieving  impact: 
improved food security and nutrition for smallholders in semi-arid areas. 
28. 
One of the biggest challenges is for projects to plan for delivering outputs: instead of planning 
for 10 farmer training courses on fertilizer/manure application under dryland conditions in project year 
3, because that is what is stated in an appraisal report, the question is: what is the best way to achieve 
increased technical capacity of smallholders to successfully produce dryland crops? By concentrating 
on another output, namely improved access to safe water sources managed by the community, a certain 
project  changed  from  boreholes  with  handpumps  in  the  project  design  to  protected  wells  with  bucket 
and winch, because it was concluded during discussions with the community that this was a cheaper yet 
feasible  alternative  that  allowed  more  water  points  to  be  established,  while  easier  maintenance  and 
fewer problems with availability of spare parts made it a better alternative for community management. 
E.   Stages in AWPB Preparation 
29. 
The AWPB for the first year of the project will usually be based on the project design and will 
be prepared by a small team of experienced staff. From project year 2 onwards, the decentralized and 
participatory  planning  process  should  take  over  (Figure  4).  Three  important  sources  of  information 
should be used when implementing agencies prepare their part of an AWPB: 
• 
• 
• 
the project design, which provides the overall framework for project implementation3; 
the findings of needs assessment and participatory planning exercises in the project area; and 
the findings of annual strategic review and performance evaluation4. 
30. 
The  project  design  as  provided  in  the  appraisal 
report  should  not  be  regarded  as  a  “bible”  which  could 
be  adjusted/changed  only  at  the  time  of  mid-term 
review. While the appraisal report is to provide a basis, it 
is  important  for  project  implementers  to  continue 
reflecting  upon  the  project  environment,  as  well  as 
implementation 
to  make 
adjustments  required  to  operationalise  the  basic  project 
design and project strategy. 
experiences, 
possibly 
31. 
First  Stage.  Implementing  agencies  may  first 
carry  out  their  own  planning  exercise,  define  the 
activities  required  to  produce  outputs,  and  resources 
required.  It  is  useful  to  provide  implementing  agencies 
with  a  standard  form  or  forms  to  assist  in  activity 
planning and budgeting at this level. 
32. 
The various implementing agencies should then 
come  together  in  a  local  planning  workshop  to  discuss 
their proposals. This would be the first level where plans 
are  checked  in  relation  to  each  other,  to  the  project 
objectives,  the  design,  and  the  available  resources. 
Synchronization of the activities of different institutions 
is very important at this stage.  
Figure 4. Stages in the annual planning process.
Participatory Needs
Assessment
Project Design
Annual Perfor-
mance Evaluation
Annual work planning
and budgeting by
Implementing Agencies
Planning workshops 
in each operational
project area
Budget information data entry
Activities data entry
Consolidation of plans and 
budget: draft AWPB
Review and Approval: steering committees, UNOPS, IFAD
Print and distribute activity schedules and budget information 
to Implementing Agencies - guideline for the year
Monthly/weekly work planning 
(individual work scheduling)
Project
Implementation
3 The project design and its subsequent adjustments would be referred to in various documents such as: the appraisal report; the 
logical framework; the Project Implementation Manual; loan and grant agreements, which contain specific conditions that 
should be met; letter to the borrower; and a mid-term review report. 
4 Annual performance evaluation can include: review workshops; assessment of changes in the project environment; use of 
performance questions to evaluate implementation experience and results under each component; analysis of past reports, 
prepared by implementing agencies, consultants; etc. 
6
33. 
Second Stage. Implementing agencies would then submit their planned activities, together with 
a  summary  that  explains  and  justifies  the  focus  for  the  year,  to  a  central  level  such  as  a  district  or 
regional  office  or  the  PMU.  Project  management  should  review  the  plans  and  budgets,  contact  the 
implementing  agencies  if  there  are  questions  and  provide  feedback  as  needed.  Usually  the  data  from 
activity and budget forms that have been submitted would be entered in a computer:  
•  planned activities are typically entered in tables or in a spreadsheet; and 
•  budget information is entered in tables, a spreadsheet or separately in an accounting package. 
During data entry, it is possible to add codes to each activity, which identify the different areas 
34. 
where  activities  will  take  place  and  the  institutions  that  will  implement  them.  Using  such  codes, 
activities can then be sorted in different ways, and budget information can be aggregated more easily. 
Third Stage.  There is need to consolidate work plans and budget information at a central point 
35. 
– a head office of central ministry or the PMU.  While it is possible to do this by sending computer files 
with planning and budget information for consolidation, it may be useful to use a participatory approach 
to this process, e.g. organize a stakeholder workshop.  
•  budget  information  will  be  consolidated  in  the  AWPB  and  will  result  in  budget  summary 
• 
tables; and 
activity  schedules  will  be  consolidated  in  the  AWPB  and  will  result  in  tables  with  planning 
information  on  outputs/activities,  including  a  budget  per  activity,  together  with  text  that 
summarizes  the  focus  for  the  year  and  justifies  any  proposed  deviations  from  the  project 
design. 
Fourth  Stage.  The  consolidated  AWPB  is  presented  to  management,  one  or  more  steering 
36. 
committees and often the Ministry of Finance for approval. After this, the AWPB will be submitted to 
the  CI  (Cooperating  Institution)  and  IFAD  for  comments  and  approval.  After  necessary  amendments 
have  been  made  and  approval  has  been  granted  at  all  levels,  the  AWPB  should  be  printed  and 
distributed. During the year that follows, it becomes the main document that is used constantly by the 
implementing agencies, as well as by the CI as a basis for supervision. 
37. 
There is often a deadline for submission of budget estimates to government, so that they can be 
included  in  the  national  budget  and  secure  the  government  contribution  to  the  project.  The  loan 
agreement will spell out when a draft consolidated AWPB must be submitted to IFAD and the CI for 
review and comments. Because annual planning can be an elaborate exercise, it is useful to summarize 
the different steps and their timing on a planning calendar that is  made  available to all implementing 
agencies, to ensure that: 
•  project requirements will be submitted on time to be included in the national budget; 
• 
• 
the draft AWPB will be submitted to IFAD and the CI on time; and 
all key implementing partners are involved in the planning process. 
Figure 5. Example of an annual planning calendar 
The project year in this case is from January to December. 
Monthly 
Work planning for next month - PMU and Implementing Agencies. 
May 
June 
July 
Strategic review by project management, modification of project strategy as needed. 
Prepare indicative budget for next year. 
15th Project management reviews/approves budget estimates for next year. 
30th National Steering Committee reviews/approves budget estimates for next year. 
Implementing Agencies complete detailed activity plans and budgets for next year. 
15th Local planning workshops to share and synchronize work plans. 
31st Implementing Agencies submit drafts work plans and budgets to PMU. 
31st Submit budget estimates for next year to MOF for inclusion in national budget. 
7
August 
September 
October 
November 
December 
Local consolidation of plans; data entry of detailed plan and budget information. 
15th Review/approval by any local management units or steering committees of detailed plans and 
budgets for next year; submit to PMU. 
30th Consolidation of plan and budget information into draft AWPB at national level, including 
separate disbursement plans for donors and Government.  
15th Central management and National Steering Committee review/approve draft consolidated 
AWPB for next year. 
1st Submit draft AWPB to IFAD and the CI for comments and no objection. 
1st The CI and IFAD provide comments; automatic approval if none is provided. 
15th PMU distributes copies of approved AWPB to Government Ministries, IFAD, co-financiers, the 
CI, and all Implementing Agencies. 
III. 
THE ANNUAL WORK PLAN AND BUDGET 
A.   AWPB Outline 
Following  a  planning  process  similar  to  what  was  discussed  in  the  previous  chapter,  bits  and 
38. 
pieces of planning information will eventually reach the PMU, where they are combined in one overall 
AWPB  for  the  project.  What  should  be  included  in  such  an  AWPB,  as  a  minimum?  This  question  is 
now  addressed  using  the  Table  of  Contents  shown  in  Figure  6:  each  of  the  headings  will  be  briefly 
discussed.  
Figure 6. Annual Work Plan & Budget Outline 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
ABBREVIATIONS & ACRONYMS 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
1.1 PROJECT OUTLINE 
1.2 THE ANNUAL PLANNING PROCESS AND THIS AWPB 
2.  IMPLEMENTATION PROGRESS AND PERFORMANCE TO DATE 
Project background 
i f
i
2.1 OVERALL PERFORMANCE 
2.2 PROGRESS BY COMPONENT 
3.  PROJECT STRATEGY AND FOCUS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
Past experience & 
results: the basis for 
future plans. 
3.1 KEY CONSTRAINTS AND ACTION REQUIRED 
3.2 OVERALL STRATEGIC FOCUS 
3.3 COMPONENT A. IN SUMMARY 
3.4 COMPONENT B. IN SUMMARY 
3.5 COMPONENT C. IN SUMMARY 
ETC. 
4.  CONSOLIDATED ANNUAL BUDGET 
ANNEX 1. THE LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
ANNEX 2. PROCUREMENT PLAN 
ANNEX 3. STAFF DEVELOPMENT PLAN 
ANNEX 4. DETAILED WORK PLANS AND BUDGETS 
Next year’s plan in 
summary. 
What it will cost: the financial 
summary.
The details: planned 
activities. 
39. 
This  Table  of  Contents  is  derived  from  the  sample  AWPB  in  Appendix  A,  and  this  chapter 
functions  as  a  commentary  on  that  sample  AWPB.  It  is  recommended  to  look  at  Appendix  A  while 
reading the description for the various elements below, to see what the different sections look like in 
practice. 
THE COVER 
40. 
The cover of an AWPB can function as a basic fact sheet, mentioning among other things: 
• 
• 
the country; 
the official name and acronym of the project; 
8
• 
• 
• 
• 
the financiers and cooperating institution; 
the version or status of the AWPB (draft, revised draft, approved); 
the year for which the plan is made; and 
the date the document was produced.  
41. 
Once  a  good  cover  has  been  designed,  it  can  be  used  both  for  the  AWPB  and  the  Annual 
Report,  and  the  information  can  simply  be  updated.  Because  AWPBs  may  be  used  in  future  for 
reference and comparison, it is important to clearly mention for what year (e.g. calendar year 2003 or 
financial year 2003/04) and what project year (e.g. Project Year 3) the AWPB is. 
42. 
Should an Executive Summary be included in the AWPB? This is certainly an option, but it is 
not a requirement for two reasons: an AWPB is usually not so lengthy and complicated that it needs an 
Executive Summary; and it is actually quite difficult to write a good Executive Summary, while a poor 
one does not serve much purpose. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
43. 
A table of contents should be created: one or two levels of headings are recommended. Most 
projects  provide  a  table  of  contents,  but  some  clearly  struggle  to  do  so  manually,  with  the  obvious 
danger of getting page numbers and headings wrong. Try to ensure that computer training includes how 
to automatically create a table of contents using headings. Once that has been set up properly, it can be 
used every year. 
ABBREVIATIONS & ACRONYMS 
44. 
It is annoying for a reader to encounter unknown abbreviations in a text that are not explained. 
Include a list of acronyms and abbreviations at the beginning of the document to avoid this problem. 
Keep the use of abbreviations and acronyms to a minimum; they are a type of jargon that can keep the 
reader from fully understanding a document. As a general indicator, if a name is short or appears in the 
text three times or less, write it in full. A way to find the abbreviations that are used in the text is to do a 
spell check: the spell checker will stop at most abbreviations because they are unknown words. Once a 
list of abbreviations and acronyms has been prepared, it can be used every year in both the AWPB and 
the Annual Report, and there is only need to ensure that any new abbreviations are included. 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
The  introduction  should  be  a  section  that  gives  essential  background  information  about  the 
45. 
project  and  about  the  AWPB  itself.  The  purpose  is  to  provide  a  quick  reference  for  people  in 
government and other stakeholders who do not deal with the project on a daily basis - but it should be 
brief (1-2 pages). The section could include two sub-sections: (i) Project Outline; and (ii) the AWPB. 
1.1 
PROJECT OUTLINE 
This sub-section should give a quick overview of the project, summarizing the main features. 
46. 
For the CKDAP, the project used in the sample AWPB, this section includes (see Appendix A): 
the financiers (government, loan and grant details); 
• 
•  key project dates (signing of agreements, effectiveness, project completion and closing dates); 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
the project area and target group; 
the goal and purposes of the project; 
the titles of the project components and by whom they are implemented; 
the main coordination and management bodies; and 
a  short  description  of  each  project  component  (1-2  paragraphs),  stating  the  purpose  of  the 
component, the types of interventions, and who is responsible for implementation. 
9
47. 
The information in this sub-section would be static (unchanging), which means it only needs to 
be  written  once,  afterwards  it  can  be  used  in  every  AWPB  maybe  with  small  modifications.  It  is 
therefore not advisable to mix the information in this sub-section with other more dynamic (changing) 
information,  such  as  a  summary  of  implementation  progress  to  date,  or  budget  summaries  for  the 
coming year. It is also not useful to make this a long sub-section that describes details of component 
strategies  and  implementation  methods,  that  is  the  function  of  an  appraisal  report  and  a  Project 
Implementation Manual.  
1.2 
ANNUAL PLANNING AND THIS AWPB 
48. 
This  sub-section  should  briefly  describe  the  process  that  has  led  to  this  AWPB,  such  as 
community-based  planning  that  has  taken  place,  consultations  with  other  stakeholders,  planning 
workshops  held  to  discuss  and  synchronize  the  plans  of  various  implementing  agencies,  etc.  Avoid 
describing this process as it is supposed to happen or as it happens on paper. It is much more useful to 
describe  what  really  happened,  and  if  there  are  weaknesses  in  the  process,  mention  them  and  what 
should be done to improve the situation next year. This sub-section could also be used to highlight some 
key considerations that influenced the AWPB, for example: plans and budgets were reduced because 
they  were  considered  too  ambitious  compared  to  implementation  capacity  and  the  performance  of 
previous years. Finally, something could be said about the structure of the AWPB itself, especially if it 
has  changed  since  last  time:  in  the  sample  in  Appendix  A,  it  is  mentioned  that  the  CKDAP  changed 
from having separate planning documents for each district to having one consolidated document.  
2. 
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRESS AND PERFORMANCE TO DATE 
This  section  of  about  2-4  pages  should  present  information  on  the  project’s  current  status, 
49. 
progress  with  implementation  to  date,  problems  experienced,  lessons  learned  and  changes  in  the 
external  environment.  This  information  helps  to  set  the  stage  for  next  year’s  plan.  Since  this  section 
looks at the past, the information can to a large extent be copied from last year’s Annual Report, and 
then updated based on experience of the current year. Make sure to summarize, otherwise the AWPB 
becomes a repeat of the latest Annual Report with endless pages of progress review. This section would 
summarize at least the overall performance of the project and progress by component. 
2.1 
OVERALL PERFORMANCE 
50. 
In most projects, there are typical stages in implementation. First, it is common to find that at 
least during the first year, most effort goes into procurement, setting up offices, recruiting staff, signing 
cooperation agreements,  etc. Second, during the first few years project activities  may take place on a 
pilot basis, to be increased over time based on experience and performance. Third, the project area may 
grow  over  time,  starting  with  a  few  sites  or  districts  and  expanding  as  capacity  is  put  in  place  and 
experience is gained. It is also common that certain components take off well while others struggle; that 
progress  in  parts  of  the  project  area  is  slow  but  much  better  in  others;  and  that  the  implementation 
capacity of implementing institution varies.  
51. 
General trends as described above would be  mentioned in this sub-section, and the stage  that 
the project has reached in general terms. The overall performance from a financial point of view could 
be illustrated with expenditure to date: this information can be based on last year’s Annual Report and 
updated  with  data  for  the  current  year.  Variations  in  performance  between  components,  parts  of  the 
project  area  and  implementing  institutions,  and  the  reasons  why  these  variations  exist,  is  important 
because it helps planning to become more realistic and in line with existing capacities.  
2.2 
PROGRESS BY COMPONENT 
This sub-section would describe what types of activities have been implemented over the past 
52. 
years,  what  specific  outputs  have  been  produced,  what  interventions  have  been  successful  and  why, 
where  implementation  progress  has  been  good  and  where  it  has  been  problematic.  Presenting  this 
10
information by component would provide a basis for setting priorities for the next year - which after all 
is  a  key  function  of  annual  planning.  Where  does  his  information  come  from?  The  facts  and  figures 
should be available from a functional M&E system, and analysis of implementation performance should 
be available in implementing agency reports and from (annual) review workshops. 
3. 
PROJECT STRATEGY AND FOCUS FOR THE COMING YEAR 
53. 
An  AWPB  needs  to  explain  in  text  what  is  expected  to  happen  during  the  next  year.  This 
section should describe the annual planning process that took place, summarize critical constraints that 
have  been  identified  and  that  need  to  be  addressed,  and  describe  the  main  focus  for  the  year,  new 
strategic  directions,  and  the  scope  of  activities  for  each  project  component.  It  would  typically  be  4-8 
pages  in  size.  This  key  narrative  section  should  find  a  balance  between  simply  listing  proposed 
activities  without  sufficient  explanation  and  justification,  and  too  complicated  presentation  with 
excessive detail, in which case the AWPB would almost become another appraisal report. 
3.1 
KEY CONSTRAINTS AND ACTION REQUIRED 
Planning  and  project  implementation  are  expected  to  get  better  over  the  years.  This  can  be 
54. 
achieved  because  experience  is  gained  and  staff  capacity  is  developed.  It  can  also  be  achieved  by 
clearly  identifying  bottlenecks  and  constraints,  and  making  a  focused  effort  to  resolve  these.  The 
purpose  of  this  sub-section  in  the  AWPB  is  to  list  the  constraints  that  will  need  particular  attention 
during  the  coming  year;  to  identify  what  should  be  done  to  resolve  these  constraints;  and  to  indicate 
who  should  be  involved  in  problem  solving.  A  simple  table  as  shown  below  may  be  a  good  way  to 
present  this  in  the  AWPB.  Of  course,  the  “actions  required”  in  this  table  should  be  translated  into 
project activities in the detailed activity and budget tables of various implementers. 
Figure 7. Constraints that will require attention in the coming year 
Constraint 
Solution / action required 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
3.2 
STRATEGIC FOCUS 
Responsible 
person/institution 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
55. 
Any  changes  in  the  logical  framework,  and  the  general  focus  and  direction  of  project 
implementation, would be described and justified in this sub-section. This could include aspects such as 
proposed  expansion  of  the  project  area;  changes  in  the  management  structure  or  implementation 
responsibilities; launching a general capacity building campaign; and an indication whether the focus is 
on  consolidation  and  replication  of  interventions  of  previous  years  or  the  opposite,  on  venturing  into 
new research and pilot activities. 
3.3 
COMPONENT A 
This sub-section would describe, in text, the essence of component A for the coming year: the 
56. 
general focus; types of activities to be implemented and specific outputs to be produced; whether there 
is any particular geographical focus; and whether new implementing institutions or a different division 
of  responsibilities  among  implementing  institutions  will  be  put  in  place.  Where  necessary,  reference 
would be made to the planning and budget tables in Annex 4 (see the sample AWPB), where details can 
be found for each specific activity. 
3.4 
COMPONENT B 
3.5 
COMPONENT C 
ETC. 
11
4. 
CONSOLIDATED ANNUAL BUDGET 
57. 
This  section  with  budget  summary  tables  should  present  a  clear  overview  of  the  financial 
picture for the coming year: where and on what will money be spent? As a minimum, budget summary 
tables should present three budget summaries: 
• 
• 
• 
consolidated budget by component (Figure 8); 
consolidated budget by category (Figure 9); and 
consolidated budget by financier (Figure 10). 
Figure 8. The annual budget broken down by component and cost centre 
Cost Center 
Component   
. . . . . 
A. 
. . . . . 
B. 
. . . . . 
C. 
. . . . . 
D. 
. . . . . 
E. 
F. 
. . . . . 
Total 
Proportion (%) 
1. . . . . . 
2. . . . . . 
3. . . . . . 
4. . . . . . 
5. . . . . . 
6. . . . . . 
Total 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
See Appendix A for a complete table 
USD ... 
USD ... 
with data.
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
...% 
...%
...%
...%
...%
...% 
100% 
Propor- 
tion 
...% 
...%
...%
...%
...%
...%
100% 
Figure 9. The annual budget broken down by category and cost centre 
Cost Center 
Category 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
V 
VI 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
Total  USD ... 
1. . . . . . 
2. . . . . . 
3. . . . . . 
4. . . . . . 
5. . . . . . 
6. . . . . . 
Total 
See Appendix A for a complete table 
with data.
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
Propor-
tion 
...% 
...%
...%
...%
...%
...%
100% 
Proportion  
...% 
...%
...%
...%
...%
...% 
100% 
Figure 10. The annual budget broken down by category source of funds 
Category 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
V 
VI 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
Financier 
IFAD 
BSF 
GOK 
Total 
See Appendix A for a complete table 
with data.
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
Total  USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
Proportion 
...% 
...% 
...% 
100% 
58. 
Cost  centres  can  be  geographical  areas  where  the  project  is  implemented  (e.g.  districts),  or 
institutions, or both. Notice that for each component, category and cost centre, the budget amount as the 
proportion  of  the  total  annual  budget  is  included.  This  makes  it  easy  to  compare  how  money  will  be 
divided  between  different  areas,  institutions,  components  and  categories.  The  tables  should  be 
accompanied  by  brief  comments,  to  explain  anything  that  might  raise  questions  in  the  tables,  for 
example why a certain district will receive much less money or why a certain component takes such a 
high proportion of the overall budget. 
12
59. 
Other budget summaries that address local requirements, for example using government budget 
codes,  can  be  added.  Make  sure  to  present  the  budget  summary  information  clearly  and  in  tables, 
instead  of  in  the  text  or  scattered  across  different  sections  of  the  document.  Consistency  is  essential, 
both within a summary table (do the numbers add up?) and between tables (are the totals the same in 
different tables?). Try to limit the number of budget breakdowns: once your project has a spreadsheet or 
accounting software up and running, it can be easy and tempting to produce a large number of budget 
summary tables, but this does not necessarily add value or clarity and should be done with caution. 
ANNEX 1. THE LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
60.  When  the  Logical  Framework  Approach  is  used  during  annual  planning,  it  can  be  useful  to 
include  the  logical  framework  matrix  in  the  AWPB.  This  matrix  may  be  a  different  version  from  the 
one in the project design or from last year, in which case the changes that have been made should be 
pointed out. In the case of CKDAP in the sample AWPB, a new tool has been introduced based on the 
logical  framework  to  facilitate  annual  planning,  and  this  planning  tool  is  therefore  included  in  the 
sample AWPB in Appendix A. Alternatively, the traditional 4x4 matrix can be included here. 
ANNEX 2. PROCUREMENT PLAN 
61. 
Procurement of goods and services is a critical management area that needs special attention, in 
order to ensure that project funds are spent wisely, and that the goods and services obtained under the 
project are in line with needs and of good quality. For these reasons, proposed procurement should be 
summarized in a table that lists all the facilities, equipment, technical assistance and other services that 
are to be contracted. Minimum information on each item should include a description with quantities, 
the  procurement  method,  when  the  goods  or  services  are  expected  to  be  delivered,  and  the  estimated 
cost. Contract management is an important task throughout the year that follows from the procurement 
plan. A possible format to present the items to be procured is shown in Figure 11. 
Figure 11. Sample procurement plan  
No 
Description of items/services 
Quantity 
Procurement 
method 
Expected delivery 
/ completion date 
Budget estimate 
1 
2 
Item A. of ... specifications 
Service B. of ... specifications 
Etc. 
950 
5 
ICB 
LS 
15/09/2003 
01/04/2004 
KES ... 
USD ... 
ANNEX 3. STAFF DEVELOPMENT PLAN 
62. 
Another area that requires special attention is staff capacity development. The success or failure 
of  a  project  greatly  depends  on  the  knowledge,  skills  and  commitment  of  staff  involved  in 
implementation.  Staff  capacity  development  involves  defining  the  staff  who  should  be  involved  in 
project  implementation  in  the  first  place  (numbers,  qualifications  and  experience);  and  in  addition, 
defining who should be trained, in what they should be trained, and how training should be carried out - 
which  can  range  from  on-the-job  coaching  at  a  construction  site  to  Master’s  studies  overseas.  This 
Annex  should  show  the  key  areas  where  staff  development  will  be  focused,  by  listing  the  proposed 
capacity building activities for the year.  
Figure 12. Sample staff development plan  
Comp 
A 
B 
Name of person or 
description of persons 
Individual A. 
Group B. consisting of 
... 
Etc. 
Description of 
training/activity 
To be trained in X & Y 
To be trained in Z. 
Proposed 
institution/trainer 
At ... institute 
On the job training by 
... trainer  
Budget estimate 
KSH ... 
KSH ... 
13
ANNEX 4. DETAILED OUTPUT/ACTIVITY PLANS AND BUDGETS 
63. 
In addition to the main text, which summarizes what is expected to happen during the next year, 
the  AWPB  should  contain  tables  with  detailed  activity  schedules  (timing  and  responsibilities)  and 
budget information (resource requirements). Most projects prepare such tables, although the format can 
vary considerably. As a minimum, the data in these tables should include (Figure 13): 
a description of the activity; 
an indication where exactly it will take place; 
an indication when it will take place; 
• 
• 
• 
•  quantitative information: a unit (e.g. training course) and how many (5); and 
•  budget information for the activity, including unit cost, total cost and cost classification (e.g. 
category). 
Figure 13. Sample output/activity planning and budgeting table 
Component: Primary Health Care 
Output: improved access to good quality preventive and curative health services. 
Dis-
trict 
Nya 
Nya 
Nya 
Planned activity & location 
Construct a 100m3 masonry water 
tank at Kiriogo Dispensary. 
Purchase and distribute growth 
monitoring kits to CHWs in 
Kiriita Location 
Non-residential training for 
CHWs  of Leshau location on 
management of health issues 
When 
Q1  Q2 Q3 Q4
Unit  Quantity
Unit 
Cost 
Total 
Budget 
Cat
Item 
x  x 
tank 
1 
466,030
466,030
1 
400 
x 
kit 
30 
5,600
168,000
2 
220 
x 
  course
1 
175,000
175,000
3 
068 
Who is Responsible / 
Comments 
DMOH. To start after 
rainy season 
DMOH. Weighing scale, 
tape measure, records 
PHC Officer. 5 day 
training for 50 CHWs 
Note: budget information 
includes Category (Cat), 
applicable to any project, and 
Cost Item (Item), budget codes 
specific for Kenya. 
Alternative: separate activity and location 
  Alternative: timing by month instead of quarter
Planned activity 
Where 
j 
a 
s 
o  n
When 
j 
d
f  m a  m j 
Alternative: two separate 
columns 
Who 
Responsible 
Comments 
Construct a 100m3 
masonry water tank. 
Purchase and distribute 
growth monitoring kits 
to CHWs. 
Non-residential 
training for CHWs  on 
management of health 
issues. 
Kiriogo Dispensary 
x
x x x
  DMOH 
Shauri Sub-
Location, Kiriita 
Location 
  x
x
  DMOH 
to start after rainy 
season 
weighing scale, 
tape measure, 
records 
Leshau Location 
x
x
PHC 
Implemen-
ting Officer 
5 day training for 
50 CHWs 
64. 
Some choices to consider regarding the format of these tables: 
• 
• 
activity and location can be combined in one column; however, it is worth considering having 
separate columns to put more emphasis on where exactly activities take place, which can help 
with monitoring and physical auditing if that is necessary; 
timing can be indicated by quarter, which is recommended because attempts to do more precise 
planning have not added much value in most cases; but it is also be possible to plan by month; 
and 
•  budget information should include the Expenditure Category, which is relevant for any IFAD 
project; but other codes can be added, for example Item, which are Kenyan Government budget 
codes specific for the CKDAP. 
65. 
The way that planning data is structured in the tables can vary, activities are often presented by 
area (e.g. districts) and by component within each area. In the CKDAP, planning data is structured by 
14
component,  and  by  cost  centre  (district  or  institution)  within  each  component.  This  is  a  choice  each 
project  has  to  make.  In  either  case,  it  is  important  that  objective-oriented  planning  using  the  logical 
framework  is  used,  which  means  that  activities  are  planned  in  order  to  achieve  a  certain  output; 
regardless of whether that output is presented under a component or under a cost centre. 
Some projects integrate planning and budget information in one table, while others use separate 
66. 
tables:  both  have  certain  advantages.  When  using  separate  tables,  activity  tables  (Figure  14)  would 
focus on what activities takes place where, when, and by whom; and budget tables (Figure 15) would 
focus  on  quantities  and  costs.  The  advantage  of  having  separate  tables  is  that  they  make  it  easy  to 
include more detailed budget information. However, this can become complicated, because it requires a 
fairly rigorous numbering or coding system that clearly links budget items in budget tables to activities 
in activity tables, while the information also quickly becomes too detailed for an AWPB.  
Figure 14. AWPB with separate activity and budget tables: activities 
Dis-
trict 
Nya 
Planned activity 
Location 
When 
Q1 Q2 Q3  Q4
Who 
Responsible 
Comments 
Purchase and distribute growth 
monitoring kits to CHWs 
Shauri Sub-Location, 
Kiriita Location 
x 
  DMOH 
weighing scale, tape 
measure, records 
Figure 15. AWPB with separate activity and budget tables: budget 
Dis-trict  Planned activity budget items  Unit
Quantity Unit 
Cost 
Total 
Budget 
Cat 
Item 
Comments 
Nya 
Nya 
Nya 
Growth monitoring kits for 
Kiriita Location: weighing 
scales 
Growth monitoring kits for 
Kiriita Location: tape measure 
Growth monitoring kits for 
Kiriita Location: record sets 
each
30 
This is too much detail for an AWPB - 
but the data must be available for 
reference purposes. 
220 
2 
4,500 135,000
each
30 
350
10,500
2 
220 
set 
30 
750
22,500
2 
220 
a set is one box file, three 
record books, one pen and 
pencil 
67. 
The level of detail that is contained in the AWPB deserves special attention. Finding the correct 
level  of  detail  in  describing  activities  is  a  difficult  balancing  act.  Too  much  detail  can  be  unrealistic, 
removes flexibility and makes work plans unwieldy. On the other hand, too much aggregation results in 
an AWPB that does not present planned activities, but only shows summarized budget lines. What is the 
best  way  to  go  about  this?  The  AWPB  should  contain  enough  detail  so  that  it  can  be  used  by 
implementing agencies for short-term work scheduling. In principle, one row in planning and budgeting 
tables should represent a single activity, with information on what, when, where, and a total budget for 
the activity. Excessive budget detail should be avoided. Several similar small activities can be grouped 
together in one item. Major activities and large investment should be split in components or stages. 
68. 
Some  examples  of  activities  that  would  be  listed  as  single  items  are:  construction  of 
infrastructure (e.g. a borehole, a school block); a study or survey (e.g. a mini survey on the impact of 
community-based  health  services);  a  training  course,  workshop,  study  tour  (e.g.  annual  review 
workshop in district X); environmental rehabilitation (e.g. reclaiming a gully; terracing an area);  etc. 
Budgeting  would  be  in  the  form  of  one  amount  for  such  an  activity,  e.g.  a  three-day  annual  review 
workshop for 35 people at a cost of KSH 217,500, without going into details such as how much of that 
amount is for travel, accommodation, materials, meeting room, and a facilitator. Of course, these details 
are  worked  out  when  the  actual  budgeting  is  done,  and  the  information  should  be  kept  by  the 
responsible institution for reference, but for an AWPB it would be too detailed. 
15
69. 
Some examples of several smaller activities that would be grouped together as single items are: 
small  infrastructure  works  (e.g.  ten  demonstration  VIP  latrines  in  Thirigutu  Sub-Location);  small 
training activities (e.g. five Sub-location training courses in Tebere Location for community councillors 
on HIV/AIDS & VCT); trials and demonstrations (e.g. 20 maize and small grain variety trials in Nyeri 
District); distribution of inputs or demonstration materials (e.g. distribution of 50 rabbits in Kiora Sub-
location  for  stock  improvement);  or  loan  disbursement  under  a  credit  line  (e.g.  15  loans  for  small 
traders in Ndivai Sub-location). 
70. 
Large activities or investments would be split into several items in the AWPB. One example is 
investment in large infrastructure, such as irrigation schemes, which could be split into elements: survey 
and design; headworks; pipeline; major canal; in-field system; supervision could each be a separate line 
item.  Another  example  is  large  procurement,  for  example  medical  equipment  for  a  district  hospital, 
which  could  be  split  into  single  items  or  sub-sets:  laboratory  equipment;  maternity  wing  equipment; 
recovery  room  equipment;  offices  equipment.  A  third  example  could  be  a  large  and  costly  training 
programme,  for  40  senior  medical  officers  in  the  project  area,  for  which  the  classroom  stage,  the 
subsequent field work, and the international workshop could be listed as separate items. 
71. 
In addition to specific activities carried out to produce a project output, there are always more 
general budget items that are not directly linked to a project output. Typical items are utilities such as 
telephone  and  electricity  bills,  general  office  stationary  expenses,  procurement  of  a  vehicle  for  an 
institution at national level, training for an M&E Officer, or meetings of a national steering committee. 
These could be presented in separate tables, again by component and cost centre. 
72.  Many projects face problems with implementing agencies that do not adhere to formats when 
they submit their work plans, which results in either a major editing task at central level, or an AWPB 
with  different  sections  that  are  not  consistent  in  their  presentation  and  therefore  more  difficult  to 
consolidate and monitor. Mandatory use of standard paper forms and simple templates that cannot be 
changed, for example in Excel, are a relatively easy way to address this issue.  
B.   AWPB Basic Standards 
73. 
In  this  chapter  and  in  the  sample  AWPB  in  Appendix  A,  many  details  have  been  discussed 
regarding the content and structure of an AWPB, which are intended as suggestions to be considered. 
Each project should decide how to present the information in the AWPB, and whether to add additional 
information. A key choice is how to structure the AWPB: information is often presented by component, 
and this is what has been done in the sample AWPB in Appendix A, where activities are organized by 
component,  and  by  district  under  each  component.  Alternatively,  information  could  be  presented  by 
geographical area, or by institution, and broken down by component under each of those. Whatever the 
choice, it should be used consistently from year to year to facilitate comparison. 
74.  While  there  is  considerable  flexibility,  each  project  should  seek  to  produce  an  AWPB  that 
includes the following basic points: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
a comprehensive cover page, table of contents and list of abbreviations and acronyms; 
a project outline section that presents essential background information on the project; 
a section that summarizes implementation progress and performance to date; 
a core section that describes the project strategy and focus for the coming year, and that says 
something about: 
o 
o  key constraints to be addressed and proposed actions;  
o  overall strategic focus for the whole project during the coming year;  
o  more specific description of the project focus, by component, or by geographical area, or by 
the process that has led to the AWPB;  
institution; 
• 
a section with consolidated annual budget tables, which present financial data at least by: 
o  component and cost centre;  
o  category and cost centre;  
16
o  category and source of funds; 
• 
a procurement plan, listing all proposed procurement for the year in table format; 
• 
a staff development plan, listing proposed staff capacity building activities in table format; and 
•  detailed  output/activity  tables,  with  planned  activities  and  their  costs  listed  as  line  items, 
organized by component, geographical area, or institution. 
IV. 
REPORTING 
A.   Reporting Principles 
75. 
Progress  reports  are  a  formal  requirement:  the  Loan  and  Financing  Agreements  dictate  these 
requirements,  and  half-yearly  and  annual  reports  are  usually  to  be  submitted  to  IFAD  and  the  CI.  
Sufficient  information  must  be  made  available  about  what  money  is  spent  on,  how  much  is  spent  on 
what, and what the results are.  
76. 
The main functions of progress reports include: 
• 
review current progress compared to planned activities, and expenditure compared to budget; 
•  provide overall status information on the project since it started, in terms of physical progress 
and total expenditure; 
identify problems during the reporting period and steps to solve these problems; 
analyse strengths and weaknesses, opportunities and threats; 
• 
• 
•  discuss quantitative and qualitative progress made in achieving overall objectives; and 
•  provide strategic direction for the next planning cycle. 
77. 
The  primary  importance  of  preparing  progress  reports  is  that  it  forces  implementing  agencies 
and  project  management  to  record  data,  review  progress,  reflect  on  outputs,  evaluate  performance, 
discover weaknesses that can be improved and successes that can be expanded on. It is this process of 
reflection and analysis that matters, hopefully leading to better plans and implementation in the future. 
The actual progress reports are simply the end product. 
78. 
The  AWPB  is  the  basis  for  implementation  during  the  year.  Logically,  one  of  the  pillars  for 
reporting is progress monitoring based on the AWPB: actual activities compared to planned activities, 
actual  expenditure  compared  to  budget.  This  needs  to  be  done  in  a  structured  manner,  and  there  are 
several challenges related to this activity: 
• 
• 
• 
ensuring that it is actually done regularly by different implementing agencies at different levels; 
ensuring  that  formats  used  are  consistent,  so  that  comparison  and  consolidation  of  data  is 
easier; and 
convincing  implementers  that  the  activity  is  an  important  management  tool  and  part  of  the 
learning system of the project, instead of an obligation to satisfy the demands of superiors.  
79. 
The function of project management is to 
give direction (consistent formats), create capacity 
(training  in  report  writing),  follow  up  on  late 
submission of reports (create demand), use reports 
to identify areas where intervention is needed and 
provide feedback (justify the effort). Solutions and 
feedback  as  a  result  of  reports  is  the  best  way  to 
convince  people  that  monitoring  and  reporting  is 
worth the effort. 
A functional monitoring system will have 
80. 
to  provide  the  data  that  is  needed  to  prepare 
progress  reports.  The  details  of  a  monitoring 
Figure 16. Elements of a monitoring system
Monthly financial 
progress reports:
- by component
- by category
- by financier
- accounts position
- assets/services
Quarterly update of impact-
related data for annual 
performance evaluation
Regular update of
aggregate physical 
progress indicators
Quarterly 
implementation 
progress review 
Monthly financial 
returns
Monthly update
of assets and 
contracts register
Monthly update of
physical progress
registers
Project Implementation
17
system are beyond the scope of this document, but any such system would have to include: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
standard formats for submission of financial returns on at least a monthly basis; 
a  spreadsheet,  database  or  accounting  software  to  enter  data  and  produce  financial  summary 
information (tables, graphs); 
standard  forms,  based  on  the  AWPB,  to  record  implementation  progress  and  expenditure  for 
each planned activity on a quarterly basis, and standard computer-based formats or templates to 
enter such data in a consistent manner, to facilitate consolidation; 
standard forms to record project results, in terms of activities  completed and  specific outputs 
produced,  which  will  be  the  basis  for  physical  progress  summary  information,  and  standard 
computer-based formats or templates to enter that data in a consistent manner; and 
standard forms and computer-based formats or templates to enter data on project resources, in 
particular registers of assets and contracts. 
81. 
The first formal external project evaluation is usually a Mid-Term Review, which may or may 
not include a quantitative assessment; often, the first quantitative impact assessment is towards the end 
of the implementation period. It is risky to wait that long to evaluate whether a project is heading in the 
right  direction,  and  there  is  need  to  regularly  and  systematically  collect  impact-related  information 
earlier on. Based on the findings, conclusions should be drawn during Annual Performance Evaluation 
about  the  extent  to  which  the  project  is  moving  in  the  right  direction,  and  whether  there  is  need  to 
modify any project strategies. 
82. 
First, annual performance evaluation should look at implementation results of the past year: the 
actual activities that took place compared to what was planned; the actual outputs that were produced 
compared  to  targets;  and  the  actual  expenditure  compared  to  the  budget.  Conclusions  will  be  drawn 
about  implementation  progress,  capacity,  and  efficiency  in  terms  of  the  use  of  project  resources. 
Second, annual performance evaluation should assess the results or outcomes of components. Important 
aspects to be considered can include: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
the condition and use of resources and facilities established under the project (e.g. water points, 
markets, irrigation facilities, roads, schools);  
capacity,  attitudes  and  performance  of  actors  (e.g.  village  health  committees,  producer 
associations, local resource management committees, savings groups, traders);  
the  adoption  of  methods  (e.g.  sustainable  resource  management,  improved  sanitation,  new 
fertilizer/manure application methods, savings culture); and 
the opinion of the target group about improvements in the local situation and quality of services 
they  receive  (e.g.  market  access,  price  information,  training  and  demonstrations,  community-
based health services). 
B.   IFAD’s Results Management System 
83.  While the primary users of the information on implementation progress are project management 
and  other  local  stakeholders,  there  is  also  a  need  for  M&E  systems  and  reports  to  satisfy  minimum 
requirements by IFAD.  Following the call by the Governing Council in February 2003 for the Fund to 
“establish  a  comprehensive  system  for  measuring  and  reporting  on  the  results  and  impact  of  IFAD-
supported  country  programmes”,  the  Executive  Board  of  IFAD  in  December  2003  approved  the 
“Framework  for  Results  and  Impact  Management”  now  referred  to  as  the  Results  and  Impact 
Management  System  (RIMS)5.    In  accordance  with  this  decision,  IFAD  is  required  to  report  to  the 
Executive  Board  April  sessions  on  the  results  and  impact  of  the  portfolio  based  on  a  number  of 
standardized indicators in an aggregated manner.   
84. 
This does not mean that all projects will be required to report on all RIMS indicators. However, 
each project will be expected to report on RIMS indicators of direct relevance to the project, and on a 
5 The document is available at IFAD’s website: http://www.ifad.org/gbdocs/eb/80/e/EB-2003-80-R-6-REV-1.pdf  
18
number  of  mandatory  indicators:  two  ‘anchor’  impact  indicators6  (number  of  households  with 
improvement  in  a  household  assets  ownership  index,  and  reduction  in  the  prevalence  of  child 
malnutrition); the number of households that have improved food security; and the number of persons 
receiving project services.  
85.  What are the main practical implications of this new system for projects? The relevant RIMS 
indicators to be included in a project’s M&E system need to be identified and agreed upon with IFAD.  
Again, this does not mean that monitoring and reporting systems will only focus on RIMS indicators, 
these would be additional to what already exists. Data and information on the agreed RIMS indicators 
that are relevant to the project will be reported preferably within the context of regular progress reports.  
For  ease  of  reference  and  aggregation  at  IFAD,  the  data  on  RIMS  indicators  should  be  clearly 
distinguishable  from  other  indicators  used  by  the  project,  and  should  be  presented  in  a  standard 
tabulated format in progress reports. The table that summarizes physical progress in the annual report in 
this guideline follows the format that is proposed at this stage. The data reported under RIMS will then 
be  consolidated  at  IFAD  level.  Since  the  system  is  still  under  development,  more  details  will  be 
forthcoming separately. 
C.   Types of Progress Reports 
86. 
Progress  reports  are  the  most  tangible  result  of  monitoring.  Usually,  a  distinction  is  made 
between  quarterly,  half-yearly  and  annual  reports.  Monthly  reports  are  not  strongly  recommended, 
although specific implementing agencies may use monthly reports as part of their internal management 
systems. For an IFAD project, however, a month is generally too short to record significant change and 
prepare a consolidated report.  
87. 
The function of quarterly and half-yearly reports is similar. It is recommended to see quarterly 
progress reports as internal reports of the project. These reports should concentrate on detailed review 
of actual achievements compared to planned activities and actual expenditure compared to budgets, and 
they  would  primarily  consist  of  a  collection  of  progress  review  forms  that  have  been  submitted  by 
various  implementing  agencies  (Figure  17).  The  PMU  would  add  a  brief  analysis  of  implementation 
progress  (1-2  pages),  to  highlight  main  achievements,  to  identify  problems  such  as  delays  or  over-
expenditure, and the factors that cause such deviation. The result should be immediate intervention and 
problem-solving by management.  
Figure 17. Outline for quarterly and half-yearly reports 
1.  MAIN ACHIEVEMENTS AND IMPLEMENTATION PROBLEMS (1-2 pages) 
2.  MANAGEMENT RESPONSE AND PROPOSED ACTIONS (½-1 page) 
3.  DETAILED AWPB-BASED PROGRESS REVIEW 
Component: ... 
Output: ...  
Planned activity & 
location 
Unit 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
etc. 
Budget  Cat 
Item 
Achievements & 
comments 
Quan-
tity 
KSH . . . 
. . . 
KSH . . . 
. . . 
KSH . . . 
. . . 
 . .. . .   KSH . . . 
KSH . . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
This is from the AWPB.
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
Project 
expenditure 
KSH . . . 
KSH . . . 
KSH . . . 
KSH . . . 
KSH . . . 
Beneficiary 
contribution 
KSH . . . 
KSH . . . 
KSH . . . 
KSH . . . 
KSH . . . 
This is progress 
information. 
This format is discussed in more detail under the 
Annual Report
6 For ongoing projects that carried out baseline surveys prior to approval of RIMS framework, Mid-Term Review will identify 
the  RIMS  impact  indicators  for  which  baseline  data  already  exists.  A  suggested  standard  methodology  for  benchmark  and 
impact surveys is being developed and is expected to be available by September 2005. 
19
88. 
Half-yearly reports would normally be submitted to the CI and IFAD, but they would still have 
a similar function. Because of their short-term nature and internal  management function, presentation 
and  eloquent  writing  are  not  first  priorities  for  these  reports:  a  comprehensive,  tabulated  review  of 
planned activities and their cost is sufficient. Again, a few pages with analytical observations should be 
added,  listing  key  achievements,  major  deviations,  implementation  issues,  resource  constraints,  and 
solutions. 
89. 
The  nature  of  annual  reports  is  different.  At  least  once  per  year  stocktaking  is  necessary,  in 
terms  of  where  the  project  comes  from  and  where  it  is  going.  In  addition  to  a  simple  review  of 
implementation  progress,  this  requires  analysis  by  project  management.  A  full  picture  of  project 
resources, achievements of the past year and since the beginning of the project, as well as annual and 
cumulative  expenditure  needs  to  be  presented.  Analysis  is  required  of  successful  approaches  and 
outputs, failures and constraints, performance of implementing partners, and whether progress is being 
made towards achieving objectives. Such analysis should lead to conclusions about the effectiveness of 
project  strategies,  the  need  for  modification  of  the  logical  framework,  and  planning  for  the  following 
year. Because of the importance of annual reports, their content and structure is discussed in detail in 
the next chapter, and a sample Annual Report is presented in Appendix B. 
90. 
There are various specific  financial reporting  requirements,  which can vary by project. These 
are described in the loan or financing agreement, and it is important to check those requirements and 
plan  for  them,  so  that  the  necessary  data  is  available  when  needed.  To  illustrate,  the  following  are 
requirements taken from the loan agreement of a certain project: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
financial statements of the operations, resources and expenditures related to the project, should 
be delivered to IFAD and the CI within three months of the end of each fiscal year; 
a  certified  copy  of  a  long  form  audit  report  in  accordance  with  international  accounting 
standards will be delivered to IFAD  and the CI within six  months after the end of any fiscal 
year; 
statements  of  expenditure,  based  on  which  withdrawals  from  the  loan  account  may  be  made, 
will be retained by the project and kept for inspection by representatives of IFAD and the CI; 
and 
activities financed by the donor who is co-financing the project will be separately covered in 
financial reports. 
91. 
In addition to the above, a variety of special reports may be prepared under the project: 
reports on the findings of needs assessment, diagnostic studies, other studies and surveys; 
analytical reports by implementing agencies; 
completion reports for construction of infrastructure, including certification of completion; 
• 
• 
• 
•  Environmental Impact Assessment reports; 
• 
• 
• 
reports by contracted service providers (consultants, NGOs, etc.); 
evaluation reports (baseline survey report, case studies, impact assessment reports); and 
staff appraisal reports, related to the performance of project staff and implementing agencies. 
All reports must be properly stored for future reference: there is as much scope for improving 
92. 
filing  systems  in  most  projects  as  there  is  scope  for  improving  reporting.  This  is  another  important 
M&E responsibility. It is advisable to include the various dates by which reports are to be submitted in 
a monitoring & reporting calendar, similar to the planning calendar presented in chapter 2. 
V. 
THE ANNUAL REPORT 
A.   Annual Report Outline 
93. 
Hopefully  based  on  a  functional  M&E  system,  different  types  of  data  will  be  collected 
throughout the year and will be combined, together with progress reports that are submitted by various 
implementing agencies, into the Annual Report. What should be included in such an Annual Report, as 
20
a minimum, and how can the information be structured? This question is now addressed using the Table 
of  Contents  shown  in  Figure  18.  This  Table  of  Contents  has  been  derived  from  the  sample  Annual 
Report presented in Appendix B, and each of the headings will be briefly discussed. Please refer to the 
sample  Annual  Report  to  see  what  the  different  sections  look  like  in  practice,  while  reading  the 
description for the various elements below. 
Figure 18. Outline for annual reports 
ABBREVIATIONS & ACRONYMS 
CURRENCY UNITS, WEIGHTS & MEASURES 
MAP OF THE PROJECT AREA 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
1.1 PROJECT OUTLINE 
1.2 ABOUT THIS ANNUAL REPORT 
Project background. 
2.  SUMMARY OF IMPLEMENTATION PROGRESS TO DATE 
2.1 PHYSICAL/TECHNICAL PROGRESS SUMMARY 
2.2 FINANCIAL PROGRESS SUMMARY 
3.  DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION PROGRESS BY COMPONENT 
Key financial tables and 
physical progress indicators 
table. 
3.1 COMPONENT A.  
3.2 COMPONENT B. 
3.3 COMPONENT C. 
ETC. 
4.  PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT 
Description of 
results of the past 
year. 
4.1 THE PROJECT ENVIRONMENT 
4.2 IMPLEMENTATION CONSTRAINTS 
4.3 SUCCESSFUL APPROACHES AND LESSONS LEARNED 
4.4 PROJECT OUTCOMES AND IMPACT  
Analysis by project 
implementers and 
managers. 
5.  THE WAY FORWARD 
ANNEX 1. MAPS SHOWING DISTRIBUTION OF PROJECT INTERVENTIONS 
ANNEX 2. PROCUREMENT AND CONTRACTS 
ANNEX 3. ADDITIONAL FINANCIAL REPORT 
ANNEX 4. KEY PROJECT STAFF 
ANNEX 5. ACTION ON SUPERVISION MISSION RECOMMENDATIONS 
ANNEX 6. DETAILED AWPB-BASED PROGRESS REVIEW 
COMPONENT A. 
COMPONENT B. 
COMPONENT C. 
ETC. 
The details: tables with 
planned activities and actual 
achievements. 
ABBREVIATIONS & ACRONYMS 
The same comments as those made under the AWPB apply here. A good list of abbreviations 
94. 
and  acronyms  only  needs  to  be  prepared  once,  and  can  then  be  used  in  all  the  AWPBs  and  Annual 
Reports. There will only be need for annual updates, if any new abbreviations are included. It is good 
practice to also list the currency units (KSH, SDR, USD), weights (pound, ton, bag... of how many kg?) 
and  other  measures  (acre,  hectare),  and  in  particular  any  measures  that  would  not  be  widely  known 
(ndebe, bale... of how many kg?). Exchange rates  are especially important because they fluctuate over 
time, and affect variables  such as budget-expenditure comparisons and balances of project  funds. For 
example,  at  year-end  rates,  a  modest  devaluation  of  7%  will  mean  that  a  70%  expenditure-to-budget 
ratio in Kenya Shilling terms is equal to a 65% expenditure-to-budget ratio in USD terms. 
MAP OF THE PROJECT AREA 
A general map of the project area is useful as a reminder for those who are not involved in the 
95. 
project on a daily basis. There are ways to make the map extra useful though. In particular, indicating 
how the project area has expanded over time would be valuable. This can be done by using different 
colours  or  shading  for  those  parts  of  the  project  where  activities  have  been  going  on  since  the 
21
beginning; where activities started in PY2; where activities started in PY3; etc. The CKDAP has done 
this on its map in Appendix B. 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
An Executive Summary may be included but is not a requirement, because an Annual Report 
96. 
should  not  be  so  lengthy  and  complicated  that  it  needs  an  Executive  Summary.  Moreover,  section  2 
largely  functions  as  an  Executive  Summary.  The  introduction  should  include  some  background 
information  about  the  project  and  about  the  Annual  Report,  mainly  as  a  reminder  for  people  in 
government or outsiders who do not deal with the project on a daily basis. The section would include at 
least two sub-sections: Project Outline; and About this Annual Report. 
1.1 
PROJECT OUTLINE 
97. 
This sub-section would be the same as the one in the AWPB, except maybe for minor changes 
that are necessitated by what has happened during the past year - but those would be minimal, and the 
information in this section will not change much from year to year. 
1.2 
ABOUT THIS ANNUAL REPORT 
98. 
This sub-section could describe on what information this Annual Report is based, which could 
include  mentioning  specific  progress  reports  that  have  been  received  from  implementing  agencies, 
consultants’  reports,  studies,  important  elements  of  the  M&E  system  such  as  registers  of  assets  and 
contracts, etc. It could also be useful to indicate how the report has been prepared. The basic facts and 
figures  are  often  verified  and  consolidated  by  an  M&E  Officer,  who  may  write  much  of  the  Annual 
Report.  However,  other  people  may  be  involved  especially  in  writing  analytical  sections,  and  the 
findings  may  have  been  arrived  at  during  one  or  more  review  workshops,  or  through  specific  impact 
studies. Similar to the AWPB, this sub-section could also be used to say something about the structure 
of the Annual Report itself, especially if it has changed since last time. 
2. 
SUMMARY OF IMPLEMENTATION PROGRESS TO DATE 
99. 
To  some  extent,  this  section  functions  as  an  Executive  Summary,  because  it  presents  the 
financial  and  physical  progress  of  the  project  on  a  few  pages,  mostly  in  tabulated  form.    The  section 
should  capture  implementation  progress  not  only  for  the  particular  year  covered  by  the  report  but 
cumulative progress.  It would also be important and useful to include combined/integrated analysis of 
financial and physical aspects: i.e. the budget and expenditure against physical targets and achievements 
(e.g. 80% of the budget has been spent on achieving 20% of physical progress targets).  
2.1 
PHYSICAL/TECHNICAL PROGRESS SUMMARY 
The information in this sub-section will be based on detailed monitoring data that is collected 
100. 
from the field and which may be submitted by various implementing agencies. This data will have to be 
interpreted  and  summarized  by  an  M&E  Officer  or  PMU  in  order  to  produce  a  physical  progress 
summary.  
101. 
The aim of this section is to provide a quick insight into project results, principally at the level 
of  key  activities  completed  and  specific  outputs  produced.  Normally,  only  activities  and  outputs  that 
have been completed would be listed, not those that are ongoing but incomplete. The table may initially 
be set up using results that are defined in the project design (appraisal report). For some of these results 
total project targets will be included, while for others quantities are omitted. Other activities and outputs 
can be added over time as they become relevant. Ideally, targets for activities and specific outputs will 
be clearly defined in an AWPB, but in practice even there quantities are sometimes missing. 
102. 
Figure 19 shows a simple format to present physical progress summary information: items are 
listed,  actual  results  for  the  year  are  compared  to  the  AWPB,  cumulative  total  results  to  date  are 
22
compared with the total project target in the project design, and there is a column for comments. This 
format is in line with the new RIMS of IFAD. Other columns could of course be added, but it has been 
found that more detailed information is either hard to find in practice or doesn’t add much value, and 
the simple format is considered quite sufficient. 
Figure 19. Summary of physical progress 
Specific for IFAD’s new RIMS.
Project results 
Unit 
RIMS 
level 
AWPB 
target 
Achieved 
this year
% 
Total 
project 
target
Cumulative 
Achieve-
ments 
key activity / 
specific result 1 
key activity / 
specific result 2 
key activity / 
specific result 3 
key activity / 
specific result 4 
key activity / 
specific result 5 
Etc. 
1 
1 
men 
women 
group 
unit 
2 
group 
5 
15 
na 
na 
2 
7 
5 
14 
2 
2 
140 
na 
33 
125 
na 
na 
62 
na 
100 
12 
19 
19 
59 
6 
6 
Comments 
Low effectiveness; no longer a 
priority 
High adoption rate, will be 
given more emphasis in future 
% 
na 
15 
95 
na 
50 
average 15 participants 
Total Project: 
planned 
& achieved
103.  A  word  of  caution  is  necessary.  The  format  of  this  table  may  reinforce  the  idea  that  all  the 
quantitative targets for the various key activities and specific outputs (in the appraisal report) must be 
achieved. This is not the case, and this is where the “comments” column is important. The purpose of 
this table is on the one hand to show physical progress for the project as a whole towards delivering a 
total set of anticipated activities/outputs, but on the other hand to show where the project has decided to 
deviate  from  original  targets,  as  indicated  by  comments  such  as  “Low  effectiveness;  no  longer  a 
priority”  or  “High  adoption  rate,  will  be  given  more  emphasis  in  future”.  It  is,  for  example,  quite 
normal that during the later years of a project, activities/outputs that were never included in the project 
design show up in this table, because they were found necessary or effective, with the comment: “New 
activity not in the project design”.  This also indicates the importance of periodic strategic reviews and 
learning for planning. 
2.1 
FINANCIAL PROGRESS SUMMARY 
104. 
The  data  for  this  sub-section  will  most  likely  come  from  a  Project  Accountant  or  Financial 
Controller,  who  uses  an  accounting  system  to  enter,  analyze  and  report  on  all  financial  transactions. 
This system can range from a simple spreadsheet or database to advanced accounting software. Based 
on  the  detailed  information  in  the  accounting  system,  summary  tables  should  be  prepared  for  project 
management, implementing agencies, government and donors, on the overall financial performance and 
status of the project. This would include, as a minimum:  
expenditure by cost center and component; 
expenditure by cost center and category; 
• 
• 
•  disbursement by financier (external sources of funds); 
•  government and beneficiary contributions (local contributions); and 
• 
the status of project accounts. 
105. 
Each  of  the  main  project  components  has  an  approximate  budget  in  the  project  design.  Each 
component  pursues  its  objective,  and  jointly  the  components  will  contribute  to  achieving  the  overall 
project goal. In this regard, the balance between the components, in terms of implementing activities, 
achieving outputs and using up the associated budget, is important. When expenditure under a certain 
component  falls  far  behind  the  planned  expenditure,  this  should  be  cause  for  concern,  the  reasons 
should be investigated and action taken. Financial progress by component (Figure 20) will provide the 
23
information that is necessary to detect such an imbalance in expenditure. The information will also be 
useful  to  assess  whether  budgeting  is  realistic  and  to  track  expenditure  over  time.  As  an  option, 
expenditure by component compared to the project budget can also be presented using graphs. 
Figure 20. Financial progress by component 
Component   
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
2003/04 
AWPB 
2003/04 
Actual 
Expenditure 
2003/04 
Actual 
Expenditure 
(USD) 
2003/04 
Exp/Bud 
(%) 
Total 
Project 
Budget 
Total 
Cumulative 
Expenditure 
Cumu-
lative 
Exp/Bud 
(%) 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
See Annex 2 for a complete table with 
data. 
...%  USD ... 
...% USD ... 
...% USD ... 
...% USD ... 
...% USD ... 
...% USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
These tables could be prepared in USD or 
local currency. 
...%
...%
...%
...%
...%
...%
Total  USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
...%  USD ... 
USD ... 
...% 
106. 
Similar to components, the total budget of the project can be broken down according to types or 
categories of expenditure (Figure 21). These categories are not supposed to be overspent. The reason is 
the  same  as  described  under  components:  there  is  a  certain  balance  in  the  project  design,  between 
different items and activities on which money will be spent. If this balance is lost, for example because 
far more money than expected is spent on vehicles and allowances and very little is spent on studies and 
training, certain aspects of the project will fail to work as expected. When expenditure under a certain 
category  approaches  the  limit  while  other  categories  have  a  much  lower  level  of  expenditure,  the 
reasons  should  be  investigated.  Financial  progress  by  category  will  provide  the  information  that  is 
necessary to detect such situations, which may lead to reallocation. The allocation of the project budget 
by component and category is usually amended during a Mid-Term Review.  
Figure 21. Financial progress by category 
Category   
I 
II 
III 
IV 
V 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
2003/04 
AWPB 
2003/04 
Actual 
Expenditure 
2003/04 
Actual 
Expenditure 
(USD) 
2003/04 
Exp/Bud 
(%) 
Total 
Project 
Budget 
Total 
Cumulative 
Expenditure 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
Total  USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
See Annex 2 for a complete table with 
USD ... 
data. 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
...%  USD ... 
...%  USD ... 
...%  USD ... 
...%  USD ... 
...%  USD ... 
...%  USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
Cumu-
lative 
Exp/Bud 
(%) 
...% 
...% 
...% 
...% 
...% 
...% 
Financial progress by component and by category can be presented in more detail than shown 
107. 
in the above tables, for example by breaking down the expenditure data by cost centre, or by presenting 
budget and expenditure data for all the previous years. This is optional; but data for the past year and 
cumulative since the beginning of project implementation is a minimum requirement.  
108.  Most  projects  have  several  sources  of  funds:  an  IFAD  loan,  co-financing  by  other  donors 
usually in the form of grants, the government contribution, and beneficiary contribution. Assumptions 
are made in the appraisal report about the contributions of different financiers, and these assumptions 
are formalized in loan and grant agreements. 
109. 
It is important to track the cumulative disbursement for each financier, in relation to the total 
amount committed, in order to know how much money the project has left. One complication is that the 
commitments  of  the  different  financiers  may  be  defined  using  different  currencies:  the  IFAD 
commitment is usually in Special Drawing Rights (SDR), while other commitments may be in Belgian 
Francs (BEF), U.S. Dollars (USD), etc. It will be important to record exchange rates on the date of any 
disbursement, direct payment, or government contribution. If this is not done properly, a project may 
24
assume that it still has substantial funds remaining, while in fact  most of these remaining funds have 
been lost due to exchange rate fluctuations. 
Figure 22. Disbursement and balance by source of funds (external financiers) 
Category 
Disbursed 
IFAD 
(SDR) 
SDR 
% 
Balance 
(USD) 
BSF (BEF) 
Disbursed 
(BEF) 
% 
 Total External 
Resources 
Balance 
(USD) 
Disbursed 
% 
Balance 
(USD) 
I. . . . . .  SDR ... 
II. . . . . .  SDR ... 
III. . . . .   SDR ... 
IV. . . . .   SDR ... 
V. . . . .  SDR ... 
VI. . . . .   SDR ... 
Initial 
Deposit 
Total 
SDR ... 
0 
Disbursement data can be obtained from 
IFAD’s “Status of Funds by Category” 
sheets.
SDR ... 
SDR ... 
SDR ... 
SDR ... 
SDR ... 
SDR ... 
...%  USD ... 
...%  USD ... 
...%  USD ... 
...%  USD ... 
...%  USD ... 
...%  USD ... 
BEF ... 
BEF ... 
BEF ... 
BEF ... 
BEF ... 
BEF ... 
BEF ... 
BEF ... 
BEF ... 
BEF ... 
BEF ... 
BEF ... 
...%  USD ... 
...%  USD ... 
...%  USD ... 
...%  USD ... 
...%  USD ... 
...%  USD ... 
...%  USD ... 
...%  USD ... 
...%  USD ... 
...%  USD ... 
...%  USD ... 
...%  USD ... 
See Annex 2 for a complete table 
with data. 
SDR ... 
100%  USD -... 
0 
BEF ... 
100%  USD -... 
100%  USD -... 
SDR ... 
...%  USD ... 
BEF ... 
BEF ... 
...%  USD ... 
...%  USD ... 
110. 
The information on cumulative disbursement should be recorded by financier and by category. 
For each financier, this should be done in the currency used in the Loan or Financing Agreement, using 
appropriate exchange rates. This will ensure that the information available to the project is as accurate 
as  possible,  in  terms  of  the  total  disbursements  made  and  the  remaining  budget.  Please  look  at  the 
figures and explanation for the CKDAP in the Sample Annual Report for further clarification.  
111.  Government and beneficiary contributions (Figure 23) can be reported in local currency or in 
USD. In the latter case it should again be kept in mind that the exchange rates used for conversion will 
vary  from  year  to  year.  Community  contribution,  mostly  in  the  form  of  labour  and  material 
contributions, will have to be captured at field level and converted into monetary value, using a system 
of standard record forms and rates. 
Figure 23. Government and beneficiary contribution (local sources of funds) 
Expected Total Government 
Contribution 
Budget 
Total 
Taxes 
Actual 
government 
contribution 
this year 
Actual 
government 
contribution to 
date 
Expected 
total 
beneficiary 
contribution 
Actual 
beneficiary 
contribution 
this year 
Actual 
beneficiary 
contribution to 
date 
USD ... 
USD ...  USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
...%  USD ... 
USD ... 
...% 
More detail could be 
added. 
USD ... 
112. 
The project will receive its disbursement in one or more Special Accounts. Funds will usually 
be transferred from the Special Accounts to a central project account as needed, where the government 
contribution will also be received. From the central project account, expenditure may be incurred and 
disbursements will be made to operational accounts of implementing agencies. Money will be released 
from these operational accounts to buy assets, pay bills and carry out project activities. Accountability, 
including original receipts, will have to be submitted afterwards.  
113. 
Project management should be fully aware of the status and performance of all project-related 
bank  accounts,  and  relevant  information  should  be  included  in  the  annual  reports.  The  minimum 
required  information  would  be  the  total  amount  of  funds  held  in  project  operational  accounts,  this  is 
funds disbursed and not accounted for7, but preferably this information would be included separately for 
each implementing agency (Figure 24).  
7 Funds disbursed and not accounted for include the balance in the bank account of an implementing agency, imprests / 
advances held by implementers, and accountability received but held in the implementing agency and not yet submitted to the 
project accountants or PMU where it is recorded as expenditure incurred. 
25
Figure 24. Status of project accounts 
Balance in IFAD Loan Special Account 
Balance in BSF Grant Special Account 
Balance in IFAD Loan Project Account 
Balance in BSF Grant Project Account 
Balance at national level: 
implementing agency 
accounts and outstanding 
imprests 
District account balances and 
outstanding imprests 
Institution A.  
Institution B.  
Institution C.  
Institution D.  
Institution E.  
Institution F.  
District A. 
District B. 
District C. 
District D. 
District E. 
KSH 
USD 
USD 
x 
x 
x 
KSH ... 
KSH ... 
Total 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
-----------------  USD ... 
See Annex 2 for a complete table with 
data. 
KSH ... 
KSH ... 
KSH ... 
KSH ... 
KSH ... 
KSH ... 
KSH ... 
KSH ... 
KSH ... 
KSH ... 
KSH ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
USD ... 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
Expenditure accounted for but not replenished (Statements 
of Expenditure & Withdrawal Applications in process) 
KSH ... 
USD ... 
-----------------  USD ... 
Grand total (equal to initial deposit in Special Accounts) =  USD ... 
----------------- 
Total 
3. 
DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION PROGRESS BY COMPONENT 
114. 
The physical progress summary would leave out much detail, such as activities and outputs that 
are ongoing but not complete. The summary table may indicate that rehabilitation of three schools has 
been  completed  last  year,  and  seven  since  the  start  of  the  project;  and  that  17  maize  and  small  grain 
variety trials have been completed during the past year, and 29 since the start of the project. But what 
did the rehabilitation of these schools entail (these may be significant investments!), and are there other 
schools where work has started but has not been completed? In which districts did the variety trials take 
place, and what are the findings? These details would be elaborated on in this section, in principle under 
the project outputs for each component.  
3.1 COMPONENT A 
115. 
Information  would  be  presented  under  one  or  more  project  outputs  that  are  defined  in  the 
logical framework matrix. In the sample Annual Report for the CKDAP in Appendix B, Component A 
has two such outputs for two different sub-components:  
•  Output:  improved  access  to  good  quality  preventive  and  curative  health  services  (Primary 
Health Care); and 
•  Output:  more  safe  water  sources  and  community  capacity  to  manage  these  (Domestic  Water 
Supply). 
116.  Under these outputs, there should be a narrative description of implementation progress in some 
detail,  and  also  using  tables  to  provide  more  specific  facts  and  figures,  for  example  on  infrastructure 
works on health facilities, and training of health caretakers. Such tables are unique for each project and 
would probably be designed by the person responsible for M&E.  
117. 
It is recommended to structure the information under each project output as follows: 
26
• 
• 
first recap briefly what was planned for the year (this can largely be copied from the AWPB) 
and  then  mention  what  was  actually  done  during  the  past  year,  explain  what  remains  to  be 
done, give specific reasons for any delay, postponement,  cancellation, etc.; and 
secondly, present cumulative results since the beginning of the project. 
118. 
The  first  point  is  included  in  Annual  Reports  of  most  projects  in  one  way  or  another.  The 
second point, cumulative progress, has been left out in many Annual Reports, but needs to be included. 
The Annual Report is the main analytical and strategic document that is produced by any project, and it 
must deal with total progress and results of the project in addition to describing what happened during 
the  past  year.  If  this  is  done  consistently,  the  document  will  be  able  to  better  fulfil  two  of  its  core 
functions:  to  assist  in  management  decision  making;  and  to  provide  information  for  other  key  events 
during the life of the project, such as the Mid-Term Review and the Project Completion Report. 
3.2 COMPONENT B 
119.  Output: . . . 
•  plan for the year: . . ., and what was actually done during the past year: . . . 
• 
cumulative results since the beginning of the project: . . . 
3.3 COMPONENT C 
120.  Output: . . . 
•  plan for the year: . . ., and what was actually done during the past year: . . . 
• 
cumulative results since the beginning of the project: . . . 
ETC. 
4. 
PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT 
121. 
This section has been absent in most Annual Reports. It is an analytical section, where external 
factors that influence the project, positive and negative experiences and performance under the project, 
and  the  progress  towards  achieving  project  objectives  are  discussed.  The  findings  in  this  section  will 
form the basis for considering strategic changes that may be required to improve performance, and will 
provide an input for the next AWPB, in terms of constraints to be resolved and successful interventions 
that should be given more prominence. 
4.1 
THE PROJECT ENVIRONMENT 
122.  Various external factors, some of which may have been covered in the assumptions column of 
the logical framework matrix, can influence project implementation and results, and these factors may 
change over time. The environment in which the project has operated during the past year, in particular 
changes that have occurred and how these have affected implementation, should be described here.  
123.  What types of external factors are we talking about?  
•  One  common  example  is  unexpected  or  erratic  weather  patterns,  which  have  influenced  the 
outcome of research trials, or have delayed infrastructure works.  
•  Another  common  example  is  unexpected  financial  and  economic  developments,  such  as  high 
inflation  or  unrealistic  official  exchange  rates  that  have  an  effect  on  the  available  project 
resources, but also new market opportunities that can be taken advantage of. 
•  There may be political factors, for example a national election, due to which project vehicles 
have been unavailable and project activities have been paralysed during part of the year. 
27
•  Another  example  is  technological  change,  that  has  made  certain  interventions  in  the  project 
design  irrelevant:  mobile  phone  network  coverage,  for  example,  that  has  done  away  with  the 
need for expensive radio equipment. 
•  Other  projects  and  institutions  in  the  project  area  can  be  an  external  factor,  positively  or 
negatively, for example, conflicting messages may reach a target group regarding community 
contribution, due to lack of coordination or different views. 
•  There can be changes in government  at the policy and institutional level, in the form of new 
policies and laws that affect the project, and in the form of a changing institutional set-up that 
may have an effect on the project.  
•  Finally, the implementation may have been affected by unsupportive action or “unnecessary” 
interference by CI or IFAD.  
4.2 
IMPLEMENTATION CONSTRAINTS 
124. 
Implementation constraints that are within the area of influence of the project and that could be 
resolved under the direction of project management, would be presented here. There is no limit to the 
types of issues and constraints that can be listed, just to give some examples: 
•  poor quality of infrastructure works (by project staff, contractors or the community); 
•  poor quality of services (by project staff, community-based service providers, NGOs, technical 
• 
assistance); 
financial  issues,  such  as  late  disbursement  of  funds,  cash  flow  problems,  delayed 
accountability, over-expenditure, outdated allowance regulations; 
•  problems  related  to  other  project  resources,  including  lack  of  facilities  or  equipment, 
• 
• 
breakdown of vehicles, malfunctioning accounting software; 
inefficient  or  inappropriate  use  of  project  resources,  such  as  excessive  telephone  usage, 
inappropriate use of vehicles, inflated cost of works or services; 
insufficient staff capacity, in terms of an inadequate number of people for certain tasks, or key 
positions that have not been filled, or lack of knowledge and skills; and 
•  other factors that hold back implementation of a project activity or sub-component. 
125. 
Two suggestions should be considered for the presentation of implementation constraints. The 
first is: be specific. There is little point in mentioning that allowances are too low, they always are. It 
makes  more  sense  to  indicate  that  government  mileage  rates  for  use  of  private  transport  are  below 
actual fuel cost and only 35% of the nationally accepted rates used by the Automobile Association. The 
second is: include a solution. When districts are without project funds for seven out of twelve months 
because of bureaucratic delays at national level, where exactly do these delays occur and how can they 
be addressed? When a certain project activity cannot be implemented, what is the best alternative use of 
the funds or what can be done to unblock the activity? A simple table as shown in Figure 25 can be used 
to present implementation constraints. 
Figure 25. Implementation constraints 
Implementation Constraint 
Proposed Solution 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
4.3 
SUCCESSFUL APPROACHES AND LESSONS LEARNED 
126. 
This  is  where  the  positive  results  of  the  project  are  highlighted,  which  are  often  overlooked 
because the constraints require so much attention. However, a shift from activities and approaches that 
do  not  work  to  those  that  do  work  is  actually  a  way  to  resolve  certain  types  of  constraints.  Some 
examples of items that could feature here:  
28
• 
successful  innovations  under  the  project:  technologies  (e.g.  highly  energy-efficient  stoves, 
water  harvesting  techniques,  silage  making)  or  methods  (e.g.  to  record  community 
contribution, or better involve women in management committees) that show promising results 
and should be replicated; 
•  project  interventions  (new  crop  variety,  pest  control  measure,  fishing  technique,  lending 
product)  that  are  "taking  off",  in  the  sense  that  people  show  interest  or  even  better,  that  it  is 
rapidly adopted and spreading among the target group; and 
•  more efficient ways of doing things and using project resources (e.g. reducing participants in 
meetings  to  essential  members,  transferring  monitoring  tasks  to  local  committees,  small 
performance allowances that increase productivity). 
4.4 
PROJECT OUTCOMES AND IMPACT 
127.  Useful information related to project purposes and the overall goal cannot be expected until a 
reasonable period after project interventions and delivery of outputs has passed. While there may not be 
anything to report in the first year and not much in the second, there is need to systematically collect 
data related to the project purposes and overall goal almost from the beginning of the project. In the first 
Annual Report, this may take the form of mentioning some of the key findings of baseline survey work 
that  has  been  carried  out. Standardized  impact indicators  under  IFAD’s  new  RIMS  would have  to  be 
included and reported on in this sub-section. 
128. 
From  the  second  year  onwards,  the  project  needs  to  start  analysing  whether  outputs  that  are 
being  produced  are  actually  leading  to  changes  and benefits  among  the  target  group.  As  a  minimum, 
examples  should  be  presented  of  outcomes  based  on  project  outputs.  At  the  early  stages  any  major 
conclusions would be unwarranted, but this type of information does provide “pointers” for effects that 
project interventions appear to have, and this in turn can inform project strategy during annual planning. 
New  technologies  have  been  introduced,  but  are  they  being  adopted  and  are  they  resulting  in  the 
increased yields, better quality or time savings that were expected? Access to rural credit and capacity 
to utilize loans properly has been improved, but is this leading to business growth and improved profit 
margins?  Access  to  clean  water  sources  and  knowledge  on  sanitation  and  personal  hygiene  have 
increased, but has this reduced the incidence of water-related diseases and improved productivity? Have 
income levels and well-being improved among the target group?  
129. 
The  use  of  case  studies,  focus  group  discussions  and  mini-surveys  would  yield  the  type  of 
information  that  is  needed  here.  Case  studies  can  be  a  good  tool  for  qualitative  analysis,  and  the 
possibility  of  systematically  using  case  studies  to  collect  impact-related  data  should  be  considered.  
Providing such case studies in boxes in annual reports, possibly accompanied by “before” and “after” 
photographs, may be an effective way of conveying messages. By the fourth year at the latest, a more 
formal  quantitative  impact  assessment  using  baseline  study  results  should  be  conducted,  ideally  in 
preparation for a Mid-Term Review so that the findings can be used in refocusing the project. While the 
results of such a wider study would be contained in a separate report, the findings could be summarized 
in this section of the Annual Report. 
5. 
THE WAY FORWARD 
130. 
This is the conclusion of the Annual Report. Based on the financial and physical progress, the 
analysis of project performance, and progress towards achieving project outcomes and impact that has 
been discussed in previous sections, where is the project heading to? What new directions, changes in 
the  project  strategy  (methodology  of  components,  community  participation  approaches,  gender  and 
poverty targeting) and logical framework (ineffective activities or outputs) need to be considered?  
131. 
Should certain activities that have proven to be ineffective be abolished or scaled down? How 
should certain approaches that have not worked as expected be modified? How will inefficient use of 
project resources or construction of unnecessarily expensive structures be stopped? Should certain pilot 
initiatives,  that  were  not  foreseen  in  the  project  design  but  have  had  a  significant  impact,  be 
29
incorporated  and  expanded?  How  should  capacity  constraints  that  have  been  identified  be  addressed? 
The conclusions in this section will form the basis for a key section in the next AWPB: project strategy 
and focus for the coming year.  
ANNEX 1. MAPS SHOWING DISTRIBUTION OF PROJECT INTERVENTIONS 
Including detailed maps is optional, but they can certainly enhance a report. Maps can be used 
132. 
to show at least three fundamental characteristics of a project: 
• 
• 
• 
coverage and outreach: what areas, districts, catchments are covered; 
interventions:  for  example,  where  have  water  points  been  constructed,  roads  rehabilitated, 
groups established, trials conducted, loans disbursed, surveys carried out; and 
impact (socio-economic indicators): for example what was the number of households per water 
point,  the  knowledge  about  HIV/AIDS  and  prevention  measures,  or  the  average  level  of 
savings in each district at the beginning of the project and at present? 
133. 
The  most  common  and  useful  maps  in  Annual  Reports  are  those  that  show  the  spatial 
distribution of project interventions and specific outputs in parts of the project area. Using one map for 
the entire project area would normally make it difficult to show enough detail, so several maps may be 
needed.  For  the  CKDAP,  Annex  1  of  Appendix  B  shows  the  map  for  one  of  the  five  districts  of  the 
CKDAP, Kirinyaga. It is not a very good map: the base map is hand drawn and doesn’t include features 
such  as  roads  or  towns;  the  administrative  boundaries  are  not  very  clear;  the  symbols  could  be 
improved; but at least it is a start. 
134.  Maps  can  be  drawn  by  hand;  photocopied  with  added  hand-written  information;  scanned  and 
edited with graphics software; produced by simple mapping software; or produced using sophisticated 
Geographic  Information  Systems  (GIS).  Using  colours  on  maps  can  improve  the  clarity  a  lot,  but 
remember  that  these  documents  are  often  photocopied,  in  which  case  that  clarity  may  be  lost.  The 
challenge is to keep maps as simple as possible while producing mapped information that adds value to 
the Annual Report. 
ANNEX 2 PROCUREMENT AND CONTRACTS 
135. 
Projects make substantial investments in assets and contracted services. Project assets, such as 
vehicles, motorcycles, computers, or laboratory equipment are needed for implementation of the various 
components  and  must  be  used  effectively.  Contracted  services  will  be  used  when  the  available  staff 
capacity does not meet the project requirements, when specialized skills are needed or when the use of 
external services is more cost effective. Good management of contracts and external service providers is 
required to ensure that they produce the expected outputs. 
Effective management of project assets requires a clear overview of the assets and their status. 
136. 
Essential information should be recorded for all assets in a register of assets, including depreciation and 
net  book  value  (NBV).  Also,  the  performance  of  service  providers  and  technical  assistance  is  an 
important  concern  of  project  management.  Actual  performance  and  output  should  be  monitored  and 
compared  to  the  expectations  as  per  contracts  and  terms  of  reference.  To  facilitate  this  process,  the 
details of any contracted position or service contract should be recorded. For this purpose, a register of 
contracts  should  be  kept  similar  to  the  register  of  assets.  It  is  recommended  that  an  extract  of  the 
register of assets and register of contracts is included in annual progress reports, showing all goods and 
services that have been procured during the past year (Figures 26 and 27). 
30
Figure 26. Procurement of the past year 
No 
Description of 
the contract 
Name of service 
provider (supplier, 
contractor, etc.) 
Procu-
rement 
method 
Total 
contract 
sum 
Contract 
date 
Expected 
comple-
tion date 
Status of 
delivery/works 
1 
2 
3 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
KSH . . . 
KSH . . . 
KSH . . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
Total 
payment 
made 
KSH . . . 
KSH . . . 
KSH . . . 
Figure 27: Fixed Asset Register – Format Example 
No.  Date of 
Purchase 
Particulars/ 
Description 
Supplier  Amount 
(KSH) 
Tax 
(KSH) 
Total Cost 
(KSH) 
Acc Dep 
(KSH) 
NBV 
(KSH) 
Location 
Comment 
[The columns for data entry may vary depending on types of assets (e.g. equipment or vehicles). ] 
ANNEX 3. ADDITIONAL FINANCIAL REPORTS 
137. 
The financial summary tables that have been presented in the main text of the Annual Report 
are standard and applicable to any project. They represent a minimum requirement regarding financial 
information. In addition, there may be other more specific records that the project uses for its financial 
management and wishes to present in the Annual Report. It is recommended to dedicate one Annex to 
the presentation of such additional and more specific financial information.  
In the case of the CKDAP, four types of tables are included in Annex 3 of the sample Annual 
138. 
Report. First, the project found that a major bottleneck is slow disbursement of project funds through 
the  government  system  at  national  level  down  to  implementing  agencies  at  district  level.  It  was 
therefore decided to record the different stages involved and track the time required for each step. The 
results are presented in two tables.  
139. 
Secondly, it was found that the funds disbursed do not normally match the budget amounts, and 
another  table  was  therefore  prepared  to  compare  the  budget  amounts  in  the  AWPB,  the  amounts 
disbursed through the government system, and actual expenditure levels. Both these types of tables are 
quite  revealing  regarding  the  financial  bottlenecks  in  the  government  system,  that  greatly  affect  the 
implementation of this project. 
Thirdly, the table that is used in the main text to show the accounts position of the project is 
140. 
repeated in this Annex, only with more detail for implementing institutions at national and district level. 
Finally,  Withdrawal  Applications  of  the  past  year  are  listed  in  a  table,  in  order  to  analyze  the  time  it 
takes  for  Withdrawal  Applications  to  be  processed  and  replenished.  Other  types  of  tables  could  be 
added, based on specific needs and in response to specific financial issues in a project. 
ANNEX 4. KEY PROJECT STAFF 
It is not always clear who exactly is involved in project implementation, because staff turn-over 
141. 
can be high and the project organization as well as structure of government institutions may change. It 
is not possible or necessary to list all the people involved in a project, which can be hundreds. However, 
key staff, especially those with management responsibility, should be listed in an Annex. It would also 
be useful to indicate which positions are contracted or seconded. This list could include: 
•  members of a Project Coordinating Committee or Steering Committee; 
•  members of the PMU; 
31
•  overall managers or coordinators in parts of the project area, for example at regional, provincial 
or district level; 
•  who is responsible for M&E and for financial administration in parts of the project area; and 
• 
senior  staff  of  technical  implementing  agencies  at  field  level  who  have  management 
responsibility for implementation of parts of the project. 
142. 
Instead of a listing as is done for the CKDAP in Appendix B, it is possible to present the same 
information in an organogram for the project. This may present an even clearer picture of the staffing 
structure, but only if it is done well, while it can be quite a bit of extra work and less easy to update if 
there are changes. 
ANNEX 5. ACTION ON SUPERVISION MISSION RECOMMENDATIONS 
143. 
Supervision  missions  can  make  an  important  contribution  to  improved  project  performance, 
through  recommendations  regarding  financial  and  general  management  systems,  comments  regarding 
compliance with formal requirements such as audits, and also by reviewing the progress and results of 
technical components. Recommendations are not always perfect nor necessarily consistent from year to 
year,  but  on  the  whole  these  missions  and  their  recommendations  represent  an  important  moment  of 
quality control and dialogue on project results. It is therefore unfortunate that, afterwards, supervision 
reports are not always distributed to and read by implementing agencies, and are sometimes not used at 
all to follow up on the recommendations. 
144. 
In order to stimulate a more active use of the supervision reports, the recommendations table of 
supervision  reports  should  be  included  in  the  Annual  Report  (Figure  28)  with  a  response  by  project 
management  to  the  recommendations,  mainly  in  terms  of  a  description  of  action  taken,  although  in 
some instances probably expressing disagreement with a recommendation. Which supervision report to 
use depends on the timing of supervision missions: if the latest mission came just a few months before 
the time of writing the Annual Report, little action would have been taken on the recommendations and 
it would make sense to use the previous supervision report. 
Figure 28. Feedback on supervision mission recommendations  
Recommendation 
Action By 
Comments / Action Taken 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
. . . . . 
ANNEX 6. DETAILED AWPB-BASED PROGRESS REVIEW 
145. 
Finally, it must be possible to verify implementation progress over the past year at the detailed 
level of individual planned activities (Figure 29). This Annex would therefore present the findings of 
the most fundamental monitoring activity:  
•  what is actual implementation progress of planned activities? 
•  what is the actual cost compared to what was budgeted? 
146. 
Two important aspects of detailed progress review need to be pointed out. Throughout the year, 
this work would normally be done by different implementing agencies, just as initial annual planning 
may be carried out by different implementing agencies, and data would reach the PMU on a quarterly 
basis. Because the data then has to be consolidated, it is important that implementing agencies follow a 
standard  format  when  they  submit  their  progress  review  information,  to  avoid  a  major  editing  task  at 
central level. This can be facilitated by distributing tables with planning information already filled in, 
which can be copied and pasted from the AWPB, and with empty columns where progress information 
can be added. If this is done using simple templates that cannot be changed, for example in Excel, both 
data entry and consolidation of the data from different institutions will be much easier.  
32
Figure 29. Detailed review of implementation progress by activity  
This can be quite complicated from 
an administrative point of view and 
is optional. 
Primary Health Care 
Nyandarua District -  Output: improved access to good quality preventive and curative health services. 
Project 
expenditure 
Item  Achievements & comments 
Planned activity & 
location 
Quan-
tity 
Budget 
Unit 
Cat 
Beneficiary 
contribution 
Construction of maternity 
block at Ndaragwa 
Dispensary. 
block 
1 
3,060,000 
1 
400 
Materials procured & on 
site. 30% complete. To be 
completed during 
2004/05. 
1,007,520 
264,500 
... 
0 
... 
0 
... 
..... 
This has been copied from the AWPB
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
This is progress information
... 
Purchase bicycles for 
CHWs and health staff in 
Kahutha Location. 
..... 
Training of PHC  
implementing officer on 
Tools for Health 
Managers  
..... 
bike 
30 
150,000 
2 
220 
Not done, no funding in 
AIEs and Exchequers. 
... 
per 
son 
... 
... 
1 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
356,000 
3 
068 
Done, Mr. Nderitu has 
been trained. 
... 
... 
... 
... 
0 
... 
356,000 
... 
Secondly,  progress  information  in  Figure  28  includes  actual  cost  (project  expenditure)  and 
147. 
beneficiary  contribution  for  each  activity.  In  practice,  both  of  these  can  be  quite  difficult  to  obtain. 
When expenditure has been incurred by the project, the related documents such as receipts are normally 
not linked to an activity in the AWPB, but are submitted to accountants as expenditure incurred under a 
certain  component.  Most  projects  are  weak  in  systematically  recording  beneficiary  contributions  and 
standard  rates  to  convert  in-kind  contributions  to  monetary  value  are  often  lacking.  An  attempt  will 
have  to  made  to  capture  community  contribution,  which  is  often  mainly  related  to  selected  activities 
such as infrastructure development. Projects that feel it is necessary to capture expenditure data activity 
by  activity  may  of  course  do  so,  but  from  the  point  of  view  of  an  Annual  Report  this  is  not  a 
requirement. 
B.   Annual Report Basic Standards 
148. 
In  this  chapter  and  in  the  sample  Annual  Report  in  Appendix  B,  many  details  have  been 
discussed  regarding  the  content  and  structure  of  progress  reports,  especially  the  Annual  Report.  As 
mentioned  already  for  the  AWPB,  these  details  are  suggestions  to  be  considered  as  a  starting  point. 
Each project should decide how to present the information in the Annual Report; should to some extent 
design  its  own  tables  especially  when  reporting  on  the  details  of  implementation  progress  and  when 
presenting project-specific financial data; and whether to add additional information and what. Again, a 
key choice is how to structure the Annual Report: information can be organized by component, as is the 
case in the sample Annual Report in Appendix B, but could also be organized by geographical area or 
by institution. 
149.  While there is considerable flexibility, each project should seek to produce an Annual Report 
that includes the following basic points: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
a comprehensive cover page, table of contents and list of abbreviations and acronyms; 
a general map of the project area, preferably showing how the project expanded over time; 
a project outline section that presents essential background information on the project; 
a section that summarizes implementation progress for the past year and since the start of the 
project, including: 
o  at  least  five  key  tables  with  financial  summary  data:  expenditure  by  cost  centre  and 
component;  expenditure  by  cost  centre  and  category;  disbursement  by  financier  (external 
sources of funds); government and beneficiary contributions (local contributions); and the 
status of project accounts; 
33
o  a  table  that  is  compliant  with  the  new  RIMS  of  IFAD  and  that  summarizes  physical 
progress, using both project-specific indicators and RIMS indicators; 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
a  section  that  describes  implementation  progress  for  the  past  year  and  cumulatively  in  some 
more detail, by component, by geographical area or by institution; 
implementers  and  project  management  analyse  project 
an  analytical  section,  where 
performance  and  factors  that  influence  project  performance,  including  information  on  project 
outcomes and impact; 
a  section  that  draws  conclusions  and  charts  the  way  forward  for  the  project,  based  on 
performance and experience gained; 
a tabulated overview of procurement and contracts of the past year and asset register; 
additional financial tables to meet project-, government- and country-specific requirements; 
a  listing  of  key  staff  involved  in  the  project,  especially  contracted  positions  and  those  with 
management responsibility; 
a tabulated overview of supervision mission recommendations and action taken; and 
• 
•  detailed output/activity tables, where the progress made with implementing planned activities is 
reviewed activity by activity. 
34
South Sudan
South Sudan Livelihoods Resilience Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Project Risk Matrix (IPRM)
Mission Dates:
20 August to 6 December 2020
Document Date:
01/03/2021
Project No.
2000002869
Report No.
5643-SS
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Overall Summary
1/22
Risk Category / Subcategory
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Country Context
Political Commitment
Governance
Macroeconomic
Fragility and Security
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Policy Development and Implementation
High
Substantial
Substantial
High
High
High
High
Substantial
High
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Environment and Climate Context
Substantial
Substantial
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Technical Soundness
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Project financial Management
Project Organization and Staffing
Project Budgeting
Project Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Project Internal Controls
Project Accounting and Financial Reporting
Project External Audit
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Accountability and Transparency
Capability in Public Procurement
Public Procurement Processes
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Cultural Heritage
Indigenous People
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
High
High
High
High
High
High
High
Substantial
Substantial
High
High
High
High
High
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Substantial
No risk envisaged
Substantial
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Risk Category / Subcategory
2/22
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Labour and Working Conditions
Community Health and Safety
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate
variability and hazards
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Stakeholder Grievances
Low
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
High
High
Substantial
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Overall
Substantial
Substantial
Country Context
Political Commitment
Risk:
High
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
The Transitional Government has a 3-year validity, with elections due
in 2022/2023. Any potential conflict may impact on the Peace
Agreement, and the ongoing State Building and sustainable
development efforts.
If the new Government of National Unity does not focus on rebuilding
livelihoods for the massive numbers of returnees and internally
displaced persons (IDPs), the peace deal may fail and conflict may
resume.
Mitigations:
● Component 0 will enable SSLRP to reallocate funds to provide
emergency support as required. SSLRP will also coordinate with
humanitarian agencies such as UNHCR, to tap into their early warning
systems, to be able to better predict emerging conflict. 
● SSLRP will be implemented in a modular approach premised on the
County Development Plans, allowing for implementation of
interventions in specific locations (Payams, Counties), independent of
the developments in the other Counties. 
● IFAD will monitor in-kind contributions to fully capture the
contribution of the Government and beneficiaries. SSLRP expects a
very modest counterpart funding from the Government (950,000 USD)
and beneficiaries (366,000 USD). IFAD is seeking to mobilize co-
financing from Dev partners – Dutch, Germans, and African
Development Bank (AfDB).
Governance
High
Substantial
Risk:
High
Substantial
3/22
Capacity and system deficits in public sector institutions, revenue and
expenditure systems, legal frameworks, accountability frameworks
and systems for provision of services to citizens would negatively
impact the effective implementation of SSLRP through Government
structures. 
South Sudan has a Public Financial Management and Accountability
Act that guides the public financial management architecture.
However, there are no established standards governing preparation of
financial statements or verification of corporate financial reporting.
This results in insufficient accountability, a lack of transparency and
creates gaps in financial reporting. 
The decentralisation policy is not yet fully implemented and may
impact on the coordination between the Central and Decentralised
government.
Mitigations:
● SSLRP will be implemented through a Third Party Implementing
Agency (IA), comprised of a consortium of competent NGOs with a
strong track record, systems and capacities in implementing resilience
projects. . The IA will work with the decentralised Government
systems, and strengthen the County Development Committees
(CDCs), and the Payam Development Committees (PDCs), which all
play a critical role in the implementation and sustainability of SSLRP.
The IA will be expected to possess an equivalent or superior
framework to IFAD's Project Procurement Guidelines, Procurement
Handbook and standard procurement documents (SPDs) 
● IFAD will and engage and dialogue with the IFI (IMF, WB, AFDB)
and Development Partner representatives in the ongoing Public
Financial Management (PFM) reforms working group which is working
to strengthen financial governance in the Ministry of Finance, National
Revenue Authority, Tax Management and realign the budget towards
service delivery. 
● In sub-component 3.2 SSLRP in partnership with other IFIs (e.g.
AFDB and World Bank) will build capacities of the PCU and
decentralised State in financial management, internal control
frameworks, M&E, and procurement. By project end the GoSS PCU
will be able to take on increased implementation of future donor
projects. 
● SSLRP will work with ILO to strengthen the Cooperative
Development Policy Framework under sub-component 3.2.
Macroeconomic
Risk:
High
High
Substantial
Substantial
According to the IMF article IV consultations of 2019, the outlook
remains extremely difficult, with continuing threats to macroeconomic
and financial stability, declining income due to low oil prices, resulting
in deteriorating humanitarian conditions. GoSS has therefore
persistently experienced significant budget shortfalls (40 percent – 60
percent) over the past few years, which significantly strains the
Country’s ability to investment in service provision and mobilise
counterpart funds.
In addition, the South Sudanese Pound (SSP) is facing high inflation,
resulting in volatility of exchange rate and a thriving black market. The
discrepancy between official exchange rate and the black market may
distort the profitability analysis of the project in the EFA.
Mitigations:
4/22
● IFAD’s allocation to South Sudan is under DSF terms i.e. 80% grant
and a 20 % loan at highly concessional terms, with a grace period of
10 years, which will enable GoSS to recover before repayments are
required. 
● IMF has just granted GoSS a US$52.3 million emergency loan
under the Rapid Credit Facility to help its economy weather the shock
of the COVID-19 pandemic. It is expected that this loan will contribute
towards stabilising the SSP currency. 
● IFAD will dialogue with the IFI (IMF, WB, AFDB) and Development
Partner representatives in the ongoing Public Financial Management
(PFM) reforms working group which is working to strengthen financial
governance in the Ministry of Finance, National Revenue Authority,
Tax Management and realign the budget towards service delivery. 
● Profitability analysis for SSLRP has been run in USD, to mitigate the
volatility of the exchange rate and ensure realistic price/expenditure
scenarios for internationally sourced goods. 
● IFAD supervision missions will continuously review value for money
to address any potential expenditure increases.
Fragility and Security
Risk:
High
High
Substantial
Substantial
Historical, political, social and economic marginalization has resulted
in tensions due to ethnic divisions, corruption and power struggles.
This has resulted in outbreaks of conflict, the breakdown of
governance structures and law and order, and disruption of community
institutions that support livelihoods. There is also on-going inter-
community conflict due to competition for natural resources.
The country is expected to hold elections in 2023, which may
potentially impact the security situation.
The country is also affected by the Desert locust phenomenon which
is devastating food and nutrition security across East Africa.
COVID-19 may impact on community engagement due to restrictions
to gatherings.
Mitigations:
● The project will integrate adaptive programming with scenario based
planning and modular implementation, to enable the project to
respond to potential security risks in different locations. SSLRP will
work with humanitarian agencies i.e. UNHCR, WFP to I) identify
beneficiaries graduating from humanitarian assistance that are ready
for SSLRP interventions, ii) share information from their early warning
systems and iii) provide information on conflict analysis. 
● SSLRP includes an un-costed component 0 to address any
potential disasters and emergency situations arising from the project.
If needed, funds will be reallocated from other Components to provide
emergency support in support of a GoSS emergency response. 
● SSLRP will provide employment opportunities for the youth, which
may dissuade them from engaging in conflict activities. 
● Missions will ensure full compliance with Minimum Operational
Security Standards (MOSS) & partnership with other IFIs and/or UN
agencies for implementation 
● IFAD will engage third party project supervision modalities if the
security situation is not conducive for IFAD missions 
● SLRP will follow all GoSS COVID-19 protocols.
Sector Strategies and Policies
5/22
Policy alignment
Risk:
High
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
While the foundational policy framework for agriculture development
exists and aligns well with IFAD’s Strategic Framework and priority
arears, there is a need to revise these frameworks to ensure full
alignment with the emergent focus on a stronger role for the
agriculture sector to support economic diversification. The key policy
documents include - The Agriculture Sector Policy Framework 2012-
2017, Comprehensive Agriculture Master Plan, Irrigation Development
Master Plan (CAMP/IDMP) 2015–2040, National Nutrition Policy. In
view of the Peace Agreement and the restructuring of the economy,
these will need to be revised to support operationalisation and to
trigger an agriculture transformation in the country. 
On the mainstreaming themes, South Sudan has been a member to
the Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) Movement since 2016, although it
lacks the relevant nutrition legislation, while the Food and Nutrition
Policy is under preparation.
Mitigations:
● Although SSLRP will support the development of the Cooperative
Development Policy Framework and the Rural and Agriculture
Finance Policy under sub-component 3.2, the actual implementation
of the policies will depend on political will, prevailing context and the
availability of investment funds to address structural and functional
gaps 
● SSLRP will support the implementation of Local Government
Development Policy by realigning service delivery by the stakeholders
in line with local demands, and working through the decentralised
structures i.e. County Development Committees (CDCs), Payam
(village) Development Committees (PDCs). CDCs and PDCs will be
strengthened to facilitate implementation of SSLRP. In addition,
Component 1 & 2 will facilitate operationalisation of decentralisation
while integrating IFAD’s mainstreaming themes into the CDD
framework, through facilitation 
● IFAD’s targeting policy and SECAP will be applied to ensure
appropriate social inclusion. SSLRP will liaise with the Nutrition
Department and other stakeholders in the SUN Movement to bring
lessons from SSLRP/IFAD into ongoing efforts to prepare the nutrition
action plan.
Policy Development and Implementation
Risk:
High
High
Substantial
Substantial
-High-level development frameworks are in place but specific policies,
laws and regulations necessary to guide day-to-day public service
delivery in the agriculture sector are still in the early stages of
development.
- There is a need to support the Government of South Sudan in the
revision and operationalisation of the policy frameworks, in view of the
Peace Agreement and the restructuring of the economy to tap into the
huge potential of the agriculture sector.
Mitigations:
6/22
● SSLRP will support the development of the Cooperative
Development Policy Framework and the Rural and Agriculture
Finance Policy under sub-component 3.2, in partnership with ILO and
the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security (MAFS). 
● SSLRP will align with the interventions of other development
partners in policy development including: AFDB – Value chain
analyses for key commodities Sorghum, Groundnut, Sesame, Seed
Sector Policy Framework, Food Safety Regulations and SME Policy. 
● The IA will be expected to apply IFAD policies (SECAP, Targeting) 
● Capacity needs assessment, which will inform capacity
development interventions and the provision of specialised technical
assistance.
Environment and Climate Context
Substantial
Substantial
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Substantial
Substantial
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Given the poor spatial and temporal distribution of water as well as
scarcity of rainfall, drought is the single most important production risk
factor. Excess rainfall that leads to flooding is another high risk.
Mitigations:
● CDPs will identify and prioritise investments at household and
community level to combat climate change impacts through support to
climate smart agriculture and investment in climate resilient
infrastructure. 
● SSLRP will mobilise communities to collectively address disasters
caused by natural hazards especially climate change, which has a
multiplier effect on natural resources, water, and land (common
source of conflict). The interventions will include: (i)Support
establishment of local community groups to address issues of conflict,
drought, gender issues and peace building (ii) Build capacity of these
community groups to identify risks and hazards early enough and to
disseminate information to communities.(iii)Optimize community
preparedness for early action e.g. weather predictability through
identification of traditional/ community early warning indicators and
linking them with modern early warning information system.
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Substantial
Substantial
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Climate change is a significant driver of environmental change in
South Sudan. Generally, temperature has been increasing and rainfall
decreasing and this is forecasted to continue for coming decades.
Seasonal rainfall trends are highly variable across the country. Since
the mid-1970s, South Sudan has experienced a decline of between
10 to 20 per cent in average precipitation as well as increased
variability in the amount and timing of rainfall from year to year and
rainfall will decrease in the north and increase in the south.
Mitigations:
7/22
● CDPs will identify and prioritise investments at household and
community level to combat climate change impacts through support to
climate smart agriculture and investment in climate resilient
infrastructure. 
● Some of the climate smart technologies to be promoted include: a)
rainwater harvesting; b) drought tolerant and early maturing crop
varieties; c) drought tolerant forage and agroforestry fodder species; d)
watershed conservation and management; e) afforestation; f)
mangrove rehabilitation and conservation; g) solar and other forms of
renewable energy sources, and energy saving approaches etc. 
● Furthermore, SSLRP, through the CBOs and CDP facilitation
process will mobilise communities to collectively address disasters
caused by natural hazards especially climate change, which has a
multiplier effect on natural resources, water, and land (common
source of conflict). The interventions will include: (i)Support
establishment of local community groups to address issues of conflict,
drought, gender issues and peace building (ii) Build capacity of these
community groups to identify risks and hazards early enough and to
disseminate information to communities.(iii)Optimize community
preparedness for early action e.g. weather predictability through
identification of traditional/ community early warning indicators and
linking them with modern early warning information system. 
● Notwithstanding, the country will continue to face significant natural
hazard risks – floods, drought which may impact negatively on IFAD’s
target group under SSLRP. In addition, the uptake and internalization
of new climate-smart technologies and approaches proposed under
SSLRP may take time to yield a positive impact. This is especially due
to the capacity and policy gaps, and the difficult food insecurity and
hunger situation in the country.
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The Peace Agreement has motivated the return of the displaced
population, with the bulk settling in the Equatorias . The returnees are
faced with conditions of limited physical and financial assets and weak
public and private service coverage. Agriculture and rural
infrastructure are dilapidated with seasonally impassable community
access roads, and inefficient and expensive transportation from farm
to storage facilities and markets. Irrigation and water harvesting
technologies are inadequate, with poor post-harvest and value
addition.
Mitigations:
8/22
In alignment with the GoSS Comprehensive Agriculture Master Plan
(CAMP) and IFAD’s Country Strategy Note (2021-2022), SSLRP will
focus on re-establishing livelihoods for rural communities, focussing
on returnee households, young people and women. It will strengthen
the resilience of rural communities to emergency and crises, rebuild
local agricultural production and stabilize incomes through micro-
enterprises and short-term employment. SSLRP will complement the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan (R-ARCSS), which commits to restore
economic foundations by generating employment and improving
livelihoods. A CDD approach provides leeway for the beneficiaries to
identify projects based on their own needs. 
SSLRP also foresees some social protection activities to build the
asset base of beneficiaries to be able to participate in the project
activities through livelihoods promotion and Labour Intensive Public
Works (LIPW) where youth will derive income.
Technical Soundness
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Due to the remote design process some elements of the project
assumptions may need to be revisited and/or validated through site
visits and beneficiary engagement. Some of these areas include:
selection of villages (payams) where interventions will be
implemented, thorough assessment of the existing infrastructure and
community assets that could complement SSLRP and guide selection
of project sites, and baseline understanding of the mainstreaming
themes (gender, youth) in the 5 Counties.
Mitigations:
● The GoSS appointed a team of experts from the Ministry of
Agriculture who formed a companion SS-PDT that has worked with
the IFAD team throughout the design process to provide information
and validate the design assumptions. IFAD PDT will undertake a
validation mission after the DRM to further confirm project 
● IFAD engaged a local consultant who undertook field verification
missions to collect field data and engaged with State and County
officials. IFAD also held extensive consultations with the Agriculture
and Livelihood Development Working Group (ALDWG), NGO Forum
and other key partners including FAO, WFP, UNHCR. 
● SSLRP will prepare County Development Profiles which will assess
and identify ‘low hanging fruits’ in terms of community infrastructure
and assets, conditions of mainstreaming themes, and inform the
selection of villages where the project will be implemented. The
profiles will also inform the finalisation of a targeting strategy which
will be cleared by IFAD. 
● SSLRP ensures that at least 30% of the Community Development
Plans financed are from women groups.
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
High
High
Substantial
Substantial
Risk:
High
Substantial
The Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security (MAFS) does not have
sufficient capacity and systems to manage the project effectively (in
accordance with the Financing Agreement and all relevant IFAD basic
legal documents) towards achievement of envisaged project
development objectives.
9/22
The Government has requested to implement the capacity
development activities for Sub-component 3.2, as they relate to the
value of IFAD’s loan to GoSS on highly concessional terms.
Mitigations:
● The core components will be implemented by a competent
consortium of NGOs led by VSF-Germany. The selection of the
consortium partners was driven by their respective technical,
operational, project management, and financial management
capacities. Full details are contained in the TORs included in the PIM. 
● For capacity development activities under sub-component 3.2, the
PCU will be expected to work through local service providers, under
ring-fenced financial management and procurement arrangements. 
● The PCU will be represented at the Central, State, County levels
and will be expected to ensure i) technical alignment with the PDR
and Government policy and legal frameworks, ii) achievement of the
overall targets and iii) ensuring sustainability of strategic investments
of a public good nature. 
● Core investments will take place at the County and Payam (Village)
levels, with Payam Development Committees having a critical role to
approve Community Development Plans, while County Development
Committees will play a critical role in validating the County
Development plans and identifying strategic infrastructure. 
● The CDD approach empowers communities to plan and implement
investments, and relevant Operations and Management capacities will
be built throughout project implementation at the County, Payam and
Community levels. 
● Notwithstanding the above-indicated mitigation measures, the
context remains fragile, and implementation will be dependent on a
smooth working relationship between the IA and the PCU.
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Risk:
High
High
Moderate
Moderate
M&E capacity, processes and systems remain weak in the Ministry of
Agriculture and Food Security (MAFS) resulting in a limited ability to
monitor, validate, analyse and communicate results, capture lessons,
and adjust implementation to seize opportunities and take corrective
actions in a timely manner.
Mitigations:
10/22
● The IA will be responsible for all M and E and reporting for all of
SSLRP, except Component 3.2. Full details of the M and E
requirements are contained in the detailed ToR for recruitment of the
IA. 
● The GoSS PCU will oversee the IA, undertake field verification
missions, review M&E reports and submit for approval to the two
GoSS oversight bodies, the National Technical Committee (NTC) and
the National Advisory Committee (NAC). 
● IFAD will supervise SSLRP through a technical start-up and 6-
monthly and annual supervision missions. Where visits by
international staff are not possible, IFAD will engage Third Party
Monitoring including through independent consultants and partners
such as FAO-DPI 
● Component 3.2 will provide capacity-building support to the PCU to
build capacities in M&E
Project financial Management
Project Organization and Staffing
Risk:
The risk that the implementing Agency (VSF Germany) and the Lead
agency (MAFS) does not have the necessary number of adequately
qualified and experienced financial management staff resulting into
limited ability to meet the functional needs of the project;
The risk that assigned staff from both the PCU and VSF Germany do
not have previous experience with IFAD or donor financial
management requirements resulting into sub optimal financial
management; and 
The risk of high staff turnover affecting continuity and creating a
lengthy learning curve/slowing down implementation of the project.
Mitigations:
•IFAD will review the qualifications and experience of the financial
management staff assigned to the project from time to time (including
staff changes) to ensure that staff with the requisite qualifications and
experience are assigned to the project; 
•Recruitment of qualified and experienced staff in project financial
management by the service provider (VSF Germany) and will be part
of a contract between GOSS and the service provider; 
•In the event of failure to recruit qualified and experienced staff,
sourcing of Technical Assistance (Local or International) will be
considered; and 
•Provide continuous capacity building, covering among others, IFAD
financial management procedures/requirements. 
•VSF Germany will be required to present staff with requisite
qualifications and experience to implement the project
High
High
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Project Budgeting
High
Moderate
Risk:
High
Moderate
11/22
The risk that budgeted expenditures are not realistic, not prepared or
revised on a timely basis, ineligible costs and reallocation of project
funds and slow implementation progress due to low absorption of
funds; 
There is a risk that SSLRP budget calendar will affect timeliness of
approval of the AWPB as it is not aligned to IFAD project budget
submission requirements; 
and 
There is a risk of poor budget monitoring and control arising out of
failure to post the budget in the accounting system, budgets not
executed in an orderly and predictable manner resulting in funds not
being available when needed as the PMU has been using MS Excel
for accounting and reporting.
Mitigations:
•Budget framework/procedures including budget timetable to be
included in the PIM that will be updated by SSLRP; 
•The project accounting software to be coded in a manner that
facilitates computerized budget monitoring and control; 
•Proper treasury management with monthly management reviews that
include addressing causes of budget variances; 
•Timely preparation of realistic budgets based on the implementation
experience of previous experience; and 
•Budget figures to be posted in the accounting software to facilitate
budget monitoring and control.
Project Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Risk:
High
High
Substantial
Substantial
The risk that funds will disburse with delays due to cumbersome
treasury arrangements and inability of project implementing partners
and service providers to justify advances, resulting in delayed
withdrawal applications and implementation; 
The risk that funds transferred to the GOSS and service providers will
be misused as a result of the current high corruption perception or
misappropriated due to the current economic situation characterized
with liquidity problems; 
The risk that the value of funds transferred from foreign currency
accounts to local currency accounts (SSP) will be eroded due to the
volatile exchange rate regime; 
The risk that value for money will not be realized from transactions
denominated in SSP as suppliers/contractors/service providers base
their quotations on a parallel exchange rate which has been between
three to five times higher than the official exchange rate; 
The risk that GOSS position that government resources should be
budgeted for and spent in SSP is extended to cover external financed
projects; 
and 
The risk that the GOSS will not have adequate liquidity to meet its
counterpart contribution affecting/delaying implementation.
Mitigations:
12/22
•Ring fenced bank accounts will be opened, both at the MAFS and
VSF Germany, one in USD and another in SSP. 
- Revolving account mechanism will be used for both fund to VSF
Germany and MAFs based on quarterly releases tagged to approved
AWPB 
•Most transactions entered into both at service provider level and
MAFS/PMU level will be by direct payments; 
•Transactions shall be entered into in USD and as far as practicable
aggregate procurements to benefit from use of USD for transactions
and direct payments; and 
•Transfers to the SSP accounts will be limited to few items, where
expenditure is incurred in small amounts.
Project Internal Controls
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
The risk that appropriate controls over project funds at MAFS/PMU
and VSF Germany are not in place, leading to the inefficient or
inappropriate use of project resources:
This constitute the risk of absence of control over funds transferred to
IA (VSF), working advances, segregation of duties both at PMU and
IA, insufficient approvals, misuse of assets, poor cash management –
including procurement of common use items using petty cash and
poor contract management/including monitoring leading to misuse of,
misallocation and misappropriation of project resources. GOSS has
indicated that where third party implementation arrangements are
used with no oversight and supervision roles by government, there is
no control over project resources on part of government; and
The risk that internal audit arrangements are insufficient or do not
exist due to lack of resources to provide assurance on the
effectiveness of internal control systems and processes leading to
unreliable internal control systems and non-compliance with the
financing agreement, LtB, PIM and GoSS requirements. Currently,
whereas an Internal Audit Unit exits with personnel posted from MOF,
there unit is not staffed – also, the mission has not assessed
arrangements at IA(s) as selection exercise had not been completed.
Mitigations:
13/22
•SSLRP to develop a financial management procedures manual and
guidelines as part of the PIM. These include segregation of duties,
posting of transactions, record keeping, authorisation of transactions,
checking, bank reconciliations, and physical security of assets
including cash, approval arrangements, financial monitoring and
reporting; 
- Clear and concise guidelines on grant making and accountability to
be established and implemented by VSF Germany. 
- Include a performance audit tagged to a disbursement target for the
grants and will be a condition in the FA 
•Regular reconciliations of bank accounts, both foreign and local
currency accounts by both PMU and IA. The bank account
reconciliations will be part of the Interim Financial Reports; 
•Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security (MAFS) internal audit
function will provide internal audit services to the project based on an
annual audit plan. The function will check compliance and provide
assurance of the effectiveness of control processes and procedures
both at PMU and IA (working with IA Internal audit function); and 
•In the absence of the services from MAFS, a service provider will be
engaged on contract basis to provide internal audit services and
reports periodically shared with IFAD.
Project Accounting and Financial Reporting
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
The risk that the accounting systems including policies and standards
are not integrated and reliable, leading to inaccuracies in financial
records, and that reasonable records are not prepared, issued and
stored systematically, leading to lack of informed decision making; 
The risk of inadequate accounting for in-kind contribution from
beneficiaries and GoSS in-kind contribution in the form of office space,
staff time, tax exemptions, among others due to poor valuation
methods and documentation; and
Due to parallel implementation and accounting at PMU and IA levels,
there is a risk of absence of financial management information
systems or computerized accounting required to facilitate generation
of timely reports for project management decision making and those
required by IFAD. The accounting at IA level has not been assessed
as IA had not been selected while the accounting and financial
reporting for the current projects under PMU is done using MS Excel –
this is cumbersome, prone to errors and manipulation. This also limits
production of timely and accurate reports, prone to data loss and does
not provide audit trail.
Mitigations:
14/22
•Both the PCU at MAFs and VSF Germany shall deploy an off-the
shelf accounting software for accounting and financial reporting
capable of reporting by category, component, activity and financier as
required by IFAD. This will be a requirement to both at PMU and VSF
Germany. 
•Making acquisition and installation of accounting software a condition
for disbursement; 
•Acquisition of the accounting software to be part of start-up activities
to mitigate against any possible delays in implementation of the
software; 
•Training of financial management staff in accounting including use of
the accounting software; 
•SSLRP to submit Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) to IFAD on a semi-
annual basis following IFAD IFRs templates; and 
•Regular reconciliation of accounting records to accounting software
data.
Project External Audit
Risk:
High
High
Moderate
Moderate
The risk that independent and competent oversight of the project
financial statements is not in place or performed timely leading to
possible misrepresentation of the financial results and/or suspension
or other remedies due to compliance breaches; 
The risk that the Audit Chamber (Auditor General) which is the
Statutory Audit Institution (SAI) of the GoSS may not have capacity to
provide audit services to the project due to limitations of staff strength
(numbers) and skill. Presently, the WB funded projects are audited
jointly between the Audit Chamber and a private audit firm in
recognition of absence of capacity (skill) with a view that this facilitates
develop the capacity of the audit chamber. The capacity of the audit
chamber has not been assessed during the design mission;
The selected implementing partner/service provider, in where their
systems are relied upon do not adequately address IFAD project
statutory requirements;
and 
The risk that the auditor will not sufficiently address IFAD project audit
requirements, as included in the IFAD Handbook for Financial
Reporting and Auditing for IFAD funded projects making the quality of
the audit unsatisfactory.
Mitigations:
15/22
•Use of standard TOR for audit engagements as spelt out in the IFAD
Handbook for auditing and financial management for projects. The
prepared TORs are subject to IFAD clearance; 
•Use of private audit firm to audit financial statements with
consideration use of firms in neighboring countries; 
•Implementation support from IFAD to facilitate timely preparation for
the audit exercise; 
•Inclusion in the FA a provision that the financial statements of the
project (both at PMU and IA) are subject to audit on an annual basis; 
•Draft financial statements (consolidated for PMU and IA) for audit to
be shared with IFAD no later than two months following the end of the
financial year; 
•Consideration of Audit Chamber as an auditor of the project be done
only after an assessment of the audit chamber of their capacity to
audit the project is completed over time; and 
•Audited financial statements, together with the related management
letter to be submitted to IFAD no later than six months following end
of the financial year.
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Risk:
South Sudan adopted a legal and regulatory framework for
procurement, but its application is limited. In particular, the Public
Procurement and Asset Disposal Act was approved in 2018, there is
need to update, validate and issue Public Procurement Regulations,
and prepare standard Procurement Tender documents in line with the
Procurement Act 2018.
The MoFEP does not enforce the provisions under the interim Public
Procurement and Property Disposal Act of 2018, in particular the
provision that competitive procurement methods are the preferred
option above specified thresholds. The government also lacks a
system to generate substantial and reliable coverage of key
procurement information, or does not make key procurement
information available to the public.
Tendering opportunities are publicized, but the same cannot be said
about public procurement plans, contract awards and decisions on
complaints (though, according to the PPU, no complaints have been
registered). No standard bidding documents exist.
The Government has requested to implement the capacity
development activities for Sub-component 3.2, as they relate to the
value of IFAD’s loan to GoSS on highly concessional terms.
High
High
High
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Mitigations:
IFAD’s Project Procurement Framework in its entirety will apply
(Project Procurement Guidelines, Procurement Handbook and
Standard Procurement Documents) both for activities carried out by
the IA and under subcomponent 3.2 where activities may be carried
out directly by the PCU.
16/22
SSLRP shall advertise all activities on a dedicated site. The use of
IFAD’s Contract Monitoring Tool shall ensure publication on IFAD’s
Project Procurement site of all contracts entered into.
The ongoing PFM reforms (supported by IMF and WB) are also
focused on developing the requisite Public Procurement Regulations,
and standard Procurement Tender documents in line with the
Procurement Act 2018, and will roll out dissemination and training at
central and local government level, within a time frame of 1 year.
Procurement for component 3.2 will be undertaken by the GoSS.
The project will also benefit from the BUILD PROC grant that will be
rolled out in the region in 2021 and will target project and Government
staff with a tailored procurement certification programme.
Specifically for sub-component 3.2, implemented by GoSS,
procurements will follow IFAD’s project procurement framework and
prior review thresholds are set at USD 20,000 for all procurement
activities. The NOTUS system will be used with quarterly procurement
reviews and a dedicated IFAD TA supporting procurement activities.
All contracts will be managed through the IFAD ICP contract
monitoring tool. Most service providers will be paid through direct
payments.
Accountability and Transparency
Risk:
High
High
Substantial
Substantial
The Country Corruption Perception Index score assigned by
Transparency International is high at 12 (in a scale from 0 to 100).
Articles 56 and 57 of the Interim Public Procurement and Disposal
Regulations (IPPDR) provide for a mechanism for submitting
complaints. However, there is no independent procurement
complaints body, since the PPU is the last port of calls for submitting
complaints, according to the IPPDR. In fact, the PPU is not technically
fully independent in terms of handling procurement complaints, as it is
involved in the process of procurement approvals above the threshold.
In practice, complaints are not submitted in any formal way. As a
result, it is not possible to assess whether authorities address
complaints according to the regulations.
Mitigations:
17/22
All procurement entities, as well as bidders, suppliers, contractors,
consultants and service providers, shall observe the highest 
standards of ethics during the procurement and execution of contracts
financed under IFAD funded Projects, in accordance with IFAD’s
Project Procurement Guidelines and the Revised IFAD Policy on
Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities and Operations shall
apply to all projects, vendors and third parties, in addition to the
relevant national anti-corruption and fraud laws.
IFAD can strongly encourage government through policy dialogue to
establish an autonomous authority tasked with addressing
procurement complaints and with debarring suppliers, contractors or
consultants from participating in public procurement.
Capability in Public Procurement
No risk envisaged
Project will be implemented through a non government
implementation agency. IFAD Project Procurement Framework will be
adopted in its entirety. 
● Procurement in SSLRP will exclusively follow IFAD’s Project
Procurement Guidelines, IFAD’s Procurement Handbook and IFAD’s
Standard Procurement Documents due to the legal and regulatory
weaknesses highlighted in the PRM. 
● All contracts will be managed through the IFAD ICP contract
management module. 
● Most service providers will be paid through direct payments 
● IFAD prior review thresholds will be USD 20,000 for all
procurements. The NOTUS system will be used. 
● An IFAD TA will support the procurement activities.
Public Procurement Processes
Risk:
High
High
Substantial
Substantial
South Sudan adopted a legal and regulatory framework for
procurement, but its application is limited. The MoFEP does not
enforce the provisions under the interim Procurement and Property
Disposal Regulations, in particular the provision that competitive
procurement methods are the preferred option above specified
thresholds. The government also lacks a system to generate
substantial and reliable coverage of key procurement information, or
does not make key procurement information available to the public.
Tendering opportunities are publicized, but the same cannot be said
about public procurement plans, contract awards and decisions on
complaints (though, according to the PPU, no complaints have been
registered). No standard bidding documents exist.
Mitigations:
All procurement posts will be awarded subject to IFAD’s prior no
objection. TORs for procurement positions are contained in the PIM.
All procurement activities will be carried out in accordance with IFAD’s
Project Procurement Framework, hence risks will be highly mitigated.
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Low
Low
Low
Low
Risk:
Low
Low
ESMF identifies the activities as potentially having an impact on local
biodiversity - construction and/or rehabilitation of water infrastructures,
rehabilitation/upgrading/construction of roads, construction of
processing and storage facilities and expansion of agricultural land.
18/22
Mitigations:
In line with the SECAP and ESMF frameworks, SSLRP will undertake
relevant assessments to identify and potential negative impacts on
biodiversity, and will integrate conservation and development
objectives.
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
South Sudan’s water resources are unevenly distributed both spatially
and temporally, since water quantity varies substantially between
years depending on periodic major flood and drought events. Water is
held in perennial rivers, lakes and wetland areas, in seasonal pools,
ponds, rivers, streams and extensive floodplains. There is increased
pollution, reduced river flows, declining water tables in urban areas
and both surface and ground waters are becoming contaminated
Mitigations:
SSLRP will align with the ESMF, which includes materials on banned
substances in terms of pesticides and herbicides, which are in any
case will controlled by MoA/Regulatory Services SSLRP will explore
options natural integrated pest management 
Green manuring will be practiced, while being cognizant of potential
competing demands for these same materials
Cultural Heritage
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
The project’s construction activities may lead to conversion and/or
loss of physical cultural resources during construction of
infrastructures etc.
Patriarchal norms may prevent women from participating and
benefitting from project activities. Secondly, there may be a risk of
men taking over if women’s economic activities increase in value
and/or become more profitable. The same situation may lead to adults
taking over youth assets and economic activities
Mitigations:
SECAP2017 will be made available to the PMU at both central and
county levels and sub-project development will be accompanied with
the Environmental and Social screenings and ESMP preparation and
implementation.
GALS training will also be used to empower women to take up
leadership positions, and address socio-economic dimensions.
Simultaneously, community facilitators will be in close contact with
beneficiaries to monitor use of asset and economic activity. The
grievance redress mechanism (GRM) has been developed to address
conflicts and grievances that may arise from project interventions.
Indigenous People
Risk:
19/22
Low
Low
Low
Low
South Sudan has different tribes/ political parties that need to be taken
into account by the project implementation. Inequitable participation
and delivery mechanisms insufficiently sensitive to the specific
requirements and culture of IPs are possible risks.
Mitigations:
The project targeting strategy has a focus on the vulnerable in each
project area, which in turn is selected on the basis of multiple and
explicit criteria. 
Align IFAD’s strategies with South Sudan State of The Environment
and Outlook report (2018)
Communities will be engaged in a consultative and participatory
manner through the FPIC process, while also ensuring that they
provide consent to all interventions included in their action plans
Labour and Working Conditions
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
Child labour is pervasive thus project may exacerbate the exploitative
labour practices (e.g. child labour), gender-based violence,
discriminatory and unsafe/unhealthy working conditions for people
employed to work specifically in relation to the project, including third
parties and primary suppliers.
Mitigations:
The government has signed the relevant international treaties and
regularly exchanges with ILO. IFAD will engage with ILO to potentially
field joint technical assistance. 
The project’s ESMP will include safeguards to ensure that each
technical lead and IA ensures that there are no exploitative labour
practices (e.g. Child labour), gender based violence, discriminatory
and unsafe/unhealthy working conditions for people employed to work
specifically in relation to the project. The beneficiary feedback
mechanism through surveys will include feedback on these aspects
and a GRM mechanism in place will ensure this risk is minimized.
Labour Intensive Public Works, where community members are
expected to participate and be remunerated, will follow international
standards and align with other agencies including World Bank
remuneration standards.
Community Health and Safety
Low
Low
Risk:
Low
Low
20/22
There will be water retention//feeder road structure rehabilitation
and/or construction, the exact dimensions of which are still to be
determined but are expected to be under IFAD SECAP thresholds. 
SSLRP has a goal of improving nutrition wellbeing through and
promotion of diversification of livelihoods thereby increasing
household income. While this will have a positive impact on household
health, some activities may have risks to the communities. For
example, risks to the public during construction activities, gender
issues and all forms of Gender-Based Violence, including Sexual
Harassment (SH) and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) 
COVID-19 has put significant pressure on already overburdened
health and social service delivery systems, exacerbating the
vulnerabilities of affected populations.
Mitigations:
Qualified engineering consultants will do the designs and supervise
the construction to ensure the infrastructure conforms to government
health and safety guidelines and standards and that the same will be
clearly documented. These structures will be inspected upon each
supervision by a qualified team member.
Through GALS, SSLRP will engage with both female and male
household’s members and promote campaigns for sensitisation on
gender equality and against gender biases and GBV.
The ESMP outlines a number of measures to be taken to mainstream
health and hygiene considerations across all project activities. These
measures include food safety and awareness raising on COVID-19
precautions. Promotion of diversified and healthy diets is expected to
build the immunity of beneficiary community to withstand the effects of
COVID.
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
Activities related to construction may cause temporary/permanent
displacement of people. However, most of the impacts are localized to
the project site, short term and most importantly can be
avoided/reduced or mitigated by properly applying mitigation
measures.
Mitigations:
The planned infrastructure (water supply, post-harvest infrastructure &
road rehabilitation) will not lead to displacement of people, relocation,
resettlement of people or even loss to farm fields. Community leaders
will heavily be involved in the selection processes.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
The nature of the production system leaves no reason to believe that
there will significant risks of GHGs apart possibly from small livestock.
Mitigations:
Improved fodder will reduce the already low level of GHGs. The
watershed conservation includes agroforestry which will actually
reduce GHGs. No deforestation or additional biomass burning will
result from project activities
21/22
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate
variability and hazards
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Note: this refers to the risk from the project in terms of inadvertently
exacerbating the vulnerability of the population by promoting
maladaptive practices.
Mitigations:
A climate risk and vulnerability Assessment has been prepared which
covers climate vulnerability of the selected counties and also possible
adaptation options. The Project provides for formation of a user’s
committee to manage each of the constructed infrastructure. The
committees will be trained in Organisation & Management and
Operations & Maintenance for sustainability
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Risk:
Highly marginalised rural communities, and Government has
inadequate capacity to reach communities
Inadequate systems and processes for bottom-up planning and
participatory approaches and weak voice of the rural poor in decision-
making. This is mainly due to the weak
Mitigations:
The Community Driven Development approach is the most effective
approach for bottom-up planning and empowering communities to
identify their challenges, define their priorities and participate in key
decision making processes. In addition, SSLRP will work through local
Government including County Development Committees and Payam
(village) Development Committees, strengthen their capacities to
ensure ownership and critical decision-making at the local levels.
The PDO includes an outcome indicator on - beneficiary satisfaction
with project support services and empowerment, which will be
monitored through the outcome surveys. SSLRP Comp 1 will
strengthen Community Based Organisations to be able to plan and
implement projects that will improve their livelihoods.
High
High
High
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Stakeholder Grievances
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Potential grievances around i) selection of project sites, ii) location of
water infrastructure, iii) diversion of water upstream, iv) identification
of beneficiaries and v)
Mitigations:
Implementation of IFAD’s Framework for Operational Feedback from
Stakeholders: Enhancing Transparency, Governance and
Accountability
22/22
Apply IFAD’s targeting strategy, including transparency on selection
criteria in the country. SSLRP will facilitate intensive public
consultation with local communities and administrators, and
representation from different groups including women and youth.
SSLRP will carry out periodic conflict analysis in consultation with
humanitarian agencies, such as UNHCR, WFP
The Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) will be deployed to
address any potential localized conflict, including deployment of
Component 0 as needed.
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Potential grievances around water infrastructure and diversion of
water upstream
Mitigations:
• Undertake stakeholders’ feedback sessions. 
• Government implements a bottom-up approach in the identification
of investments, hence there is free and prior consent of the
communities 
• Implementation of IFAD’s Framework for Operational Feedback from
Stakeholders: Enhancing Transparency, Governance and
Accountability
South Sudan
South Sudan Livelihoods Resilience Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Mission Dates:
20 August to 6 December 2020
Document Date:
01/03/2021
Project No.
2000002869
Report No.
5643-SS
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 10: Exit Strategy 
1. 
Activities to build the sustainability of the SSLRP results and benefits will be implemented at 
four  different  levels:  the  smallholder  farmer,  the  farmer  group,  PCU  and  through  national  policy 
development. 
●  Strengthened  smallholder  farmers:  All  SSLRP  activities  at  household  and  community 
level will support and strengthen local processes of organising, prioritizing and implementing 
solutions. Involvement of local facilitators, boma and payam development committees will 
embed the SSLRP activities into the existing local planning and implementation processes, 
so they can be sustained after the project ends.  
●  Organizing beneficiaries into strong CBOs: Component 1 will develop strong community 
groups  that  will  have  the  capacity  to  define  their  priorities,  design  and  monitor  the 
implementation  of  sub-projects  that  will  strengthen  their  livelihoods.  These  skills  and 
planning processes will remain with the CBOs at the end of the project. In addition, during 
SSLRP  the  strength  of  these  CBOs  will  be  evaluated  to  assess  their  progress  towards 
graduation to self-sustaining organizations and potentially into cooperative societies 
●  Capacity building of the PCU: A clear exit and sustainability plan for the PCU is built into 
the SSLRP design. The PCU will be established as a multi-donor funded platform within the 
MAFS  to  provide  oversight  for  all  donor  funded  projects.  The  donors  will  support  capacity 
development and strengthen oversight controls, so that the PCU can take on more and more 
management and implementation of their donor funded projects.  This approach means that 
the PCU will continue to supervise and coordinate donor projects after SSLRP ends. 
●  Sustained and strengthened beneficiary enterprises: Based on the prioritization in the 
CDP process, it is expected that more than 486 enterprises will be funded by SSLRP. A key 
SSLRP investment is in building the capacities of individuals and the CBOs to manage and 
develop their enterprises.  Smallholder farmers will acquire technical skills that will enable 
them set up and run their own individual small businesses - managed either collectively or 
individually.  It  is  expected  that  20  percent  of  enterprises  will  graduate  to  maturity  and 
sustainability by the end of the project. The level of maturity will be reached faster in Magwi 
and Kajo-keji districts, which has a tradition of small-scale commercial agriculture and a pool 
of  skilled  manpower.  In  addition,  linking  these  groups  with  other  projects  such  as  South 
Sudan  Agriculture  Development  Project  SSADP,  a  Dutch  financed  project  that  offer 
sustainable financing investments for local agriculture-based enterprises, would accelerate 
attainment of sustainable levels. The enterprises will be linked to local initiatives in the area 
that focus to offer rural financial services such as SACCO, VSLA etc. as means to save and 
keep  capital  for  reinvestment.  Such  benefits  will  go  beyond  the  life  of  SSLRP  and  would 
constitute a tangible exit strategy for the project. 
●  Sustainability of public infrastructure investments. SSLRP will set-up and strengthen 
a  User  Association  (UA)  for  all  infrastructure.  The  UA  manage  and  maintain  the  various 
infrastructure  investments  beyond  the  life  of  SSLRP.  The  UAs  will  be  over-seen  by  the 
existing lower level structures such as the PDCs and BDC. 
●  Development  of  Policy  Frameworks 
finance  and  cooperatives 
development:  As part of the SSLRP sustainability strategy SSLRP will build the capacity of 
the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Food  Security’s  directorate  of  Cooperatives  and  Rural 
development.  The project will partner with ILO to develop two national policies: 
for  rural 
1 
○   National Cooperatives Development Policy Framework; 
○   National Rural Financial Policy Framework 
2. 
At the end of the project, these policies will remain with the directorate of cooperatives and 
rural  development  and  ready  for  use  by  the  country  to  guide  cooperative  development  and 
strengthening  of  the  rural  finance  sector  with  the  help  of  different  development  partners  in  the 
respective sectors. 
3. 
The SSLRP exit strategy framework is presented in the table below.  
2 
SSLRP Exit Strategy Framework 
Activity to 
continue post-
project 
Component 1:  
Support to 
smallholder 
farmers 
CBO operations 
Who will take up the 
activity 
Mechanisms for 
handover 
Boma and Payam 
development 
committees 
(BDCs/PDCs) 
Given that the BDCs and 
PDCs will be variously 
involved planning and 
overseeing of activity 
implementation, the 
handover process will be 
a seamless one 
CBOs with guidance 
from CDCs/PDCs/BDCs)  
CBOs would have 
stabilized by the time of 
project end. This would 
also be a seamless 
transfer because CBOs 
will be in charge of their 
own affairs from the 
onset. Their capacity is 
going to be augmented 
variously by the project.  
Commitments from national 
actors to continue activity 
Are further inputs 
required (Funds, 
trainings, seeds, etc.)? 
Who will provide 
them? 
Can this activity 
reach a larger scale? 
How? 
The local boma and payam 
development committees are 
already embed in the SSLRP 
activities in the local planning 
and implementation processes.   
No funds will be required, 
the smallholder farmers 
use skills acquired during 
the implementation of 
SSLRP 
Yes, the smallholder 
farmers will continue to 
use their skills acquired 
to increase their 
agriculture production 
The lower level government 
structures are already an 
active party in SSLRP design, 
they will be involved in 
training these CBOs.  
No funds needed 
Inputs exchange, 
trainings will be 
facilitated by the PDCs 
and BDCs   other 
development partners in 
the area  
Yes, about 20 percent 
of these groups are 
expected to graduate 
into cooperatives. 
Component 2: 
Sustained and 
strengthened 
enterprises for 
beneficiaries 
(small scale 
enterprises) in sub 
component 2.1 will 
be sustained and 
upscaled 
Two forms: about 20 
percent of enterprises 
will evolve and become 
self-sustaining private 
enterprises e.g. input 
shops storage facility 
etc. with other group 
Enterprises, 10 percent 
will graduate into 
Farmer Cooperatives  
Viable Private Enterprises 
run by individuals’ 
entrepreneurs 
Groups who become 
cooperatives will be taken 
over by cooperatives 
societies through 
voluntary registration. 
This is true for Kajo-Keji 
and Magwi 
Sustainability of 
public 
investment e.g. 
the infrastructure 
subcomponent. 
The strengthened CBOs 
and lower level 
governments: State, 
County and Boma 
development 
committees 
Community 
infrastructure will be 
handed over to the 
community structures 
County Departments, 
PDCs and BDCs  
Private enterprises will be 
self-sustaining while those 
enterprises using cooperative 
principles will fall under 
Directorate of Cooperatives at 
National and State Levels  
 No further financing to 
private enterprises, is 
required 
Yes, but not fully its 
estimated the 20 
percent of the 
enterprises will 
become self-sustaining 
while the rest will 
remain attractive to 
other development 
projects in the area  
Formation of User 
Associations will be an 
integral part of the installation 
of these infrastructures. The 
PDC, BDCs and CBOs are part 
No. User Associations 
will be responsible 
Maintenance of these 
infrastructure either 
through charging a small 
Yes – full investment 
for selected 
infrastructure will be 
ensured  
3 
Other development 
partners e.g. WB and 
AfDB  
National and state level 
Government 
Capacity building 
of the PCU: The 
Capacity Building 
Support provided 
to PCU and lower 
Level Government  
Development of 
Policy 
Frameworks for 
rural finance and 
cooperatives 
development: 
The PCU will already be 
an autonomous unit 
within MoAFS involved in 
supporting donor 
projects and will not 
need to be handed over.  
The cooperatives 
department will take over 
the guidance of the 
implementation of these 
strategies and make 
them available to other 
development partners    
of the selection process of 
these investments.  
user fees or local 
government investment  
Other development partners 
are already funding the PCU 
and proving capacity building 
as part of their investment 
projects 
Each new ODA project 
will provide funds to 
support and strengthen 
the PCU.  
No, the PCU has a 
finite size and function.  
The department of 
cooperatives is already 
revamping itself to position to 
take the role to of guarding its 
policies and enhance rural 
cooperative development 
No further financing is 
needed for policy 
develop in these areas.  
Once approved these 
policies will need to be 
implemented 
nationally. 
4 
5 
South Sudan
South Sudan Livelihoods Resilience Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 11: Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
Mission Dates:
20 August to 6 December 2020
Document Date:
01/03/2021
Project No.
2000002869
Report No.
5643-SS
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
1/2
 Gender transformational  
 Youth sensitive
 Nutrition sensitive
 Climate finance  
 National gender policies, strategies
 National youth policies, strategies
 National nutrition policies, strategies
Situation
analysis
and actors
 Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
 Key livelihood problems and
youth group
opportunities, by gender
and actors
and actors
 Main youth groups
 Key nutrition problems and
 Challenges and opportunities by
underlying causes, by group
 Nutritionally vulnerable
beneficiaries, by group
Theory of
change
 Gender policy objectives
(empowerment, voice, workload)
 Pathways to youth socioeconomic
 Nutrition pathways
empowerment
 Causal linkage between problems,
 Gender transformative pathways
 Youth employment included in
outcomes and impacts
 Policy engagement on GEWE
project objectives/activities
Logframe
indicators
 Outreach disaggregated by sex
 Outreach disaggregated by sex
 Outreach disaggregated by sex and
 Women are > 40% of outreach
and youth
youth, and IPs (if appropriate)
beneficiaries
IFAD empowerment index
(IE.2.1)
Output level CIs
CI 1.1.8 Mandatory
Outcome level CIs (at least one
of below)
CI 1.2.8
CI 1.2.9
Human
and
financial
resources
 Staff with gender TORs
 Staff with youth TORs
 Staff or partner with nutrition TORs
 Funds for gender activities
 Funds for youth activities
 Funds for nutrition activities
 Funds for IFAD empowerment index
in M&E budget
IFAD Adaptation
Finance
IFAD Mitigation
Finance
$4,061,000
$0
Total IFAD Climate-
focused Finance
$4,061,000
ECG
Remarks
Gender
The project is mainstreaming gender
Nutrition
2/2
The project is nutrition sensitive, meeting all the set criteria and including the core indicators
Youth
The project is youth sensitive and meeting all the set criteria and disaggregating data accordingly
 No social inclusion themes
South Sudan
South Sudan Livelihoods Resilience Programme
Project Design Report
Annex: Annex 12 Formal Grievance Mechanism
Mission Dates:
20 August to 6 December 2020
Document Date:
01/03/2021
Project No.
2000002869
Report No.
5643-SS
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 12: Formal Grievance Mechanism 
A.  Community Based Grievance Redress Mechanism 
1. 
This  will  be  a  stand-alone  Grievance  Redress  Mechanism  where  the  communication 
mechanism involves only community members and will tend to be site specific. This will be used to 
facilitate  agreements  among  community  members  but  also  to  solve  disagreements  where  these 
might  occur.  The  Community  Based  Grievance  Redress  Mechanism  aims  to  use  the  existing 
traditional structures and facilitate grievance resolution at higher levels (including the court of law, 
where necessary). 
2. 
Communities  tend  to  rely  substantially  on  their  own  internal  social  regulatory  systems 
including mechanisms to deal with grievances that work in parallel with the formal systems. These 
internal social regulatory systems will be used to the extent possible at community level. Recourse 
where necessary will be facilitated by the Programme, but in general SSLRP will ensure easy access 
to information through culturally appropriate means and language of communication. 
3. 
In solving problems, negotiation and agreement by consensus will provide the first avenue 
to  iron  out  and  resolve  any  grievances  expressed  by  programme  affected  individuals.  Thus, 
appropriate community-based channels of grievance redress mechanisms will be put in place, and 
the programme affected people sensitised to make use of them. 
4. 
The channels will have to be in line with the norms of the communities as well as laws of the 
country. Thus, the process will involve informal courts handled by traditional leaders (Community 
chiefs etc.), and will follow the following route (Figure 2): 
5. 
Community Level - The first port of entry is the Community level run by the community 
Chiefs. The Chiefs preside over the matter over a set time (possibly 15 days) from receipt of the 
grievance to act upon it. 
6. 
Payam Level - When one party is not satisfied with the decision at Community Level, the 
complaint  can  be  taken  up  to  the  Payam  Level.  The  Payam  Grievance  Redress  Committees  then 
investigates and give their ruling on the matter. In most cases such complaints get sorted out at 
this level. 
7. 
County Level - However, those who are not satisfied will be allowed to appeal to the County 
Council (CC). At this level, the County Grievance Redress Committee under the District Officer will 
preside over the case. However, if the aggrieved party is still not satisfied then they can ultimately 
take the formal route. 
1 
The Community-based grievance mechanism 
B.  Formal Grievance Redress Mechanism 
8. 
Introduction - The grievance redress mechanism (GRM) is a system by which queries or 
clarifications about the project will be responded to, problems with implementation will be resolved, 
and complaints and grievances will be addressed efficiently and effectively.  
9. 
Purpose of the GRM - The purpose of the GRM will be to: a) be responsive to the needs of 
beneficiaries  and  to  address  and  resolve  their  grievances;  b)  serve  as  a  conduit  for  soliciting 
inquiries, inviting suggestions, and increasing community participation; c) collect information that 
can  be  used  to  improve  operational  performance;  d)  enhance  the  project’s  legitimacy  among 
stakeholders; e) promote transparency and accountability; and f) deter fraud and corruption and 
mitigate project risks.  
2 
10. 
Structure of the GRM – The GRM consists of the following components: a) the access point 
for impacted/concerned people; b) grievance log; c) assessment stage; d) acknowledgement stage; 
e) response; f) room for appeal; and g) resolution. The components are summarized in the process 
flow diagram below: 
11. 
The requirements for each of these steps is detailed below.  
C.  Grievance Reception and Classification 
At the Payam level, the SSLRP IA focal point would be responsible for receiving, recording, 
12. 
and classifying grievances. He/she ensures that all potential issues are captured and classified for 
escalation, review and action as required. 
13. 
The  access  point  for  impacted/concerned  people  will  be  situated  as  close  to  the  project 
affected person (PAP) as possible. This will be established at each of SSLRP IA offices and MoAFS 
Payam, County and Head offices so that it will be credible and accessible: a) at the various offices, 
phone  numbers  will  be  posted  and  notices  written  indicating  the  process  to  be  taken  when 
aggrieved; b) at the various offices, there will be a grievances boxes situated in the reception area, 
3 
where  anonymous  reports  can  be  deposited.  The  SSLRP  IA  Officers  will  oversee  the  keys  to  the 
boxes; c) at the various offices, there will be a designated officer who receives, classifies, and logs 
all grievances. 
14. 
The main issues for the access point include the following: a) Uptake channels should include 
some  or  all  these  (phone  hotline,  email,  mail,  SMS,  webpage,  Grievances  Box,  anonymous 
complaints, or face-to-face); b) the uptake channels will be publicized and advertised via local media 
and  the  implementing  agency;  c)  verbal  complaints  should  be  recorded  by  staff  for  them  to  be 
considered; d) many complaints may be resolved ‘on the spot’ and informally by project staff but 
should also be logged in order to: i) encourage responsiveness; and ii) ensure that repeated or low-
level grievances are being noted in the system; and e) the GRM should have the ability to handle 
anonymous complaints. 
15. 
Typically, the complainant will be provided with a receipt and ‘roadmap’ telling him/her how 
the  complaint  process  works  and  when  to  expect  further  information.  Any  complaint,  issue,  or 
negative stakeholder interaction (whether this is formally logged by the complainant or not), must 
be logged and classified for action. All these complaints must be formally logged using the standard 
forms. 
16. 
All complaints must be prioritised as follows: 
➔  Priority 1 – urgent, potential high health and high business impact. This requires a response 
to the complainant within three (3) working days. This should be used (sparingly) for major 
health  issues  where  the  complaint  may  have  disastrous  impacts  on  either  humans,  the 
environment or SSLRP itself. Also, this could be used in a situation where the complainant 
may  be  able  to  influence  or  make  public  statements  that  would  impact  upon  the  SSLRP 
reputation. All Priority 1 complaints must be escalated immediately to the  Head of 
that Office; 
➔  Priority  2  -  non-urgent,  lower  health,  environmental  and  social  impact.  This  requires  a 
response  to  the  complainant  within  2  working  weeks.  This  should  be  used  for  most 
complaints  with  individual  stakeholders,  as  this  allows  a  reasonable  time  to  collect 
information and produce a balanced response. Discretion and flexibility should be exercised 
in  prioritizing  all  complaints.  The  staff  member  logging  the  complaint  should  review  the 
complaint and its priority with the Head of that office, before proceeding to the next step. 
The  Head  of  that  Office  will  decide  on  the  appropriate  person(s)  to  carry  out  subsequent 
steps, including the investigation.  
a.  Acknowledgement 
17. 
The  Head  of  that  Office  will  ensure  that  every  complaint  receives  a  formal  written 
acknowledgement, containing an expectation of when they will receive a response, and the person 
dealing with it. All complaints, regardless of priority, should receive a pro forma acknowledgement 
sent out on the day of receipt.  
b.  Investigate 
The  Assigned  member  of  staff  follows  up  all  aspects  of  the  complaint,  both  internal  and 
18. 
external, to ensure that the key facts are identified and clarified. The priority of the complaint will 
drive  the  timescale  for  completion  (3  days  for  urgent  or  2  weeks  for  non-urgent).  All  areas  of 
interaction  and  communication  should  be  established  (who,  what,  where,  when,  why  etc.)  and 
documented where possible.  
c.  Resolve and Confirm 
The Head of that Office ensures that the final resolution is clear and fair. He/she also confirms 
19. 
the proposed action and resolution with His/her Superiors. 
The Head of the Office ensures that the proposed resolution meets corporate guidelines and 
20. 
does not prejudice SSLRP IA in any unnecessary legal or financial manner; 
4 
●  The Head of the Office documents the proposed action and discusses and agrees with the 
Facility Manager/Sister in Charge; 
●  The  Head  of  the  Office  Discusses  and  reviews  the  solution  from  both  the  corporate  and 
complainant viewpoint to ensure fairness and clarity; 
●  The review should include recognition and documentation of any underlying issues that have 
contributed to the complaint and recommendations for actions to prevent further occurrence; 
●  This should then be reviewed as part of the bi-monthly quality assurance reviews. 
d.  Respond to Complainant 
21. 
The Head of the Office Provides the Complainant with the resolution within the timescales 
promised. The details of the findings and proposed resolution should be clearly explained (in written 
or verbal form as appropriate) to the complainant within the agreed timescales. If this cannot be 
done on time the Complainant should be contacted by telephone to request further time. 
e.  Follow up 
The  Head  of  the  Office  ensures  that  complaints  are  followed  up  to  confirm  that  the 
22. 
complainants are satisfied with the response given. 
➔  All Priority 1 complaints and 95 percent of priority 2 complaints must be followed up within 
a reasonable timescale; 
➔  This will be carried out by the Head of the Office’s office; 
➔  The follow-up should identify the following: a) is the complainant satisfied with the response? 
b) Did they feel that their complaint was properly and fairly handled? 
➔  Any negative responses to these questions should be referred to the Head of the Office for 
action and direct follow up with the complainant. 
f.  QA & Close 
23. 
 The  Head  of  the  Office  must  ensure  that  the  facility  is  aware  of  the  complaints  and  any 
underlying issues. Plan actions to remove these and prevent future recurrence. He/she then submits 
a monthly summary incident report to the SSLRP IA. 
➔  All complaints should be  reviewed monthly as part of the quality assurance review 
meetings. 
➔  Any complaints where action can be taken to avoid recurrence must be acted upon 
and raised with the appropriate managers/teams across the said Office; 
➔  A monthly summary incident report is submitted to SSLRP IA for record keeping and 
consolidation. 
5 
South Sudan
South Sudan Livelihoods Resilience Programme
Project Design Report
Annex: Annex 13 Draft KM Plan
Mission Dates:
20 August to 6 December 2020
Document Date:
01/03/2021
Project No.
2000002869
Report No.
5643-SS
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
ANNEX 13 SSLRP Knowledge Management Plan 
First draft (to be refined and validated at start-up) 
Knowledge management: Definition 
For the purposes of this strategy, Knowledge Management (KM) is defined as “a set of 
processes, tools and behaviors that connect and motivate people to generate, use and 
share  good  practice,  learning  and  expertise  to  improve  projects’  efficiency  and 
development effectiveness”1.  
The  present  document  is  a  draft  plan  developed  to  this  end.  After  start-up,  this  draft 
should be completed and refined with support from IFAD. The KM strategy and plan will 
be validated by project stakeholders through a national workshop. The workshop will be 
an opportunity to refine the thematic focus and dissemination strategy of policy relevant 
studies,  but  also  to  better  understand  the  key  information  needs  for  SSLRP  to  be 
successful. 
Knowledge management: Goal, objective and activities 
The  overall  goal  of  this  KM  plan  is  to  support  assembling  and  transformation  of 
knowledge  into  better  development  results  for  poor  rural  people,  and  greater  impact 
towards learning and adaptation for improved project performance, and enable SSLRP to 
develop, disseminate and use knowledge products. 
In particular, the specific objectives of this plan are:  
 
Improve  SSLRP's  ability  to  generate,  use  and  share  the  best  available 
evidence and experiential knowledge to achieve higher quality operations, 
and greater visibility and influence in the development in South Sudan. 
  To support learning, adaptation and improved project performance during 
implementation; 
  To raise awareness among on the importance of adopting more climate-
sensitive technologies and to gender and nutrition-sensitive practices.  
  To improve the design of future projects in South Sudan and elsewhere 
based on the lessons learned from SSLRP; 
  To influence policy processes and scale up successes and innovations; 
  To  raise  awareness  of  project  activities  and  results,  and  publicize 
successful experiences; 
1 IFAD, 2019 
  To boost the project profile among decision makers; 
  To engage with and inform rural people about project activities; 
The activities will be implemented in four broad action areas: a) raising awareness on the 
importance  of  sustainable  practices;  b) producing  policy-relevant material  and  sharing 
lessons on what works and what does not and; c) promoting SSLRP’s visibility on climate, 
gender and nutrition issues in the national and international fora and publications.  
Knowledge management structure  
KM will be the primary responsibility of the IA’s M&E officer. The M&E officer will work 
in  close  collaboration  with  technical  experts,  state  focal  points  and  community 
facilitators to ensure that: i) M&E findings on project results are widely disseminated in 
a clear, synthetized, and interesting way; ii) knowledge products are backed up by solid 
M&E  evidence  (and  therefore,  the  M&E  system  collects  all  data  necessary  for  the 
envisaged knowledge products to be developed); iii) field visits to collect stories by the 
KM  officer  are  also  used  for  triangulating  M&E  data,  and  the  way  around;  iv)  case 
studies, stakeholder interviews and surveys, will be used to deepen the understanding 
of factors contributing to successes and failures, and to enable full documentation of 
impact.  
SWOT analysis in the KM context 
A  SWOT  analysis  is  a  simple  but  useful  framework  for  analyzing  the  Strengths, 
Weaknesses,  Opportunities,  and  Threats  that  PMU  may  encounter,  especially  when 
about to start a new project or undergo a midterm evaluation, etc. It can also be used 
in project planning and eventually evaluation of its activities at various intervals.  
This SWOT analysis helps in focusing on the main strengths and leverage them to pursue 
key  opportunities  and  to  avoid  threats.  The  team  can  also  become  aware  of  its 
weaknesses which might need to be overcome in order to take the greatest possible 
advantage of potential opportunities available. 
The table below is an example of SWOT analysis, to be completed/adjusted/completely 
modified at start-up and updated during implementation.  
Table 1: SSLRP’s KM SWOT analysis  
STRENGHTS 
OPPORTUNITIES 
  Qualified IA human capital; 
 Networking with other projects; 
  Use of different dissemination 
tools, both traditional (radios, 
campaigns) and new (websites)- 
hard to reach areas that cannot be 
reached physically can receive 
these messages these remote 
methods. 
  Translation of information into 
local languages- will make it easy 
for local people to understand and 
use the messages. 
 Exchange of good practices with 
partners; 
 Attract more young beneficiaries via 
social media; 
  Use of local structures- beneficiary 
communities are familiar with local 
leaders, such as community 
facilitators, and these leaders 
better understand how to best 
communicate with the beneficiaries 
WEAKNESSES 
THREATS 
  limited availability of data; 
  Weak M&E capacities at local 
government levels 
 Poor coordination between 
government and project 
implementers 
Stakeholders and audiences  
SSLRP  KM  activities  will be  differentiated depending  on the different  audiences they 
aim to reach. The tables 2 and 3 below are examples of KM stakeholders/audiences and 
KM  products  that  could  be  used  to  reach  these.  Both  these  tables  are  to  be 
start-up  and  updated  during 
completed/adjusted/completely  modified  at 
implementation.  
Table 2: SSLRP KM Stakeholders.  
Stakeholders 
What do they want/need to know? What 
do we want to communicate to them? 
Local 
  Project staff 
  Beneficiaries 
  Local communities 
  Local offices of government agencies and 
project partners 
National  
  Project partners 
  Other similar projects 
  Government agencies 
  Policy makers 
  Civil society organizations 
  General public 
International 
  Donors/financiers 
  Development agencies  
  Communities of practice/interest groups 
  Other projects 
  Purpose and activities of the project  
  Opportunities to partner, participate, 
or benefit 
  Notifications about project events 
and meetings  
  Project results and impacts 
  Experiences of beneficiaries 
  Relevant lessons learned 
  Results of successful pilots and trials 
of new technologies, crops etc.  
  Guidelines and methodologies 
  Results of studies, surveys and 
assessments undertaken 
  Policy relevant lessons 
Table 3. SSLRP KM products 
Products 
What knowledge can they share and with who? 
  Stories from the field 
  Lessons learned 
  Project briefs  
  Policy briefs 
  Reports and studies 
  Technical guidelines 
  Working papers 
  How-to-do-note 
  Research 
publications 
 
 
Inputs to partners’ 
publications 
Inputs to 
government policies 
and strategies 
  Good for sharing information on project activities, results 
and lessons learned with a wide variety of audiences from 
beneficiaries to high-level decision makers.  
  Typically short (a few pages) and not too technical, but 
with enough detail to be useful or to encourage audience 
to seek out more information. 
  Where necessarily, translated into local languages for 
ease of use by beneficiary communities 
  Addressing particular issues in significant detail, normally 
longer and more analytical and targeted towards 
audiences with specialist knowledge or interest in the 
topic. 
  Require considerable investment of time and resources to 
produce 
  Useful opportunities to put project knowledge into action 
and to use partners and government resources to 
leverage its impact and raise awareness of the project. 
  Articles 
(newspaper/magazin
e) 
  Useful for communicating information about project 
activities and results achieved and reaching a wide 
general audience. 
  Blog posts 
  Newsletters 
  Videos 
  Photos 
 
Interviews 
TOOLS 
  Newspapers, websites and blogs are normally eager for 
content and are normally keen to publish interesting 
stories from projects. 
  These make great content for the project to disseminate 
through social media – publishing videos and photos of 
project activities, beneficiaries, field visits etc. online is a 
good way to attract interest (it is advisable to get 
permission where necessary). Interviews often provide 
good soundbites for sharing through social media, 
perhaps together with links to longer articles or 
publications. 
Useful KM tools and templates can be accessed on the IFAD KM Resource Centre, 
accessible through this link: https://ifadkmcentre.weebly.com/integrating-km-in-
projects.html  
Table 4: Template for Knowledge Management action plan  
KM AREA 
OUTCOME 
Sensitization 
campaigns  
State-level 
stakeholder 
consultations/fe
edback 
County-level 
stakeholder 
consultations/fe
edback 
Nutrition 
education 
Behavioral change in 
beneficiary 
communities towards 
employment of more 
climate-sensitive 
technologies, nutrition-
sensitive and gender-
inclusive practices     
 Strong primary 
stakeholder 
engagement, greater 
awareness and 
understanding  of 
project issues by 
stakeholders, 
acquisition of 
information needed 
for impact-oriented 
project management 
by project staff 
Strong primary 
stakeholder 
engagement, greater 
awareness and 
understanding  of 
project issues by 
stakeholders,  
acquisition of 
information needed 
for impact-oriented 
project management 
by project staff 
Beneficiaries increase 
production and 
consumption of 
diversified foods of high 
nutritional value 
2 M&E officer will double as M&E and KM officer 
OUTPUT 
 (knowledge products) 
DISSEMINATION 
CHANNELS/EVENTS 
RESPONSIBLE  
STAKEHOLDERS/ 
TARGET 
AUDIENCES 
Beneficiary 
communities, 
project and 
government staff, 
local leaders  
video documentaries, 
Radio messages, online 
messages, publications 
of success stories, 
awareness materials 
for climate, gender 
and nutrition 
sensitivity 
Radios (channel X and X), 
video shows, religious 
gatherings, community 
groups, schools, 
newsletter, brochures, 
websites, Farmer Field 
Schools 
Donors, Ministry 
of Agriculture and 
Food security 
(MAFS) staff, Civil 
Society 
Organizations 
(CSOs) and others 
interested parties 
Publications of 
stakeholder workshop 
proceedings 
(magazines),  technical 
reports on results and 
lessons learnt. 
Stakeholder 
workshops,  seminars 
and review meetings 
BUDGET 
(USD) 
35, 000  
USEFUL 
/POTENTIAL 
PARTNERSHIPS 
World Food 
Programme, 
Food and 
Agriculture 
Organization, 
National media; 
others 
TIMEFRAME 
350  
sensitization 
campaigns 
starting with 50 
in year 1 and 
100 in the 3  
year  
Partnership for 
Recovery and 
Resilience (the  
Partnership or 
PfRR) and others 
15 workshops (  
1 workshop per 
state per year  
starting in year 
2) 
45, 000 
M&E officer2, 
technical experts, 
community 
facilitators from 
state focal persons 
and community 
facilitators and 
extension workers 
etc. 
M&E officer,  
component 
specialists, state 
focal persons and 
community 
facilitators 
County-level 
government 
officials and 
beneficiaries 
communities, 
local leaders 
Publications of 
stakeholder workshop 
proceedings 
(magazines), 
Stakeholders 
workshops,  religious 
gatherings, community 
groups, newsletter, 
brochures, Farmer 
Field Schools 
M&E officer, 
component 
specialist, county-
focal persons and 
community 
facilitators  
Partnership for 
Recovery and 
Resilience (the  
Partnership or 
PfRR)and others 
25  workshops (  
1 workshop per 
county per year  
starting in year 
2) 
125, 000 
Househol
d member 
and 
communit
ies 
Nutrition modules 
Nutrition education 
sessions,  community 
groups and schools, FFS 
M&E officer, 
technical experts, 
nutrition specialist 
and community 
facilitators 
World Food 
Programme 
(WFP), Food and 
Agricultural 
Organization 
198 sessions 
with 18 
sessions in year 
1 and 36 
sessions in each 
39, 600 
KM AREA 
OUTCOME 
STAKEHOLDERS/ 
TARGET 
AUDIENCES 
OUTPUT 
 (knowledge products) 
DISSEMINATION 
CHANNELS/EVENTS 
RESPONSIBLE  
Exchange visits 
Synergies built with 
similar projects funded 
by other agencies and  
successful results 
shared with national 
and regional 
stakeholders 
Donors, 
partner 
organizati
ons, 
internatio
nal 
audience 
Publications of success 
stories and lessons 
learnt 
Regional workshops, 
inter-organizational 
seminars 
MAFS staff, 
beneficiaries, 
project staff 
USEFUL 
/POTENTIAL 
PARTNERSHIPS 
(FAO), 
institutions of 
higher learning 
and others 
Countries in SSCT 
TIMEFRAME 
BUDGET 
(USD) 
of the 
remaining 5 
years 
6 visits, 3 visits 
in year 3 and 
another 3 in 
year 5 
6, 000 
