Sri Lanka
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience Project
Project Design Report
Main report and annexes
Document Date:
04/11/2019
Project No.
2000002583
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
4P
ABS
ACAD
ADB
AF
AG
ARPAs
ASC
AWPB
BCC
BMI     
CBSL   
CC
CGD    
CKDu
COSOP
CPI
CRIP
CSA
DAD
Public-Private-Producer Partnership
Agri-Business Mentorship
Assistant Commissioner Agrarian Development
Asian Development Bank
Adaptation Fund
Auditor General
Agrarian Research and Productivity Assistants
Agrarian Service Centers
Annual Work Plan and Budget
Behaviour Change Communication
Body Mass Index
Central Bank of Sri Lanka
Climate Change
Chronic Granulomatous Disease
Chronic Kidney Disease of Unknown Aetiology
Country Strategic Opportunity Programme
Corruption Perception Index
Climate Resilience and Improvement Project
Climate Smart Agriculture
Department of Agrarian Development
DEWN
Disaster and Emergency Warning Network
DHS
DoA
Demographic and Health Survey
Department of Agriculture
DRM    
Design Review Meeting
EB
EMA
ESIA
ESMF
ESMP
FA
FAO
FBO
Executive Board
Environmental Management Act
Environmental and Social Impact Assessments
Environmental and Social Management Framework
Environmental and Social Management Plan
Financing Agreement
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Farmer Based Organization
FBS     
Farm Business School
FFS
FIPS
FMAQ
FO
GAP
GCF
GDP
Farmer Field School
Faster Implementation of Project Start-up
Financial Management Questionnaire
Farmers' Organizations
Good Agricultural Practices
Global Climate Fund
Gross Domestic Product
GIS     
GIZ
GoSL
HDI
ICP
IFAD
IOE
IUCN
Geographical Information System
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit
Government of Sri Lanka
Human Development Index
IFAD Client Portal
International Fund for Agricultural Development
Independent Office of Evaluation
International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources
IWMI    
International Water Management Institute
JICA
KC
LPA
MIS
MoF
MoUs
MPAT  
MsAPN
MTR
NADeP
NAP
NCCP
NPsC
NSC
PARM
PEFA
PFI
PHM
PID
PIM
PMU
RBA
RSP
SAP
SAPP
SARP  
SDGs
SECAP
SLM
SMS
SOEs
SUN
Japan International Cooperation Agency
Knowledge Centres
Lead Project Agency
Management Information System
Ministry of Finance
Memoranda of Understanding
Multidimensional Poverty Assessment Tool
Multi sector Action Plan for Nutrition
Mid-Term Review
National Agribusiness Development Programme
National Adaptation Plan
National Climate Change Policy
National Project Steering Committee
National Steering Committee
Platform for Agricultural Risk Management
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Assessment
Participating Financial Institution
Post Harvest Management
Provincial Irrigation Department
Project Implementation Manual
Programme Management Unit
Rome Based Agency
Rural Sector Performance
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships Programme
Sustainable Agricultural Productivity Programme
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience Project
Sustainable Development Goals
Social Environment and Climate Assessment
Sustainable Land Management
Short message service
Statements of Expenditures
Scale-up Nutrition
TIU
UNDP
UNFPA
UNOPS
VAM
VC
VTCs
WFP
WHHs
WHO   
Technical Implementation Unit
United Nation Development Programme
United Nations Population Fund
United Nations Office for Project Services
Vulnerability Analysis and Mapping
Value Chain
Village Tank Cascades
World Food Programme
Women Headed Households
World Health Organisation
Executive Summary
1/42
Climate Change (CC) represents a major challenge in Sri Lanka with an increasing trend towards heavier and less predictable rains,
hot spells and extended dry periods. This is acutely affecting rural households in the Dry Zone region. CC is also exacerbating the
effects of environmental degradation, population pressures and unsustainable land use practices with depleted land being further
degraded by heavy rains and floods. The World Bank-CIAT Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) country profile for Sri Lanka (2015)
points to critical vulnerabilities related to the overreliance on rain-fed systems, limited access to irrigation systems, and limited
diversification with paddy rice comprising about 46 percent of the total harvested area. Local communities have in the past managed
this water stress by constructing many small cascade systems of reservoirs, transfer canals and irrigation schemes. Currently, the
livelihood of a large population in the dry zone depends on small tank-based irrigated farming. A number of studies confirm that
smallholder farmers cultivating under these village irrigation systems are poorer7 8and more vulnerable to the impacts of climate
change than dry zone farmers who have access to major irrigation. As productivity and crop yields decline with low water availability
and unseasonal rains resulting from climate variability and extreme events, these farmers are dragged deeper into poverty and face
food deficits, which have to be met by buying food for consumption, increasing the level of indebtedness and further eroding their
capacity to cope with climate risks. In order to address the CC challenges facing the regions a request was made by Government to
IFAD to address the challenges of CC on smallholder farmers whilst promoting farm commercialization.
The problem tree and theory of change has identified five factors that contribute to the persistently high levels rural poverty: (i) lack of
knowledge and technical capacity of service providers and farmers; (ii) lack of access to quality inputs and effective advisory and
support services; (iii) limited access to rural infrastructure (water, land, storage, feeder roads); (iv) variable rainfall distributions,
intensity and rising temperature (CC); (v) poor quality of diet, and insufficient of dietary and nutritional knowledge; and (vi) a negative
perception of youth in agriculture. In the Dry Zone, these factors lead to droughts and intermittent flooding, limited access to water
resources, land degradation, limited access to improved technologies, weak local level capacity, limited levels of farm
commercialization and a lack of interest by youth in agriculture related employment. The development hypothesis, as premised by
SARP is that smallholder farmers need to address the challenges posed by the Dry Zone environment through an integrated, area
based approach focusing on ‘pockets of poverty’ combined with a differential strategy aimed at the various categories of vulnerable
households.
Development Objective: The goal of SARP will be to contribute to Sri Lanka’s smallholder poverty reduction and food security in the
Dry Zone region. The development objective is to build resilience and market participation of 40,000 rural smallholder households in
the project area (180,000 persons).
Project Area: SARP will focus on priority districts in the North, North Central, Central, and North West provinces of the dry zone. The
project will focus on selected 260 tanks forming water management cascades in three river basins – the Malwathyu Oya, Mi Oya and
Deduru Oya - identified jointly with the Department of Agrarian Development (DAD) as most vulnerable, ecologically and socially. The
selected cascades are located in the so called ‘hot spot’ geographical areas where farmers and farming livelihoods are highly
exposed and vulnerable to increasing climatic variability.
Target Group: SARP will target three categories of households – the extreme rural poor, poor with potential to sell in local markets
and more commercially oriented smallholder farmers. The extreme poor include non-labour constrained households that are rain fed
producers, with small fragmented holdings, and the landless. Both categories are food insecure. The main category of farmers will be
moderately poor households that are economically active in agriculture and are located in cascades with minor irrigation systems.
These farmers have holdings of less than 1 hectare that produce surpluses of rice, depending on the water availability and during the
yala season some cash crops, albeit the level of marketed sales is usually low. The households are at risk of slipping into the lower
ranks of poverty and food insecurity due to climate and economic shocks. The better-off farmers (with holdings of between 1-2 ha.)
and other value chain actors are more commercially oriented and play an important role in value chain development. Other vulnerable
groups include households suffering severe malnutrition, disabled persons and ex-combatants. The targeting mechanisms include: (i)
geographic targeting, (ii) self-targeting; and (iii) direct targeting.
Project Components: The development objective of the project will be achieved through implementing two technical components
focusing on capacity building for climate resilience and inclusive value chains (Component 1) and climate sensitive investments for
climate resilience and inclusive value chains including last mile infrastructure (Component 2). Each of these components comprise
two technical sub-components supported by a cross-cutting component that will service the project through effective coordination and
management.
Figure 1   SARP Design Framework
2/42
Component 1 will be implemented through two sub-components: 1.1: Strengthening adaptive capacity of service providers and
farmers to climate change and 1.2: Strengthening capacity for inclusive value chain development. The objective of sub-component 1.1
is to strengthen the capacity and skills of local service providers, water user associations, watershed management organizations and
farmers to adapt to climate resilience. The objective of sub-component 1.2 is to strengthen capacity for inclusive value chain
development through trainings in nutrition, business management, finance and marketing for Producer Organizations, Self Help
Groups and individuals to improve nutrition, access markets and enhance their income.
Component 2 will be implemented through two sub-components: 2.1: Investments for climate resilient production and infrastructure
and 2.2: Investment for inclusive value chain development. The objective of sub-component 2.1 is to enhance climate resilience and
promote better production conditions through investments in the construction of water and land development and adaptive farm
technologies. The objective of sub-component 2.2 is to increase profitability and income through investments in markets, feeder roads
and service support centres for smallholder farmers, women and youth.
Component 3: Project Management and Coordination Unit (PMU) at national level will be led by a National Project Director. The PMU
will coordinate SARP together with the sister project SAPP for synergy effects. Placed in the Presidential Secretariat, it will be
supported by technical lead agencies under the Ministry of Agriculture that include the Department of Agrarian Development, the
Department of Agriculture and the Department of Irrigation. A National Steering Committee (NSC) will provide strategic oversight. At
District level, SARP will set up two hub offices in selected districts led by Area Coordinators responsible for day to day
implementation.
Project Benefits: SARP will increase household family income by at least 50 percent. The overall investment would yield an ERR of
18.6 percent assuming a 70 percent adoption of new climate smart agricultural and climate resilient practices. Financial benefits will
be in the form of increased cash incomes of beneficiary households. Social benefits will include a reduction in poverty rates, with
special measures taken to ensure inclusion of disadvantaged groups, and increased food and nutrition security. Environmental
benefits will consist of reduced land degradation through better land and water management and community forestry.
Project Costs: Total Project costs are USD 82 million (LKR 14,757 million) which include 5 percent physical contingencies and 7
percent price contingencies. The component structure of the project including contingencies is: Component 1: Capacity building for
climate resilience and inclusive value chains - USD 11.6 million; Component 2: Investments for climate resilience and inclusive value
chains - USD 65.4 million; Component 3: Project Management and Coordination Unit - USD 4.9 million.
Implementation Structure: The project will be executed by the Presidential Secretariat and various departments of the Ministry of
Agriculture. The Secretary of the Presidential Secretariat will establish a Programme Management Unit (PMU) to manage and
supervise the project. The Project Management Unit (PMU) will be led by a National Project Director, who will have overall
responsibility for project implementation. The PMU will be supported by a team of technical specialists and administrative and financial
support staff. Two area based hubs will be set up to provide overall coordination and oversight of all project activities within the 6
districts and ensure an adequate presence and implementation support at district level.
A Technical Implementation Unit (TIU) will be established in the District Hubs. The TIUs will have executive and technical
responsibilities and will consist of technical staff from implementing agencies at district level and contracted project staff. The
Secretary to the Presidential Secretariat will oversee the SARP National Steering Committee (NSC) which will provide strategic
oversight to the project. At district level coordination will be conducted through the District Multi-Stakeholder Committees. At local
level, Coordination Committees will be set up at the level of the Agrarian Service Centre. Communities, individuals and women who
believe that they are adversely affected by project decisions will be able to submit complaints to Divisional Grievance Committees to
be set up at Divisional Level.
3/42
Exit Strategy and Sustainability: SARP has been designed in consultation with and involvement of relevant government agencies,
technical line departments of the Ministry of Agriculture and development partners. These consultations and discussions have resulted
in a sound approach and a suite of interventions which will be implemented with strong community participation and engagement of
local officials. Building on this foundation, it is expected that the investments as well as the results of the interventions will be
sustained beyond the project period and over the long term.
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Economic and social context: Since the end of the civil war in May 2009, the Sri Lankan economy has grown at a steady rate,
averaging 6-7 percent up to the present day resulting in significant poverty reduction.[1][2] Real GDP growth was recorded at 3.2
percent in 2018, compared to 3.4 per cent in the previous year.[3] This rapid economic growth rate has led to Sri Lanka being
classified as a lower middle-income country with a per capita GDP of USD 4,104.[4] Sri Lanka is undergoing a structural
transformation away from agriculture, with agriculture accounting for 10 percent of GDP, industry for 30.5 percent and services for
60.0 percent. The shift is a result of productivity growth and accelerating urbanization. Agricultural exports as a share of GDP
have also declined from 39 percent in 2000 to 21 percent in 2016. Remittances from Sri Lankan migrants abroad and tourism
play an important role in offsetting any trade deficit[5]. GDP growth, however, dropped slightly to a rate of 3.8 percent in the first
half of 2017 as a result of drought affecting the agricultural and industrial sectors. However, this transformation is progressing
relatively slowly and 30 percent of the labor force remain in agriculture. The population of Sri Lanka in 2018 was reported at 21.6
million, with a rural population accounting for over 81 percent of the total, the largest share in South Asia.[6][7][8] The fertility rate
is relatively low compared to other countries in the region[9] with annual population growth in 2016 reported as 1.1 percent,
below the average for South Asia.[10]
Poverty and food security: Extreme poverty is rarely found and is concentrated in geographical pockets. Whilst growth has
contributed to poverty reduction, some 32 percent of the population remain ‘nearly’ poor or ‘poor’ with the majority living in the
rural areas and estates and subsisting slightly above the extreme poverty line of USD1.5 per day. The population groups most
affected by poverty are agricultural smallholders, plantation workers, underemployed and landless labourers, particularly youth
and women. Youth represent approximately 24 percent of the total population, and are the group with the highest unemployment
rate.
Sri Lanka, however, can be considered a development success story having surpassed many of the Millennium Development
Goals[11]. Absolute poverty declined from 22.7 to 4.1 percent from 2002 to 2016 while per capita consumption of the bottom 40
percent of the population grew at 3.3 percent a year, compared with 2.8 percent for the total population.[12] The decline in
poverty was mostly due to increased earnings linked to a shift to the industry and service sectors. Sri Lanka was ranked 73 out of
188 countries, decisively higher than other lower middle-income countries.[13] Primary school enrolment is near universal.
Secondary and tertiary enrolment has substantially increased. Maternal and infant mortality rates are at very low levels.
These achievements at the national level, however, hide important differences by gender, age, ethnic group and geographic
location.[14] The 2012/13 poverty headcount index by district shows a wide disparity from 1.4 percent in Colombo to 28.8 percent
in the Northern Province. Pockets of poverty can be found mainly in the North and East. The income gap, according to the Gini
coefficient, is high (39.8 in 2017) in comparison to other Asian countries.[15]
Over the last three decades, the food security situation in Sri Lanka has improved significantly but in 2017 it was estimated that
900,000 people live with borderline food consumption levels.[16] Whilst availability of food at the national level is secure, this
does not necessarily translate to food and nutrition security at household level for all segments of the population, especially the
socially and nutritionally vulnerable groups.
Agricultural development: Sri Lanka’s agricultural sector is characterised by plantation crops (mainly tea, rubber and coconut)
and a smallholder cropping sub-sector (mainly rice, maize, fruits, vegetables and other crops). Of the country’s approximately 2.3
million hectares of agricultural land, 80 percent are used for non-plantation food crops. About 1.65 million smallholder farmers
operate on average less than 2.0 hectares of land and contribute 80 percent of total annual food production. The smallholder
contribution, despite a declining share in GDP, remains the backbone of the agricultural sector and an important source of
employment. Sectoral challenges include low and declining productivity, land fragmentation, misuse of agrochemicals (including
fertilizer), which affects the water supply and food quality, inappropriate agricultural technologies, poor water management and
lack of market competitiveness due to poor quality products and inadequate food safety measures.
7.
There are two distinct monsoon periods associated with distinct cultivation seasons, Maha (September to March) and Yala (May
to August) with the latter largely dependent on irrigation. The Maha season accounts for 65 percent of the annual paddy
production. Headway has been made in rice production, which has increased steadily from 2.9 million tons (2002) to 4.8 million
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
tons (2015). This has been in part due to previously inaccessible land being reopened for cultivation after the end of the conflict
as well as the introduction of high-yielding varieties, the expansion of irrigation capacity, and policies such as fertilizer subsidies
for paddy, restrictions on crop choices, and import substitution. Maize is also grown during these two seasons but on a much
smaller scale.
4/42
National strategies, policies and programmes: Since the early 2000s Sri Lanka has had a series of development policy
frameworks which reflect the vision of the changing governments that swing the emphasis between private sector-driven growth
and continued state intervention in the economy.[17][18] These evolving visions include: ‘Regaining Sri Lanka’ (2002)[19],
Mahinda Chintana or ‘Mahinda’s Vision’ (2006-2016) [20] and the Vision 2025. These visions lay out pathways for creating pro-
poor growth with a focus on agriculture, land and water resource management, as well as off-farm rural employment through
small and medium enterprise development. Emphasis is also given to participation and empowerment of poor communities.
The current government economic development vision is illustrated by the Vision 2025 (2017-2025), which aims at transforming
Sri Lanka into a private sector-led and export-oriented hub. It focuses on inclusive and equitable growth with targets to make the
country more competitive and become an upper middle-income country raising per capita income to USD 5,000 per year. The
vision for the rural sector is to increase competitiveness through improved technologies and a shift to commercial agriculture,
along with food security and income increases for small farmers. It recognizes the need to address growing income disparities
among income earners and geographical regions.[21]
In recent years the Government of Sri Lanka (GoSL) has developed a series of sectoral policies and action plans relevant for
agriculture.[22] While the National Agriculture Policy launched in 2007 is in the process of being updated, the current government
has developed a Food Production National Programme (2016-2018) with the primary objective of enhancing domestic production
and minimizing food imports. The national programme includes: (i) enhancement of food crop production and productivity; (ii)
livestock development; (iii) increased production of fisheries and aquaculture products; and (iv) promotion of plantation crop
production. It also suggests attention by the Government to nutrition[23].
Sri Lanka has introduced broad macro policies such as the Public Investment Programme (PIP) of 2017-2020 and ‘Vision 2025’
National Development Framework. Apart from these broad macro policies set by the State, there are also sectoral policies such
as the National Employment Policy, Child Labour Policy, Small and Medium Enterprise Policy, Skills Development Policy,
Education Policy and existing labour laws that deal with the working conditions of labour[24]. The country has also ratified 40 ILO
Conventions against forced labour, discrimination and minimum age[25]. Notwithstanding these measures considerable work is
still needed to enforce policies and strategies that refer to rural development at decentralised level.
The GoSL has set key targets related to poverty reduction, including the creation of 1 million job opportunities combined with
raising per capita income. For the agricultural sector in particular, the strategic orientation is to achieve sustainable improvements
in production through increased productivity, sustained incomes for producers and enhanced market competitiveness. As part of
these efforts, the Government has indicated a keen interest to build capacity of existing producer institutions (i.e. producer groups
or farmers' organizations) to serve as a key entry point and catalyst for agricultural modernization and transformation.
To demonstrate the commitment towards nutrition, in 2012, the GoSL joined the Scale-up Nutrition (SUN) Movement.
Subsequently, the first Multisector Action Plan for Nutrition (MsAPN) 2012-2017 was developed, emphasizing the importance of
a more comprehensive, sustainable and holistic response that calls for a multi-sector approach using nutrition-sensitive and
nutrition-specific programming. This strategy re-affirms that malnutrition cannot be addressed effectively by the health sector
alone. The MSAPN calls for action from other sectors including Agriculture, Social protection to contribute to the national nutrition
agenda. The Presidential Secretriat is currently in the process of finalizing MSAPN 2018 – 2025 – which reaffirms the position
and commitment of Sri Lanka to nutrition.
Key actors and institutional arrangements: The Government's institutional framework is complex and multi-layered. The
current Government is composed of over 50 ministries; there are at least six ministries that cover various aspects of agriculture
with duplication of functions.[26] Agriculture extension services are weak and delivered without proper co-ordination. There are
also frequent movements of departments from one ministry to another.[27] Moreover, functions and service deliveries in some
areas have been devolved to provincial councils (e.g. to the Ministry of Mahaweli Development and Environment Agriculture and
Irrigation) but others have not (e.g. Plantation Industries, Export Agriculture, Agrarian Development). The Ministry of Agriculture
in 1972 introduced the concept of the Agrarian Service Centres in order to establish a ‘one stop shop’ service support. Currently,
there are around 559 service centres throughout the country populated with a cadre of 10,400 animators given the title Agrarian
Research and Productivity Assistants (ARPAs).
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
15.
16.
Gender and social inclusion: Sri Lanka is ranked 75 out of 149 countries according to the Gender Inequality Index. Over the
last decade, the country has made significant improvements with respect to women’s right. Despite the notably high achievement
in terms of education a relatively small percentage of women (30.2 percent) participate in the labour market.[28]
Women play an important role in agriculture (in addition to their domestic and reproductive role) comprising 53 percent of the
agricultural labour force (often as unpaid family labour)[29]. The traditional norms, however, are biased in favour of men,
resulting in obstacles to women’s equitable access to resources (land, capital– including credit) and markets, and the control of
assets. Only 16 percent of all privately owned land belongs to women. Men laborers are employed to do more menial works such
as land preparation and women are employed for less harder works such as planting, weeding. Among the paid agriculture
labourers, women get lower wages than their male counterparts. The lack of substantial source of income and absence of assets
such as land for collateral has made it difficult for women to avail high value loans that could enable them to move up the
agricultural value chain.
17.
There has also been a marked increase in Women Headed Households (WHHs) in post-war Sri Lanka. The 2012-2013
5/42
Household and Income Expenditure Survey showed that in Sri Lanka, 1.2 million households or 23 percent of the households are
WHHs[30]. Taking cognizance of the economic and social vulnerabilities of WHHs, the Ministry of Women and Child Affairs, with
technical support from UNFPA, is implementing a national action plan on WHHs. Within the SARP project, the targeting of WHHs
will be aligned with IFAD’s approach of supporting government programmes and policies[31]. The gender strategy in Appendix 8
details the project activities and approaches towards gender equality and women's empowerment. Some key elements of it
include building programme staff capacity to deliver on gender responsive and socially inclusive programme implementation,
selection of gender responsive agribusiness and climate resilient agribusiness value chains, Farm Business Schools (FBS),
gender responsive M&E and gender sensitive selection of interventions. Capacity of women, youth and marginalized groups
could be built through direct targeting of homestead gardening activities and farm production to local markets, as well as support
to collectivised women’s groups in improving marketing, participating in advanced value chains and growing rural enterprises.
Women could also be empowered as change agents and gatekeepers of Natural Resource Management and rehabilitated water
systems. Such interventions will maximize women's labour returns, reduce drudgery and unpaid work and support their social
and economic empowerment.
Sri Lanka had segregated male and female farmers' organizations since the early 2000s which has resulted in limiting the scope
for women to share a common platform with men and participate in equal decision-making and dialogue[32]. The general lack of
social capital in the agriculture sector, commercial spaces and markets, has created barriers for women’s involvement in trade
and commerce. They are less involved in commercial agriculture and small and medium-scale enterprises that could raise their
incomes and profits[33].
SARP will pay due attention to women’s empowerment and voice including skills and capacities (at producer organizational level,
and within communities as farmer leaders) and the promotion of economic activities best-suited to them. Particular consideration
will also be given to nutrition determinants for the potential to engage with women and adolescent girls in project activities.
People with disabilities: The social inclusion strategy of SARP recognizes the vulnerabilities faced by people with disabilities.
The exclusion and vulnerabilities are more pronounced for elderly, single women, widows, ex-combatants and youth with
disabilities. SARP will pay specific emphasis to these groups during the community mobilization process for their inclusion in
project activities. The project implementation team will be trained to ensure access and benefits of the project to people with
disabilities.
Indigenous People: Sri Lanka has a small number of indigenous communities. The forest-dwelling Wanniyala-Aetto (also
referred to as Vedda) comprise a very small community. Their deep-rooted connections to their ancestral lands enabled them to
maintain their cultural and spiritual traditions. Currently, the entire community is in danger of extinction and has been facing the
brunt of marginalisation, land grabbing, relocation and exclusion. Sinhala-speaking Veddas are found in Anuradhapura District in
North Central Province, one of the project districts[34]. The project through its social inclusion strategy outlined in Appendix 8 will
include them as beneficiaries if they are present in the areas of intervention. The principles of IFAD’s policy on “Engagement with
Indigenous people” will be fully adhered to by SARP.
Youth: Youth between the ages of 15-29, represent approximately 24 percent of the population of the country with over 75
percent of them living in rural areas. Youth continue to face challenges related to education, civic engagement, political
participation and employment in particular. Unemployment for people aged between 20-24 and 25-29 is around 44 percent and
34 percent, respectively (2014).[35]
Sri Lanka’s vulnerability to climate change has a strong impact on youth population, limiting their job opportunities and income-
generating ability in agriculture. Other factors for youth unemployment include mismatched skills, limited employment creation in
the formal private sector and lack of entrepreneurship. Self-employment is also constrained by a lack of business skills and
financial literacy and the inability of youth to access finance. In rural areas youth who are self-employed often have little to show
in terms of income and market access. The challenges of young women’s participation in the labour force is even more
pronounced. Whilst young male participation is around 74.8 percent, only 35.8 percent of young females participate in the labour
force. The trend of departure of youth from agriculture and rural outmigration is seen across Sri Lanka. The social inclusion
strategy in Appendix 8 elaborates on measures for youth’s engagements in SARP.
Climate and environment: Climate Change (CC) represents a major challenge in the country with an increasing trend towards
heavier and less predictable rains, hot spells and extended dry periods. This is acutely felt amongst rural households in the dry
zone. CC is also exacerbating the effects of environmental degradation, population pressures and unsustainable land use
practices with depleted land being further degraded by heavy rains and floods. There has been observed an increase in the
frequency and intensity of climatic events over the last decades with the Dry Zone particularly affected by these natural disasters.
The high incidence of land degradation as a result of the increasing intensity of rainfall, severely threatens the biodiversity of the
country and has resulted in a loss of diverse species. Deforestation, pollution, indiscriminate use of agrochemicals, soil erosion,
frequent floods and droughts have been identified as the main causes of land degradation. According to a report by the World
Bank approximately 19 million people in Sri Lanka today live in locations that could become moderate or severe ‘hotspots’ by
2050 under a carbon-intensive scenario.[36] Evidence of the impact of climate change is already being felt and in 2016, the
country was hit by the worst drought in four decades that continued up to 2017. In the same year it experienced one of the worst
floods in 14 years followed by another spell of drought in 2018.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
CC has adverse effects on the health of the Sri Lankan population. The dry zone is characterised by a high incidence of Chronic
Kidney Disease of Unknown Aetiology (CKDu). Although the exact cause of the disease has not been identified, poor water
quality, the overexploitation of agrochemicals and heat stress (partly a result of rising temperatures and reduced availability of
potable water) are likely major factors[37][38]. The disease has affected 11 dry zone districts with the morbidity and mortality
rates highest among male farmers between the ages of 35-50, which has left women widowed and children orphaned in many
areas of the dry zone[39].
26.
As a response to the environmental and health challenges, the GoSL has put in place a National Climate Change Policy (2011),
as a guide for integrating CC into development planning and implementation by all stakeholders. Its main objectives are to take
adaptive measures to avoid/minimize the adverse impacts of climate change on the people, their livelihoods and ecosystems,
and to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions in the path of sustainable development. The National Climate Change Adaptation
Strategy for Sri Lanka 2011-2016 prepared in 2010 and the National Climate Change Policy (NCCP) adopted in 2012 are the two
major achievements. The National Adaptation Plan for Climate Change Impacts in Sri Lanka (NAP) 2016-2025 is the present
framework for meeting the adverse effects of climate change adaptation.
6/42
27.
Nutrition: Under-nutrition remains a concern in Sri Lanka, with around 17 percent of children under five years of age regarded as
stunted[40]. Additionally 15 percent suffer from wasting, indicating a critical public health situation according to the WHO
benchmark. The rate of 15 percent also positions Sri Lanka as having one of the highest prevalence of wasting in the world. More
than 50 percent of children and women suffer from anaemia, with more than 9 percent of the female population affected by
severe chronic energy deficiency. One in six (15 percent of children aged 6-59 months in Sri Lanka) were found to be anaemic
(Hb < 11 g/dL), indicating a mild public health situation according to the World Health Organization (WHO) benchmark.  Of these,
over one in three (33.6 percent) were iron deficient and 7.4 percent had Iron Deficiency Anaemia[41]. This has long term
implications for the country as these deficiencies can lead to significant and irreversible cognitive damage.[42] Further, among
pregnant women, it was found that one in three (31.8 percent) were Anaemic (Hb < 11g/dL), indicating a moderate public health
situation; one in five (19 percent) had iron-deficiency, and 9 percent had Iron Deficiency Anaemia[43]. The high rate of low birth
weight (16 percent) is also a major predictor of under nutrition in children as well as poor maternal nutrition. The DHS survey
found that while 9.1 percent of women of reproductive age (15-49 years) have a low Body Mass Index (BMI <18.5 kg/m2), 45.3
percent are overweight or obese. Although the level of stunting is lower than other countries in the region there are significant
inter-provincial differences and variations according to income levels.[44][45] According to the RSPA, Sri Lanka’s nutrition
policies are prioritizing nutrition as a key national development strategy with a rank of 4.8, achieving satisfactory outcomes. The
infant mortality rate has decreased from 10 to 7.5 deaths per 1,000 live births over the period 2010-2017, and life expectancy
increased to 75 years. The social inclusion strategy in Appendix 8 outlines the nutrition-sensitive approach with a situational
nutrition analysis of the targeted beneficiaries and activities to address it.
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
28.
29.
30.
IFAD has been an important partner for Sri Lanka’s rural development agenda since 1977 supporting 18 investment projects, at
an overall cost of USD347 million. The initial focus of IFAD investments was on increasing production, productivity and incomes
of the smallholder farmers but in recent years there has been a strategic shift by the GoSL to respond to CC whilst
commercializing smallholder agriculture as a sustainable driver for poverty reduction. These objectives are closely aligned with
IFAD’s core competencies. IFAD also has a comparative advantage given the successful experience with the previous Dry Zone
Livelihood Support and Partnership Programme as well as the recently constituted Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships
Programme (SAPP) with its focus on private sector partnerships for agribusiness development, which is already showing signs of
success.
In order to address the CC challenges facing the country, a request was made by Government to target the Dry Zone region to
address the challenges of CC on smallholder farmers whilst promoting farm commercialization. This request is in line with the
IOE impact evaluation findings of the Dry Zone Livelihood Support and Partnership Programme which emphasized the need for a
follow-up phase from IFAD, noting that a focus on the dry zone is consistent with the current priority accorded by the Government
for the modernization of agriculture.[46]
This is the context in which the Government recognizes IFAD as a main partner in supporting its development efforts to reduce
poverty. IFAD’s particular comparative advantage in support of these priorities are also reflected in the current 2015-2020
COSOP by its two strategic objectives, namely: (i) smallholders benefit from sustainable productivity enhancement in a more
resilient livelihood system; and (ii) poor rural women and men are effectively connected to markets.
B. Lessons learned
31.
Based on IFAD’s operational experience in Sri Lanka and those of other projects in the dry zone, a number of lessons can be
drawn.[47] These include:
32.
33.
Greater coherence and strategic focus: Strategic guidance is needed in the choice of technical and thematic areas for focus of
concentration as well as the targeting of geographical areas and groups whilst addressing priority issues such as climate
resilience, nutrition and youth. [48]
Poverty targeting. The agribusiness partnership focus of the IFAD project portfolio over the last decade has signified a reduced
poverty focus in spatial terms with few of the public-private-producer partnerships (4Ps) covering the poorest districts. Targeting
the poor in commercial-oriented initiatives has been challenging since the private partners have tended to favour areas,
communities and individuals with the best productive capacity. More attention needs to be given towards making the
interventions more inclusive and avoid elite capture. Elite capture will be guarded against in the project by using a variety of
approaches, including: (i) close targeting (ii) working with small self-help groups; (iii) putting a ceiling, expressed as a percentage
of the total amount of capital of the PO that can be lent to any individual or group; (iv) specifying that office holders of the POs
cannot borrow; and (v) monitoring of elite capture by field agents during field visits.
34.
Financial services: Formal rural and microfinance institutions were seen to be effective in providing financial services to the
poor. However, IFAD and the GoSL need to be cognizant of the negative impact of subsidized interest rates credit schemes
which are inefficient (credit rationing) and inconsistent with IFAD’s Rural Finance Policy. Smarter approaches need to be
considered which include the signing of memoranda of understanding with financial institutions and providing subsidies in the
form of lump-sum matching grants as equity contributions to the borrower[49] while applying commercial interest rates for loans.
Furthermore, the design of the financial components in these schemes have tended in the past to focus more on the supply of
financial services rather than the demand. A broad perspective is also needed to sharpen the focus and explore opportunities to
innovate. While this lesson is important the design of SARP also calls for matching grant funding for public and collective
investments, social inclusion and the testing and demonstration of new technologies and enterprises. The grants will be used as
an interim instrument to co-finance productive investments and will complement and support the expansion of sustainable
financial services whilst minimizing possible distortions and negative interferences.
7/42
Private sector participation: The private sector’s involvement in IFAD projects has been strong and sustainable when regular
supplies and volume of raw material are assured and strong strategic alliances can be made. Notwithstanding this, there has
been a concern with the issue of ‘additionality’.[50] More efforts are needed to strengthen the strategy and operational framework
to enhance and ensure that private sector partnerships impact positively the poorer rural communities and households. This calls
for opportunities for public/project support to share risks and costs whilst providing incentives to leverage private-sector
investment and innovation, which are less likely to occur without public investment.
Linking smallholder farmers with markets: Past projects have included measures to enhance productivity and improve market
access with varied emphasis between them. Support for marketing activities needs to be comprehensive, and not ad-hoc.
Interventions should be designed at several levels, including assistance to farmer organizations (FOs) and entrepreneurs in
bulking of agricultural produce and the purchase of inputs, post-harvest[51] management, the provision of market information and
support to micro-, small- and medium-scale processing enterprises by providing better feeder road connectivity to markets.
Improved targeting mechanisms: As noted before, poverty targeting has generally been weak due to an unclear definition of
the target group and weak targeting measures beyond geographical targeting. Economic growth and reduction in poverty on the
one hand, and the nature of projects that shift more to commercialization have also played a role in making poverty targeting
more challenging, with problems including mis-targeting and elite capture. Sounder targeting strategies are needed.
Partnership building: Partnership building has generally been limited, in particular, with development partners for co-financing
as well as strategic and technical level collaboration. It has also been challenging to develop partnerships with government line
agencies beyond project boundaries, also due to the diverse portfolio and numerous lead agencies involved. Partnerships with
NGOs and civil society organizations have similarly been limited, partly reflecting the historical uneasy relations between them
and the Government. More effort will be needed to develop synergies, avoid duplications and ensure closer integration of donor
support.
Advocacy on policy issues needs to continue: To date, country-level policy engagement has also been limited especially with
regards to macro policy issues which are politically entrenched, such as land tenure and the creation of a conducive enabling
environment for value chain development to promote agribusiness for youth, including access to finance. Additionally, there are
meso-level issues such as the formal registration of village level societies and the fragmentation of advisory services within the
public sector that have a national impact. More related to the issue of climate change is the need for a new policy that recognizes
the importance of integrated ecosystem development. Addressing these issues deserves consideration not only at an individual
project level but also across the entire country programme. Policy dialogue will be encouraged on targeted topics through studies
and collaborative partnerships with other development agencies and national stakeholders.
Local level coordination: While the support of government staff from the different line ministries is needed, their capacity is
stretched, particularly as demands for their time come from various institutional bodies and donor funded projects. A concerted
and coordinated strategy is needed to avoid duplication of project activities in the same districts and divisions of the project area.
Efforts to better strategizing donor support for the country are expanding.
Farm Business Schools (FBS). In previous IFAD and FAO projects FBS programmes have been rolled out in parts of the
country. An evaluation of FBS activities has been conducted nationally and the concept is recognized as having been effective.
FBS has proved to be a useful tool for changing participants’ mind sets towards farm commercialization and agribusiness,
including business oriented decision making, improved price negotiation skills and higher incomes. This is particularly relevant for
women and youth as long-term and sustainable empowerment of women and youth will benefit tremendously from the
educational/capacity enhancement activities. The Government is keen on extending the FBS programme to other areas.
Scaling up ‘good practices’. Good practices drawn from the implementation of development projects in the dry zone should be
adapted and replicated within SARP. The interventions build on the traditional Village Irrigation Systems that include village
reservoirs/tanks that provide a strong, cost-effective and tested basis for interventions that build resilience in the dry zone
districts. The cascade-wide/sub-basin approach to village irrigation rehabilitation has produced positive results.
These lessons have been fully taken into consideration in the design of SARP to improve project performance. Strategically,
SARP will pursue a programmatic approach with clear interfaces and complementary activities that will lead to synergies between
the three ongoing IFAD supported projects in Sri Lanka. The implementation arrangements reflect a stronger decentralized
structure of 2 sub-PMU hubs each of which will cover 3 districts. This structure will ensure more effective response to local
demands. The decentralised design and the partnership arrangements with UNDP and WFP, set up prior to implementation, will
ensure better coordination of programme activities. Coordination mechanisms have also been set up in the institutional
arrangements. SARP will, consequently, strengthen the decentralisation process of government regarded in the CSPE as one of
the most positive aspects of the performance of GoSL.
SARP has been designed to follow a community-driven approach where different assets and complementary activities can be
integrated and implemented at a meaningful scale that responds to the problems that communities identify. The project will not be
implemented in isolation and mechanisms have been incorporated to both learn from the experience of relevant projects and
actively seek coordination with other initiatives in the region.[52] The approach places the rural communities and people at the
centre of planning, ensuring a better understanding of the local context, the landscape and their livelihoods. The participatory
planning process should empower the community and provide a voice to the most vulnerable people and in particular to women
and marginalized groups in decision-making, implementation and management of assets created. The local level development
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
effort will also ensure that quality standards for assets created will be met, a critical factor to ensure their sustainability.
45.
8/42
By collaborating with its implementing partners, a more strategic approach to targeting will be pursued, differentiating
beneficiaries, addressing gender issues more effectively and ensuring a more systematic approach to addressing malnutrition.
These have been limitations pointed out by the CSPE that have impacted on the performance of past IFAD projects. Provisions
have also been made to ensure inclusiveness of beneficiaries by detailing the targeting process, providing adequate resources to
ensure that individual and household mentoring support is available and capacitated. In contrast to past projects greater
emphasis will be placed at household and small group level to avoid the risk of elite capture. By partnering with WFP/UNDP
greater opportunities exist for “scaling up results”, which will focus on leveraging policy changes, mobilizing additional resources
and learning to bring the results to scale. Deliberations are currently on-going between IFAD, WFP, and FAO to utilize SSCT
funding for a follow-up RBA programme in the Dry Zone of Sri Lanka.
46.
SARP will also build on the existing capacity of the SAPP in fiduciary issues and M&E and will ensure efficiencies by preparing
joint auditing report. SARP will ensure that delays will be minimised at start-up by recruiting a consultant to facilitate selection and
mobilisation of project staff and the preparation of background documentation and Terms of Reference for undertaking start-up
studies.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
47.
48.
The goal of the SARP will be to contribute to Sri Lanka’s smallholder poverty reduction and food security in the Dry Zone region.
The development objective is to build resilience and market participation of 40,000 rural smallholder households in the project
area (180,000 persons). Women will constitute 50 percent (90,000) and youth 20 percent (36,000) of the total beneficiaries. The
duration of the project will be six years.[53]
Geographic area: SARP will focus priority districts in the North, North Central, Central, and North West provinces of the dry
zone. The project will focus on selected cascades in three river basins – the Malwathyu Oya, Mi Oya and Deduru Oya - that were
identified by the Department of Agrarian Development (DAD) as most vulnerable, ecologically and socially. DAD classifies sub-
watersheds and Village Tank Cascades (VTCs) according to their resilience to climate change. The selected cascades are
located in so called ‘hot spot’ geographical areas covering an average of 25,000 ha., where farmers and farming livelihoods are
highly exposed and vulnerable to increasing climatic variability. The criteria used for the selection of hot spots are: (a) the impact
of drought and floods on crop losses and expenditures on drinking water and relief supplies; (b) the current climate vulnerability
as reflected by income poverty, source of drinking water, and participation in safety net programs; and (c) future climate
vulnerability based on an index of 42 indicators measuring exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity[54]. Cascades and VTCs
have been tentatively selected during the design to avoid duplication of locations where the on-going World Bank projects are
operating.[55] Additionally, decisions have been taken to include cascades and micro-catchments where synergies can be
developed with on-going UNDP and WFP projects to ensure integrated watershed development[56].
49.
The selection of the project sites has taken into account a number of factors, but the process will be refined in the early stages of
implementation. The factors include:
household data on poverty;
vulnerability and sensitivity to shocks and stresses (drought and flood);
food insecurity and malnutrition;
land degradation, agro-ecological zone (dry zone), seasonality and livelihood, prepared through the World Food Programme,
Vulnerability Analysis and Mapping (VAM) system;
geographical advantage of working on the cascade systems and rejuvenating the water tanks with the potential to provide
perennial water sources for the rural communities;
concentration of farmers engaged in the production of selected value chains;
potential for agricultural diversification, agribusiness and market access;
selections aimed at avoiding duplication of activities with World Bank projects and to build synergies with UNDP (5 common
target districts) and WFP (3 common target districts).
existence of Protected Areas: the project sites must not be in close proximity/adjacent to the Protected Areas
9/42
50.
These elements were overlaid in order to select tentatively target divisions within districts where WFP is operating. The hot spots
and selected cascades traverse six districts in two clusters: Anuradhapura, Vavuniya, Matale, Mannar, Puttalam, Kurenagala
some of which have been targeted by UNDP and WFP and others suggested by DAD. Additional work will be needed to extend to
the remaining districts.
51.
Farmers located in the vicinity of the cascades are supported by extension staff located in the Agrarian Service Centres. In the
selected districts there is a total of 111 ASCs that serve a farming population of more than 231,000 farm households and 11,000
producer groups. The total number of village tanks in these districts are in excess of 8,400 with a command area of 98,000
hectares. For the design purposes and in order to estimate the target number of beneficiaries around 260 tanks were selected in
cascade systems that lie within and adjacent to the target areas of the partner projects (WFP/ UNDP)[57].
52.
Target groups:
53.
SARP will target three categories of households – the extreme rural poor, poor with potential to sell in local markets and more
commercially oriented smallholder farmers. The extreme poor are non-labour constrained households that are rain fed producers,
with small fragmented holdings, as well as the landless, who are food insecure. The main category of farmers will be moderately
poor households that are economically active in agriculture and are located in cascades with minor irrigation systems. These
farmers have holdings of less than 1 ha. and produce surpluses of rice, depending on the water availability and during the yala
season some cash crops, albeit the level of marketed sales is usually low. The households are at risk of slipping into the lower
ranks of poverty and food insecurity due to climate and economic shocks. The better-off farmers (with holdings of between 1-2
ha.) and other value chain actors are more commercially oriented and play an important role in value chain development. SARP
will bring the better off farmers together with the moderately poor households, youth and other value chain actors into selected
value chains linking them with processors and other private sector buyers. Some of the beneficiaries will be organised into
watershed associations to manage on-farm water use and others into producer organizations with the potential to graduate into
social and business enterprises. Other vulnerable groups including households suffering severe malnutrition, disabled persons
and ex-combatants who will receive specific attention to facilitate their social integration in agricultural production and economic
activities.
54.
Through the cascade/ tank targeting process around 16,000 farm households have been identified as located in the command
area of the tanks and a further 18,300 in upstream locations and adjacent areas. An attempt was also made to estimate the
number of farm households in each category through an expert consultative process. Some 10 percent of the households were
regarded as better-off and more commercially oriented, 70 percent regarded as poor with potential and 20 percent as the most
vulnerable and food insecure. Using an average of 4.5 people per household, this translates into a total of around 154,000
persons. A further 5,700 beneficiary households will lie outside the catchment areas. SARP will reach at least 50 percent women
and 20 percent youth as beneficiaries. The project will introduce approaches that promote gender equality, women empowerment
and social inclusion.[58]
55.
Targeting strategy
56.
57.
SARP will ensure the participation of the more marginal rural households, whilst being inclusive of so-called ‘better-off’
smallholder farmers and specific vulnerable groups. The mechanisms include: (i) geographic targeting, (ii) self-targeting; and (iii)
direct targeting. SARP design includes empowering, enabling and procedural measures to promote sustainable socio-economic
development with particular focus on the youth, women, indigenous people, women headed households, single women, widows
and other vulnerable groups (ex-combatants and the disabled).
The World Food Programme’s Vulnerability Analysis and Mapping (VAM) system[59] will be used to target specific numbers of
sub-categories of households that could include: a) women headed households; b) young unemployed women; c) households
with disability or kidney diseases as a result of CGD; d) conflict displaced/resettled persons; e) households affected by floods
over the last five years; and f) families with children/women at risk of malnutrition.
58.
Direct targeting will be used to choose activities, taking into consideration where the most vulnerable farmers can be found. A
differential approach will be used to ensure accessibility, relevance and impacts of different technological packages for women,
men, youth, and the most vulnerable. Quotas will ensure the effective participation of the different vulnerable groups in project
activities. Self-targeting will occur through participation in the Farmer Field School (FFS) and Farm Business School (FBS) and
direct targeting will be used for specific activities directed to women, youth, ex combatants, the disabled and other vulnerable
groups in the communities. Mentoring will be done to ensure proper participation, achievement and sustainability of interventions,
especially for the extreme poor, and specific disadvantaged groups – women headed households and the disabled.
10/42
59.
60.
The combined approach has three important aspects: (a) ensure the availability of water, increasing the cropping intensity and
diversifying the farming system to introduce high value priority commodities. (b) focusing on value adding activities for women
and youth including post production, the provision of support, advisory and information services; and (c) reaching the extreme
poor through cash for assets and other cash transfers, graduating the beneficiaries into small income generating activities and
building capacities.
An effective and well-defined community mobilization process will facilitate the inclusive and effective delivery of SARP activities.
It will ensure that the project is able to effectively target and fully engage its intended beneficiaries. It will also enable project
activities to be fine-tuned to respond to the local context, opportunities and the priorities of the households. The project’s social
mobilization and inclusion approach will involve selecting community mobilisers for each target community (50 percent women
and 20 percent youth) from within the local communities. These mobilisers will be supported by Social Inclusion and Gender
Facilitators trained and tasked with using PRA techniques to undertake social and economic mapping of the communities to
identify project beneficiaries for different activities and ensure their inclusion in project activities. The community mobilization
team will be key to mobilizing and incentivizing the community to participate in project activities, build the capacity of women and
men farmer groups to function more effectively and delivering empowerment and nutrition training as well as establishing an
effective communication channel between the project beneficiaries and project implementers. The community facilitators will be
supported by community development service providers and project staff working at the Agrarian Service Centres.
61.
Gender and Targeting checklists used for the SARP design will be adapted and used in implementation. (see Appendix 1).
62.
Value chain development
63.
A part of the project targeting and inclusion strategy is the sound selection of the suitable commodities to be supported[60].
Potential commodities include goat, dairy, chili and fruit and vegetables and more specialized crops such as aloe vera and
morenga. The range of commodities are broad reflecting the diverse and risky environment where a wide range of commodities
are needed to mitigate the risks of climate change. The more specialised crops have currently limited coverage but a high
potential. Flexibility will also be needed to allow additional VCs to be added during project implementation, as new opportunities
can arise and market dynamics can change quite rapidly.
D. Components/outcomes and activities
64.
Project components: The development objective of the project is expected to be achieved through implementing two technical
components focusing on capacity building for climate resilience and inclusive value chains (Component 1) and climate sensitive
investments for climate resilience and inclusive value chains (Component 2). Each of these components comprises two technical
sub-components, respectively, supported by a cross-cutting component that will service the project through effective coordination
and management. The project design is illustrated in Figure 1 in Appendix 8.
65.
The project will pursue its objective through four major outcomes:
Outcome 1: Strengthened capacity of producer organizations and watershed associations supported to manage climate risks -
182 associations.
Outcome 2: Strengthened capacity of women, youth, group organizations and social enterprises to manage enterprises in a
financially profitable and sustainable way - 400 groups/organizations
Outcome 3: Smallholder households reporting improved access to water and land– disaggregated by gender and age –
10,450 households
Outcome 4: Smallholder farmers, women and youth managing profitable farm and non-farm enterprises – 6,400 persons
66.
See the Logframe in Annex 1 for a more complete overview of the design.
67.
The components are summarized below, with further details presented in the Project Implementation Manual.
68.
Component 1:Capacity Building for Climate Resilience and Inclusive Value Chains (USD10.5 million)
69.
Component 1 will be implemented through two sub-components, each with specific activities which are outlined below. 
70.
Sub-Component 1.1: Strengthening adaptive capacity of service providers and farmers to climate change
71.
The objective of sub-component 1.1 is to strengthen the capacity and skills of local service providers, water user associations,
watershed management organizations and farmers to adapt to climate change/build climate resilience. This capacity building
component will ensure effective implementation of sub-component 2.1 whilst contributing to policy dialogue. It will include a
number of interrelated activities intended to improve service delivery by strengthening the human resource capacity of service
providers and farmers to mobilise the community to prepare natural resource management plans, adapt to climate change
through the use of climate smart technologies and have the skills and know-how to diversify livelihoods. 
72.
Activities include: 
73.
Community Organization, Planning and Mentoring: This activity is designed to improve the capacities of local level actors - field
officers, farmer organizations and women’s groups - to develop integrated climate-risk informed water management plans for 260
tanks. The plans and guidelines will be implemented through mobilization of cascade level water committees that will include
men, women and youth from communities and the local field officers. The activity invests in training of trainers (for provincial and
district officials and ASCs) and farmer training programmes to ensure design, implementation, and O&M of climate-resilient
village irrigation schemes. The planning process will be complemented by seasonal livelihood analyses and community
participatory planning to support the development of a climate resilient community plan. A social mobilization process will be
followed that develops self-reliance among community members. A cadre of Agro-enterprise Promoters will be responsible for
enterprise development supported by Social Inclusion and Gender Facilitators to reinforce the work of local service providers that
would be responsible for community organization and the establishment of farmer organizations, self-help groups and other
organizational forms. The support staff will be selected from Dry Zone districts and will support contracted service providers
responsible for social mobilization, group formation/strengthening and household mentoring.
11/42
Climate Smart Technologies: Climate smart agricultural technologies will be promoted through the Farmer Field School (FFS)
methodology[61]. The FFS approach will be facilitated by government and project technicians, service providers and lead
farmers. The DoA Agricultural Instructors (AIs) and DAD Agrarian Research and Productivity Assistants (ARPA) will be trained to
deliver FFS services. Backstopping mentoring and coaching support will be available from a Core Team of Trainers and
experienced staff of national service providers (NGOs). The project will also provide technical assistance support through the
recruitment of national agricultural officers supported by a national expert with experience in the FFS approach. The training
programme will also invest in awareness raising, knowledge generation, and learning for climate-risk management including
understanding and analysis of impacts and options for adaptation in the context of water management and agriculture planning.
Approximately 300 schools will be established for 6,000 Dry Zone farmers.
Livelihoods Resilience Building: The skills and capacities required amongst women in particular will be strengthened to ensure
that communities become more resilient to climate-related shocks and that the necessary support services to communities and
households will be readily available. The capacity building programme will support the diversification of livelihoods amongst the
more vulnerable households by building their capacity for resilience. It will involve a three step process of (i) awareness raising of
the potential benefits livelihood activities, (ii) experiential training workshops and (iii) exposure visits to successful enterprises for
knowledge sharing and learning from practitioners. A possible menu of interventions that includes aquaculture, livestock
development and other diversified activities has been defined. A total of 550 short training programmes have been planned.
Nutrition Education and Training: Nutrition has been mainstreamed in SARP through a multi-pronged and nutrition-sensitive
approach that includes selection of nutrition sensitive value chains for dietary diversity, inducing behavioural change and more
general capacity building[62]. Poor dietary diversity will be addressed by increasing the availability and consumption of nutritious
and diverse foods and enhancing income to ensure healthy eating and improved family diets. Outcome The focus will be on
training extension workers and service providers to understand the relevance of better nutrition to climate resilient productivity
and livelihoods diversification. Evidence informed Behaviour Change Communication (BCC) activities, adapted from WFP’s on-
going work, will be implemented in all 6 districts to complement and promote positive behaviour changes related to improved
nutrition and diet quality.
Action Research for Policy Dialogue. SARP will take the integrated ecosystem development approach as an example of what
can be accomplished if quality implementation is achieved. This approach, if effectively conducted, should be viewed as a
paradigm shift for the project in that it promotes an integrated, holistic approach to enhancing water and land management
through the interconnected elements of irrigation systems, soil conservation, agroforestry combined with improved farming
practices. It will be the first time that an integrated approach to catchment management is being advanced incorporating climate
change concerns, understanding linkages across river basins/sub-river basins, and including multiple uses of water. Policy
dialogue will be conducted on the approach followed by SARP and other projects relating to integrated watershed development.
Preliminary Studies: A process for the selection of sub-basins and tanks will be followed to ensure the maximization of the returns
on water infrastructure investments. The approach to be followed involves a combination of socio-economic and biophysical data.
The methodology will follow three steps: i) an assessment of the water availability in the sub-catchments/ tanks; ii) an analysis to
see if the available water quantity is sufficient to meet the existing demands for water from different sectors (irrigation, drinking
water, environment, etc.); and (iii) detailed hydrological and water allocation modelling of the sub-basins selected. The last step
in the process involves a checklist to verify the sociological, economic, technical, institutional and environmental suitability of the
sub-basins/tanks as a guide for The programme of work is expected to be spread over two years.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
Other preliminary studies expected to be undertaken for start-up include a) a Climate Risk Analysis consultancy; b) preparation of
the Environmental and Social Mapping Framework; c) VAM targeting and planning to be conducted by WFP.
80.
Micro and Weather Insurance: Currently, in Sri Lanka only 2 percent of all farms are covered by weather index insurance policies.
To fill this gap, SARP will build on work undertaken by the GIZ funded, Small and Medium Enterprise project in collaboration with
Sri Lanka's Agricultural & Agrarian Insurance Board (AAIB) and the Global Index Insurance Facility (GIIF) in the field of
commercial agricultural insurance. The project has introduced innovative technologies utilising drones and satellite imagery for
claims assessments. This is combined with the digitization of insurance policies and claim processes through the development of
a mobile app which has already shown first results in the Dry Zone. There are considerable opportunities for SARP to extend the
innovations to other parts of the Dry Zone under a public-private-producer partnership (4P) arrangement that aims to introduce
weather index based insurance combined with a price-index model for farmers to be assured of minimum prices for crops
produce sold.
81.
The IFAD hosted Platform for Agricultural Risk Management (PARM), which embeds the Weather Risk Management Facility will
provide the insurance sector with capacity development and TA together with other development organizations in Sri Lanka (GIZ,
Desjardins and FAO) to bring tested innovative crop insurance schemes to scale. IWMI will also be viewed as a potential partner
building micro insurance systems from its existing flood and drought monitoring systems to manage water risks at farm, tank and
project-wide levels. Building on the flood and drought monitoring systems developed and supported by IWMI, the organization
could support implementation of index-based agricultural insurance for water-related risks, as well as associated innovations in
bundling of insurance products with climate information services for farmers and seed technologies. At the initial inception phase
of implementation these potential services will need to be aligned with the needs and priorities of SARP.
12/42
82.
Sub-Component 1.2: Strengthening capacity for inclusive value chain development
83.
The objective of this sub-component is to strengthen capacity for inclusive value chain development and value chain participation
through trainings in business management, finance and marketing for producer organizations, Self Help Groups and individuals.
This aims at improving their access to markets and enhancing their profitability and income. The Farm Business School
methodology will be used as a main instrument for reaching target households within the community.[63] The skills and
capacities of ARPAs, service providers and the agro-enterprise promoters will be developed to ensure that the necessary support
to communities and households will be available to help them become more market oriented. Inclusive business models will be
designed and developed linking farmer based organizations to agribusinesses through contractual processes (4Ps).[64] This sub-
component will provide the essential capacity building to ensure effective implementation of subcomponent 2.2. 
84.
Activities include: 
85.
86.
87.
88.
Farm Business School: The FBS methodology will be used as a main instrument for reaching target individuals – men, women
and youth - within the community. The skills and capacities of field level staff, social mobilisers and agribusiness facilitators will
be developed to ensure that the necessary support to communities and households will be available to help them become more
market oriented. This will be done through a Training of Trainers programme with backup coaching support from a Core Team of
Trainers. Some 75 schools are expected to be conducted. Farmers undertaking the Farmer Field Schools (sub-component 1.1)
could graduate to the FBS programme. Inclusive business models will be designed and developed linking FOs to agribusinesses
through contractual processes[65]. Activities will include the training of agro-enterprise promoters in group organization, business
management and marketing.
Skills Development Training for Youth: Support will be given to develop a youth incubation system to address the various
challenges of youth participation in agriculture/agri-business. SARP will use innovative interventions, such as Advanced Agri-
Business mentorship (ABS) through incubators and access to financial services. Youth led groups or SMEs will be linked to the
Enterprise Sri Lanka programme which offers loans to finance product upgrades, volume increases and new product
development, supported by business service providers/coaches to assist them to develop business plans.[66][67]
Market Appraisal, Post-harvest and Value Addition: Activities will include developing the technical skills of women, youth and the
most vulnerable households through practical training in post-harvest management and GAP. Training activities will include
piloting and demonstrating new post-harvest management and value adding technologies.Training programmes will be designed
for District and ASC technical and extension staff who will be expected to organize a cascade training programme for farm
households in all 6 districts. Some 20 training programmes at field level will be organized. Entrepreneurs with successful value
adding businesses will be invited as resource cum training persons.
National Policy Engagement: Policy engagement will also be encouraged on the issues of youth employment in agriculture and
micro-insurance ecosystem development. As part of the integrated approach to smallholder agribusiness and resilience
development, micro-insurance can build resilience against and transfer risks from the smallholder households. SARP will seek to
combine insurance with other financial and non-financial services and to create public-private-producer partnerships (4Ps)
between the GoSL and the financial sector, particularly public and private insurers and agribusinesses To support an enabling
environment for insurance programme designs and sharing lessons for scaling-up, the project will also promote the inclusion of
micro-insurance products (e.g. crop, weather-index or price index insurance), technologies (e.g. satellite image based or mobile
app-based) and models (e.g. agent insurance) in national strategies.
89.
Component 2: Investments for Climate Resilience and Inclusive Value Chains (USD 58.2 mill)
90.
Component 2 will be implemented through two sub-components, each with specific activities, which are outlined below.
91.
Sub-Component 2.1: Investments for climate resilient production and infrastructure
92.
The objective of this subcomponent is to enhance climate resilience and promote better production conditions through
investments in the construction of water and land development infrastructure and adaptive farm technologies. Different types of
investments will be supported including: a) water resources development including small scale irrigation, b) sustainable land
management and c) climate resilient farming practices.
93.
Activities include:
94.
Cascade Water Resource Infrastructure Development: Co-financing will be used to support the design and upgrade of Village
Irrigation Systems, incorporating elements to enhance the resilience of these systems to climate change risks and impacts. About
260 village irrigation systems, including the upstream catchments, will be upgraded based on cascade level natural resource
development plans. The interventions to upgrade the irrigation systems include: (i) reforesting the watershed (ii) restoring the
reservoir bund (dam), spill, sluice and canals supplying the fields, and (iii) de-silting the reservoir bed. These upgrades will
incorporate climate risks and combine traditional and new design elements and practices including partial de-silting to deepen
reservoirs close to the bund and retain more water during dry seasons, intensified reforesting of the catchment with multi-purpose
trees, creating ponds and diversions for run-off capture in the catchment. Interventions to redress land degradation will include
undertaking soil conservation measures (bunds and contour drains) and agroforestry measures to prevent erosion. Catchment
organizations will be set up and supported to ensure sustainability and to avoid possible conflicts. Cash for Assets will be used to
engage the most vulnerable households related to water tank renovation and maintenance drawing on the experience of
WFP[68]. Interventions will be identified through the participatory catchment/ natural resource management planning. Grants of
up to $10,000 per cascade would be offered to support soil and water conservation and forestry activities.
95.
96.
97.
98.
Household Water Harvesting, Irrigation and Soil Conservation: Household level measures will include creating small ponds or
tanks in home gardens to capture intense rainfall, low-cost drip irrigation technologies that will be easy to operate and maintain.
These and other small scale water harvesting structures will be developed to increase water quality and availability for multi-
purpose usage. Low cost drip irrigation systems and domestic water harvesting measures at household level will be appraised
following the preparation of sub-project/ micro project proposals. WUGs will be set up or existing groups strengthened to ensure
sustainability in management and to avoid potential conflicts.
13/42
Household Resilience and Nutrition: Supporting activities at household level will include the development of multi-purpose home
gardens, nurseries, aquaculture and small scale livestock development (goats and dairy cows) and other income generating
activities as part of a livelihoods diversification strategy. Income generating activities will be adapted to the needs of each of the
target beneficiary categories.[69] Matching grants in the form of small livestock will be offered to the more vulnerable households
with limited access to land and the means to graduate from the Cash for Assets interventions. The beneficiary contribution will
vary between 10 to 30 percent depending on household selection criteria based on level of vulnerability. Consideration will also
be given to setting up 120 nutritive rich home gardens in collaboration with WFP. Households that will receive commercial home
gardening support will simultaneously receive technical support to produce nutrition dense products for home consumption. This
activity will be complemented by the Behaviour Change Communication (BCC) activities referred to under sub-component 1.1
Activities relating to household resilience cater for low cost livelihood activities for the most vulnerable households. Contributions
from beneficiaries are considered to be low covering labour and some materials. Beneficiaries will be eligible to request grant
support either individually, as partnerships or as small groups. A ceiling of $1,100 per person has been set based on the
experience of other livelihood projects with similar activities in the Dry Zone.
Climate Resilient Farming Practices: Climate resilient agricultural production will be introduced as part of the cropping system to
increase the cropping intensity of the farming system. Since productivity is still low and land degeneration is high, farmers'
organisations and producer groups will be strengthened (apart from capacity building on better production methods and pest
management) for access to risk mitigation measures and existing subsidy schemes to ensure better adoption of techniques from
FFS to actual farms. In-kind grants for seeds and tools will be given to smallholder farmers combined with fertiliser through the
government subsidy programme, supplemented by agricultural extension support. The intervention will be accompanied by the
capacity building efforts to ensure sustainability of activities (Subcomponent 1.2). Approximately 30,000 farm households will be
targeted for this activity.
99.
Sub-Component 2.2: Investment for inclusive value chain development
100.
The objective of this sub-component is to increase profitability and income through investments in markets, feeder roads and
service support centres for smallholder farmers, women and youth. Building capabilities of producers and groups through
technical assistance, business skills training, social mentoring and producer group coaching will equip individuals and
households to become resilient, reliable and successful actors in selected value chains. As such, participants will be able to make
successful investments in their farm or non-farm enterprises informed by market and climate adaptation considerations.
101.
Feeder Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance: Connectivity to local markets through feeder road rehabilitation, storage facilities
and other market infrastructure is an essential prerequisite for market access. Investments will be made to improve the condition
of existing feeder roads in the vicinity of the catchment areas to access off-farm water infrastructure and agricultural markets
.Access road rehabilitation will upgrade existing access tracks and pathways in the vicinity of the water tanks and will not exceed
10 km in length for any single track. Road infrastructure investments will not involve farm land expropriation and clearing.
102.
Road gangs will be formed for road rehabilitation, and local road maintenance plans will be prepared. Activities will include
rehabilitation of drainage, construction of structures and set up of road maintenance mechanisms employing the most vulnerable
households in temporary employment. The design will adopt innovative climate smart solutions and also promote good
environmental management. The interventions will comply with the Environmental Management Act (EMA), the Guidelines for
Environmental Impact Assessment and IFAD’s SECAP requirements. SARP will scale–up the on-going sustainable district road
maintenance system through road maintenance groups, which are to be set up in collaboration with WFP. For sustainability, the
GoSL and IFAD will initially co-finance road maintenance works on a phased-out basis, such that the GoSL will finance the full
costs by the third year of the programme.
103.
Agrarian Service Centres and Agrarian Banks: 30 Agrarian Service Centres (ASCs), which serve clusters of villages, will be
taken transformed into one-stop-shop facilities for advisory and support services (Knowledge and Service Centres). ASC staff in
each target area will be trained to deliver integrated planning and implementation services for climate smart water and
agricultural management in cascade systems. While the ASCs were designed to provide various services required by the farmers
in a coordinated manner, their weaknesses– such as lack of trained advisors, lack of funding, lack of modern equipment like
computers and software like GIS - prevent such services from being provided in an efficient manner. In conjunction with
government co-financing, this activity will also develop capacities (training and equipment) of ASCs to undertake scientific crop
selection with farmers and the Department of Agriculture through soil testing and input management. It will implement improved
soil testing facilities to support farmers to rationally select crops, inputs and climate-smart practices according to soil conditions. It
will also support the development of a suite of climate resilient agronomic practices in upstream home gardens, upland farm fields
and downstream-irrigated fields. In respect of the Knowledge Centre (KC) focus, the ASCs will be equipped with digital
connections, facilities to link with markets, weather information sources, etc. They will also act as meeting and learning hubs,
host training programmes on various subjects and disseminate climate and weather forecasts, market information, training
materials and other capacity building information. The establishment of these ASCs may provide employment opportunities for
under-represented individuals/groups of the community (especially youth and women).
104.
SARP will work together with 20 selected Agrarian Banks primarily to strengthen their technical and financial capacity at the level
of village clusters in the six project districts. It is expected that the Agrarian Banks, which are required to meet minimum
performance criteria, will receive additional liquidity by the Agrarian Development Division of the MoA to strengthen their capital
basis and expand their lending portfolio. On the basis of an institutional assessment (technical, operational, financial), SARP will
render support to strengthen their delivery capacity. Qualified local partner institutions, such as the Institute of Bankers of Sri
Lanka and Centre for Banking Studies of Central Bank of Sri Lanka, will be contracted to provide capacity development services
based on a rigorous needs assessment. Staff training and technical assistance may be centred around risk management, loan
portfolio management, management information system, etc.
14/42
105.
Market Infrastructure and Stakeholder Platforms: Market infrastructure will be provided at district and ASC level in the form of
construction of local markets, farmer’s markets and platforms for value chain stakeholders to convene. Investments will include
collection points, storage and package facilities.
106.
Youth and Women’s Enterprises: Combinations of matching grants and loans will be offered to youth, women, able bodied
persons, and entrepreneurial small farmers to provide commercial goods and services (input supplies, mechanization, spraying,
transportation etc.) to farm households. Innovative technologies, particularly with respect to resilience by individuals and agri-
entrepreneurs will be promoted. Agri-machinery and equipment for hire service providers is seen to be an attractive and feasible
source of income for young entrepreneurs and will be supported by youth employed in repair workshops. Other potential
businesses for youth and women flourishing in the Dry Zone are protected agriculture, quality seed production, semi commercial
dairy and goat production. Small post-harvest management (PHM) investment grants will also be offered to households to fund
investments in post-harvest and value adding technologies.
107.
A youth incubation scheme in collaboration with the private sector will be pilot-tested. Youth will be eligible to receive the grant/
loan combination up to a limit on graduation from the incubation scheme. Approximately 1,200 businesses will be supported with
start-up financing for their business plans, in the form of credit and start-up funds (matching grant). Some of these investments
are envisaged as partnerships and/ or for small groups. The grants will be offered by SARP as investment financing with loans
potentially available through the Agrarian Banking system and other Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs), including those
participating in the Enterprise Sri Lanka Programme by the Department of Development Finance. SARP will work closely with
SAPP to develop 4P business models[70]. SAPP will also render technical support to PFIs under the Consolidated Revolving
Fund managed by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) to explore innovative technology applications, such as a new debit card,
commonly known as "farmer card", service delivery through agency banking and VC finance solutions specifically for the dry zone
beneficiaries.
108.
Market, Weather and Climate Information Services: SARP will assess the need to support the generation of market, weather and
climate information and its timely dissemination. The aim will be to provide market information which will go beyond commodity
pricing but will focus to aid smallholder capacity to plan better and identify available market opportunities. The market information
needs will be determined and tailored to specific products in geographical The system will incorporate weather and climate
information for better farm planning. This inclusion of climate information will complement the institutional capacity and financial
barriers that UNDP has faced undertaken through their GCF funded project. SARP will complement the work being implemented
by UNDP by developing a multi-purpose SMS/mobile communication tool that includes market information and weather
information and that can be translated into local languages. Attention will be given to the dissemination of advisories through
mobile platforms (using the DEWN system operated by Dialog telecom). A lump sum allocation has been set aside to develop the
SMS/mobile communication tool through engaging the private sector in a cost sharing partnership. 
109.
The livelihoods development pathways are summarized in the table 1 below.
110.
Table 1: Beneficiary Targeting and Livelihoods Development Pathways
Category of
beneficiaries
Characterization
Individual/ group
organisation
Activities
Livelihoods development
pathways
15/42
Most vulnerable 20
percent of potential
beneficiaries
(focus on women and
disadvantaged)
Covers the most vulnerable
and food insecure households
of which a significant group is
disadvantaged due to their
economic and social exclusion.
This category includes people
with physical and mental
disabilities as well as the
landless and marginal farmers
Cash for work
employment
Goat rearing
Backyard poultry
Trading
- Individual
households
- Informal self-
help and other
interest groups
Casual labour (on-farm
and off farm)
Income generating
activities (e.g. Mushroom
cultivation for disabled)
Community forestry on
communal land (for
landless labourers)
Fingerling cultivation
Functional literacy
programmes
Cash for work/ assets are
offered to satisfy the short
term seasonal cash and food
deficits of the most vulnerable
households over the Yala
season. This intervention will
be supplemented by casual
employment opportunities in
communal activities –
fingerling rearing and
community forestry.
Households will also be
eligible for small enterprises
as part of a graduation
process from the employment
options. A prerequisite to the
provision of income
generating activities will be to
participate in functional
literacy programmes where
needed.
Some of the elderly and
disabled will be supported by
group managed safety nets
and intra-household
management arrangements.
16/42
Poor with potential for
integration into value
chains – 70 percent of
farm households
This category do not produce
enough to cover their food
needs at times of climate
shocks. The households are
essentially characterized by: (i)
low production and productivity
of the main crops (rice, maize
etc.); (ii) vulnerability to climate
change; (iii) lack of or low
access to production factors
(land, improved inputs, water
and capital); (iv) limited access
to mechanization; (v) weak
organizational capacity; and
(vi) low income levels.
- Incipient
producer/ self-
help/ interest
groups
- Mature POs or
farmer
organizations
Farming activities -
climate smart technology
testing
FFS programmes –
group technology
demonstrations
Post-harvest
management
technologies & value
adding enterprises
Nutritive rich home
gardens for household
needs and linking to
school feeding
Mixed commercial/
subsistence home
gardens
Commercial level
backyard poultry & semi-
intensive goat and dairy
production
Aquaculture
FBS programmes for
market-oriented farmers
The goal for this group is to
stabilise production through
the more efficient use of
water and the introduction of
climate-smart technologies.
By increasing the regularity of
supplies and the quality and
volume of agricultural
production stronger links will
be made to market outlets.
Interventions will aim at
assisting economically active
smallholder farmers
(including farmer groups) to
accelerate their transition to
commercially oriented and
market led production and
value addition.
This broad category suggests
two pathways depending on
the level of entrepreneurship
amongst individual
households: a) less market
oriented with activities
targeted towards food
accessibility and utilization
(nutrition); and b) more
market-oriented with a focus
on access to food.   The
second group of farmers will
be eligible to participate in
the FBS programme.
Initially produce will be
marketed locally through
informal value chains. Some
of the more entrepreneurial
farmers will integrate their
activities into more formal
value chains and will target
regional and central markets
FBS graduates could be
included in a more advanced
training programme to
develop further their
entrepreneurial skills
17/42
Better off households
– 10 percent of total
beneficiaries, POs/
FOs and other VC
actors
Households could have up to 2
ha of farm land and a proven
ability to produce for the
market. Households are able
to access agricultural inputs
and mechanical traction and
operate irrigated or partially
irrigated systems.
- Individuals
- Partnerships
Commercial farming
activities
Value adding activities
MSE’s
FBS to develop
entrepreneurial skills
Commercial horticulture
Commercial dairying and
poultry production
Specialised crops under
protected agriculture
Youth
Amongst youth interest in
agriculture is diminishing as it
fails to bring a respectable and
secure income. The lack of
incentives in the agricultural
sector (lack of land and capital
to invest) lead to a large
number of rural youth
migrating to urban areas in
search of formal employment.
- Individuals
- Partnerships
- Small groups
Support service
enterprises commercial
goods and services (input
supplies, mechanization,
spraying, transportation
etc.)
Protected agriculture,
quality seed production,
semi commercial dairy
and goat production.
This category includes the
water management objective
of the poor with potential, to
ensure volume and regularity
of supplies.
The strategy supports
inclusive investments in farm
and non-farm micro and small
enterprise development along
selected value chains
through supply and demand-
side interventions to increase
the volume and quality of
output. Farm-household
members will be eligible to
participate in advanced FBS
programmes. Business
management and marketing
training programmes will be
offered to the management of
cooperatives and producer
organisations to strengthen
their capacity for
sustainability.
Commercial partnerships
between POs/ FOs through
linkages with the private
sector will be facilitated by
the project with links to SAP.
The strategy is to develop an
incubation system to address
the paucity of youth skills in
farming and related value
chain activities. Both
technical and entrepreneurial
skills of young people will be
developed culminating in the
preparation of business plans
for priority value chains.
Agricultural machinery and
equipment for hire service
providers have been seen to
be an attractive and feasible
source of income for young
entrepreneurs and will be
supported by youth employed
in repair workshops.
Youth who graduate from the
incubation scheme could
decide on self- employment
business ventures or
alternatively salaried
employment
Amongst the more
entrepreneurial youth
opportunities will arise to
engage in higher level
entrepreneurial activities as
individuals, partnerships and
youth groups
Women
18/42
This includes women heads of
household, widows and young
women that are socially,
culturally and economically
disadvantaged but responsible
for ensuring the well-being of
their families and agricultural
activities. Many women-
headed households regard
farming as an important option.
They, however, face the
following challenges: (i)
unequal access to resources
(land, water, credit); (ii) lack of
business development and
management skills; and (iii)
limited voice, leadership and
decision-making capacity in
farmer organizations and other
groups.
Women – post harvest
and value adding labour
saving activities
- Individuals
- Partnerships
- Small groups
Small livestock
development
Nutrition rich home
gardens
Commercial agroforestry/
home gardens
The project will promote
targeted activities for women
organized into groups for
processing (using labour
saving technologies),
marketing and service
provision. Specific training to
enhance women’s
empowerment and effective
participation in activities and
household welfare will be
included in the FBS curricula.
Other activities targeting
women concern nutrition,
where women are at the
centre of food preparation for
the family.
Women could embark on the
different pathways as
described in the categories
above.
111.
Implementation arrangements: Sub-components 2.1 and 2.2 will be implemented through matching grants, loans and
combinations of the two. The matching grants will be put in place to address partially the financial constraints of the target groups
to enable them to procure the necessary inputs, equipment and infrastructure. The matching grant targeting, eligibility,
management, level, type of investment, disbursement and monitoring procedures are detailed in the table below.
112.
Technical Assistance: Technical and facilitation assistance will be provided for: (i) training of IA, ARPA, NGO service providers
community and farm leaders as required; (ii) facilitation of the participatory planning and implementation processes for
community-level and group-based micro-projects and verification of eligibility of communities, groups and their proposed
investments; (iii) technical assistance for the screening, assessment and design of proposed investments, such as technical,
financial, economic, social and environmental feasibility, as well as (iv) preparation of business, operation and maintenance
plans.
113.
SARP’s policy on grants and loans is given in Table 2 below. Find details of the implementation arrangements for grants and
loans including ceilings community and individual grant ceilings in the Project Implementation Manual in Annex 8.    
114.
Table 2.   Policy on grants and loans
Category of
beneficiaries
Indicative maturity of
group organisation
Grant/ loan policy Rationale
Objective
Most vulnerable 20
percent of potential
beneficiaries
(focus on women and
disadvantaged)
- Individual households
- Informal self-help and
other interest groups
Cash for assets
schemes
Social protection
Social inclusion
Grants with 10
percent beneficiary
contribution
Households do not
have access to loan
financing
Safety net to satisfy short term
seasonal cash and food deficits
over the Yala season. Households
will be eligible for small
enterprises as part of a graduation
process
Activities relating to household
resilience cater for low cost
livelihood activities for the most
vulnerable households.
Contributions from beneficiaries
are considered to be low covering
labour and some materials.
Beneficiaries will be eligible to
request support either individually,
as partnerships or as small
groups. A ceiling of $1,100 per
person has been set based on the
experience of other livelihood
projects with similar activities in
the Dry Zone.
19/42
Poor with potential for
integration into value
chains – 70 percent of
farm households
- Incipient producer/
self-help/ interest
groups
- Mature POs or farmer
organizations
Combinations of
matching grants for
investments and
loans for working
capital
The majority of these
farm households do not
have access to loan
financing and/ or the
level of financing will
only contribute to
working capital
requirements
For the farming
activities grants are
offered for
demonstrating climate
smart technologies.
Better off households –
10 percent of total
beneficiaries, POs/ FOs
and other VC actors
- Individuals/
partnerships/
- Value chain actors
Loans
Equity capital
availability and access
to loans
Youth / women’s
entrepreneurship
schemes
- Individuals
- Partnerships
- Small groups
Grants and loans
(grant for
investment
financing/ loans for
working capital)
New enterprise/ risky/
limit on loan ceiling
Assist economically active
smallholder farmers (including
farmer groups) to accelerate their
transition to commercially oriented
and market led production, and
value addition; and provide
resources (up to 70% with the
recipient contributing 30% in cash
or in-kind) to purchase productive
assets.
Additional loan financing may in
some instances be available
through the Agrarian Banks (and
other PFIs) albeit at a limited
ceiling for working capital
For well organised POs/ FOs
support partnerships with the
private sector through linkages to
SAPP.
A ceiling of $5600 per household
has been set for some activities
although the average micro-
project cost is around $3000.
To support inclusive investments
in farm and non-farm micro and
small enterprise development;
support supply and demand-side
interventions to increase output
levels, productivity, quality, and
resiliency of production of small
scale famers
Support commercial partnerships
between POs/ FOs through
linkages with the private sector
facilitated by SARP with linkages
to SAPP.
Combinations of matching grants
and loans will be offered to youth
to provide commercial goods and
services (input supplies,
mechanization, spraying,
transportation etc.) to farm
households. Agricultural
machinery and equipment for hire
service providers is seen to be an
attractive and feasible source of
income for young entrepreneurs
and will be supported by youth
employed in repair workshops.
Other potential businesses for
youth and women flourishing in
the Dry Zone are protected
agriculture, quality seed
production, semi commercial dairy
and goat production.
20/42
Roads and market
infrastructure
- Producer groups/
organizations
- Other value chain
actors
Matching grants
Public goods/ some
private good nature
An upper limit for these activities
has been set at $100,000 to
include some of the market
infrastructure and value adding
investments
Proposals for infrastructure sub-
projects of a pure public good
nature, will be 90 percent funded
by grants.
For assets like storage facilities
which are jointly owned and
operated by farmers and other
value chain partners, and where a
proper arrangement is in place for
joint management a 20%
beneficiary contribution will be
required.
115.
Component 3: Project Management and Coordination Unit (PMU) (USD 4.4 mill)
116.
Component 3 is a cross cutting component to the technical components described above. The principal coordination body will be
the Presidential Secretariat supported by technical lead agencies under the Ministry of Agriculture that include the Department of
Agrarian Development, the Department of Agriculture and the Department of Irrigation. By being placed in the President’s
Secretariat, synergies with the sister project – SAPP – will be ensured. The Presidential Secretariat will establish a Project
Management Unit (PMU) for SARP at national level, led by a National Project Director. The Presidential Secretariat will work very
closely with the PMU to oversee implementation. A National Project Steering Committee (NPsC) will provide strategic oversight.
At District level, SARP will set up two hub offices in selected districts led by Area Coordinators responsible for day to day
implementation. Given the nature of the SARP and in order to capitalize on the experience and competences of the SAPP to
address the commercialization of smallholder farmers, it is considered convenient to ensure that the two projects are coordinated
by an experienced Programme Coordinator as a first step towards developing an IFAD programme.
E. Theory of Change
117.
The problem tree and theory of change have identified seven factors that contribute to the persistently high levels rural poverty: (i)
weaknesses in policies and knowledge sharing (ii) lack of knowledge and technical capacity of service providers and farmers; (iii)
lack of access to quality inputs and effective advisory and support services; (iv) limited access to rural infrastructure (water, land,
storage, feeder roads); (v) variable rainfall distributions, intensity and rising temperatures (CC); (vi) poor quality of diet, and
insufficient dietary and nutritional knowledge; and (vii) a negative perception by youth of agriculture. In the Dry Zone area of Sri
Lanka, these factors lead to droughts and intermittent flooding, limited access to water resources, land degradation, limited
access to improved technologies, weak local level capacity, limited levels of farm commercialization, and lack of interest by youth
in agriculture related employment. A cross cutting implication is an absence of policies and innovative strategies among
government at central and decentralized levels to address the key dry zone issues. These causal factors have a number of
contributory elements some of which will be tackled by the project.
118.
The development hypothesis, as premised by SARP, is that smallholder farmers need to address the challenges posed by the
Dry Zone environment through an integrated, area based approach focusing on ‘pockets of poverty’ combined with a differential
strategy aimed at the various categories of vulnerable households. In Sub-components 1.1 and 2.1 the focus will be placed on
resilience to climate change and targeting a range of poor households with different tailor made strategies and interventions. The
components will be area based ensuring an integrated approach to address climate change in poverty pockets – ‘hot spots’ –
through the sustainable management of water and land resources. A watershed and sub-watershed focus will be used in
targeting priority areas. Under Sub-components 1.2 and 2.2 farm commercialization and enterprise development will be inclusive
addressing the needs of the different target households. In some cases the most vulnerable may engage in livelihood activities or
will seek employment as part of an income diversification strategy.
119.
Other more market-oriented households will sell produce locally in spot markets or alternatively link to private sector buyer with
the support of the sister project – SAPP. The project will pilot a number of cross-cutting innovations particularly with respect to
finance – insurance – and business skills development – FBS and financial literacy programmes. Pilot-testing of IT-based
information system – for climate and market information – will be introduced. Nutrition sensitivity is a further cross cutting
intervention that will be highlighted through selecting nutrition sensitive value chains and Social Behaviour Changes among the
target community.
120.
Support for farm commercialisation will complement the resilience efforts by strengthening and orientating farmer organizations
into business concerns and linking them to markets and private sector companies, finance and business services. A crucial
dimension for a sustainable solution is to formalize and strengthen these organizations by improving their outreach, managerial
capabilities, services and enhancing their market power.
121.
The direct result of these interventions will be:
182 producer organizations and watershed associations with strengthened capacity to manage climate risks.
400 groups/ organizations with strengthened capacity to manage enterprises in a financially profitable and sustainable way
10,450 smallholder households reporting improved access to water and land
6,400 persons smallholder farmers, women and youth managing profitable farm and non-farm enterprises.
21/42
122.
Studies and investigations on prioritized topics will contribute to policy dialogue at national level. The evidence-based lessons
from project implementation will be disseminated via documents and events and then discussed and mainstreamed in a drought
resilience strategy for dry zone which would lead to improvement in the adaptive capacity and the resilience of households to
drought. Combined together the achieved results will considerably accelerate commercialization of smallholder agriculture and
improved CC resilience for ultimate achievement of sustainable livelihoods of rural people in the long-term. For a schematic
illustration with more details on the programme theory of change, see Annex 2.
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
123.
SARP is closely aligned with Sri Lanka’s evolving visions and national priorities and strategic direction.[71] From these sources,
the main priorities of the GoSL of relevance to SARP can be considered to be: a) eradicating poverty by enhancing income
levels; b) developing the rural economy, including agro-based industries; c) diversifying, modernizing and commercializing
agriculture, including value addition and e-agriculture; d) adapting to climate change impacts; and e) improving the sustainable
management of natural resources.
124.
SARP is also closely aligned to the SDGs contributing to five of them in particular: ending poverty (Goal 1), zero hunger (Goal 2),
), gender equality (Goal 5), climate action (Goal 13), and life on land (Goal 15), as well as IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-
2025 contributing directly to: SO1 - Increase poor rural people’s productive capacities; SO2 - Increase poor rural people’s benefits
from market participation and SO3 - Strengthen environmental sustainability and climate resilience of poor rural people’s
economic activities.
125.
SARP will also harmonize its design with the activities of WFP, UNDP, and the World Bank working on resilience issues in the
Dry Zone[72]. SARP will work closely with SAP (2017-2023) to build synergies and partnership with the private sector.[73] As
there are other development partners working in the Dry Zone region, including World Bank, ADB, UNDP, WFP and UNOPS,
SARP will closely coordinate with them to ensure that economies are made to reduce the cost of investments and avoid
duplication of interventions. It will build on ‘good practices’ to scale up improved technologies tried and tested by partner projects
and south-south collaboration in the region.
126.
An integral partner is UNDP through its GCF funded project, “Strengthening the Resilience of Smallholder Farmers in the Dry
Zone” (2018-2025). The project includes three components a) upgrading village irrigation systems and promoting climate resilient
farming practices; b) enhancing decentralized water supply and management solutions to provide access to safe drinking water;
and c) strengthening climate and hydrological observing and forecasting systems to enhance water management and adaptive
capacity of smallholder farmers to droughts and floods. SARP will work in the same cascades as UNDP and will complement
their activities in specified ways; a) include some 100 tanks that UNDP will not be in the position to complete because of
budgetary and time limitations; b) provide support to upland areas of the catchment through soil conservation and community
forestry activities; c) support the target UNDP beneficiaries in the convergent districts (14,100 hh) by introducing value adding
enterprises, linking farmers to markets and developing the entrepreneurial capacity of producer groups to connect with private
sector buyers. UNDP and SARP will co-invest in strengthening the climate and hydrological observing and forecasting systems.
SARP will also extend its activities to adjacent cascades in collaboration with UNDP to scale up the integrated catchment
process.
127.
SARP will similarly partner with the WFP, “Building Resilience Against Recurrent Natural Shocks through Diversification of
Livelihoods for Vulnerable Communities in Sri Lanka” project (2019-20122) developing the commercialisation aspects through
entrepreneurship capacity building, strengthening the services offered through the Agrarian Service Centres and Agrarian Banks
and linking more entrepreneurial farmer groups to private sector buyers. The WFP project has targeted around 2,100 households
in the two convergent districts where there will be scope to upgrade the same households in production, post-harvest
management, value addition and linking groups to markets. There will also be opportunities to scale up and out within the same
localities to expand the number of targeted beneficiaries. WFP will support SARP through its Cash for Assets programme,
providing temporary employment for the most vulnerable. The experience gained will be replicated in non-WFP areas.
Additionally WFP is committed to provide technical assistance support to roll out their household nutrition programme through
training, behavioural change, nutrition rich home gardens and linking women’s groups to institutional markets such as school
feeding. Finally, SARP will make use of WFP’s VAM targeting tools - climate vulnerability, poverty mapping and Seasonal
Livelihood Programming.
128.
SARP will also cooperate closely with UNOPS, which has already committed contribution to support the construction of
production and marketing infrastructure to compensate for the lack of technical capacity for the construction of last-mile
infrastructure. SARP will also work closely with SAPP to build synergies and partnership with the private sector but will develop a
fine tuned approach suitable for the dry zone beneficiaries to promote partnerships between beneficiaries and buyers of
agricultural produce.      
129.
A potential partnership with IWMI and IRRI will be further developed at the initial stages of implementation. It is also intended that
SARP will cooperate with UNDP, WFP, UNOPS and the World Bank in the area of policy engagement and dialogue. The Institute
of Policy Studies, IWMI and FAO are well placed to support an evidence-based policy engagement and the design of evaluation
studies.
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
130.
A six‑year project implementation period is anticipated, starting from 2020. Total project costs are USD 82 million (LKR 14,756
million) including 5 percent physical contingencies and 7 percent price contingencies. An exchange rate of LKR 180 per US
dollar, and local and foreign inflation rates of 2 percent per annum were assumed. The total climate finance amount is USD 36
723 902 (86% of the total IFAD project amount.
22/42
131.
Project financing by components are tentatively: USD10.5 million for Component 1 – Capacity building for climate resilience and
inclusive value chains (24.0 percent of project costs) and USD58.3 million for Component 2 – Investments for climate resilience
and inclusive value chains (70 percent of project costs). For Component 3 – Programme management and coordination, project
costs came to USD4.4 million (6.0 percent of project costs). Physical and price contingencies were estimated at 3.6 and 5.1
million respectively.
132.
Table 3    SARP estimated costs by Component
133.
Table 4   Expenditure Accounts Project Cost Summary
Table 5 Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (in USD '000)
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
23/42
134.
The proposed IFAD financing for the project is USD42.7 million from the IFAD11 PBAS allocation for Sri Lanka. This funding also
includes a USD1 million grant for background studies that will contribute to project start-up, policy dialogue[74], and TA for
strengthening the ASCs and knowledge hubs. These are elaborated on in the PIM. The GoSL is expected to contribute about
USD12.6 million (mainly taxes and duties), the private sector USD1.7 million (mainly through capital investments and loans), and
beneficiaries USD13.2 million (mainly in-kind and through loans from the Agrarian Bank). The beneficiaries and private sector will
contribute through a combination of loans and matching grants under sub-component 2.2. Additional resources to the amount
USD13.8 million have been earmarked by UNDP and WFP as parallel funding. UNOPS has also committed USD300,000
towards SARP.
135.
Table 6    SARP financing plan by Component (USD Million)
136.
Table 7 SARP financing plan by Expenditure Account (USD Million)
137.
Table 8 SARP Disbursement Accounts by Financiers (USD Million)
c. Disbursement
138.
The Designated Account will be administered following Imprest Account arrangements. Advances from this Financing must be
segregated from other funds for the Project .
139.
The LPA should make adequate annual budgetary provisions for IFAD funds and Counterpart funds in the National Budget,
based on the AWPB of the Project.
140.
Before disbursement can begin, IFAD must receive, from the designated representative a letter designating the names of officials
authorized to sign withdrawal applications which includes their authenticated specimen signature(s).  The project is  eligible and
authorised to use the IFAD Client Portal (ICP), the applicable form is included in LTB.
24/42
141.
The Project will maintain Project Accounts in local currency at a state owned commercial  bank, to receive funds from the
Designated Account for eligible expenditure for the project implementation.
142.
The government will maintain the Project Accounts in a state owned local currency at the commercial bank to provide
counterpart funds for Project implementation.
143.
The following are the SOE thresholds[1] that apply for withdrawal application under procedure (i) "Advance Withdrawal" and
under procedure (iii) "Reimbursement": USD 50,000 for all expenditures categories.
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
144.
The goal of SARP is to contribute to Sri Lanka’s smallholder poverty reduction and food security in the Dry Zone region. The
outcome for the smallholder farmers will be: a) 260 water tanks rehabilitated increasing their water holding capacity for water
supply and irrigation addressing the challenges posed by the Dry Zone environment through an integrated, area based approach;
b) production and productivity increases from their available resources (water, land and labour); c) reduced production losses due
to climate-related negative events; d) enhanced engagement and sustainable partnerships with the private sector and access to
services (e.g. technical assistance, mechanization services, marketing, etc.); e) added value to agricultural production by
processes including produce aggregation, conditioning, grading, drying, cooling, and storage; and f) enhanced farmers’
entrepreneurial and business capacity. As a result of project interventions, and based on the results achieved by other similar
projects in the country[75], it is estimated that 80 percent of the beneficiaries will have improved their food security, 72 percent will
have increased their resilience, and they will benefit from an average incremental annual income of 108 percent. Additionally, it is
expected that beneficiaries will increase their productivity by around 75 percent, due to the adoption of improved farm practices.
25/42
145.
The primary beneficiaries to be covered by SARP will be approximately 40,000 smallholder households, and other value chain
actors (traders, transporters and aggregators) participating in the supported value chains (of which at least 45 percent women
and 25 percent youth). Assuming an average household size of 4.5 people, total beneficiaries would be about 180,000
people[76]. The details about the incorporation of beneficiaries assumed for the Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA) are
presented in Appendix 4.
146.
The SARP financial analysis is based on a set of representative crop, livestock, service provision and post-harvest activity
models representing HHs and beneficiaries’ joint activities that are expected to develop from the Project. Models include both
‘without project’ (WoP) and ‘with project’ (WP) scenarios. They present annual budgets of each activity, including main
parameters, annual gross and net revenues, investments and operating costs before and after the Project interventions.
147.
Farm models were developed to simulate the traditional farm household production systems showing how they would evolve and
benefit from the diverse project interventions. The demand driven project approach will target rice (as user of more than 90
percent of available water) and livestock production as the main livelihood activities in the project areas, leaving to the expected
demand the choice of the other crop and/or post-harvest activities to develop. To assess the expected results of representative
investments of the many type of interventions, the cases of: (i) enhanced access to water for rice and other crops, together with
crop intensification and diversification with the adoption of climate smart technologies, (ii) improved livestock production practices
leading to higher productivity; and (iii) services provision (mechanization) for production, and post-harvest interventions for linking
farmers with buyers (or private aggregators) for collecting and conditioning rice, milk, fruits, vegetables and other products for
quality enhanced produce and higher selling values.
148.
For the EFA, 22 crop or activity models (Tables 1 to 22 in Appendix 4) were prepared to represent targeted activities that the HHs
would be improving. In addition, 10 HH/farm models (Tables 23 to 32 in Appendix 4) show how the promoted activities within
their production systems would improve beneficiaries and HH annual income as a result of the project activities. Models allow the
quantification of the expected results from the project overall investments, including the rehabilitation of the water storage tanks
and the irrigation network enhancing access to water, other support services, and the post-production investments. Some models
include the support for solutions providing HH with small irrigation for 0.20 to 0.25 ha from wells or small structures for enhancing
production of home gardens and higher value crops (fruits, vegetables, etc.). The farm models enable estimates to have been
made for the following indicators: the expected increase in HH net benefits, the Financial and Economic Internal Rates of Return
(FIRR and ERR) and the Net Present Values (NPV) of the incremental cash flows. The following Table summarizes the main
indicators for the farm models representing the expected financial impact of SARP on beneficiaries. The FIRR in all cases are in
excess of 100 percent, the result of project grants (seed and tools) supporting the farm improvements that vary between the
equivalent to USD40 for the commercial oriented beneficiaries (Model 1), and USD80 per farm for the subsistence farmers
(Model 3). Models 4 to 6 show higher support targeting women and youth where grants vary from USD560 to USD660.
149.
Table 9   Financial impact of typical HH benefitted by SARP (in LKR)
150.
26/42
The “without project” column in the detailed models presented in Appendix 4 - Tables 1 to 36 represents the traditional practices
and results observed from HHs in the SARP production areas. The WoP yields are in line with the area averages, and the
returns to the HH families are low. They represent the current situation which is assumed to remain unchanged in the WoP
scenario. Beneficiary farmers will be reached through extension workers with the FFS approach to undertake small but
necessary investments supported by small grants. Model results (incremental financial benefits) show that HHs’ net income
would increase significantly (from 50 to 300 percent) as a result of the different interventions. In the Models 8 to 10 the cases of
groups of beneficiaries (mostly youth and women), increments are significantly higher because they represent new activities
undertaken by mostly landless members. The models show encouraging results for most of the current crop and livestock
activities. Indicators suggest significant potential for creating higher net cash flows for targeted HHs in their productive activities
through the SARP interventions, confirming that the proposed interventions and production packages are financially attractive for
the participants to be adopted. Cash flows also show that the HHs will have the capacity to cover the necessary operating costs
for changing their traditional production practices.
151.
Table 33 in Appendix 4 show a case of a group of 3 to 5 youth starting a rice harvesting enterprise with one combine harvester
for providing the service to around 300 farmers; and Table 34 present a FO developing a agro-service center. Their main income
sources will be a combined harvester, two 4WT, two Rice Trans Planter and an Integrated Rice processing Mill. Both Models
show that the investment is financially feasible with FIRR of 96% and more than 100% (after grants and debt service), which in
addition will allow around 500 farmers to reduce cost of production and increase yields and their HHs income.
152.
A representative milk collection center for groups of 40 – 60 livestock farmers establishing milk societies including cooling
facilities for handling 600,000 liters per year is presented in Table 35 in Annex 4. Uplifting of the milk quality by issuing milk
analyses to the milk collecting centers as well as veterinary office will allow small dairy farmers to handle and sell their milk to
processing plants at higher prices. These are examples of activity models to be supported by SARP both for the development of
machinery service providers and for marketing of rice and milk.
153.
The estimation of the likely economic impact of the Project interventions was done considering a 20 year period during which
SARP will generate benefits, including the 6-year implementation period. Economic benefits at crop/activity and HH levels were
built by taking into account the direct economic results per type of intervention or activities, aggregated according to the project
targets. Appendix 4 provides detailed budgets and economic indicators for most of the foreseen interventions including both WoP
and WP scenarios. For each model the net cash flow and overall net income, the ERR and the NPV using 10 percent as discount
rate are presented.
154.
The overall Economic Rate of Return (ERR) of the Programme was estimated at 18.6 percent (base case scenario) which is
significantly above the opportunity cost of capital in Sri Lanka estimated at 10 percent. It is emphasized that the computed ERR
is realistic because it has been conservatively estimated. The analysis only considered the economic benefits at farm-gate and
group of beneficiaries (including some post-harvest activities in the value chain). Most of the benefits to upstream and
downstream actors in the value chain from increased production, quality of products, trade volumes, and value adding
opportunities beyond those few quantified for the analysis, have not been considered due to estimation difficulties. The economic
Net Present Value (NPV) was estimated at SLR 6.5 billion (equivalent to USD 36 million) with the benefit stream based only on
the quantified benefits.
155.
Sensitivity of the expected impact to major risks were tested.
If the Programme investments would be higher by 20 percent, the ERR would drop to 15 percent;
If all agricultural output prices would drop by 20 percent, the ERR would decrease to 12.2 percent; and
If both previously named events would occur simultaneously (investment costs up by 20 percent and agricultural output prices
down by 20 percent), the ERR would then drop to 9.2 percent.
156.
Summarizing, the proposed Project will increase the beneficiaries’ family income by at least 50 percent and up to three fold their
current income. The overall investment would yield an ERR of 18.6 percent assuming the targeted beneficiaries would adopt the
proposed climate smart agricultural and climate resilient practices assuming an adoption rate of about 70 percent. These positive
results are considered strong as shown in the sensitivity analysis against adverse situations as cost over-runs, reduction of
prices for the agricultural products, and even reducing in the case of both adverse events occurring simultaneously. The follow-
up of these indicators - while monitoring performance during the implementation of the Project - can provide valuable information
for adjusting the strategy and interventions to improve the Project impact.
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
157.
SARP has been designed in consultation with and involvement of relevant government agencies, technical line departments of
the Ministry of Agriculture and development partners. These consultations and discussions have resulted in a sound approach
and a suite of interventions which will be implemented with strong community participation and engagement of local officials.
Building on this foundation, it is expected that the investments as well as the results of the interventions will be sustained beyond
the project period and over the long term. Sustainability considerations that have guided project design include:
158.
a) Capacity building for integrated, locally owned solutions: SARP will invest in building capacities for climate-resilient, integrated
solutions for irrigation following the ecosystem/ cascade approach. The project will promote institutional planning and
coordination across government officials and communities to overcome the sectoral and piecemeal approach to water
management that was adopted in the past. Project outputs will also contribute to enhancing organisational capacity of farmers to
plan for and implement climate-risk informed local water management solutions, adopt technologies and systems for climate-
smart agricultural production and integrate climate information and advisories for water management ensuring their financial and
human resource viability post-project. In designing such solutions, the approach is to strongly engage communities at every level
of planning and execution. By doing so, SARP will not only ensure that the investments respond to beneficiary needs but also
ensure that community organisations, including youth and women’s groups, will have sufficient technical and financial capacity to
keep improving system design and operations, even as climate variability increases and seasons become more unpredictable.
27/42
159.
b) Operations and Maintenance plans: More specifically, SARP will support watershed groups to prepare O&M plans that include
budgeting the human and financial resources required for implementation. The plans will reflect local ownership and commitment
to the long-term sustainability of the project activities and outcomes. SARP will finance and leverage financing to support the
human and technical resources required for O&M initially, with a decreasing contribution towards the end of the project lifetime,
after which domestic financing will be expected to continue to support O&M. This approach will build on farmers’ traditional
system of managing by themselves the village irrigation systems. The project will improve the capacity of FOs to function more
efficiently. Supported by an increased incomes from agriculture it is expected that the FO contribution would also incre
160.
c) Farmer producer organizations. Outside the watershed, SARP will also ensure institutional sustainability and effectiveness
through dedicated support to farmer producer organizations to establish them as independent economic entities and actors.
Farmers/producers will be supported with capacity building and technical assistance, to form more cohesive common interest
groups, eventually graduating to a more mature and evolved organization; based on regular maturity assessments, the eventual
formation of sustainable producer companies is envisaged. The project will provide extensive capacity building in business
management skill development, support to registration, and access to finance through financial institutions with a mandate to
support small farmers together with targeted matching grants.
161.
d) Private sector development: SARP will build the capacity of young men and women to engage in managing economic
enterprises at community level. The engagement of women in POs and as interlocutors between private sector markets for
climate smart value chain products will increase livelihood options and income sources for women entrepreneurs in villages.
SARP will simultaneously seek to leverage commercial private sector investments. The project will build on lessons learned and
experience of SAP placing greater emphasis on strengthening producer/ farmer voice and encouraging the preparation of farmer-
led business plans. Investment commitments from the private sector, including from farmer producer organizations and
agribusinesses, are also expected to provide an important indication for the business rationale and longer-term sustainability of
agricultural and commercial activities.
162.
e) Establishment of Agrarian Service Centre Hubs: SARP will also strengthen the ASCs as one-stop-shop service and information
platforms. Some of the service offered such as quality seed, mechanization hire services, and market/weather information will be
developed and managed by local youth. The strengthened ASCs will serve as a platform for public-private sector
collaboration/4Ps and with access to funding through the Agrarian Banks could incentivize private sector investment beyond the
project life span.
163.
f) Policy support. To ensure longer-term sustainability, the project will also provide support for policy dialogue informed by
targeted studies to be conducted during implementation. Topics such as integrated watershed development, youth employment
in agriculture and micro insurance have been singled out as priorities. Complementary policies or strategies would be expected to
help improve the overall enabling environment for development of the Dry Zone and hence contribute to long-term sustainability.
164.
SARP’s exit strategy, consequently, relies on building capacity at different levels; at farmer/FO level but also of the public and
private advisory services in climate smart technologies as well as farm business management, marketing and commercialisation.
Capacity building will be undertaken at the institutional, community and household levels. The skills and capacities required will
be strengthened to ensure communities are resilient to climate variability and climate change and that the relevant institutions at
all levels are able to provide the necessary support and services.
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
165.
Table 10:   Main Risks and Mitigation Measures
Main risks
Mitigation measures
Rating
Political and governance:
Political changes following the December 2019 election could result in
changes of personnel at senior decision making levels with a subsequent risk
of delays in approval of the project and the start of implementation. The
anticipated changes at government level are not expected to affect the
current administration structure at provincial and district levels. There may,
however, be some risk that the Presidential Secretariat may be realigned.
IFAD should still be able to submit this investment for EB approval in April
2020.
Moderate
Macro-economic:
Level of macro-economic debt SARP will attempt to minimise grant funding
and will focus more broadly facilitating links to banking institutions for loan
financing
28/42
Low
Sector strategies and policies:
Policies relating to land tenure, agricultural extension and an enabling
environment for agricultural value chain development have been posed as
potentially impacting on the project but the expected impact is deemed low
Low
Technical design of project:
There is a low likelihood that factors related to the technical design of the
program or project may adversely impact the achievement of the project
objective.
Low
Institutional capacity:
Weak institutional capacity, especially in the areas of support services, social
mobilization, building resilience to climate variability and facilitating market
linkages amongst support service providers.
SARP will:
strengthen capacities through technical assistance, training,
management tools;
diversify and support service delivery, including through the private
sector and specialized government entities
support from NGOs and technical assistance to work with service
provider organizations
Moderate
SARP will ensure: (i) Constant dialogue and follow-up with lead project
ministries to ensure the appointment of competent project management
personnel and to minimize staff turnover; (ii) proactive implementation
support from the country office and (iii) integrating project management
processes into the SAP management structure and seconding government
staff.
Procurement:
Fiduciary:
29/42
Sri Lanka is ranked in medium risk bracket with the score of CPI index of 38
and   RSP rating 3.7.
In order to mitigate inherent country risks government authorities have taken
a series of measures during the recent past. Among them, main reforms are:
establishment of a National Procurement Commission,
release of a comprehensive set of Public Procurement Guidelines
covering all aspects of public procurements,
widening the scope of the “Commission to Investigate Allegations of
Bribery or Corruption” and
strengthening the Public Audit function by establishment of National
Audit Commission to ensure independency of the Auditor General
Department responsible for all public audits that include public
procurement
Medium
A number of fiduciary management and process issues have negatively
affected the efficiency of past projects.
A qualified Finance Manager supported by accountants will be appointed to
the PMU for financial management (FM) including the development of a FM
and information system according to IFAD rules and regulations, elaboration
of project FM procedures to be included in the PIM, training provincial FM
staff, and reporting
Low
SARP will:
provide adequate and suitably qualified personnel;
minimize frequent staff transfers.
build capacity of financial management staff at district level, ensure
strict fiduciary control measures.
provide training and supervision to project-staff.
Project objectives, approach and activities were discussed during the concept
note preparation mission at a stakeholder meeting composed of
representatives of the main line ministries, the External Resources
Department and the Presidential Secretariat.
Stakeholders:
SARP will further:
Moderate
ensure transparency in the management of all project activities,
especially procurement activities and grants administration;
follow tender procedures for infrastructure;
carry out due diligence of grant recipients;
support signing of agreements and MoUs between stakeholders.
Environmental and social:
30/42
Climate change has the potential for adverse climatic events.
SARP will:
set up a system for climate smart information collection and
dissemination to provide climate change adaptation options that will
complement the Environmental and Social Management Plan
(ESMP);
invest in climate smart technologies (solar pumps, irrigation, water
harvesting);
provide training to increase smallholder and public-/private sector
capacities to adapt to the effects of climate change.
High
166.
The overall inherent risk of the country is deemed MEDIUM. Sri Lanka is ranked 89th out of 180 countries with the score of 38 in
the Corruption Perception Index (CPI) in the survey conducted by Transparency International. The 2018 RSP rating is 3.7 –
medium risk bracket.
167.
 Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) has one of the four main functions as to manage the country’s public debt, on behalf of the
government. All advance accounts related to foreign funds are opened and maintained at the CBSL. Government is in the
process of implementing a series of focused legislative, administrative, institutional and capacity improvement measures. These
initiatives mainly cover reforms in the areas of taxation, expenditure management, public enterprises, procurement and policy
improvements.
168.
Overall, the financial management risk is rated as Medium. Taking into consideration recent experience of IFAD-financed
projects, Financial Management Assessment was undertaken for the NADEP and SAP  at this design, guided by the 'financial
management questionnaire (FMAQ)'. In view of the mitigation measures and previous experience of the NADeP and SAP, the
overall project fiduciary risk is assessed to be Medium at the design stage.
169.
The Presidential Secretariat as the Lead Project Agency (LPA), will have the overall accountability for the project, including
fiduciary aspects.
170.
The project will (i) establish a control framework integrating periodic internal audits, independent external audits, and social
safeguards to be adopted based on IFAD policies; (ii) adopt a good governance and mutual accountability framework to
strengthen accountability and transparency in line with international best practices.(iii) outline the project specific financial
management procedures and disbursement requirements in the PIM. (iv) establish a Management Information System (MIS) to
support the core project management functions
Summary of Project Fiduciary Risk Assessment at Design
Initial Risk
Assessment
Proposed  Mitigation
Final Risk
Assessment
Inherent Risk
1. TI Index
Control Risks
M
Index: 38 in 2018
(ranking 89 out of
180)
The overall inherent risk of the country is deemed MEDIUM. Sri Lanka
is ranked 89th out of 180 countries with the score of 38 in the Corruption
Perception Index (CPI) in the survey conducted by Transparency
International. The 2018 RSP rating is 3.7 – medium risk bracket-
M
1. Organization and
Staffing
H
·          A dedicated PMU for SARP to be set up
·         Additional finance and procurement staff to be recruited
M
·         Comprehensive, user-friendly PIM to be finalized
Summary of Project Fiduciary Risk Assessment at Design
31/42
Initial Risk
Assessment
Proposed  Mitigation
Final Risk
Assessment
2. Budgeting
M
All financing contributions should be clearly stated in the budget to be
submitted to the NSC and IFAD for its approval.
The LPA should make adequate annual budgetary provisions for IFAD
funds and Counterpart funds in the National Budget, based on the
AWPB of the Project.
M
Early consultative process for preparation of AWPB and PP with timely
submission to NSC and IFAD
3. Funds flow and
Disbursement
Arrangements
M
·         Clear definition of funds flow
The PMU would give effect to a formal delegation of authority and clear
segregation of duties among the project staff. In addition, the project’s
financial performance will be periodically reviewed by the National
Steering Committee chaired by the Presidential Secretariat. The overall
control measures and systems and procedures that are in place
(applying Government rules) are relatively adequate to address needs of
the proposed project
Management Information System (including Accounting software). The
Project will establish a Management Information System (MIS) to
support the core project management functions at the central and
district  levels, such as business plan development, financial
management and project monitoring and evaluation.
·         PIM to detail reporting and monitoring requirements and rules
·         Financial reporting to be automatically generated through
accounting software
, following Government circular, all donor-financed projects must
employ an internal auditor, which will also be the case for
Project management to act on internal audit findings and
recommendations
·       Agree on TORs and maintain continuous dialogue with AG of Sri
Lanka and IFAD to ensure submission of acceptable reports, timely
submission of annual audits and informative management letters
4. Internal Controls
M
5. Accounting
Systems, Policies &
Procedures
6. Reporting and
monitoring
H
M
7. Internal Audit
M
8. External Audit
M
Project Fiduciary
Risk @ Design
M
M
M
M
M
L
M
M
I. Environment and Social category
171.
The project will have positive impacts on the environment by developing an integrated watershed approach through the
rehabilitation of the existing traditional Tank Cascade System in the target areas, conducive to greater water retention in the dry
zones and a more climate resilient agriculture. Following the screening exercise (Annex 7, part A) the environmental and social
category assigned to SARP is B. The project will be carried out in different Districts that include protected areas (national parks
and their buffer zones, wildlife/nature reserves, areas of high cultural/religious significance). The project took this situation into
account by integrating the following criterion in the list of criteria for the selection of project sites: “Existence of Protected Areas:
the project sites must not be in close proximity/adjacent to the Protected Areas.” An Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) will be conducted to set out the principles, rules, guidelines and procedures to assess the environmental and
social risks and impacts for the project.
32/42
172.
Approval of all road alignments and design would be subject to an environmental screening process to ensure that the
rehabilitation does not have adverse social or environmental impact. The annexed ESMP details the actions needed to implement
the measures, in accordance with national and international rules on this matter.
J. Climate Risk classification
173.
The climate risk classification for the SARP is defined as High. SARP is located in areas where rural development projects have
experienced significant weather-related losses and damages. Flood events have negatively impacted roads, bridges and
irrigation schemes and droughts, prolonged dry spells and floods have adversely affected the targeted smallholders. The Dry
Zone reflects mainly rain-fed cropping systems which are subject to significant annual variations in rainfall, and therefore
productivity fluctuations. The project relies also on water-based (groundwater and/or surface water) development in areas where
significant depletion and/or reduced flow has occurred from the effects of climate change and/or from overutilization.
174.
An in-depth climate risk analysis climate vulnerability analysis will be conducted during project implementation to further inform
the adaptation measures that SARP is expected to bring, including improvements in cropping technology, which will increase
farmer’s resilience to climate variability and climate change.
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
175.
Project structure and organization:
176.
The SARP implementation structure will have strong management foundations both at National and District levels. The project
will be executed by Presidential Secretariat and the various departments of the Ministry of Agriculture[77]. The Secretary of the
Presidential Secretariat will establish a Programme Management Unit (PMU) to manage and supervise the overall project. The
Project Management Unit (PMU) will be led by a National Project Director, and will have overall responsibility for project
implementation. The PMU will be supported by a team of technical specialists and administrative and financial support staff. Two
area based hubs will be set up to provide overall coordination and oversight of all project activities within the 6 districts and
ensure adequate presence and support of the project management out in the districts level. The main project implementation
activities will be undertaken at district levels. The PMU and district offices will be staffed by dedicated full time staff and supported
by technical and administrative staff to ensure timely project delivery.
177.
By being placed in the Presidential Secretariat it will work closely with SAPP its sister project[78]. The Presidential Secretariat will
be the principal coordinating body supported by technical lead agencies under the Ministry of Agriculture that include the
Department of Agrarian Development, the Department of Agriculture and the Department of Irrigation. The Presidential
Secretariat will work very closely with the PMU to oversee implementation. In order to capitalize on the experience and
competences of SAPP to address the commercialization challenges of smallholder farmers, it was considered convenient to
ensure that the two projects are coordinated by an experienced Programme Coordinator to provide strategic guidance and
ensure closer project collaboration. This management structure will be first step towards the establishment of a single
management unit for IFAD’s future programme in Sri Lanka.
178.
At central level the PMU will comprise a Project Director, a Senior Finance Specialist, an Assistant Finance Officer, Finance/
Administrative Officers (3), a Senior Procurement Specialist, an Assistant Procurement Specialist, an M&E Specialist, Drivers,
Office Assistants and Secretary. The technical team at central level will include a Civil Engineer (chartered), Natural Resource
Management Specialist, an Agricultural Specialist, and Institutions Specialist, a Value Chain and Marketing Specialist, a Rural
Finance Trainer, a Training Specialist (focusing on the Farm Business and Farmer Field School), a Post-harvest specialist and
an Enterprise Development Specialist (also covering the youth incubation scheme).
179.
At District level, SARP will set up two District Hub offices in selected districts led by Area Coordinators – technically trained in
natural resource management or watershed development – who will be responsible for day to day implementation whilst doubling
up as specialised technical support. Each District Hub will be staffed by an Agriculturalist, Institutions Officer, Water Resource/
Civil Engineer, M&E assistant and Driver. The remaining four Districts will have a contained technical staffing complement of an
Agriculturalist (extension worker) and Agro-enterprise Promoter (who will double up as a social mobiliser). Each of the District
Offices will have Office Assistants. The District Units will be housed under the District Offices in each district. The District Offices
will be led by Area Coordinators and supported by the relevant support staff to provide implementation support and managing all
project activities within the selected sub-watersheds and cascades.
180.
The PMU will be supported by chartered engineer who will be responsible for managing the district engineering team for day to
day management and coordination. The team will be for verifying the engineering design of the water, road and market
infrastructure works and will supervise the construction works in the project area.
181.
The Organogram for SARP is given below:
182.
Figure 2: Implementation Structure Chart
33/42
183.
SARP will be fully integrated within the GoSL administration, and the project implementation is designed to capitalize on existing
government agencies at all levels. The participating departments will carry out the project activities within their mandates, but
coordinated by provincial DPD offices, with district units established at the Department of Agriculture (DoA)/Provincial Irrigation
Department (PID)/Assistant Commissioner Agrarian Development (ACAD) offices and divisional units established at Agrarian
Service Centers (ASCs).
184.
While there will be no dedicated structure established at Provincial level, the provinces will focus on coordination and monitoring
support and as such will not lead any activities nor manage activities in districts. They are considered necessary to provide closer
support and backstopping to the District Offices during implementation.
185.
Technical Implementation Unit. A Technical Implementation Unit (TIU) will be established at District level. The Technical
Implementation unit will have executive and technical responsibilities. The TIU will consist of (at least) the Area Coordinator, the
District Agrarian Development representative, the District Agriculture representative and the District Planning representative and
appropriate project technical officers. The TIU will be responsible for the approval and implementation of micro project proposals
relating to small irrigation systems, feeder roads, market infrastructure and small enterprise development. Larger cascade natural
resource plans will need to be approved at PMU level where senior engineering and water resources staff are based. The task of
the TIU will be to: (i) speed-up decisions and procedures; (ii) approve micro-projects under Sub-components 2.1 and 2.2; (iii)
propose the agenda for the District MSC meetings and prepare the support documents; (iv) propose the Annual Work Plan and
Budget (AWPB) to the District Cluster Hub and PMU for analysis and decision; (v) submit Annual Reports on sub-projects; and
(vi) coordinate the planning, M&E and implementation of activities between SARP, UNDP, WFP. Periodically representatives of
the two World Bank projects in the Dry Zone will be invited to participate. The TIU will, in addition, include representatives of
NGO or civil society and a representative of the private sector, when deciding on the approval of micro-projects. Meetings will
take place monthly. Technical experience between implementing and cooperating partners will be shared through periodic
workshops at hub level.
186.
Project coordination and grievance: The Secretary to the Presidential Secretariat will oversee the SARP National Steering
Committee (NSC) which will provide strategic oversight to the project. The Steering Committee will comprise representatives of
the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Planning and the respective departments of the Ministry of Agriculture as well as the Forest
and Wildlife Departments of the Ministry of Mahawelli Development and Environment. Coordination will be made with the Ministry
of Mahawelli Development and Environment which has responsibility for forestry and wildlife.
187.
At District Level coordination will be conducted through the District Multi-Stakeholder Committees, Chaired by the District
Secretary. Members will include the Director Planning, Asst. Commissioner, DAD & Land, the Provincial-District Director
Agriculture, Provincial-District Engineer, the Irrigation Department, Provincial-District Director Animal Production and Health,
District Forest Officer, District Director Wildlife, Environment Officer, a representative from the Chamber of Commerce and
Project staff – of SARP and collaborating projects (UNDP, WFP). Meetings are expected to be conduce once every two months.
188.
At local level, Coordination Committees will be set up at the level of the Agrarian Service Centre. The committees will be chaired
by the Divisional Officers and members expected to participate will include project staff, counterpart ARPAs/ AIs, the Livestock
Development Instructor, representatives of FOs and the private sector. Meetings will similarly be convened once a month.
34/42
189.
Communities, individuals and women who believe that they are adversely affected by SARP may submit complaints to the
Divisional Grievance Committee to be set up at Divisional Level to redress grievances originating from the Agrarian Service
Centre Committee. In the event that grievances cannot be addressed locally, they will be channelled to the District Multi-
Stakeholder Committee for redress. The Grievance Committees will ensure that complaints received are promptly reviewed to
address project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may further submit complaints that are not
resolved locally to the PMU where an independent Inspection Panel will be set up to determine whether harm occurred, or could
occur, because of IFAD non-compliance with its policies and procedures.
190.
IFAD has a Complaints Procedure to receive and facilitate resolution of concerns and complaints with respect to alleged non-
compliance of its environmental and social policies and the mandatory aspects of its Social, Environmental and Climate
Assessment Procedures. For more information, visit the IFAD webpage: https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/accountability-and-
complaints-procedure."
191.
Figure 3:     Coordination and Grievance Mechanisms
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
192.
The dedicated PMU for the SARP will be set up and established under the Presidential Secretariat, though strengthened to
include additional positions relevant to achieving the SARP project objectives. This PMU will be responsible for implementing all
operational-level fiduciary functions. The Finance department of the PMU will consist of a Finance Manager, released on a full-
time basis, to be assisted by an Accountant and two Accounts Assistants. In addition, an Internal Auditor and a Procurement
Officer with experience of National Procurement Procedures will be recruited to the PMU (and will also hold responsibility for
contract management). Overall, the Finance department, reporting to the Project Coordinator for SAP and SARP , will take on
the key functions of project administration.  
193.
Budgeting. Sri Lanka has a three-tier administrative structure: central, provincial, and local government. All activities of the
government are predetermined and are set out in plans and programs. The annual estimates of expenditure detail the financial
commitment of the government for the next year’s program of activities. There are three budget areas—national, provincial, and
local— corresponding to the three levels of government. The Constitution requires the central government to allocate adequate
funds from the annual budget to the provincial councils to meet their needs. The Finance Commission is the intermediary
between the central government and the provincial councils in finance matters.
194.
35/42
The PMU, after consultations with project stakeholders, shall prepare its annual budget, linking all the planned activities to the
cost categories outlined in Schedule II of the Financing Agreement; this exercise will take place in advance of the preparation of
the national budget, to ensure that the required Government funds will be allocated and available on time from the General
Treasury. All financing contributions should be clearly stated in the budget to be submitted to the NSC and IFAD for its
approval.Disbursement arrangements and flow of funds. The Presidential Secretariat, the LPA, would be responsible for
managing the funds flow from the loan proceeds and, opening and maintaining the Designated Account in US Dollars at the
Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) to receive loan resources in advance as soon as possible after entry into force of the
Agreement. Replenishments of the DA would be effected through submission of Withdrawal Applications (WAs) and
accompanying Statements of Expenditures (SOEs) and/or supporting document, in accordance with IFAD procedure as set out in
the Letter to the Borrower and Loan Disbursement Handbook, to IFAD. IFAD funds would be channelled through the Designated
Account maintained at the CBSL. Under Imprest arrangements, the maximum authorized allocation to the Designated Account
will be USD 4 million. One or more advances may be withdrawn within this authorized allocation
195.
In accordance with Section 3.1 of the LDH, the Designated Account will be administered following Imprest Account
arrangements. Advances from this Financing must be segregated from other funds for the Project .
196.
The LPA should make adequate annual budgetary provisions for IFAD funds and Counterpart funds in the National Budget,
based on the AWPB of the Project.
197.
Before disbursement can begin, IFAD must receive, from the designated representative a letter designating the names of officials
authorized to sign withdrawal applications which includes their authenticated specimen signature(s).  The project is  eligible and
authorised to use the IFAD Client Portal (ICP), the applicable form is included in LTB.
198.
Documentation evidencing the opening of the Designated Account, with details of the names and titles of the persons authorized
to operate this/these account(s), must reach IFAD before withdrawal from the loan account can begin.
199.
The Project will maintain Project Accounts in local currency at a state owned commercial  bank, to receive funds from the
Designated Account for eligible expenditure for the project implementation.
200.
The government will maintain the Project Accounts in a state owned local currency at the commercial bank to provide
counterpart funds for Project implementation.
201.
The following are the SOE thresholds[1] that apply for withdrawal application under procedure (i) "Advance Withdrawal" and
under procedure (iii) "Reimbursement": USD 50,000 for all expenditures categories.
202.
Internal controls and internal audit. As part of internal control procedures, the PMU would give effect to a formal delegation of
authority and clear segregation of duties among the project staff. In addition, the project’s financial performance will be
periodically reviewed by the National Steering Committee chaired by the Presidential Secretariat. The overall control measures
and systems and procedures that are in place (applying Government rules) are relatively adequate to address needs of the
proposed project. Furthermore, following Government circular, all donor-financed projects must employ an internal auditor, which
will also be the case for SARP.  
203.
Management Information System (including Accounting software). The Project will establish a Management Information System
(MIS) to support the core project management functions at the central and district levels, such as business plan development,
financial management and project monitoring and evaluation.
204.
The PMU will adopt an accounting software, customised to record and generate financial reports and preserve financial data per
the requirements of IFAD. The customisation should comply to the chart of accounts, disbursement rules and share of financiers
and should be able to generate Financial Statements and automate the preparation of Was.
205.
External Financial Audit. The Auditor General (AG) who is constitutionally mandated to audit all government accounts and
report to Parliament annually, will perform the external financial audit of the project. A copy of the Financing Agreement (FA) and
other relevant information of the Project should be submitted to the AG’s office in advance, enabling AG to issue necessary
instructions and guidance to staff and ensure timely submission of audit report and management letters. Specific additional
auditing requirements of IFAD will be communicated to the AG, and the AG would submit audited financial statement and a
detailed audit report along with a Management Letter not later than six months after the end of the financial year.
206.
IFAD will publicly disclose project financial statements and audit reports of projects financed by IFAD. In line with the standards of
the International Aid Transparency Initiative, the government is encouraged to publish relevant financial information on their own
websites, for increased accountability.
207.
The audit TORs explicitly mention the right of the  borrower/recipient and of IFAD to publish the  audit report,  with no limitation-
of-use clause.
208.
Lending Terms and Financing Conditions
209.
The Loan is granted on ordinary terms and shall be subject to interest on the principal amount outstanding of the Loan rate equal
to the IFAD Reference Interest Rate, payable semi-annually in the Loan Service Payment Currency, and have a maturity period
with a MAXIMUM 35 YEARS, including a grace period   with MAXIMUM 10 YEARS starting from the date as of which the Fund
has determined that all general conditions precedent to withdrawal have been fulfilled. The grace period and maturity period shall
be confirmed at the financing agreement negotiation.
210.
Risks to public debt sustainability The gross public debt is projected at 83.7% of GDP in 2018. Going forward, sustained fiscal
efforts to reach an overall deficit of 3.5 percent of GDP by 2020 are expected to lower the debt ratio to 80 percent of GDP by
2020 and, under unchanged policies, to 73 percent by 2023, reducing the risk of debt distress.
36/42
211.
Sensitivity analyses point that Sri Lanka has high debt sustainability risks, especially with the materialization of the sizable
contingent liabilities from SOEs (state owned Enterprises), estimated at about 11 percent of GDP in 2017.
212.
Lessons learned and knowledge generated on financial management from current active portfolio:
IFAD-financed programmes in Sri Lanka suffered from some delays as for NADeP and STaRR, it was over one year from the
date of entry into force to the date of first disbursement, resulting in slow start-up. To the extent possible, new financing is
planed to build on existing structures and mechanisms, and early and continuous consultation with Government is essential to
mitigate delays.
Earlier selection of qualified staff is a critical element to ensure timely implementation and performance
Ensure the adoption of automated accounting systems at central and district level, together with maintenance and training for
proper recording of project’s transactions; Accounting software should be identified in the earlier stage during the design
mission.
Engage with internal auditors in order to have proper internal audit arrangements in place for the project.
Identify further training on Budgeting & Planning and Cash Flow Management. orts are submitted to the line ministries
overseeing project implementation.
213.
Sri Lanka is ranked in medium risk bracket with the score of CPI index of 38 and RSP rating 3.7. As the latest PEFA report is not
available for public view, the mission was compelled to make the procurement risk assessment based on the lessons learned
from IFAD projects and observations made in other donor funded project reports in Sri Lanka. Accordingly, overall procurement
risk is rated as Medium. This rating has been validated by the findings of the Procurement Risk assessment matrix prepared by
the mission. In order to mitigate inherent country risks the government authorities have taken series of measures in the recent
past, such as introduction of 19th amendment to the Constitution establishing National Procurement Commission, National Audit
Commission and widening the scope of the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption. According to the risk
assessment conducted by the mission main risk areas at project level are lack of procurement professionals, poor status of
progress monitoring and contract management. In order to mitigate these risks, the SARP would setup dedicated procurement
unit consisting of two experienced procurement officers in the PMU. These officers along with other staff who are involved in
procurement activities need to be trained in IFAD procurement procedure at the beginning of the project. In addition, action would
be taken to strengthen the system of contract management, conduct regular progress review meetings and reporting.
214.
There is no Act of Parliament for public procurement but the GoSL does have a functional public procurement system in
place.[79] The National Procurement Guidelines drafted in association with the World Bank, the ADB and the JICA are largely
consistent with IFAD guidelines and will be adopted. In case of any inconsistency, IFAD Guidelines would supersede the
National Procurement Guidelines. A dedicated Procurement Unit consisting of a Senior Procurement Officer assisted by an
Assistant Procurement officer would be setup in the PMU. The senior procurement officer will report directly to the Project
Director. The detailed procurement arrangement (roles, responsibilities, methods, prior review thresholds and staffing) is given in
Project Implementation Manual (Annex8) and the initial 18-month procurement plan is included in Annex 7.
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
215.
Planning. The main planning tools for SARP will comprise the Logical Framework / M&E Framework including its indicators and
targets, and the Results Based Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB). The AWPB preparation will be conducted initially at local
led by the Area-Based Coordinators in collaboration with district level line department staff. The local work plans will be
discussed and validated in a national stakeholder workshop and compiled into a consolidated AWPB. The consolidated AWPB
will be submitted in advance of the GoSL annual budgeting process to ensure that sufficient counterpart funds are made
available. Preparation of the AWPB will be grounded on the principles of results-based planning. Indicators for planning and
monitoring will be based on those given in this report.
216.
M&E. SARP will put in place a results-based monitoring and evaluation system. This system will generate comprehensive and
reliable information to support planning and decision-making. An annual survey will be conducted from PY3 to report on Core
Indicators. The system will be participatory, decentralised, and compliant with IFAD requirements, and relevant data, analysis
and reporting will be disaggregated by gender and age. The data will inform the preparation of above mentioned AWPBs and
annual progress reports compatible with ORMS.
217.
Baseline information will be collected in the first year of implementation. The baseline survey will establish benchmark data for
key programme result indicators that will form basis for evaluation at mid-term and end-term evaluation. The baseline study will
include a beneficiaries group and a controfl group, and will incorporate the Multidimensional Poverty Assessment Tool (MPAT).
This will be essential to determine attribution of results to programme interventions. The M&E framework in the PIM will outline
the developing of an MIS system as well as regular data collection channels from the field, and how the M&E assistants will be
linked with field staff In addition, a geo-referenced ICT-based M&E system will be used. The baseline will be supported by the
WFP-VAM system and locally conducted watershed planning and livelihood analyses.
218.
Impact evaluation: An impact evaluation study will be designed to run concurrently with project implementation to provide
evidence for adaptive management during project execution. IWMI is well placed to conduct this study as they are based in Sri
Lanka.
219.
Learning and KM. SARP will prepare a knowledge management plan that is linked to the M&E system. The objective of
knowledge management is to ensure the project units are able to generate and document that knowledge that are useful to build
practical knowledge and know-how that leads to improve project performance and results. The knowledge generated within the
project is systematically identified, analysed, documented and shared, and should be used to: (i) improve project performance
and delivery; (ii) allow flexibility to changing circumstances; (iii) document and share innovations, best practices, including
project's successes and failures to improve project intervention (iv) support innovations and up-scaling; and (v) support country
level policy engagement. Particular attention will be given to documenting innovative models that are being tested through the
project.
37/42
220.
SARP will include some innovative features that include: a) the targeting and community-level planning methodology to be
applied; b) new sustainable land management measures; c) linking nutritionally rich food items to institutional markets (e.g.
school feeding); d) roll-out of the FBS approach; e) youth incubation pilot testing; f) small-scale mechanization hire services; and
g) pilot-testing of climate data information and market information systems. The FBS approach and community planning
processes have already been tried and tested in Sri Lanka and are available for scaling-up.
221.
Some of the lessons will be captured and documented through on-going data collection, monthly/semi-annual reports, and
thematic studies as part of the knowledge management function. The M&E system will document and share knowledge through
internal (e.g., learning events, stakeholder workshop meetings, etc.) and external mechanisms (e.g., website, blogs, radio etc.).
Knowledge activities will proactively pursue gender and youth issues, and present success stories related to commercialisation of
agriculture and increasing resilience. SAP will also have bi-annual and annual review meetings / workshops which will report on
programme progress, lessons learned, challenges and solutions to implementation constraints. In complement, an SMS
communication system will be developed to reduce the communication gap between field-level farmers and the project.
222.
For innovation and learning, coordination amongst donor programmes will be required as well as amongst the various extension
services at the different administrative levels. Platforms for improved coordination and the effective dissemination and scaling of
technologies will be established at national, district and community level.
223.
The information to be generated by the M&E system will enable DoA, DAD, DAP and other related departments, the Divisional
Offices and other relevant stakeholders to carefully monitor SARP and provide reliable information on the different interventions
and the resultant impacts (or lack thereof). Information sharing with other dry zone projects in Sri Lanka will receive particular
attention. Knowledge gained in other countries of the region will be made available to SARP. In turn, the SARP experience will
inform regional learning on integrated watershed development interventions.
224.
Knowledge and learning generated during project implementation captured through the project M&E system will be used to inform
policy and public investment. Key areas of policy interest will include determining how existing policies impact the sustainable
use of climate smart technologies, how to attract youth to farming, and how to address issues of access to land for women and
youth.
b. Innovation and scaling up
225.
SARP has some innovative features such as: a) the integrated sub-basin level ecosystem-based approach; b) climate smart
technological practices; c) linking nutritionally rich food items to institutional markets (e.g. school feeding); d) roll-out of the FBS
approach; e) youth incubation pilot testing; f) small-scale mechanization hire services; and g) pilot-testing of climate data
information and market information systems. The FBS approach and community planning processes have already been tried and
tested in Sri Lanka and are available for scaling-up.
226.
Adoption of the integrated sub-basin level ecosystem-based approach to Dry Zone water management is an innovation that could
transform the current sectoral approach to investments in agriculture and irrigation. The project approach is to moves away from
the conventional, compartmentalized functioning of government agencies towards providing an integrated solution at a sub-basin
or cascade level. The approach is innovative in the following ways: a) irrigation water, land management and agriculture are
brought together to address resilience of farmers holistically at scale; b) addressing the irrigation needs of smallholders together
with improved agronomic practices combined with the cascade rehabilitation will increase water yield and more efficiently
manage the demand for water; c) by adopting the cascade-wide approach the climate risks for water management and agriculture
can be addressed; d) ensuring scaling by supporting climate-risk informed planning and implementation through cascade level
water management committees and district wide knowledge management and service delivery through ASCs.
227.
SARP will also promote the development and adoption of innovative adaptation technologies and practices to enhance water
management and improve the livelihoods of smallholder farmers. The project will upgrade traditional cascades to be climate-
resilient through design changes such as strengthened bunds whilst introducing climate-resilient crops and low cost methods of
drip irrigation. The technologies will impact at farm level the adoption of climate resilient productivity enhancing technologies,
combined with improved availability of inputs and services and strengthened farmer organizations to link their members to
markets.
228.
The integrated approach to watershed management will be a model for partnership and collaboration between stakeholders and
will engage district line ministries and departments through the inter-ministerial and basin-level committees as reflected in the
implementing arrangements. The approach can create a framework for government engagement with civil society to deliver
essential public services to the rural population of the Dry Zone. The knowledge and technical products such as technical
guidelines, water management plans and capacity building activities such as training of technical agencies and local level
organizations on climate-resilient technologies and practices will lay the potential for scaling up through government and donor
funded programmes. SARP also has the potential to make an important contribution to Sri Lanka’s national policies on land
management, agriculture, water resources and scale up innovative practices to address climate change through policy and
strategy directives.
M. Implementation plans
38/42
a. Implementation readiness and start-up plans.
229.
The IFAD Country Director will initiate a number of preparatory actions. This will include the following activities: (i) Initiating a
Climate Risk Analysis consultancy and the preparation of the Environmental and Social Management Framework – SECAP
prerequisites for approval of the PDR; (ii) Analysis and modelling of cascades; (iii) Conducting a baseline survey of the project
area combined with a livelihoods analysis; (iv) Mapping and appraisal of partner implementation organizations at community
level; (v) Mobilization and recruitment of national consultants; (vi) Review and evaluation of the performance of ASCs and the
Agrarian Banks; (vi) Assessment of an inventory of infrastructure investments for SARP; and (vii) Preparing construction designs
and initiating procurement processes (where feasible).
230.
To facilitate start up and expedite early implementation, the Presidential Secretariat will recruit a project expeditor – a person who
was previously involved in the project design - to support establishing the project management structure and system. The project
expeditor will facilitate the Presidential Secretariat to ensure the timely implementation of start-up activities. Immediately after the
signing the Financing Agreement on the behest of the Presidential Secretariat the expeditor will facilitate the recruitment of the
core PMU staff –the Project Director, technical specialists and Area Based Coordinators to provide critical, and time sensitive
start up activities, procurement of essential goods and services required during the first year of implementation and formation of
the NPSC. Once the key staff members are hired IFAD will organise a training to orient the staff in the technicalities of the
project, to review the project design and the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). The core project team will be expected to
refine the PIM with the objective of taking full ownership over its use and implementation.
231.
In the first year, a Start-up Workshop will be organized to sensitize all project stakeholders, including NSC, PMU and District
Offices about the approach of the project and its key components and implementation arrangements. The Start-up workshop will
aim at developing a common understanding of the project’s underlying design principles, processes and development objectives.
The workshop will also allow partners to understand their role in SARP, reflect on logframe/ ToC, including verification of
indicators, baselines and target values. The tools and procedures for financial management, procurement, selection of
beneficiaries for different components, strategies for M&E and KM will also be introduced to key staff undertaking these key
functions. Inception workshops would subsequently be organized in every participating district to sensitize local partners about
the project.
232.
The PMU will commission a baseline study to establish the status of outcome indicators for each target beneficiary group located
in the selected project districts/ cascades and tanks. Terms of reference would be prepared with the help of IFAD to ensure that
all key indicators included in the log-frame are included in the baseline and completion surveys. The baseline survey will provide
the foundation for subsequent evaluations.
b. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
233.
IFAD will conduct periodic implementation support as needed and at least two supervision missions per year. Supervision would
encompass four discrete processes: i) loan and grant administration; ii) procurement review; iii) audit review; and iv) supervision
and implementation support, which will be a continuous process of engagement with GoSL and PMU.
234.
The first implementation support mission will take place soon after effectiveness and first disbursement. Two annual supervision
missions will be undertaken each year with additional implementation support missions mobilized as required. IFAD will provide
continuous supervision and implementation support as required. The composition of the supervision missions will be based on
the need for technical support of the different project components especially farmer institutional development, productivity
enhancement of the selected commodities, infrastructure investments, market development, links with the private sector and
participation of women and youth.
235.
A mid-term review will be organized by IFAD, GoSL early in year 3 to: (i) assess achievements and interim impact, the efficiency
and effectiveness of management arrangements, and the continued validity of project design; (ii) identify key lessons learnt and
good practices; and (iii) provide recommendations for improved performance. The mid-term evaluation will review and
implementation progress of programme components, document performances on key implementation aspects such as
approaches, strategies and processes and make recommendations for adjustments or restructuring as needed. The evaluation
shall be conducted by an independent consultant to be approved by IFAD.
236.
Thematic studies will be conducted on a needs basis to support programme activities, policy dialogue and scaling up. The project
will conduct an annual outcome survey to show progress. Project staff would be briefed on IFAD’s results management systems
and requirements.
237.
At the end of the project, SARP will conduct an end of project evaluation to assess the extent to which the project has had an
impact on the targeted beneficiaries as reflected in the logframe. The final evaluation will also provide valuable information in
preparing the Project Completion report and lessons for future programming.
238.
To finalise the SARP, the following next steps are envisaged:
Invitation Letter from the GoSL to IFAD for negotiation, November 2019
IFAD EB presentation: December 2019
Financing Agreement February 2020
Footnotes
[1] 2015. WB. Systematic Country Diagnostic.
[2] 2017. ADB. Country Partnership Strategy.
39/42
[3]https://www.cbsl.gov.lk/en/news/the-annual-report-of-the-central-bank-of-sri-lanka-for-the-year-2018
[4]https://www.cbsl.gov.lk/sites/default/files/cbslweb_documents/publications/annual_report/2018/en/3_KEI.pdf
[5] Remittances from migrant workers totaled around USD7 billion in 2015.
[6] World Bank Databank
[7] South Asian countries include: Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Pakistan, Nepal and Sri Lanka.
[8]http://www.statistics.gov.lk/PopHouSat/VitalStatistics/MidYearPopulation/Mid-year%20population%20by%20district.pdf
[9] In 1990, the total fertility rate in Sri Lanka was 2.48, whereas that in Bangladesh was 4.49 and 4.04 in India. In 2015 the figures
were 2.06 in Sri Lanka, 2.14 in Bangladesh and 2.4 in India.
[10] 2015. WB. Systematic Country Diagnostic.
[11] IFPRI 2017. Agricultural Transformation in Sri Lanka.
[12] Based on the World Bank’s international poverty line for lower-middle income countries at USD3.2 per day.
[13]. Op cit.
[14] Department of Census and Statistics and Poverty Global Practice, World Bank Group, 2015. The Spatial Distribution of Poverty in
Sri Lanka.
[15] World Bank databank. The Gini coefficient in some other lower middle-income countries in Asia was as follows: 39.5 for
Indonesia (2013), 35.3 for Viet Nam (2016) and 35.1 for India (2011).
[16] Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the World Food Programme (WFP) Food Security study 2017
[17] It is common practice in Sri Lanka for the newly elected government to announce a policy framework based on its election
manifesto (FAO 2011. Articulating and Mainstreaming Agricultural Trade Policy and Support Measures).
[18] Some tension between these two positions is found also within the same policy framework, e.g. "Regaining Sri Lanka" main text
advocates for private sector-led productivity improvements and the action plan appears to advocate for continued state intervention
(FAO.2011. Ibid.)
[19] 2002. GOSL. Regaining Sri Lanka: Vision and Strategy for Accelerated Development, December 2002, Ministry of Finance and
Connecting to growth: Sri Lanka, Poverty Reduction Strategy, June 2002. The PRSP was presented as an annex and later
incorporated as Part II of RLS.
[20] Mahinda Chintana: Ten-year Horizon Development Framework (2006-2016), Department of National Planning, Ministry of
Finance and Planning. This reflects President Rajapaksa electoral manifesto and was later updated in 2010 with Sri Lanka, the
Emerging Wonder of Asia, Mahinda Chintana: Vision for the Future, Department of National Planning, Ministry of Finance and
Planning. The document also substitutes the national PRSP
[21] The position of the government is also reflected in recently approved strategies and action plans, such as the Public Investment
Plan (2016–2020), the National Plan of Action for the Social Development of the Plantation Community (2016–2020). Department of
National Planning, Ministry of National Policies and Economic Affairs. http://www.mnpea.gov.lk/web/index.php/en/news-events/2-
uncategorised/181-public-investment-programme.html
[22] 2016. WB. Country Partnership Framework.
[23] There are a few other programmes conducted by the MoAg to improve food availability and productivity. These include: the food
crop production and improvement programme; the farm mechanization programme to improve
productivity; the fertilizer subsidy programme; and the renovation of small tanks, and minor irrigation programmes.
[24] Vision 2025’ prioritises increasing employment opportunities as well as re-skilling of the labour force to meet current and
emerging socio-economic demands, with special prominence for women and youth. Taking note of existing disparities between
regions in country, targeted regional economic development actions are also highlighted in the policy.
[25] ‘https://www.ilo.org/colombo/lang--en/index.htm
[26] Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources Development, Ministry of Plantation Industries, Ministry of
Primary Industries, Ministry of Irrigation and Water Resource Management, Ministry of Livestock and Rural Development. At the time
of the CSPE report finalization (January 2019), following some changes in the ministry portfolios late 2018, the Government is
composed of 31 cabinet ministries. (http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.lk/cab/index.php?
option=com_content&view=article&id=22&Itemid=40&lang=en).
[27] For example, the Coastal Conservation Department, which was responsible for one of the IFAD-financed project, was initially in
the Ministry of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources, moved to the Ministry of Defense and then to the Ministry of Mahaweli Development
and Environment
40/42
[28] About eighty percent of adult women in Sri Lanka have reached at least a secondary level of education with no significant
difference with men. The former can be compared to 35 percent in India and 26.5 percent in Pakistan. (2015 data).
[29] There has been a marked increase in Women Headed Households (WHHs) in post-war Sri Lanka. The 2012-13- Household and
Income Expenditure Survey showed that in Sri Lanka, 1.2 million households or 23 percent of the households are WHHs .
[30] Government of Sri Lanka, MoW&CA, National Action Plan on Women Headed Households 2017- 2019. The National Framework
for Women Headed Households (2017- 2019) has been introduced specially to improve the socio economic situation of women
affected by the conflict. The government as well as the Banks have provided credit facilities for enhancing livelihood development
activities for galvanizing the national policy for eradication of poverty. A recent initiative of the Ministry of Women and Child Affairs is
the directive obtained from the Treasury to allocate a minimum of 25% investment for economic development of rural women.
Programs are in place to encourage girls to enter into technological fields, which provide opportunities in accessing the labour market.
[31] SARP interventions will guided by a gender strategy as outlined in Appendix 8
[32] These groups were formed under a World Bank project.
[33] 2018. FAO. Country Gender Assessment of the Agriculture and Rural Sector in Sri Lanka
http://www.fao.org/3/CA1516EN/ca1516en.pdf
[34] Minority Rights, Minority and indigenous peoples, Sri Lanka https://minorityrights.org/country/sri-lanka/
[35] Government statistics 2014
[36] Defined as areas where changes in average weather will adversely affect living standards. Hotspots are the result of two
interrelated factors: (a) the magnitude of predicted changes in average weather at the local level; and (b) the relationship between
weather and living standards in that location
[37] Gunatilake, S.K., Samaratunga, S.S. and Rubasinghe R.T., 2014. Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) in Sri Lanka - Current
Research Evidence Justification: A Review. Sabaragamuwa University Journal 2014, V. 13 NO. 2 pp 31-58
[38] Johnson R.J Heat Stress Nephropathy from Exercise-Induced Uric Acid Crystal Uria: A Perspective on Mesoamerican
Nephropathy. American Journal of Kidney Disease. January 2016 http://www.ajkd.org/article/S0272-6386%2815%2901156-7/abstract
[39] Ministry of Health and Provincial Renal Disease Prevention and Research Unit - North Central Province, in a presentation at the
Technical Working Group for Project Preparation in October 2015
[40] Ministry of Health. Sri Lanka Demographic and Health Survey 2016
[41] National nutrition and micronutrient survey 2012
[42] IFPRI (2016). The Global Nutrition Report.
[43] Medical Research Institute, 2016
[44] Global Nutrition Report, 2016
[45] Low weight-for-height: Wasting or thinness indicates in most cases a recent and severe process of weight loss, which is often
associated with acute starvation and/or severe disease.
[46] IFAD Dry Zone Livelihood Support and Partnership Programme, Impact Evaluation, 2013.
[47] IFAD CSPE 2018; Dry Zone Livelihoods Project, UNDP, WFP
[48] IFAD CSPE 2018
[49] For specific investments promoted by the project, such as climate smart production technology and innovative information and
communication technology development that serve the purpose of the project
[50] This refers to whether private investment and its impact would not have happened anyway in the absence of the IFAD
intervention.
[51] 35-38% of post-harvest losses are reporting throughout (central bank reports)
[52] Lessons utilized for the design of this project include (a) the UNDP Green Climate Fund project - Strengthening the Resilience of
Smallholder Farmers in the Dry Zone; (b) WFP project - Building Resilience Against Recurrent Natural Shocks through Diversification
of Livelihoods for Vulnerable Communities in Sri Lanka and (c) the World Bank Climate Resilience and Improvement Project (CRIP).
[53] The estimated number of households to be reached was derived from previously implemented projects linked to the overall
budget of the project and adjusted for the dry zone rural population that is more dispersed than the potential areas.
[54] The hotspots are hydrologically defined as a catchment within a river basin that contains several Village Tank Cascades (VTCs)
and individual tanks.
41/42
[55] Agriculture Sector Modernization Project is covering 7 districts and the Climate Smart Irrigation Project covers 11 districts and 17
river basins.
[56] The UNDP project Strengthening the resilience of smallholder farmers in the Dry Zone covers three river basins, 16 cascades in
7 districts. The WFP project, Building Resilience Against Recurrent Natural Shocks through Diversification of Livelihoods for
Vulnerable Communities in Sri Lanka, covers 5 districts.
[57] These include 100 tanks in Anuradhapura district, 25 (Vavuniya), 35 (Puttalam), 25 (Mannar) 10 (Matale) and 105 (Kurenagala).
The 300 tanks include 100 tanks in UNDP watersheds. The figure should be seen as an upper level target based on the capacity to
design and construct over the project life as well as funding considerations.    
[58] The targeting strategy as detailed in appendix 8 provides detailed vulnerability analysis, profile targets, risk mitigation measures,
inclusion strategies. The vulnerability analysis provides an overview of the challenges faced by farmers including landlessness,
smallholding, remoteness and inaccessibility to markets, institutions and inputs, meagre coverage under social protection, limited
household incomes and assets, indebtedness, food insecurity, limited access to rural finance and enterprises, climate change
vulnerability and social and economic marginalization faced by ethnic, indigenous, disabled, youth and women farmers.
[59]     IFAD will work closely with WFP and government agencies to utilise the existing geographical and household targeting VAM
system
[60] The criteria used for the selection of potential value chain commodities is elaborated on in the PIM.
[61] DoA has listed a set of climate smart agricultural (CSA) practices based on successful interventions carried out in other countries
and tried and tested in Sri Lanka. The practices with high adoption rates include planting with the onset of rains, land preparation for
rice utilizing rainfall in Yala, agroforestry and crop diversification (in home gardens), climate resilient crop varieties for paddy, short
and ultra-short duration varieties, cover cropping and mulching and mechanised land preparation for rice, reducing fertiliser and
pesticide use by mulching and agroforestry systems that promote good water and soil quality.  
[62] The strategy is elaborated in Appendix 8
[63] The FBS methodology has been tried and tested in Sri Lanka and is well appreciated by stakeholders as an effective
methodology for replication
[64] These will be an adaptation of the successful 4-P business models implemented under SAP.
[65] These will be an adaptation of the successful Public-Private-Producer Partnership (4P) business models implemented under
SAPP.
[66] Enterprise Sri Lanka by the Department of Development Finance includes interest subsidy loan schemes, which are supposed to
be implemented by all 19 public and private sector banks using their own funds while the interests are fully or partially subsidized by
GoSL. For youth beneficiaries, GIZ is providing technical support to incorporate companies, maintain books and records, negotiations
with FSPs and access to markets. The loan facility through state banks comes with a 75% loan installment paid by GoSL. SARP will
explore the opportunity of participating in that scheme for youth beneficiaries of the entrepreneurial incubation support. The ADB grant
for Women Entrepreneur Finance Initiative (We-Fi) for technical assistance and an extra grant for women in less developed regions,
such as the dry zone, blended with a credit line (80% of the investment costs), would allow to build synergies for the support of
women entrepreneurs targeted by SARP.
[67] This aligns with the focus of IFADs priority areas outlined in the Rural Youth Action Plan.
[68] Owing to the tight time line for rehabilitation of the tanks – over the dry period – the manual cash for work activities will be
complemented by mechanized operations.
[69] For instance for disabled persons activities will be selected to account for specific disabilities.
[70] Linkages with SAPP will be through the P-4 commercialization options. SARP will strengthen the capacity of PO/FOs and will
facilitate linkages to private sector buyers with the support of SAPP. The SAPP modalities will be used to access loan funding for the
POs/ FOs through the commercial banking system. SAPP will facilitate links to financial organizations. Less formal PO/ FOs selling
produce locally to small and medium agro-processors and/ or spot markets will be supported solely by SARP.
[71] ‘Regaining Sri Lanka’ (2002), the Mahinda Chintana (2006) and Vision 2025 (2017-2025) and the Food Production National
Programme (2016-2018)
[72] WFP and UNDP have been identified as potential implementing partners to support capacity building and the community planning
process as part of the resilience strategy.
[73] The revolving fund credit line operating through SAPP will be used to develop 4-P business models in the dry zone. However,
some modification will be needed to the existing business model in order to incentivize the private sector to invest in facilities in the
project vicinity.
[74] The detailed costings lay out some of the preliminary studies that will be undertaken. These include a baseline survey; an
assessment of the water availability in the sub-catchments/ tanks; an analysis to see if the available water quantity is sufficient to
meet the existing demands for water from different sectors (irrigation, drinking water, environment, etc.); and detailed hydrological and
water allocation modelling of the sub-basins selected. Other preliminary studies include a) a Climate Risk Analysis consultancy; b)
preparation of the Environmental and Social Mapping Framework; c) VAM targeting and planning to be conducted by WFP.
42/42
[75] Based on assessments of the performance of the UNDP, WFP and IFAD-SAP projects currently under implementation
[76] The farm families can be divided into three categories of households – the extreme poor, poor with potential to sell in local
markets and more commercially oriented smallholder farmers.
[77] Presidential Secretariat also coordinates the Multi-Sector nutrition approach .
[78] A financial management assessment was conducted to determine whether the Presidential Secretariat has acceptable FM
systems to provide IFAD reasonable assurance that funds will be used for the intended purpose to enable project development
objectives to be met. The assessment found the arrangements to be acceptable and the procedures employed by SAP, will be
followed by SARP.
[79] The 'National Procurement Guidelines' and 'Guidelines on Selection and Employment of Consultants' were issued in 2006 and
2007 respectively.
Sri Lanka
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience Project
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Document Date:
04/11/2019
Project No.
2000002583
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience Project
Logical Framework
1/5
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Outreach 
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households
members
RIMS
Annual
PMU
Household members
81000
180000
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
RIMS
Annual
PMU
Women-headed households
Non-women-headed
households
Households
18000
40000
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the
project
RIMS
Annual
PMU
(A) Extreme climate
change shocks do
not occur. (A)
Project
management and
support service
capacity is
supportive
Females
Males
Young
Not Young
Total number of persons
receiving services
Male
Female
25
45
Project Goal 
Contribute to smallholder poverty reduction, food
security and nutrition in target Dry Zone districts
70% of project supported HHs reporting a > 30% increase in
their income
Reference studies and
HH surveys
Number of HHs
10500
28000
PMU
Baseline,
MTR, End-
line
Extreme climate
change shocks do
not occur
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
2/5
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Development Objective 
Build resilience and market participation of rural
households in geographical areas affected by
climate change
% of children suffering from reduced prevalence of chronic
malnutrition
HH survey
% of children
25
50
% HH reporting improved food security
Households
40
80
No. of individual entrepreneurs and HH report a > 50%
increase in resilience score
Food Insecurity
Experience Scale
(FIES) assessment
Specific application of
the resilience
methodology
PMU
Baseline,
MTR, End-
line
MTR
PMU
Annual
PMU
Males
Females
Young
Not Young
Number of people
10000
28000
1.2.8 Women reporting improved quality of their diets
Baseline, MTR and
Endline surveys
Annual
PMU
Women reporting improved
quality of their diets
Percentage
Young
Not Young
0
20
50
A) Extreme climate
change shocks do
not occur.
R).population
increases may
jeopardize
sustainability of
management
systems. A)
Sustainable and
qualified business
service providers
are available to
provide access to
services
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
3/5
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Outcome 
Climate resilient and value chain capacity built
Number of water user associations and producer
organizations supported to manage climate-related risks
Evaluation studies
Annual
PMU
% water user associations
50
182
No. of Producer Organizations with capacity to manage group
enterprises in a financially profitable and sustainable way
Project M&E system
Annual
PMU
Number of POs
100
400
Output 
Service providers and producers' groups created
and capacitated for better land and water
management
No. of group members trained in land and water management Specific Technical and
project activity reports
Number members
2000
6000
Annual
PMU
Young
Not Young
Males
Females
Output 
Farmers especially women and youth trained in
business and marketing
No. of farmers, women and youth trained in business and
marketing
Project M&E system
Annual
PMU
Males
Young
Not Young
Output 
Advocacy and Policy meetings conducted
Number of people
800
1950
Policy 1 Policy-relevant knowledge products completed
Project M&E System
Periodic
PMU
Number
2
5
A) Social
mobilization and
group management
support is available;
A).Extreme climate
change shocks do
not occur; A)
Sustainable and
qualified SLM
support is available
to provide
ecosystem services
Technical
assistance is
available through
WFP in SLM
Sustainable and
qualified business
service providers
are available to
provide access to
services
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
4/5
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Extreme climate
change shocks do
not occur A)
Sustainable and
qualified SLM
support is available
to provide
ecosystem services
Outcome 
Climate resilient climate change and value chain
investments made
No. of households reporting improved access to water
resources for productive and domestic use
Project M&E system
Annual
PMU
4000
10450
Households
Females
Males
Young
Not Young
No. of HH applying climate resilient technologies and
practices
Periodic evaluation
study
Annual
PMU
10000
30000
Households
Females
Males
Young
Not Young
Number of smallholder farmers, women and youth managing
their enterprises profitably
Periodic evaluation
study
Annual
PMU
Males
Females
Young
Not Young
Number of people
1500
6400
No. of farmers, women and youth reporting the use of
knowledge in business and marketing
Periodic evaluation
study
Annual
PMU
Males
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
5/5
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Females
Number of people
1500
4600
Young
Not Young
Output 
Minor irrigation tanks and water harvesting
infrastructure constructed or rehabilitated
No. of hectares of farmland under water-related infrastructure
rehabilitated
Regular project
monitoring
Annual
PMU
Hectares of land
1000
3000
Output 
Beneficiaries with access to market infrastructure
and business services
No. of HHs utilising rural feeder roads constructed and/ or
rehabilitated
Project M&E System
Quarterly
PMU
Households
No. of HHs with access to improved support services through
the ASCs
Project M&E System
Quarterly
PMU
Households
12000
20000
Sustainable and
qualified SLM
support is available
to provide
ecosystem services
A) Local
government
planning support is
available R)District
level plans match
the geographic
targeting of districts
and divisions
Sri Lanka
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience Project
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Document Date:
04/11/2019
Project No.
2000002583
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience (SARP) Project Design Report 
Annex 2: Theory of Change 
Document Date: 11/10/2019  
Project No. 
Sri Lanka
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience Project
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Document Date:
04/11/2019
Project No.
2000002583
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience (SARP) Project Design Report 
Annex 3: Project Cost and Financing: Detailed Costs Tables 
Document Date: 31/10/2019  
Project No. 
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department 
Annex 3:  Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables 
1.  Main  Assumptions  –  This  Annex  presents  the  analysis  of  costs  and  financing  for  the  SARP.  It 
describes the assumptions made in estimating the Programme costs including the detailed cost tables 
and  financing  plan.  The  exercise  used  the  COSTAB  software  to  display  the  financial  data  and  the 
detailed cost table for each component. The cost tables have been consolidated into summary tables 
that present the costs by component, category of expenditure and financiers. The full set of detailed 
and summary tables is presented in this Annex. 
2.  SARP is proposed to be financed over a six-year period (2020-2025) based on information collected 
during the design mission providing the key parameters for the Programme costs. Data collected have 
been checked for consistency with average costs of goods and services in Sri Lanka. Costs have been 
estimated on the basis of prices prevailing during the period of design in June-July 2019.  
3.  Inflation rate in Sri Lanka decreased to 3.8 percent in June of 2019, from 5.0 percent in the previous 
month. It was the smallest rate of inflation since January. Therefore, a declining local inflation rate of 
2% was set as a base for the analysis for the Programme period 2020-2025. Foreign inflation rate has 
been set also at 2% for the same period. Both local and foreign inflation rates are compounded at mid-
year. Inflation figures used in the calculation of the Programme costs are shown in Table 1 together 
with the derived exchange rate. Most of the cost items have been set in USD.  
Table 1 Inflation and Exchange Rates 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
Inflation (in %'s) /a 
  Annual rates 
Local 
Foreign 
  Compounded rates 
Local 
Foreign 
   Exchange rates (Local/Foreign) /b 
  ALL 
2.0 
2.0 
1.0 
1.0 
2.0 
2.0 
3.0 
3.0 
2.0 
2.0 
5.1 
5.1 
2.0 
2.0 
7.2 
7.2 
2.0 
2.0 
9.3 
9.3 
   Rates actually used 
180.0 
180.0 
180.0 
180.0 
180.0 
\a Yearly values are within Each Project Year 
\b Yearly values are at Project Year Midpoints 
2.0 
2.0 
11.5 
11.5 
180.
0 
4.  Programme Costs. Total SARP costs including price contingencies, duties and taxes are estimated at 
about USD 82 million over the six-year Programme implementation period. Of this amount, about USD 
16 million (about 20% of total Programme costs) represents  the foreign exchange content and USD 
12.3 million (about 15%) are estimated as duties and taxes. Import duties (on vehicles, office furniture 
and equipment) and value added tax (VAT) are applied to costs of all transactions. A value 15% as an 
average was used for all project costs. Total base costs amount to about USD 73.2 million, while price 
contingencies are estimated to add to this amount another USD 8.8 million, corresponding to 12% of 
the base costs. Investment costs account for 96.5% of the total costs (and recurrent costs for remaining 
3.5%). Component costs breakdown are as follows: 
5.  Project financing by components are tentatively: USD10.5 million for Component 1 – Capacity building 
for climate resilience and inclusive value chains (24.0 percent of project costs) and USD58.3 million for 
Component  2  –  Investments  for  climate  resilience  and  inclusive  value  chains  (70  percent  of  project 
costs). For Component 3 – Programme management and coordination, project costs came to USD4.4 
million (6.0 percent of project costs). Physical and price contingencies were estimated at 3.6 and 5.1 
million respectively. A summary breakdown of the Programme costs by component is shown in Table 
2.  
Table 2 SARP estimated costs by Component and Subcomponent 
Table 3 Expenditure Accounts Project Cost Summary 
6.  The proposed IFAD financing for the project is USD42.7 million from the IFAD11 PBAS allocation for 
Sri Lanka. This funding also includes a USD1 million grant for background studies that will contribute 
to  project  start-up  and  policy  dialogue.  The  GoSL  is  expected  to  contribute  about  USD12.6  million 
(mainly taxes and duties), the private sector USD1.7 million (mainly through capital investments and 
loans), and beneficiaries USD13.2 million (mainly in-kind and through loans from the Agrarian Bank). 
The beneficiaries and private sector will contribute through a combination of loans and matching grants 
under sub-component 2.2. Additional resources to the amount USD13.8 million have been earmarked 
by  UNDP  and  WFP  as  parallel  funding.  UNOPS  has  also  committed  USD300,000  towards  SARP. 
Tables  5  to  7  present  the  financing  plan  per  component,  expenditure  accounts  and  disbursement 
accounts respectively. 
%% Total(LKR Million)(US$ '000)ForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsA. Capacity Building for Climate Resilience and Inclusive Value Chains 1. Strengthening Adaptive Capacity of Service Providers and Farmers to CCa. Community organizatIon, planning and mentoring 406.7101.7508.42,2605652,824204b. Climate smart technologies 332.383.1415.41,8464622,308203c. Livelihood resilience building 95.423.8119.2530132662201d. Nutrition education and training 83.520.9104.4464116580201e. Action research for policy dialogue 2.90.73.61642020-f. Contracting service providers 441.6110.4552.12,4546133,067204Subtotal 1,362.5340.61,703.17,5691,8929,46220132. Strengthening Capacity for Inclusive Value Chain Development a. FBS organization and training 45.611.457.02536331720-b. Market appraisal, post-harvest and value addition 20.45.125.61142814220-c. Skills development for youth 73.318.391.6407102509201d. National Policy Engagement 15.83.919.7882211020-Subtotal 155.138.8193.98622151,077201Subtotal 1,517.6379.41,897.08,4312,10810,5392014B. Investments for Climate Resilience and Inclusive Value Chains 1. Investments for climate resilient production and infrastructure a. Cascade water resource infrastructure development 3,808.2952.14,760.321,1575,28926,4462036b. Household water harvesting, irrigation and soil conservation 565.3141.3706.73,1417853,926205c. Household resilience and nutrition 703.7175.9879.63,9099774,887207d. Climate resilient farming practices 751.5187.9939.44,1751,0445,219207Subtotal 5,828.81,457.27,286.032,3828,09640,47820552. Investment for inclusive value chain development a. Feeder road rehabilitation and maintenance 1,177.8294.51,472.36,5441,6368,1802011b. Agrarian Service Centres and Agrarian Banks 665.3166.3831.63,6969244,620206c. Market Infrastructure and Stakeholder Platforms 208.852.2261.01,1602901,450202d. Youth and women's enteprises 426.0106.5532.42,3665922,958204e. Market, Weather and Climate Information Services: 86.421.6108.0480120600201Subtotal 2,564.3641.13,205.414,2463,56217,8082024Subtotal 8,393.12,098.310,491.446,62811,65758,2852080C. Project management and coordination 1. Project Management Unit 208.214.8223.01,157821,239722. M&E and Knowledge Management 166.541.6208.19252311,1562023. Area & District Offices 114.77.9122.763744681614. Recurrent Costs 205.136.1241.21,1392011,340152Subtotal 694.5100.5795.03,8585584,417136Total BASELINE COSTS 10,605.12,578.213,183.358,91714,32373,24120100Physical Contingencies 530.3128.9659.22,9467163,662205Price Contingencies 735.1179.0914.14,0849955,078207Total PROJECT COSTS 11,870.52,886.114,756.665,94716,03481,98120112%% Total(LKR Million)(US$ '000)ForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalLocalForeignTotalExchangeCosts I. Investment Costs A. Civil Works 4,388.51,097.15,485.624,3816,09530,4762042B. Goods Vehicles 60.915.276.133885423201Equipment 617.0154.2771.23,4288574,285206Subtotal 677.9169.5847.43,7669424,708206C. Technical Assistance and Studies 1,734.3433.62,167.99,6352,40912,0442016D. Training and Workshops 835.7208.91,044.64,6431,1615,804208E. Contracts with Service Providers 441.6110.4552.12,4546133,067204F. Grants 2,090.0522.52,612.511,6112,90314,5142020Total Investment Costs 10,168.12,542.012,710.156,48914,12270,6122096II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances 292.5-292.51,625-1,625-2B. Operation and Maintenance 144.636.1180.78032011,004201Total Recurrent Costs 437.136.1473.22,4282012,62984Total BASELINE COSTS 10,605.12,578.213,183.358,91714,32373,24120100Physical Contingencies 530.3128.9659.22,9467163,662205Price Contingencies 735.1179.0914.14,0849955,078207Total PROJECT COSTS 11,870.52,886.114,756.665,94716,03481,98120112 
Table 4 Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (in USD '000) 
Table 5 SARP financing plan by Expenditure Account (USD Million) 
Table 6 SARP financing plan by Expenditure Account (USD Million) 
Table 7 SARP Disbursement Accounts by Financiers (USD Million) 
7.  Tables 8 to 12 present the Detailed Cost Tables as follows: (i) Table 8 corresponds to Subcomponent 
1.1; (ii) Table 9 corresponds to Subcomponent 1.2; (iii) Table 10 corresponds to Subcomponent 2.1; 
(iv) Table 11 corresponds to Subcomponent 2.2; and (v) Table 12 corresponds to Component 3.  
Totals Including Contingencies202020212022202320242025TotalA. Capacity Building for Climate Resilience and Inclusive Value Chains1. Strengthening Adaptive Capacity of Service Providers and Farmers to CC2,1662,1572,0221,5671,4071,14110,4602. Strengthening Capacity for Inclusive Value Chain Development11428540625580491,189Subtotal2,2802,4422,4281,8221,4861,19011,649B. Investments for Climate Resilience and Inclusive Value Chains1. Investments for climate resilient production and infrastructure1648,5359,1069,4679,6838,58645,5402. Investment for inclusive value chain development1,5963,9563,9863,7423,6492,96119,890Subtotal 1,75912,49213,09213,20913,33211,54665,431C. Project management and coordination 1,2416667686376509404,901Total PROJECT COSTS 5,28115,60016,28815,66915,46813,67681,981IFAD LoanIFAD GrantUNDPWFPUNOPSPrivate SectorBeneficiariesThe GovernmentTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Capacity Building Climate Resilience and Agribusiness Development 1. Capacity Building for Climate Resilience 6.966.20.33.2--0.55.1------2.725.610.512.82. Capacity building for commercialisation 0.977.0--------0.02.40.15.50.215.01.21.5Subtotal 7.867.30.32.9--0.54.6--0.00.20.10.62.924.511.614.2B. Investments for Climate Resilience and Agribusiness 1. Investing in climate resilience 18.640.7--8.819.42.14.50.30.80.71.69.921.75.111.345.555.52. Investment in farm commercialization 11.256.40.73.4------0.94.73.216.13.919.419.924.3Subtotal 29.845.50.71.08.813.52.13.20.30.51.72.513.120.09.013.865.479.8C. Project management and coordination 4.184.4------------0.815.64.96.0Total PROJECT COSTS 41.750.91.01.28.810.82.63.20.30.41.72.113.216.112.615.482.0100.0UNDP ParallelWFP ParallelIFAD LoanIFAD GrantFundingFundingUNOPSPrivate SectorBeneficiariesThe GovernmentTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%I. Investment Costs A. Civil Works 13.338.70.71.96.719.6--0.31.00.20.66.418.56.719.634.341.9B. Goods Vehicles 0.250.0------------0.250.00.40.5Equipment 2.653.4--0.11.4----0.23.31.326.90.715.04.85.8Subtotal 2.853.1--0.11.3----0.23.01.324.60.918.05.26.4C. Technical Assistance and Studies 7.858.60.00.12.015.0----0.32.00.11.03.123.213.416.3D. Training and Workshops 4.774.4----0.58.3--0.00.50.11.01.015.76.47.8E. Contracts with Service Providers 2.675.20.39.8----------0.515.03.44.1F. Grants 7.948.4----2.112.6--1.06.45.332.50.00.116.319.9Total Investment Costs 39.149.51.01.38.811.22.63.30.30.41.72.113.216.612.315.679.096.4II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and Allowances 1.792.0------------0.18.01.82.2B. Operation and Maintenance 1.085.0------------0.215.01.11.4Total Recurrent Costs 2.689.3------------0.310.72.93.6Total PROJECT COSTS 41.750.91.01.28.810.82.63.20.30.41.72.113.216.112.615.482.0100.0UNDP ParallelWFP ParallelIFAD LoanIFAD GrantFundingFundingUNOPSPrivate SectorBeneficiariesThe GovernmentTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Civil Works 13.338.70.71.96.719.6--0.31.00.20.66.418.56.719.634.341.9Goods 2.853.1--0.11.3----0.23.01.324.60.918.05.26.4Consulting Services 10.462.00.32.02.012.0----0.31.60.10.83.621.616.820.5Grants 7.948.4----2.112.6--1.06.45.332.50.00.116.319.9Training 4.774.4----0.58.3--0.00.50.11.01.015.76.47.8Salaries & Allowances 1.792.0------------0.18.01.82.2Operating Costs 1.085.0------------0.215.01.11.4Total PROJECT COSTS 41.750.91.01.28.810.82.63.20.30.41.72.113.216.112.615.482.0100.0 
Table 8. Sub-component 1.1: Capacity building climate resilienceDetailed CostsQuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)ExpenditureUnit202020212022202320242025Total(US$)202020212022202320242025TotalAccountFin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Community Organization, Planning and Mentoring 1. Awareness raising and community organization number250100----35093023393----326TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )2. Training of agro-enterprise promoters number3-----31,0003-----3TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )3. Training of project, AI and ARPA staff in watershed planning number4-----41,0004-----4TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )4. Training of community members and preparation of watershed plans number300450450---1,200500150225225---600TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )5. Watershed management guidelines and planning number150100----2502503825----63TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )6. Training of producer group organization management number7013015010050-5001,50010519522515075-750TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )7. Training of FOs in O&M number-15015057--357357-545420--127TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )8. Refresher training of agroenterprise promoters number--3---31,000--3---3TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )9. Technical assistance a. Institutions and social development expert person/mth121212121212721,20014141414141486TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )b. Social inclusion and gender facilitators person/mth24242424242414435088888850TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )c. Agroenterprise promoters (1 promoter per district) person/mth727272727272432350252525252525151TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )d. Incentives for ARPAs /a Full time ARPA paid by project person/mth3603603603603603602,160230838383838383497TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Part time ARPAs paid by project person/mth3603603603603603602,16076272727272727164TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 33.3% )Subtotal 110110110110110110661Subtotal 158158158158158158949Subtotal 6907506653292331582,824B. Climate Smart Technologies 1. Training in FFS-climate smart technologies for technical staff number2222--815,00030303030--120TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )2. Training in FFS-climate smart technologies for extension  staff + youth number66----1215,0009090----180TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )3. Training of master trainers (short training programmes of key trainers) number2-----23,0006-----6TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )4. Establishment of FFS number-100100100--300500-505050--150TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )5. Training of FFS facilitators (include Ais, ARPAs and lead farmers) number10-----105,00050-----50TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )6. Refresher training FFS facilitators number--10---105,000--50---50TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )7. Technical assistance a. Natural Resource Management expert person/mth121212121212721,20014141414141486TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 33.3% )b. Agriculture + livestock specialist12 for 6 person/mth121212121212721,20014141414141486TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 33.3% )c. Agricultural Officers (6 agricultural officers - 1 per district) person/mth727272727272432420303030303030181TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 33.3% )d. Rice Specialist (CSA - AWD - IPM) person/mth663---151,200774---18TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 33.3% )e. Water resource engineers (1 per hub) person/mth242424242424144880212121212121127TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 33.3% )f. Natural resource management officers (4 officers) person/mth484848484848288600292929292929173TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 33.3% )g. Incentives for AIs at ASC level (6 AIs seconded with 100% incentive) person/mth3603603603603603602,160350126126126126126126756TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 33.3% )h. Ai incentives one third at ASC level (6 Ais seconded with 30% incentive) person/mth3603603603603603602,160150545454545454324TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 33.3% )Subtotal 2962962932892892891,752Subtotal 4724664233692892892,308C. Livelihood Resilience Building 1. Home gardens training number2020202020131131,200242424242416136TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )2. Fish Farming in the inland water reservoirs in selected seasonal and perennial tanks /b number1010101010-501,2001212121212-60TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )3. Livestock farming Semi intensive small scale dairy farming /c number-202020203831,200-242424244100TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Goat Rearing (semi-intensive goat management) /d number-252525104891,200-303030125107TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Commercial level Backyard Poultry /e number-2020202017971,200-2424242420116TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Subtotal -78787860293234. Agriculture and livelihoods Mushroom cultivation (technical and management training) number-55955291,200-66116635TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Technical and management training number-333--91,200-444--11TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Controlled agriculture /f number-1212122414741,200-141414291789TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Agri- Small scale poultry hatchery /g number-2222-81,200-2222-10TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Subtotal -2626313723144Subtotal 3614014014513367662Table 8. Sub-component 1.1: Capacity building climate resilience (continuation) 
D. Nutrition Education and Training 1. Training extension workers on nutrition number222222125,00010101010101060TRAI_WKSHPSWFP_ ( 90% )2. Training in social behavioural changes /h number1-1-1-375,00075-75-75-225TRAI_WKSHPSWFP_ ( 90% )3. Training in nutrient preserving techniques /i number51010105-407,0003570707035-280TRAI_WKSHPSWFP_ ( 90% )4. Technical assistance: Nutrition expert person/mth3-----35,00015-----15TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 135801558012010580E. Action Research for Policy Dialogue (Workshop on integrated ecosystem development) number---1--120,000---20--20TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 90% )F. Contracting Service Providers 1. IWMI technical support /j lumpsum0.50.5----1215,000108108----215SVE_PROVIDERSIFAD_GRANT ( 100% )2. Climate Risk Analysis consultancy person/mth2-----220,00040-----40SVE_PROVIDERSIFAD_GRANT ( 100% )3. Environmental and Social Management Framework person/mth1-----112,00012-----12SVE_PROVIDERSIFAD_GRANT ( 100% )4. VAM targeting and planning lumpsum1-----1100,000100-----100SVE_PROVIDERSIFAD_GRANT ( 100% )5. NGO SPs - community development, NRM etc. /k lumpsum1111116450,0004504504504504504502,700SVE_PROVIDERSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 7105584504504504503,067Total 2,0431,9941,8331,3931,2259749,462_________________________________\a 12 ARPAs fully seconded 100% incentive and 1 partially seconded to SARP 30% incentive\b Includes exposure visit to a well-functioning tank for knowledge sharing and learning from practitioners\c Covers feed management, establishment of pasture/ fodder units, AI and calving etc.\d Construction of elevated goat shed & maintenance and management\e Construction and maintenance of BYP shed, rearing practices, feed managemwnt etc.\f Protected agriculture technologies and management practices for women and youth\g Small scale poultry hatchery business for youth and women - poultry mother stock rearing and management\h Behaviour change communication: including nutrition information, education and communication for project’s beneficiaries, cooking demonstration,\i Nutrient-preserving techniques and business promotion of high nutrition value food (training, equipment\j Includes personnel $119,500 operational $38,500 & costs of travel, field data collection $23000, Indirect costs $34000\k There are currently four NGOs operating at field level in different districts - Janathakshan, Red Cross Society, Palm Community Dev. Foundation, S.Asia 
Table 9. Sub-component 1.2: Capacity building commercialisationDetailed CostsQuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)ExpenditureUnit202020212022202320242025Total(US$)202020212022202320242025TotalAccountFin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. FBS Organization and Training 1. Training of core team of trainers /a number1-----13,0003-----3TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )2. Adaptation of training materials /b number1-----110,00010-----10TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )3. Training of service providers /c number4-----42,0008-----8TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )4. Training of farmers /d number-2550---753,700-93185---278TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 80% ), BENEF ( 20% )5. Second generation farmer led FBS /e number--101010-30600--666-18TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 40% ), BENEF ( 60% )Subtotal 219319166-317B. Market Appraisal, Post-harvest and Value Addition 1. Training of extension workers in post-harvest/ GAP number333---92,000666---18TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )2. Training of farmers in post harvest/ GAP number5555--202,00010101010--40TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 90% ), BENEF ( 10% )3. Refresher training for extenson workers number---33-62,000---66-12TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )4. Value chain/ market studies, design and supervision number12-3--63,00036-9--18TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )5. Technical assistance Post harvest technologist person/mth363333211,20047444425TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Value chain and marketing specialist person/mth-6666-241,200-7777-29TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 414111111454Subtotal 23362736174142C. Skills Development Training for Youth 1. Study to explore income opportunities lumpsum1-----12,0002-----2TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )2. Mapping of incubators lumpsum1-----12,0002-----2TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 90% )3. Youth incubator training /f number201001001001003045034073434343410153TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 80% ), PRIVATE ( 20% )4. Business training and preparation of business plans /g number50100150200--5007003570105140--350TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )5. Knowledge sharing & documentation lumpsum----1-12,000----2-2TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 90% )Subtotal 461041391743610509D. National Policy Engagement 1. Agro-enterprise, finance, youth specialist person/mth633331191,20074444123TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )2. Farm business management training specialist person/mth966666391,200117777747TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )3. Workshops to discuss youth in agriculture person/mth-1---1220,000-20---2040TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 90% )Subtotal 183111111128110Total 10726436822770421,077 _________________________________\a This is an informal 5 day training of lead trainers in agribusiness with competency in training and curriculum development\b FAO farm business school manuals will be used and adapted locally\c Includes training of around 100 AIs and ARPAs to set up 75 schools\d Each curriculum will cover approximately 35 sessions or meetings a year.  Farmers will be paid $2.5 per session     The schools will be supported by coaching/ mentoring visits from the core team of trainers\e Lead farmer graduates will be certified to conduct second round training following  year. Budget is minimal\f Six month incubation costed at $56 per month. 75 per district\g 10 day business plan preparation training\g 10 day business plan preparation trainingTable 11. Sub-component 2.2 Investment in farm commercializationDetailed CostsQuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)ExpenditureFinancing RuleUnit202020212022202320242025Total(US$)202020212022202320242025TotalAccount I. Investment Costs A. Feeder Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance 1. Rehabilitation Design and Supervision /a Km120120120120120-6006808282828282-408CWIFAD_LOAN ( 50% ), BENEF ( 10% )Feeder roads rehabilitation works /b Km-1201201201201206008,500-1,0201,0201,0201,0201,0205,100CWIFAD_LOAN ( 50% ), BENEF ( 10% )Construction of structures/crossings /c number-15-15-1545500-8-8-823CWIFAD_LOAN ( 50% ), BENEF ( 10% )Subtotal 821,1091,1021,1091,1021,0285,5312. Maintenance Road maintenance - groups set up Km-102010101060150-232229CWIFAD_LOAN ( 60% ), BENEF ( 40% )Routine maintenance Km-1201201201201206002,000-2402402402402401,200CWIFAD_LOAN ( 60% ), BENEF ( 40% )Periodic maintenance (every 3 years for  rehabilitation) Km---1201201203604,000---4804804801,440CWIFAD_LOAN ( 60% ), BENEF ( 40% )Subtotal -2422437227227222,649Subtotal 821,3511,3451,8311,8231,7498,180B. Agrarian Service Centres and Agrarian Banks 1. Strengthening of Agrarian Service Centres ASC strengthening and knowledge hub /d number101010---3080,000800800800---2,400TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 90% )Agrarian service centre capacity development number55555-252,0001010101010-50TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 80% )Review of ASCs and Agrarian Rural Banks /e unit1-----110,00010-----10TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )MIS system investments /f number-5555-203,800-19191919-76EQUIPIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Training for bank staff number-5555-2040,000-200200200200-800TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 80% )Technical assistance: Rural finance training person/mth-6622-161,200-7722-19TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 8201,0361,036231231-3,3552. Construction of market centres and facilities Design and Supervision lumpsum332221131,00033222113TA_STUDIESIFAD_GRANT ( 60% ), PRIVATE ( 10% ), IFAD_LOAN ( 30% )Construction of local markets + collection points number-21111630,000-6030303030180CWIFAD_GRANT ( 60% ), PRIVATE ( 10% ), IFAD_LOAN ( 30% )Construction of farmer's markets number-1111-4168,000-168168168168-672CWIFAD_GRANT ( 60% ), PRIVATE ( 10% ), IFAD_LOAN ( 30% )Multi stakeholder platforms for value chain actors number-444442020,000-8080808080400CWIFAD_GRANT ( 40% ), PRIVATE ( 20% ), BENEF ( 20% )Subtotal 33112802802801111,265Subtotal 8231,3471,3165115111114,620C. Market Infrastructure and Stakeholder Platforms 1. Agri- Processing and value adding business number-50505050-2001,700-85858585-340GRANTSIFAD_LOAN ( 60% ), BENEF ( 30% ), PRIVATE ( 10% )2. 4-P business models number-222221055,000-110110110110110550GRANTSIFAD_LOAN ( 60% ), BENEF ( 30% ), PRIVATE ( 10% )3. Social enterprise business models number-222221056,000-112112112112112560GRANTSIFAD_LOAN ( 60% ), BENEF ( 30% ), PRIVATE ( 10% )Subtotal -3073073073072221,450D. Youth and Women's Enteprises 1. Local nurseries (1 plan 25,000 plants SKR 100 per plant) number-4332-1214,000-56424228-168GRANTSIFAD_LOAN ( 60% ), BENEF ( 30% ), PRIVATE ( 10% )2. Agri-machinery and equipment for hire service providers 8/ /g number-25252525251255,600-140140140140140700GRANTSIFAD_LOAN ( 80% ), BENEF ( 10% ), PRIVATE ( 10% )3. Protected agriculture intervention number-7510010050253502,500-18825025012563875GRANTSIFAD_LOAN ( 60% ), BENEF ( 30% ), PRIVATE ( 10% )4. Quality seed production number-1010101010505,600-5656565656280GRANTSIFAD_LOAN ( 60% ), BENEF ( 30% ), PRIVATE ( 10% )5. Aggregator business model for gherkin number-1111153,200-3333316GRANTSIFAD_LOAN ( 60% ), BENEF ( 30% ), PRIVATE ( 10% )6. Semi-intensive small scale dairy production 3 cows + shed number-30202020201105,600-168112112112112616GRANTSIFAD_LOAN ( 60% ), BENEF ( 30% ), PRIVATE ( 10% )7. Goat production 15-20 goats number-1010101010501,100-111111111155GRANTSIFAD_LOAN ( 60% ), BENEF ( 30% ), PRIVATE ( 10% )8. Commercial backyard poultry number-5050100100100400620-3131626262248GRANTSIFAD_LOAN ( 60% ), BENEF ( 30% ), PRIVATE ( 10% )Subtotal -6536456765374472,958E. Market, Weather and Climate Information Services: 1. Development of app & operationalisation /h lumpsum1-----1600,000600-----600TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 25% ), BENEF ( 25% ), PRIVATE ( 50% )Total 1,5053,6583,6133,3253,1792,52917,808 _________________________________\a Estimated at 8% (it shouldn't be more than 10%) of construction costs\b Average of 22 tanks per cascade. Each tank has 2 access roads of 2km each = 80 km per cascade\c an average of 20% of total road rehabilitation cost will be allocated to construct crossings\d Supported by IWMI & includes soil testing lab. & other equipment\e Overview assessment of the performance of ASCs and Agribanks\f Includes computer, printer, internet connection\g 2WT machinery and implements for land preparation, planting, transport etc.\h Development of an app for 50,000 farmers + micro insurance (farmer invests 25% project bears 25% and 50% subsidy by private sector) 
Continues next page 
Table 12. Component 3   Project management and coordinationDetailed CostsQuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)ExpenditureUnit202020212022202320242025Total(US$)202020212022202320242025TotalAccountFin. Rule I. Investment Costs A. Project Management Unit 1. PMU Equipment Computer and Printers set10-----101,60016-----16EQUIPIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Laptops set10-----101,50015-----15EQUIPIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Other office equipment set1-----120,00020-----20EQUIPIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Accounting software lumpsum1-----130,00030-----30EQUIPIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )MIS/M&E system upgrade lumpsum1-----120,00020-----20EQUIPIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 101-----1012. Vehicles unit4-----460,000240-----240VEHICIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )3. PMU Training /a lumpsum111111610,00010101010101060TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )4. PIM Manual /b lumpsum1-----110,00010-----10TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 3611010101010411B. M&E and Knowledge Management 1. Workshops/Forums for policy Engagement Start-Up Workshop (one in Colombo) number1-----120,00020-----20TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Sensitization and Education Workshops (Crosscutting themes) number6-----610,00060-----60TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Annual Stakeholders Planning/Review Workshop number11111165,00055555530TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 85555551102. Studies and Surveys Baseline/Annual Outcome/Impact Survey /5 /c number111112720,000202020202040140TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Backstocking missions number121221930,000306030606030270TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Midterm review number--1---1100,000--100---100TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Project completion report number-----11250,000-----250250TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Technical studies number112111710,00010102010101070TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )External audit /d number11111161,0001111116TA_STUDIESIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 619117191913318363. Knowledge Management Information and Communication Materials /e number111111610,00010101010101060TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Training Manuals set111---350,000505050---150TRAI_WKSHPSIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 606060101010210Subtotal 2061562361061063461,156C. Area and District Offices 1. Vehicles number2-----260,000120-----120VEHICIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )2. Motorbykes number18-----183,50063-----63VEHICIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )3. Computer & printers number14-----141,40020-----20EQUIPIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )4. Office equipment number6-----63,00018-----18EQUIPIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 221-----221Total Investment Costs 7881662461161163561,788 
Table 12. Component 3   Project management and coordination (continuation from previous page) 
II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries Project director person/mth121212121212721,500181818181818108SAL_DSAIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Senior finance/ admin specialist person/mth121212121212721,20014141414141486SAL_DSAIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Senior procurement specialist person/mth121212121212721,20014141414141486SAL_DSAIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Assistant finance person/mth121212121212721,00012121212121272SAL_DSAIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Assistant procurement person/mth1212121212127260077777743SAL_DSAIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Finance/ administration officers person/mth363636363636216600222222222222130SAL_DSAIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Monitoring and evaluation specialist person/mth121212121212721,20014141414141486SAL_DSAIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Drivers person/mth484848484848288400191919191919115SAL_DSAIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Office assistants person/mth24242424242414440010101010101058SAL_DSAIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Secretary person/mth1212121212127260077777743SAL_DSAIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 138138138138138138828B. Area and district offices Area Coordinators (NRM specialists): 2 Area coordinators - 1 per hub person/mth2424242424241441,000242424242424144SAL_DSAIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )M&E Assistants (1 per hab) person/mth24242424242414460014141414141486SAL_DSAIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Drivers (2) person/mth24242424242414440010101010101058SAL_DSAIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Office assistants(1 per District) person/mth727272727272432400292929292929173SAL_DSAIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 777777777777461C. Allowances Travel and allowances lumpsum111111650,000505050505050300SAL_DSAIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Honorarium to NSC participants lumpsum61212121266060047777436SAL_DSAIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 545757575754336D. Operation and Maintenance Vehicle operating costs unit4666663410,000406060606060340O_MIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Motor bike operating costs lumpsum0.68111115.6850,000345050505050284O_MIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Other equipment lumpsum0.68111115.6812,0008121212121268O_MIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Office premises and rents per office477777394,000162828282828156O_MIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Office operational expenses /f per office477777394,000162828282828156O_MIFAD_LOAN ( 100% )Subtotal 1141781781781781781,004Total Recurrent Costs 3834504504504504462,629Total 1,1706166965665668024,417_________________________________\a Covers APR retreats and international study tours.\b Includes Operations Manual, Financial and Administration Manual, M&E Manual and systems design.\c Survey may be grouped together to provide one comprehensive survey or study. Includes MTR.\d Costs covered by government with the exception of accommodation and tansport\e Includes production of material for broadcast (on TV and radio).\f Include maintenance, communications, stationary, legal fees etc. 
Sri Lanka
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience Project
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Document Date:
04/11/2019
Project No.
2000002583
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience (SARP) Project Design Report 
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Document Date: 11/10/2019  
Project No. 
0 
Annex 4:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
EFA SUMMARY 
1.  For the SARP Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA), 22 crop and activity models (Tables 1 to 22 in 
the  Appendix)  were  prepared  to  represent  targeted  activities  that  the  benefitted  HHs  would  be 
improving. In addition, 10 HH/farm models (Tables 23 to 32 in the Appendix) show how the improved 
activities within their production systems would develop beneficiaries and their HHs annual income. The 
analysis  was  prepared  using  FARMOD  software.  Model  summarized  results  (incremental  benefits) 
show that beneficiaries’ income would increase significantly (between 50 and 300 percent) as a result 
of  the  proposed  interventions.  The  overall  Economic  Rate  of  Return  (ERR)  of  the  Programme  was 
estimated  at  18.6  percent  (base  case  scenario)  which  is  significantly  above  the  opportunity  cost  of 
capital in Sri Lanka estimated at 10 percent. The following Tables present the logic behind the analysis. 
1 
A)MARKETING  Farm Model 1  Farm Model 2  Farm Model 3  Farm Model 4  Farm Model 5  Farm Model 6  Farm Model 7  Farm Model 8  Farm Model 9  Farm Model 10  Rice harvesting service Agro-service Youth EnterpriseMilk Chilling CenterPY1(80)(68)(25)(85)(71)(15)(28)(108)1975(695)(1,052)(90)PY2607328(88)154214136201792481,673119PY3115105592283088450118205541845316201PY411510568268308103531182051,0411,1472,239201PY511510568350308103541182051,5411,1472,095201PY615710568444308103551182051,5411,1472,095201PY715710568444308103551182051,5412,5203,764470PY815710568444308103551182051,5412,5213,764470PY915710568444308103551182051,5412,4384,166470PY1015710568444308103551182051,5419764,1664709587084542,5222,1546855757329,4869,4869,42014,6362,5315,3223,9332,52214,01111,9673,8063,1944,06752,70052,70052,33381,31114,061>100%>100%>100%>100%>100%>100%>100%75%--96%>100%>100%SERVICES PROVIDERSAgro Service models'net incremental benefits                 ('000 LKR)Model'net incremental benefits              ('000 LKR)PRODUCTIONFarm models'net incremental benefits ('000 LKR) FIRR (after financing)  NPV@10%('000 LKR)  NPV @10% (USD) FINANCIAL ANALYSIS 
Note: The 10 % discount rate was selected following IFAD guidelines that recommend the use of the real interest the 
GoSL pays on their 10-year Bonds1. 
1 Source: https://Investing.com/rates.bonds/sri-lanka-10-year 
2 
B) groupsHouseholdsInvestments for Climate Resilience & Incl. Value ChainsA framework for government engagement with civil society to deliver essential public services to the rural population of the Dry Zone will be developed.No. of households reporting improved access to water resources for productive and domestic use4.9Cost per beneficiaryAdoption rates68%73.282Base costsPMU         182,000 people40,000 Components and Cost (USD million)Climate resilient climate change and value chain investments made Capacity for Climate Resilience & Incl. Value Chains11.7 MClimate resilient and value chain  capacity  built  Outcomes and IndicatorsNo. of WUAs and POs  supported to manage climate-related risks. No. of POs  with capacity to managing group enterprises in a profitable               1,025                  451               2,050 USD x HHTOTAL PROJECT COSTS (in million USD)PROJECT COSTS AND INDICATORS FOR LOGFRAMEBeneficiariesProject management and coordination65.4 M4.9 MSARP will be fully integrated within the GoSL administration, and the project implementation will capitalize on existing government agencies at all levels USD x personC) Input pricesFINANCIALAv. Incremental Yields (%)Price (in LKR/kg)Output MAIN ASSUMPTIONS & SHADOW PRICES1Price (LKR/kg)508584120013015ECONOMICOfficial Exchange rate (OER)Input pricesFertilizer (Urea)Pesticides (Kieserite)FINANCIALCow PeaOnionsAv. Incremental Yields (%)Price (in LKR/kg)4654Output Rice SeedsRural wage per dayDiesel per literDiscount rate (opportunity cost of capital)25%22%100%13%10%20%Paddy RiceMaizeMilkGreen ChiliElectricity (per KWH)652001781500.1810%0.1610%0.9010.751ECONOMICOfficial Exchange rate (OER)Shadow Exchange rate (SER)Discount rate (opportunity cost of capital)Social Discount rateOutput conversion factorInput Conversion factorStandard Conversion Factor Labour Conversion factor 
3 
D) BENEFICIARIES, ADOPTION RATES AND PHASING (No of farms or enterprises)Adoption ratesPY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7Total68%Farm Mod 1 Commercial (1.25 ha)-1,0001,500800200003,500Adjusted (adoption rate)-7001,050560140002,45070%Medium Farm Mod 2 (0.8 ha)03,0004,0005,0006,5006,000024,500Adjusted (adoption rate)02,1002,8003,5004,5504,200017,15070%Small Farm Mod 3 Rainfed (0.8 ha)01,0001,0002,0002,0001,00007,000Adjusted (adoption rate)07007001,4001,40070004,90070%Milk Farm Mod 4 (4 cows)033032032032032001,610Adjusted (adoption rate)023122422422422401,12770%Goat Farm Mod 5 (22 head)031031031031031001,550Adjusted (adoption rate)021721721721721701,08570%Poultry Farm Mod 6050501001001000400Adjusted (adoption rate)03535707070028070%Home Garden Farm Mod 701,8902,3652,6502,9903,250013,145Adjusted (adoption rate)01,1341,4191,5901,7941,95007,88760%Rice Seed Farm Mod 801010101010050Adjusted (adoption rate)07777703570%Protected Agriculture Farm Mod 908010010050220352Adjusted (adoption rate)05670703515024670%Nursery Farm Mod 10054330015Adjusted (adoption rate)0322200960%Rice harvesting service01818181818090100%Agro-Service Coop Youth01111105100%Milk Chilling center 01741741448250062490%Adjusted (adoption rate)015715713074450562 
4 
E) OVERALL PROJECT AGGREGATIONPY100000348250190788(788)PY289429951(943)3661,2981001,764(2,707)PY31,5271,2901,1732,463(936)3561,2921131,761(2,697)PY44,4271,3143,4244,738(311)2621,237921,591(1,902)PY57,2591,2625,5396,8014582101,229921,531(1,073)PY69,6341,0997,1778,2761,3581641,1491301,443(85)PY711,4221518,2978,4482,9740530532,921PY812,049678,7008,7673,2820530533,229PY912,071328,7128,7443,3270530533,274PY1012,07898,7178,7263,3520530533,299PY1112,07898,7178,7263,3520530533,299PY1212,07898,7178,7263,3520530533,299PY1312,07898,7178,7263,3520530533,299PY1412,07898,7178,7263,3520530533,299PY1512,07898,7178,7263,3520530533,299PY1612,07898,7178,7263,3520530533,299PY1712,07898,7178,7263,3520530533,299PY1812,07898,7178,7263,3520530533,299PY1912,07898,7178,7263,3520530533,299PY2012,07898,7178,7263,3520530533,299NPV@ 10 %  (LKR M)6,488NPV@ 10 % ('000 USD)36,04418.6%Economic Comp. 3 Costs         (LKR M)NET INCREMENTAL BENEFITS (FROM BENEFICIARIES)ECONOMIC ANALYSISCash Flow (LKR M)NET INCREMENTAL COSTSEIRRTotal Incremental Costs          (LKR M)Net Value of Production (LKR M)Beneficiaries' Investments (LKR M)Beneficiaries' Operating Costs          (LKR M)Total Costs at Beneficiaries Level (LKR M)Total Net Incremental Benefits          (LKR M)Economic Comp. 2 Costs            (LKR M)Economic Comp. 1 Costs                    (LKR M)F) ∆%IRRNPV (USD M)19%36.04             -10%15%20.29             -20%12%5.73               10%18%33.48             20%17%30.91             16%27.04             15%19.17             10%18%33.01             20%17%30.58             -10%17%28.98             -20%16%22.45             10%0.60               SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS (SA)Project costsProject costsInput pricesInput prices1 year lag in ben.2 years lag in ben.Link with the risk matrixBase scenarioCombination of risks affecting output prices and/or yieldsIncrease of construction material pricesRisks affecting  low implementation capacity Market price fluctuationsExtension service outreach is limited, low uptake of good practices, Market price fluctuationsOutput pricesOutput pricesAdoption ratesAdoption ratesOutput prices -20% &                                                     Project costs +20% 
I. BENEFITS AND BENEFICIARIES 
A. Benefits 
2.  Direct benefits would reach to about 40,000 smallholder farmers. The goal of SARP is to contribute 
to Sri Lanka’s smallholder poverty reduction and food security in the Dry Zone region. The outcome for 
the direct beneficiaries will be: a) 260 water tanks rehabilitated increasing their water holding capacity 
for  water  supply  and  irrigation  addressing  the  main  challenges  posed  by  the  Dry  Zone  environment 
through  an  integrated,  area  based  approach;  b)  production  and  productivity  increases  from  their 
resources  (water,  land  and  labour);  c)  reduced  production  losses  due  to  climate-related  negative 
events; d) enhanced engagement and sustainable partnerships with the private sector, and access to 
services (e.g. technical assistance, mechanization, post-harvesting, marketing, etc.); e) added value to 
agricultural production by developing processes including produce aggregation, conditioning, grading, 
drying,  cooling,  and  storage;  and  f)  enhanced  farmers’  entrepreneurial  and  business  capacity.  As  a 
result of proposed project interventions, and based on the results achieved by other similar projects in 
the country2, it is estimated that about 80 percent of the beneficiaries will improve their food security, 
72  percent  will  have  increased  their  resilience,  and  they  will  benefit  from  an  average  incremental 
annual  income  of  more  than  100  percent.  It  is  also  expected  that  beneficiaries  will  increase  their 
productivity by around 75 percent, due to the adoption of improved and climate smart farm practices. 
3. 
Indirect benefits will also arise in the Programme areas from increased economic activities, which will 
stimulate  rural  employment  and,  through  multiplier  effects,  benefits  will  reach  many  more  people 
beyond  the  direct  beneficiaries.  Numerous  impact  assessment  studies  in  Sri  Lanka  and  throughout 
Asia,  point  towards  the  cost-effectiveness  of  complementary  interventions  such  as  the  upgrading  of 
600 km of rural roads, improving extension services of Agrarian Service Centers, facilitating access to 
rural credit through  Agrarian  Banks, and construction  of market facilities  enhancing market linkages, 
which  will  benefit  many  poor  people  living  in  remote  areas  by  providing  new  commercialization 
opportunities. For example, the improvement to rural roads is expected to have a significant impact on 
the reduction of transport costs and improved access to social services. Complementary interventions 
focusing on market information and market development, including forward contracts, plus improving 
produce storage facilities, product quality and reducing post-harvest losses, will all be contributing for 
the  neighboring  farmers  to  be  directly  benefitted.  Further  indirect  benefits  will  be  generated  through 
the  Programme-supported  national  policy  engagement  on  women  and  youth  development  and  other 
key policy issues such as those related to the post-harvest, value addition and markets of agricultural 
products. Information support on commodity prices and access to agricultural credit will be necessary 
conditions and become instrumental for poor farmers to benefit from the new market opportunities. 
2 Based on assessments of the performance of the UNDP, WFP and IFAD-SAP projects currently under implementation  
5 
G) PROJECT's NET BENEFITS AND INCREMENTAL COSTSNPV10%6,488 LKR M (4,000)(2,000)02,0004,0006,0008,000PY1PY2PY3PY4PY5PY6PY7PY8PY9PY10PY11PY12PY13PY14PY15PY16PY17PY18PY19PY20Total Net Incremental Benefits          (LKR M)Total Incremental Costs          (LKR M)Cash Flow (LKR M) 
B. Beneficiaries 
4.  The  primary  beneficiaries  to  be  covered  by  SARP  will  be  approximately  40,000  smallholder 
households, and other  value chain  actors (traders, transporters  and aggregators) participating  in the 
supported  value  chains  (of  which  at  least  45  percent  women  and  25  percent  youth).  Assuming  an 
average  household  size  of  4.5  people,  total  beneficiaries  would  be  about  180,000  people3.    The 
number of households directly benefiting from different project activities are given in the table below. 
Table 1: Total Household Beneficiaries 
3 The farm families can be divided into three categories of households – the extreme poor, poor with potential to sell in local 
markets and more commercially oriented smallholder farmers. 
6 
YearsUnit123456TotalHousehold water harvesting, irrigation and soil conservationFarm pond construction HH130     130     -       -     -     -     260               Micro-irrigation demonstrationHH-      160     120      100    80      20      480               Low cost irrigation systems HH-      1,000  2,000   2,000 2,000 1,000 8,000            Soil conservation (bund) HH-      2,950  3,950   4,950 5,950 500    18,300          27,040          Household resilience and nutritionHome gardensHH-      400     500      600    350    350    2,200            Home gardens + micro irrigation for 0.25 acHH-      50       50        50      50      50      250               Nutritive rich home gardensHH-      40       20        20      20      20      120               Fingerlings Persons-      300     450      450    450    450    2,100            Aquaculture Persons-      150     200      200    200    200    950               Semi-intensive small scale dairy farmingPersons-      300     300      300    300    300    1,500            Semi-intensive goat productionPersons-      300     300      300    300    300    1,500            Income generating enterprisesPersons-      200     200      160    80      40      680               9,300            Youth and women enterprisesPost harvest and value additionPersons -      50       50        50      50      -     200               Local nurseries Persons -      4         3          3        2        -     12                 Agri-machinery and equipment for hire service providers Persons -      25       25        25      25      25      125               Protected agriculture interventionPersons -      75       100      100    50      25      350               Quality seed productionPersons -      10       10        10      10      10      50                 Aggregator business model for gherkin Persons -      1         1          1        1        1        5                   Semi-intensive dairy production 3 cows + shedPersons -      30       20        20      20      20      110               Goat production 15-20 goatsPersons -      10       10        10      10      10      50                 Backyard poultryPersons -      50       50        100    100    100    400               1,302            Climate resilient farming practicesCommercial farmer model HH-      1,000  1,500   800    200    -     3,500            Market led farmer model HH-      3,000  4,000   5,000 6,500 6,000 24,500          Rainfed farmer model HH-      1,000  1,000   2,000 2,000 1,000 7,000            35,000          Total farm householdsHH35,000          of which hh in command areaHH13,000          of which hh in upstream areasHH18,300          of which hh with irrigationHH8,740            of which have homestead activitiesHH2,570             of which have IGAspersons6,730            other youth/ gender activitiespersons1,302            Other hh (WFP/UNDP)HH16,182          Total hhwithin catchment areas (command area + upstream)HH31,300          outside catchment areasHH8,700            Total direct beneficiariesHH40,000          other hh from WFP/UNDPHH16,182          Total beneficiary hh40,000           
A. Main Assumptions 
II. FINANCIAL ANALYSIS 
5.  The  objectives  of  the  financial  analysis  are  to:  (i)  evaluate  the  viability  of  the  improved  production 
technologies  and  marketing  interventions  to  be  demonstrated,  extended  and  adopted,  as  well  as  for 
various other livelihood options to be developed by targeted groups of FOs; (ii) evaluate the impact of 
these  improvements  on  the  poverty  levels  of  adopting  HHs,  specifically  on  their  income  level 
improvements; (iii) assess the incremental production that would result from the project interventions; 
and  (iv) provide a basis for the economic analysis of the project. The financial analysis was based on 
prices and costs collected by the design mission during its field work in June 2019.  
6.  The analysis was based on a set of representative crop, livestock, service provision and post-harvest 
activity models representing HHs and beneficiaries’ joint activities that are foreseen to be supported by 
the  SARP.  Models  include  both  ‘without  project’  (WoP)  and  ‘with  project’  (WP)  scenarios.  They 
present  annual  budgets  for  each  crop  or  activity,  including  main  parameters,  annual  gross  and  net 
revenues, and investment and operating costs in the WoP and WP interventions. Through enhanced 
water availability, and strengthening both agricultural production and marketing, the SARP is expected 
to  impact  on  HH  income  by  increasing  production  through  (i)  higher  yields  per  unit  of  land,  and  per 
quantity  of  water  used;  (ii)  increased  and  diversified  cropped  areas;  (iii)  irrigation  development;  (iv) 
technical assistance and other production support services; (vi) enhanced linkages with markets; and 
ultimately (v) value addition and higher prices to be obtained by farmers from their livelihood activities.  
B. Crop models and yields 
7.  The  expected  impact  of  the  project  interventions  on  the  average  yields  of  different  crops  is 
summarized  in  Table  2.  Crop  yield  increases  are  highly  conservative  averaging  22  percent.  For 
example, the productivity of paddy cultivation is currently about 4Mt/Ha which is below par comparing 
to other countries in the region where it averages around 9-10 Mt/Ha. 
Table 2: Expected Programme impact on yields (tons/acre) 
Without 
programme 
With 
programme 
% 
increase 
Irrigated 
Maha 
Paddy 
Red Onion 
Yala 
Paddy (irrigated) 
Maize 
Black gram 
Green Chilli 
Big Onion 
Red Onion 
2.60 
6.20 
2.8 
2.1 
0.46 
4.50 
6.50 
4.70 
24% 
20% 
27% 
24% 
21% 
13% 
20% 
21% 
2.10 
5.16 
2.20 
1.70 
0.38 
4.00 
5.40 
3.90 
7 
Rainfed 
Maha 
Paddy 
Maize 
Cowpea 
Green Chilli 
Yala 
Paddy (rainfed) 
Cowpea 
Livestock 
1.36 
1.60 
0.254 
0.95 
0.85 
0.28 
1.70 
1.90 
0.280 
1.10 
1.2 
0.35 
Traditional milking cows(3) 
900 lt 
1,800 lt 
Improved milking cows(4) 
5,040 lt 
14,640 lt 
Traditional goats 
80 lt 
240 lt 
25% 
19% 
10% 
16% 
41% 
25% 
100% 
190% 
200% 
Backyard poultry 
1,200 eggs 
3,800 eggs 
216% 
C. Farm models 
8.  These  models  were  developed  to  represent  the  traditional  farming  production  systems  in  targeted 
areas to show how average income would evolve as a result of the diverse and complementary project 
interventions.  The  demand  driven  project  approach  will  target  especially  on  rice  production  (as 
consumer of more than 90 percent of available  water) and on livestock production, the second main 
livelihood activities in the project areas production systems. In addition, demand will define many other 
crop,  post-harvest,  and  value  addition  activities  to  be  developed,  aiming  to  diversify  production  to 
higher value crops (HVCs). To assess the expected results, the focus was on analyzing the cases of: 
(i) enhanced access to irrigation water and the adoption of climate smart technologies (CSA) for rice 
and  other  crops,  cropping  intensification,  and  the  diversification  to  HVCs,  (ii)  improved  livestock 
production practices (through the introduction of improved breeds, better feeding practices and access 
to animal health services) leading to  higher  productivity;  and (iii) support  interventions for enhancing 
services  provision  (improved  seed  production,  mechanization,  etc.),  as  well  as  for  post-harvest 
support linking farmers with buyers (or private aggregators).  
9.  For the EFA, 22 crop or activity models (Tables 1 to 22 in the Appendix) were prepared to represent 
targeted activities that the HHs would be improving. In addition, 10 HH/farm models (Tables 23 to 32 
in  the  Appendix)  show  how  the  promoted  activities  within  their  production  systems  would  improve 
beneficiaries and HH annual income. Models allow the quantification of the expected results from the 
project interventions, including the rehabilitation of the water storage tanks and the irrigation networks, 
enhancing access to water, as well as the other support services and the post-production investments. 
Some models represent the support for solutions providing HH with small irrigation for 0.20 to 0.25 ha 
from  wells  or  small  water  structures  for  enhancing  production  of  home  gardens  and  incorporating 
HVCs. The following Table 3 summarizes the main indicators for the models adopting the Programme 
improvements, quantifying the expected financial effect on beneficiaries. 
8 
Table 3: Financial impact of typical HH benefitted by SARP (in LKR) 
10.  The  “without  project”  column  in  the  detailed  models  presented  in  the  Appendix  -  Tables  1  to  36 
represents the traditional practices and results observed from HHs in the SARP production areas. The 
WoP yields are in line with the current averages, and the resulting returns to the HH families are low. 
They  represent  the  current  situation  which  is  assumed  to  remain  unchanged  in  the  WoP  scenario. 
Beneficiary farmers will be reached through  extension agents using  the FFS approach  to  induce the 
adoption  of  small  but  effective  changes  in  their  production  systems,  including  small  investments 
supported  by  project  grants.  Model  summarized  results  (incremental  benefits)  show  that  HHs’  net 
income would increase significantly (from 50 to 300 percent) as a result of the planned interventions.  
11.  The  farm  models  enable  estimates  to  have  been  made  for  the  following  indicators:  the  expected 
increase in HH net benefits, the Financial Internal Rates of Return (FIRR) and the Net Present Values 
(NPV). The FIRR in all cases are in excess of 100 percent, the result of the use of project grants (seed 
and  tools)  supporting  the  farm  improvements  that  vary  between  the  equivalent  to  USD40  for  the 
commercial  oriented  beneficiaries  (Model  1,  Table  23  in  the  Appendix),  and  USD80  per  farm for  the 
subsistence  the  farmers  (Model  3,  Table  25).  Models  4  to  6  (Tables  26  to  28)  show  stronger 
Programme  support  targeting  women  and  youth  beneficiaries  where  grants  vary  from  USD560  to 
USD660. Model 9 (Table 29) represent HHs supported for creating small ponds or other solutions in 
home gardens to capture water from intense rainfall, and adoptiing low-cost drip irrigation technologies 
that are easy to operate and maintain. In this case a grant of USD400 was included. 
12.  Models  8  to  10  (Tables  30  to  32  in  Appendix)  represent  the  cases  of  groups  to  be  strengthened  or 
formed with adequate technical support from the project. Benefits are significantly higher because they 
represent  new  activities  to  be  undertaken  mostly  by  women  and  youth.  The  models  show  positive 
results  for  most  of  the  alternative  crop  and  livestock  activities  suggesting  significant  potential  for 
creating  higher  opportunities  for  targeted  HHs,  confirming  that  the  proposed  interventions  and 
production packages will be financially  attractive for the participants to  be adopted. Expected results 
9 
ModelValue ofCosts excl.HH netFamily labourReturns perIncrementalFIRR   |productionfamily labour benefitsuse (pers./days)family labourfamily benefits|   NPV1.Commercial Farmer (1.25 ha)WoP335,34059,551275,7891042,657> 100%WP528,12094,892433,2281353,207157%957,6202. Small with market potencial (0.8 ha)WoP158,40038,519119,881402,997> 100%WP277,35052,859224,491583,887187%708,0463. Subsistence Farmer (0.5 ha)WoP132,07530,170101,905362,854> 100%WP209,31039,375169,935533,218167%454,1304. Livestock Farmer (9 head, 4 milking)WoP392,600193,715198,885912,186> 100%WP1,031,600388,645642,9553212,005323%2,695,1705. Goat rearing (22 head) WoP6,00006,00051,200> 100%WP360,80046,305314,4951821,7285242%2,153,7076. Backyard poultry (landless)WoP25,1251,50023,625151,575> 100%WP151,00024,700126,300911,388535%685,7757. Home gardenWoP40,6987,34533,353112,991> 100%WP120,00331,48388,520273,262265%375,0418. Rice seed productionWoP241,86553,851188,014474,017> 100%WP397,29091,078306,212674,584163%731,7919. Protected AgricultureWoP5,0253004,72531,575> 100%WP523,190167,188356,002933,8467534%2,264,37610. Nursery (mango seedlings)WoP5,0253004,72531,575> 100%WP1,915,690250,3601,545,3305143,00632705%9,486,248 
also show that the HHs will have the capacity to cover the necessary incremental operating costs and 
the repayment of commercial Bank loans required for upgrading their traditional production practices. 
D. Service provider models 
13.  Table 33 in the Appendix show the case of a group of 3 to 5 youth starting a rice harvesting enterprise 
with one combine harvester for providing this service to around 300 farmers; and Table 34 present an 
agro-service  cooperative  youth  enterprise  developing  several  production  support  services  necessary 
in their areas. The main equipment, facilities and income generating sources in this case would be a 
combined  harvester,  two  four  wheel  tractors  (4WTs),  two  rice  trans-planters  and  an  integrated  rice 
processing  mill.  Models  also  include  operating  costs  and  financing  (matching  grants  and  loans) 
showing that the investment is financially feasible with FIRR of 96% and more than 100% (after grants 
and  debt  service),  which  in  addition,  will  allow  around  500  farmers  to  reduce  costs  of  production, 
increase yields and hence, improve their HHs income. 
14.  Table 35 in the Appendix presents a representative milk collection and cooling center for groups of 40 
–  60  livestock  farmers  establishing  milk  societies  including  facilities  for  handling  600,000  liters  per 
year.  Uplifting  of  the  milk  quality  by  issuing  milk  analyses  to  the  milk  collecting  centers  as  well  as 
veterinary services will allow small dairy farmers to handle and sell their milk to processing plants at 
higher prices. These models are examples of activities to be supported by SARP both for supportive 
machinery service providers and for developing marketing facilities for rice, milk and other products.  
15.  Net  income cash flows  and the net present  value indicators are shown in the  Summary Table  A.  All 
farm  system  types  and  support  activities  examined  were  found  financially  viable.  Returns  to  family-
labour  for  each model  were  shown  to  be  considerably  above  the  daily  wage  thus  providing  a  sound 
incentive  for  household  production  as  well  as  an  argument  against  outmigration  of  labour.  It  is 
estimated that the total days worked on the project area would increase from 1.3 million person days 
to 2.4 million, and on average, returns per family day worked would increase from LKR 2,840 to LKR 
3,350. 
III. ECONOMIC ANALYSIS 
16.  The estimation of the likely economic impact of the Programme interventions was done considering a 
20 year period during which SARP will generate benefits, including the 6-year implementation period. 
Financial prices have been converted to economic by applying a standard conversion factor (SCF) of 
0.9. For unskilled labour a conversion factor (CF) of 0.75 has been used in line with prevailing rates of 
rural  unemployment  among  young  people4.  All  models  are  expressed  in  2019  constant  prices.  The 
analysis builds on  primary  data collected  by  the  design team during the design  mission  in June-July 
2019  provided  by  the  GoSL,  and  derived  from  other  on-going  IFAD  projects  in  the  country. 
Conservative  assumptions  and  parameters  have  been  applied,  in  order  to  avoid  over-estimation  of 
benefits and provide realistic results. 
17.  Economic benefits at crop/activity and HH levels were built by taking into account the direct economic 
results  per  type  of  intervention  or  activities,  and  aggregated  according  to  the  project  targets  and 
expected  adoption  rates.  The  Appendix  Tables  provide  detailed  financial  budgets  and  results 
indicators for most of the foreseen  activities including both WoP and WP scenarios. For each model 
the net cash flow and overall net income was estimated. For the overall Programme the ERR and the 
NPV  using  10  percent  as  discount  rate  are  also  presented  in  Table  36  in  the  Appendix.  The  10% 
4 Youth unemployment rate in Sri Lanka decreased to 19.60% in the 3rd quarter of 2018 from 22.50% in the 
2nd quarter of 2018. It averaged 24.71% for 1992 - 2018 (https://tradingeconomics.com/sri-
lanka/youth-unemployment-rate). 
10 
discount rate was selected following IFAD guidelines that recommend the use of the real interest the 
GoSL pays on 10-year Bonds5. 
TABLE 4 PARTICIPATING FARMS AND FOs ADOPTING SARP IMPROVEMENTS (In Units) 
18.  The overall Economic Rate of Return (ERR) of the Programme was estimated at 18.6 percent (base 
case scenario) which is significantly above the opportunity cost of capital in Sri Lanka estimated at 10 
percent.  It  is  emphasized  that  the  computed  ERR  is  realistic  because  it  has  been  conservatively 
estimated considering only the direct beneficiaries. The analysis only considered the economic benefits 
at farm-gate and group of beneficiaries (including some post-harvest activities in the value chain). Most 
of  the  benefits  to  upstream  and  downstream  actors  in  the  value  chain  from  increased  production, 
enhanced  quality  of  products,  higher  trade  volumes,  and  value  adding  opportunities  created  beyond 
those  few  quantified  for  the  analysis,  have  not  been  considered  due  to  estimation  difficulties.  The 
economic Net Present Value (NPV) was estimated at SLR 6.5 billion (equivalent to USD 36 million) with 
the benefit stream based only on the quantified benefits.  
IV. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS 
19.  Sensitivity of the expected impact to major risks were tested.  
 
 
If  the  Programme  investments  would  be  higher  by  20  percent,  the  ERR  would  drop  to  17 
percent;  
If  all  agricultural  output  prices  would  drop  by  20  percent,  the  ERR  would  decrease  to  12 
percent;  
5 Source: https://Investing.com/rates.bonds/sri-lanka-10-year 
11 
Project Year1234567 to 20Participating Farm Model 1: Commercial farmer (1.25 ha)-7001,7502,3102,4502,4502,450Farm Model 2: Medium market led (minor irrigation) 0.8 ha-2,1004,9008,40012,95017,15017,150Farm Model 3: Small rain fed  (supplementary irrigation) 0.5 ha-7001,4002,8004,2004,9004,900Farm Model 4: Improved milk production (9 head, 4 milking cows)-2314556799031,1271,127Farm Model 5: Goat rearing (22 head)-2174346518681,0851,085Farm Model 6: Backyard poultry-3570140210280280Farm Model 7: Home gardens-1,1332,5524,1415,9357,8897,889Farm Model 8: Rice seed production (youth and women group)-71421283535Farm Model 9: Protected agriculture (red bell pepper in 100 sq mt polytunnel) (youth and women group)-54124194229245245Farm Model 10: Mango seedlings nursery (youth and women group)-357999Milk collection center (180,000 lt/year)-157314444518564564Rice harvesting service providers-183654729090Agro Service Cooperative Youth Enterprises at Cluster Villages-123455TOTAL-5,35612,05619,84428,37635,82935,829 
 
 
 
If  both  previously  named  events  would  occur  simultaneously  (investment  costs  up  by  20 
percent and agricultural output prices down by 20 percent), the ERR would then drop to 10 
percent; 
If implementation delays would determine 1 or 2 years delay in showing benefits, the ERR 
would decrease to 16% and 15% respectively; 
If  adoption  rates  would  drop  by  10%  or  20%,  the  ERR  would  drop  to  17%  and  16% 
respectively. 
20.  Summarizing,  the  proposed  Project  will  increase  the  beneficiaries’  family  income  by  at  least  50 
percent and up to three fold their current income. The overall investment would yield an ERR of 18.6 
percent  assuming  the  targeted  beneficiaries  would  adopt  the  proposed  climate  smart  agricultural 
and  climate  resilient  practices  to  be  promoted,  assuming  an  adoption  rate  of  about  70  percent. 
These  positive  results  are  considered  strong  as  shown  in  the  sensitivity  analysis  against  adverse 
situations as cost over-runs, reduction of prices for the agricultural products, also in the case of both 
adverse  events  occurring  simultaneously,  delays  in  attaining  the  expected  benefits  and  even  with 
lower adoption rates.  
21.  The  follow-up  of  these  indicators  -  while  monitoring  performance  during  the  implementation  of  the 
Project - can provide valuable information for adjusting the strategy and interventions to improve the 
Project impact. 
12 
∆%IRRNPV (USD M)19%36.04             -10%15%20.29             -20%12%5.73               10%18%33.48             20%17%30.91             16%27.04             15%19.17             10%18%33.01             20%17%30.58             -10%17%28.98             -20%16%22.45             10%0.60               Output prices -20% &                                                     Project costs +20%Link with the risk matrixBase scenarioCombination of risks affecting output prices and/or yieldsIncrease of construction material pricesRisks affecting  low implementation capacity Market price fluctuationsExtension service outreach is limited, low uptake of good practices, Market price fluctuationsOutput pricesOutput pricesAdoption ratesAdoption ratesProject costsProject costsInput pricesInput prices1 year lag in ben.2 years lag in ben.SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS (SA) 
Appendix:  Economic and Financial Analysis Tables 
Table 1 
Paddy Irrigated Yala Crop Model 
Table 2 
Paddy Rain fed Yala Crop Model 
Table 3 
Maize Irrigated Yala Crop Model 
Table 4 
Black gram Irrigated Yala Crop Model 
Table 5 
Cow peas Rain fed Yala Crop Model 
Table 6 
Greenchili Irrigated Yala Crop Model 
Table 7 
Big onion Irrigated Yala Crop Model 
Table 8 
Red onion Irrigated Yala Crop Model 
Table 9 
Paddy Irrigated Maha  Crop Model 
Table 10  Paddy Rain fed Maha Crop Model 
Table 11  Maize rain fed Maha Crop Model 
Table 12  Cow peas Rain fed Maha Crop Model 
Table 13  Red onion Irrigated Maha Crop Model 
Table 14  Greenchili rainfed Maha Crop Model 
Table 15  Red bell Pepper in Polytunnel (100 m2) Crop Model 
Table 16  Mango seedlings nursery Crop Model 
Table 17 
Traditional Milking cows (6 head, 3 milking cows) Activity Model 
Table 18  Milking cows (9 head, 4 milking cows) Activity Model 
Table 19 
Traditional Goats rearing (15 head) Activity Model 
Table 20  Goats rearing (22 head) Activity Model 
Table 21  Backyard Traditional Poultry Activity Model 
Table 22  Backyard Poultry - New Semi-intensive Activity Model 
Table 23 
Farm Model 1: Commercial farmer (1.25 ha) 
Table 24 
Farm Model 2: Medium market led (minor irrigation) 0.8 ha 
Table 25 
Farm Model 3: Small rain fed  (supplementary irrigation) 0.5 ha 
Table 26 
Farm Model 4: Improved milk production (9 head, 4 milking cows) 
Table 27 
Farm Model 5: Goat rearing (22 head) 
Table 28 
Farm Model 6: Backyard poultry 
Table 29 
Farm Model 7: Home gardens  
Table 30 
Farm Model 8: Rice seed production (youth and women group) 
Table 31 
Farm Model 9: Protected agriculture (red bell pepper - youth and women group) 
Table 32 
Farm Model 10: Mango seedlings nursery (youth and women group) 
Table 33  Rice harvesting service providers Youth Model 
Table 34 
Farmer organization - Agro-service Center  
Table 35  Milk collection center (180,000 lt/year)  
Table 36  Project Summary 
13 
14 
Paddy Irrigated Yala Average Crop ModelTable 1Paddy Rain fed Yala Average Crop ModelTable 2FINANCIAL BUDGET ExistingFINANCIAL BUDGETExisting(In Local Per ac) TechnologyNew Technology(In Local Per ac)TechnologyNew Technology1 to 15123 to 151 to 15123 to 15Revenue 101,200101,200115,000128,800Revenue39,10039,10046,92055,200Input costs Input costsPloughing 7,4007,4007,4007,400Ploughing8,8008,8008,8008,800Rice seed 3,5843,5843,2642,880Levelling & broadcasting2,9502,9503,4503,950TSP 1,8001,8001,6501,500Rice seed3,3603,3603,1923,024Urea 5,0005,0004,5004,000TSP1,5001,5001,4001,300MOP 1,0501,050975900Urea4,0004,0003,5003,000Weedicides 3,5003,5003,2503,000MOP1,0001,000875750Pesticides 1,4001,4001,2501,100Weedicides1,9001,9001,8501,800Harvest (combine harvester) 8,0008,0008,0008,000Harvest (combine harvester)7,5007,5008,0008,500Transport produce to stores 1,2001,2001,3001,400Transport produce to stores700700750800Sub-total Input costs 32,93432,93431,58930,180Sub-total Input costs31,71031,71031,81731,924Income (Before Labor Costs) 68,26668,26683,41198,620Income (Before Labor Costs)7,3907,39015,10323,276Labor costs 22,80022,80024,90027,000Labor costs15,60015,60017,40019,200Income (After Labor Costs) 45,46645,46658,51171,620Land Preparation2,4002,4002,4002,400 Income (After Labor Costs)-8,210-8,210-2,2974,076YIELDS AND INPUTS Existing (Per ac) TechnologyNew TechnologyYIELDS AND INPUTSExistingUnit1 to 15123 to 15(Per ac)TechnologyNew TechnologyYields ton2.22.22.52.8Unit1 to 15123 to 15Operating Inputs Yieldston0.850.851.021.2Rice seed kg56565145OperatingTSP kg36363330InputsUrea kg1001009080Rice seedkg40403836MOP kg212119.518TSPkg30302826Labor Ureakg80807060Land Preparation md2222MOPkg202017.515Plastering bunds md4444LaborLeveling and seeding md334.56Land Preparationmd2222Fertilizing, & Agrochemicals aplication md2.52.52.52.5Plastering bundsmd3333Water managment md4.54.54.54.5Leveling and broadcastingmd445.57Harvesting & Postharvesting md333.253.5Agrochemicals applicationmd2222Harvesting and Postharvestingmd2222 
15 
Maize Irrigated Yala Average Crop Model Table 3Black gram Irrigated Yala Average Crop Model Crop ModelTable 4FINANCIAL BUDGET ExistingFINANCIAL BUDGETExisting(In Local Per ac) TechnologyNew Technology(In Local Per ac)TechnologyNew Technology1 to 15123 to 151 to 15123 to 15Revenue 91,80091,800102,600113,400Revenue67,26067,26074,34081,420Input costs Input costsPloughing 5,0005,0005,0005,000Ploughing7,8007,8007,8007,800Maize seed 6,1076,1075,6415,175Black gram seed3,1003,1003,1003,100Seeder 6,2506,2506,2506,250MOP--1,2502,500TSP 2,6502,6502,5252,400Pesticides2,3502,3502,3502,350Urea 5,8005,8005,4005,000Threshing3,8003,8003,8003,800MOP 2,2502,2502,1252,000Transport produce to stores240240240240Threshing 1,8001,8001,9002,000Sub-total Input costs17,29017,29018,54019,790Transport produce to stores 1,2001,2001,2001,200Income (Before Labor Costs)49,97049,97055,80061,630Sub-total Input costs 31,05731,05730,04129,025Labor costs39,60039,60040,20040,800Income (Before Labor Costs) 60,74460,74472,55984,375Income (After Labor Costs)10,37010,37015,60020,830Labor costs 51,60051,60052,20052,800 Income (After Labor Costs) 9,1449,14420,35931,575YIELDS AND INPUTSExisting (Per ac)TechnologyNew TechnologyYIELDS AND INPUTS ExistingUnit1 to 15123 to 15(Per ac) TechnologyNew TechnologyYieldston0.380.380.420.46Unit1 to 15123 to 15OperatingYields ton1.71.71.92.1InputsOperating Ploughinglumsum7,8007,8007,8007,800Inputs Black gram seedkg10101010Maize seed kg5.95.95.455MOPkg--2550Seeder unit0.250.250.250.25Pesticideslumsum2,3502,3502,3502,350TSP kg535350.548Threshinglumsum3,8003,8003,8003,800Urea kg116116108100Transport produce to storeslumsum240240240240MOP kg454542.540LaborLabor Land Preparationmd2222Land Preparation md3333Proparation of beds and ridgesmd5555Digging holes and seeding md6666Seedind (manual)md4444Weeding and earthing up md8888Weeding & earthing upmd8888Fertilizing, & Agrochemicals aplication md6666Water managmentmd3333Water managment md8888Harvesting & Postharvestingmd888.59Harvesting & Postharvesting md121212.513Threshing & processingmd2222Transpoet md1111 
16 
Cow peas Rain fed Yala Average Crop Model Table 5Greenchili Irrigated Yala Average Crop ModelTable 6FINANCIAL BUDGET ExistingFINANCIAL BUDGETExisting(In Local Per ac) TechnologyNew Technology(In Local Per ac)TechnologyNew Technology1 to 15123 to 151 to 15123 to 15Revenue 49,84049,84056,07062,300Revenue800,000800,000850,000900,000Input costs Input costsPloughing 5,3005,3005,3005,300Nursery Inputs1,2001,2001,2001,200Cowpea seed 3,6403,6403,6403,640Ploughing12,00012,00012,00012,000Liquid fertilizer 1,1001,1001,1001,100Greenchilli seed1,6001,6001,6001,600Buffaloes work 1,8001,8001,8001,800TSP5,0005,0005,0005,000Pesticides 1,0001,0001,0001,000Urea7,5007,5007,5007,500Transport produce to stores 240240240240Specific fertilizer mix19,00019,00019,00019,000Sub-total Input costs 13,08013,08013,08013,080Pesticides22,90022,90022,90022,900Income (Before Labor Costs) 36,76036,76042,99049,220Water Management16,00016,00016,00016,000Labor costs 28,20028,20028,80029,400Transport produce to stores15,00015,00015,00015,000Income (After Labor Costs) 8,5608,56014,19019,820Sub-total Input costs100,200100,200100,200100,200 Income (Before Labor Costs)699,800699,800749,800799,800YIELDS AND INPUTS ExistingLabor costs168,000168,000169,800171,600(Per ac) TechnologyNew TechnologyIncome (After Labor Costs)531,800531,800580,000628,200Unit1 to 15123 to 15 Yields ton0.280.280.3150.35Greenchili Irrigated Yala Average Crop ModelApril -- MarchOperating YIELDS AND INPUTSExistingInputs (Per ac)TechnologyNew TechnologyCowpea seed kg13131313Unit1 to 15123 to 15Liquid fertilizer kg1,1001,1001,1001,100Yieldston444.254.5Labor OperatingLand Preparation md1.51.51.51.5InputsSeedind (manual) md3333Greenchilli seedkg0.40.40.40.4Weeding & earthing md6666TSPkg100100100100Fertilizing, & Agrochemicals aplication md2222Ureakg150150150150Harvesting & Postharvesting md999.510Specific fertilizer mixLS19,00019,00019,00019,000Threshing & processing md1111LaborTranspoet  md1111Land Preparationmd6666Proparation of beds and ridgesmd15151515Nursery Preparationmd5555Transplantingmd9999Fertilizing, & Agrochemicals aplicationmd24242424Weeding & earthing upmd23232323Water managmentmd22222222Harvesting & Postharvestingmd353536.538Transportmd1111 
17 
Big onion Irrigated Yala Average Crop Model Table 7Red onion Irrigated Yala Average Crop ModelTable 8FINANCIAL BUDGET ExistingFINANCIAL BUDGETExisting(In Local Per ac) TechnologyNew Technology(In Local Per ac)TechnologyNew Technology1 to 15123 to 151 to 15123 to 15Revenue 313,200313,200348,000377,000Revenue655,200655,200722,400789,600Input costs Input costsNursery Inputs 2,1002,1002,1002,100Ploughing3,2003,2003,2003,200Ploughing 12,00012,00012,00012,000Red onion seed132,921132,921132,921132,921Bigg Onion seed 36,19036,19036,19036,190TSP2,9002,9002,9002,900TSP 5,0005,0005,0005,000Urea3,0003,0003,0003,000Onion mix 19,50019,50022,75026,000Onion mix6,4356,4356,4356,435Pesticides 16,38016,38016,38016,380Cow dung16,38016,38016,38016,380Water Management 13,80013,80013,80013,800Weedicides1,9001,9001,9001,900Transport produce to stores 3,8003,8004,0004,200Pesticides2,5002,5002,5002,500Sub-total Input costs 108,770108,770112,220115,670Water Management10,20010,20010,20010,200Income (Before Labor Costs) 204,430204,430235,780261,330Harvest and Drawing2,6002,6002,7502,900Labor costs 148,800148,800150,000151,200Transport produce to stores2,8002,8002,8002,800Income (After Labor Costs) 55,63055,63085,780110,130Sub-total Input costs184,836184,836184,986185,136 Income (Before Labor Costs)470,364470,364537,414604,464Big onion Irrigated Yala Average Crop Model April -- MarchLabor costs84,00084,00085,80087,600YIELDS AND INPUTS ExistingIncome (After Labor Costs)386,364386,364451,614516,864(Per ac) TechnologyNew Technology Unit1 to 15123 to 15Red onion Irrigated Yala Average Crop ModelApril -- MarchYields ton5.45.466.5YIELDS AND INPUTSExistingOperating (Per ac)TechnologyNew TechnologyInputs Unit1 to 15123 to 15Bigg Onion seed kg2.752.752.752.75Yieldston3.93.94.34.7TSP kg100100100100OperatingOnion mix kg300300350400InputsLabor Red onion seedkg547547547547Nursery Preparation md5555TSPkg58585858Land Preparation md2222Ureakg60606060Proparation of beds and ridges md21212121Onion mixkg99999999Transplanting md25252525Cow dungbag105105105105Fertilizing, & Agrochemicals aplication md15151515LaborWeeding & earthing up md8888Land Preparationmd3333Water managment md22222222Seed Processingmd3333Harvesting & Postharvesting md23232425Digging holes and seedingmd7777Transport md3333Fertilizing, & Agrochemicals aplicationmd3333Weeding & earthing upmd6666Water managmentmd24242424Harvesting & Postharvestingmd212122.524Transportmd3333 
18 
Paddy Irrigated Maha  Crop Model Table 9Paddy Rain fed Maha Crop ModelTable 10FINANCIAL BUDGET ExistingFINANCIAL BUDGETExisting(In Local Per ac) TechnologyNew Technology(In Local Per ac)TechnologyNew Technology1 to 15123 to 151 to 15123 to 15Revenue 96,60096,600108,100119,600Revenue62,56062,56070,38078,200Input costs Input costsPloughing 7,4007,4007,4007,400Ploughing6,4006,4006,4006,400Rice seed 3,5843,5843,2642,880Rice seed6,0486,0485,5445,040TSP 1,8001,8001,6501,500TSP1,7501,7501,6251,500Urea 5,0005,0004,5004,000Urea3,7503,7503,4003,000MOP 1,0501,050975900MOP1,2001,2001,1001,000Weedicides 2,5002,5002,5002,500Weedicides2,6002,6002,5002,400Pesticides 1,4001,4001,2501,100Harvest (combine harvester)6,0006,0006,3006,600Harvest (combine harvester) 8,4008,4008,4008,400Transport produce to stores200200220240Transport produce to stores 800800800800Sub-total Input costs27,94827,94827,08926,180Sub-total Input costs 31,93431,93430,73929,480Income (Before Labor Costs)34,61234,61243,29152,020Income (Before Labor Costs) 64,66664,66677,36190,120Labor costs15,60015,60016,20016,800Labor costs 22,80022,80024,90027,000Income (After Labor Costs)19,01219,01227,09135,220Income (After Labor Costs) 41,86641,86652,46163,120  YIELDS AND INPUTSExistingYIELDS AND INPUTS Existing(Per ac)TechnologyNew Technology(Per ac) TechnologyNew TechnologyUnit1 to 15123 to 15Unit1 to 15123 to 15Yieldston1.361.361.531.7Yields ton2.12.12.352.6OperatingOperating InputsInputs Rice seedkg72726660Rice seed kg56565145TSPkg353532.530TSP kg36363330Ureakg75756860Urea kg1001009080MOPkg24242220MOP kg212119.518LaborLabor Land Preparationmd2222Land Preparation md2222Plastering bundsmd3333Plastering bunds md4444Leveling and broadcastingmd222.53Leveling and seeding md334.56Agrochemicals applicationmd3333Fertilizing, & Agrochemicals aplication md2.52.52.52.5Harvesting and Postharvestingmd3333Water managment md4.54.54.54.5Harvesting & Postharvesting md333.253.5 
19 
Maize rain fed Maha Crop Model Table 11Cow peas Rain fed Maha Average Crop ModelTable 12FINANCIAL BUDGET ExistingFINANCIAL BUDGETExisting(In Local Per ac) TechnologyNew Technology(In Local Per ac)TechnologyNew Technology1 to 15123 to 151 to 15123 to 15Revenue 86,40086,40094,500102,600Revenue45,21245,21245,21245,212Input costs Input costsPloughing 7,7007,7007,7007,700Ploughing5,3005,3005,3005,300Maize seed 5,7965,7965,7965,796Cowpea seed3,9203,9203,9203,920Seeder 6,2506,2506,2506,250Pesticides1,8001,8001,8001,800TSP 2,2002,2002,3502,500Transport produce to stores240240240240Urea 6,0006,0006,5007,000Sub-total Input costs11,26011,26011,26011,260MOP 1,3501,3501,4251,500Income (Before Labor Costs)33,95233,95233,95233,952Threshing 2,2002,2002,2002,200Labor costs27,60027,60028,20028,800Transport produce to stores 700700700700Income (After Labor Costs)6,3526,3525,7525,152Sub-total Input costs 32,19632,19632,92133,646 Income (Before Labor Costs) 54,20454,20461,57968,954YIELDS AND INPUTSExistingLabor costs 33,60033,60033,60033,600(Per ac)TechnologyNew TechnologyIncome (After Labor Costs) 20,60420,60427,97935,354Unit1 to 15123 to 15 Yieldston0.2540.2540.2540.254Maize rain fed Maha Crop Model April -- MarchOperatingYIELDS AND INPUTS ExistingInputs(Per ac) TechnologyNew TechnologyCowpea seedkg14141414Unit1 to 15123 to 15LaborYields ton1.61.61.751.9Land Preparationmd1111Operating Digging holes & seedindmd3333Inputs Weeding & earthingmd5555Ploughing lumsum7,7007,7007,7007,700Fertilizing, & Agrochemicals aplicationmd1111Maize seed kg5.65.65.65.6Harvesting & Postharvestingmd999.510Seeder unit0.250.250.250.25Threshing & processingmd3333TSP kg44444750Transpoet md1111Urea kg120120130140MOP kg272728.530Threshing lumsum2,2002,2002,2002,200Transport produce to stores lumsum700700700700Labor Land Preparation md3333Digging holes and seeding md6666Weeding and earthing up md7777Fertilizing, & Agrochemicals aplication md4444Harvesting & Postharvesting md8888 
20 
Red onion Irrigated Maha Crop Model Table 13Greenchili rainfed Maha Crop ModelTable 14FINANCIAL BUDGET ExistingFINANCIAL BUDGETExisting(In Local Per ac) TechnologyNew Technology(In Local Per ac)TechnologyNew Technology1 to 15123 to 151 to 15123 to 15Revenue 681,120681,120752,400818,400Revenue190,000190,000205,000220,000Input costs Input costsPloughing 13,60013,60013,60013,600Ploughing7,3007,3007,3007,300Red onion seed 197,316197,316197,316197,316Greenchilli seed2,1602,1602,1602,160TSP 4,1504,1504,3254,500Transplanting2,4602,4602,4602,460Urea 3,5003,5003,7504,000Urea7,5007,5008,2509,000MOP 2,6502,6502,8253,000Specific fertilizer mix11,60011,60012,80014,000Onion mix 6,4356,4356,4356,435Pesticides10,10010,10010,10010,100Cow dung 16,38016,38016,38016,380Transport produce to stores1,5001,5001,5001,500Weedicides 2,5002,5002,5002,500Sub-total Input costs42,62042,62044,57046,520Pesticides 7,0007,0007,0007,000Income (Before Labor Costs)147,380147,380160,430173,480Water Management 6,1006,1006,1006,100Labor costs93,60093,60096,00098,400Transport produce to stores 4,5004,5004,7505,000Income (After Labor Costs)53,78053,78064,43075,080Sub-total Input costs 264,131264,131264,981265,831 Income (Before Labor Costs) 416,989416,989487,419552,569YIELDS AND INPUTSExistingLabor costs 111,600111,600113,400115,200(Per ac)TechnologyNew TechnologyIncome (After Labor Costs) 305,389305,389374,019437,369Unit1 to 15123 to 15 Yieldston0.950.951.0251.1YIELDS AND INPUTS ExistingOperating(Per ac) TechnologyNew TechnologyInputsUnit1 to 15123 to 15Greenchilli seedkg0.540.540.540.54Yields ton5.165.165.76.2Ureakg150150165180Operating Transport produce to storeslumsum1,5001,5001,5001,500Inputs LaborRed onion seed kg812812812812Land Preparationmd9999TSP kg838386.590Proparation of beds and ridgesmd7777Urea kg70707580Nursery Preparationmd5555MOP kg535356.560Transplantingmd12121212Onion mix kg99999999Fertilizing, & Agrochemicals aplicationmd14141414Pesticides lumsum7,0007,0007,0007,000Weeding & earthing upmd10101010Water Management lumsum6,1006,1006,1006,100Harvesting & Postharvestingmd20202224Transport produce to stores lumsum4,5004,5004,7505,000Transportmd1111Labor Land Preparation md1111Seed Processing & seeding md12121212Preparation of beds and ridges md15151515Fertilizing, & Agrochemicals aplication md12121212Weeding & earthing up md9999Water managment md20202020Harvesting & Postharvesting md212122.524Transport md3333 
21 
Red bell Pepper in Polytunnel (100 m2) Crop ModelTable 15FINANCIAL BUDGET (In Local Per ac) New Technology12 to 15Revenue -507,500Input costs Investment costs Poly tunnel construction 621,600-Bricks (for foundation 5,400-Sub-total Investment Costs 627,000-Operating Costs Nursery trays 780780Red pepper seed 1,1141,114Nursery growing media 2,4002,400Funguicide 1,2001,200Albert solution 10:52:10+TE 4949Grow bags 50,00050,000100 lt tank 400400Fertirrigation 34,00034,000Electricity 375375Tools 300300Harvest trays (bell pepper 12,00012,000Maintenance costs -62,160Sub-total Operating Costs 102,618164,778Sub-total Input costs 729,618164,778Income (Before Labor Costs) -729,618342,722Labor costs Investment costs 3,200-Operating Costs 58,20058,200Sub-total Labor costs 61,40058,200Income (After Labor Costs) -791,018284,522Income Before Labor: IRR = 46.9%, NPV = 1,942,931.89Income After Labor: IRR = 35.9%, NPV = 1,444,533.39YIELDS AND INPUTS (Per ac) New TechnologyUnit12 to 15Yields ton-1.45Investment Poly tunnel construction sq ft1,110-Bricks (for foundation unit120-Land levelling md1-Masonary md1-Operating Nursery trays unit66Red pepper seed 1000 units0.470.47Nursery growing media kg0.80.8Funguicide kg1,2001,200Albert solution 10:52:10+TE kg0.140.14Grow bags unit400400100 lt tank unit11Fertirrigation kg100100Electricity KWH2525Tools lumpsum300300Harvest trays (bell pepper unit1010Maintenance costs lumsum-62,160Labor Seeding of trays md11Nursery management md3.53.5Bags and plant establishment md22Soft prunning and trainng md2424Hard prunning and training md1010Harvesting & drawing md66Transport md22 
22 
Mango seedlings nursery Crop ModelTable 16FINANCIAL BUDGET (In Local Per ac) New Technology12345 to 15Revenue --900,0001,400,0001,900,000Input costs Investment costs Poly tunnel construction 621,600----Bricks (for foundation 5,400----Sub-total Investment Costs 627,000----Operating Costs Mango seed 13,75021,25027,50027,50027,500Sand bed 5,0006,0007,0007,0007,000Wetfactant 220220220220220Funguicide 5,0006,0007,0007,0007,000Insecticides 12,00013,50015,00015,00015,000Urea 5,0006,0007,5007,5007,500Granular Blue 12,60015,12018,90018,90018,900Compost 2,9754,1654,7604,7604,760Soil Cub 7509001,0501,0501,050Coir dust 4,5006,0007,5007,5007,500Labale 10,00012,50015,00015,00015,000Printed bag 45,40054,48063,56063,56063,560For grafting 2,1602,8803,6003,6003,600Polythene 3,6005,4007,2007,2007,200Maintenance costs -62,16062,16062,16062,160Sub-total Operating Costs 122,955216,575247,950247,950247,950Sub-total Input costs 749,955216,575247,950247,950247,950Income (Before Labor Costs) -749,955-216,575652,0501,152,0501,652,050Labor costs Investment costs 3,200----Operating Costs 550,800652,800729,600729,600729,600Sub-total Labor costs 554,000652,800729,600729,600729,600Income (After Labor Costs) -1,303,955-869,375-77,550422,450922,450Income Before Labor: IRR = 73.1%, NPV = 9,244,052.32Income After Labor: IRR = 25.0%, NPV = 3,255,663.67YIELDS AND INPUTS (Per ac) New TechnologyUnit12345 to 15Yields unit--4,5007,0009,500Investment Poly tunnel construction sq ft1,110----Bricks (for foundation unit120----Land levelling md1----Masonary md1----Operating Inputs Mango seed '000 units5.58.5111111Sand bed cu mt0.50.60.70.70.7Wetfactant lt11111Funguicide kg5,0006,0007,0007,0007,000Insecticides unit12,00013,50015,00015,00015,000Urea kg100120150150150Granular Blue kg100120150150150Compost cu mt0.50.70.80.80.8Soil Cub unit11.21.41.41.4Coir dust cu mt0.30.40.50.50.5Labale unit11.251.51.51.5Printed bag '000 units1012141414For grafting unit68101010Polythene kg1015202020Maintenance costs lumsum-62,16062,16062,16062,160Labor Selection & cutting seeds md45555BED PREPARATION md1213141414BAG MAKING md1820222222MEDEA PREPARATION & FILLING md6070808080TRANSPLANTING md810121212WEEDING md3035404040REFILLING md6070808080FERTILIZER APPLICATION md2022141414SPRAYING md1517191919Grafting unit5,0007,50010,00010,00010,000IRRIGATION md140160170170170MAINTENANCE & ARRANGEMENTS md1820222222LOADING UNLOADING & TRANSPORT md1416181818OTHER/Label md1011121212 
23 
Traditional Milking cows (6 head, 3 milking cows) Activity ModelTable 17Milking cows (9 head, 4 milking cows) Activity ModelTable 18FINANCIAL BUDGET ExistingFINANCIAL BUDGETExisting(In Local) TechnologyNew Technology(In Local)TechnologyNew Technology1 to 15123 to 151 to 15123456 to 15Revenue RevenueMilk Fresh  58,50058,50087,750117,000Milk Fresh 327,600327,600639,600951,600951,600951,600951,600Calves 15,00015,00018,75022,500Calves15,00015,00022,50030,00030,00030,00030,000Culled animals 25,00025,00031,50037,500Culled animals50,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,000Sub-total Revenue 98,50098,500138,000177,000Sub-total Revenue392,600392,600712,1001,031,6001,031,6001,031,6001,031,600Input costs Input costsInvestment costs Investment costsCattle shed -236,000--Cattle shed-472,000-----Operating Costs Milking machine--90,000-90,000--Fodder --1,2502,500Grass chopper--75,00075,000---Minerals --5,70011,400Drip irrigation kit--30,00030,000---Medicines 6,0006,0009,00012,000Azzola ponds--30,00030,00010,00010,000-Artificial Insemination --7501,500Sub-total Investment Costs-472,000225,000135,000100,00010,000-Transport produce to stores --1,1502,300Operating CostsExtension --1,8003,600Fodder--15,25030,50030,50030,50030,500Sub-total Operating Costs 6,0006,00019,65033,300Concentrate108,000108,000159,900211,800211,800211,800211,800Sub-total Input costs 6,000242,00019,65033,300Minerals30,78030,78030,78030,78030,78030,78030,780Income (Before Labor Costs) 92,500-143,500118,350143,700Medicines18,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,000Labor costs Artificial Insemination2,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,000Management & maintenance 72,00072,00081,60090,000Electricity27,37527,37532,85038,32538,32538,32538,325Income (After Labor Costs) 20,500-215,50036,75053,700Transport produce to stores7,5607,56014,76021,96021,96021,96021,960 Extension--14,00029,28029,28029,28029,280YIELDS AND INPUTS TechnologyNew TechnologyTraining--5001,0001,0001,0001,000Unit1 to 15123 to 15Insurance--2,5005,0005,0005,0005,000Main Production Sub-total Operating Costs193,715193,715290,540388,645388,645388,645388,645Milk Fresh  lt9009001,3501,800Sub-total Input costs193,715665,715515,540523,645488,645398,645388,645Calves unit111.251.5Income (Before Labor Costs)198,885-273,115196,560507,955542,955632,955642,955Culled animals unit0.50.50.630.75Labor costsOperating Management & maintenance109,200109,200219,600328,800328,800328,800328,800Inputs Income (After Labor Costs)89,685-382,315-23,040179,155214,155304,155314,155Fodder kg--1,2502,500Income Before Labor: IRR = 51.9%, NPV = 2,402,967.79Minerals kg--3060Income After Labor: IRR = 25.1%, NPV = 823,273.49Medicines head334.56Artificial Insemination head--1.53Milking cows (9 head, 4 milking cows) Activity ModelExistingTransport produce to stores lumsum--1,1502,300YIELDS AND INPUTSTechnologyNew TechnologyExtension '000 lt--0.91.8Unit1 to 15123456 to 15Labor Main ProductionManagement & maintenance md60606875Milk Fresh lt5,0405,0409,84014,64014,64014,64014,640Calvesunit111.52222Culled animalsunit1111111InvestmentCattle shedunit-1-----Milking machineunit--1-1--Grass chopperunit--11---Drip irrigation kitunit--30,00030,000---Azzola pondsunit--6622-OperatingInputsFodderkg--15,25030,50030,50030,50030,500Concentratekg2,1602,1603,1984,2364,2364,2364,236Mineralskg162162162162162162162Medicineshead9999999Artificial Inseminationhead4444444ElectricityKWH1,8251,8252,1902,5552,5552,5552,555Transport produce to storeslumsum7,5607,56014,76021,96021,96021,96021,960Extension'000 lt--714.6414.6414.6414.64Traininglumpsum--5001,0001,0001,0001,000Insurancelumpsum--2,5005,0005,0005,0005,000LaborManagement & maintenancemd9191183274274274274 
24 
Traditional Goats rearing (15 head) Activity ModelTable 19Goats rearing (22 head) Activity ModelTable 20FINANCIAL BUDGET ExistingFINANCIAL BUDGETExisting(In Local) TechnologyNew Technology(In Local)TechnologyNew Technology1 to 15123 to 151 to 15123 to 15Revenue RevenueMilk (goat fresh) 16,00016,00032,00048,000Milk (goat fresh)--60,000120,000Goat (adult) 3,0003,0003,6004,200Goat (adult)6,0006,000108,000210,000Culled animals (goats) 2,2002,2002,4752,750Culled animals (goats)--15,40030,800Sub-total Revenue 21,20021,20038,07554,950Sub-total Revenue6,0006,000183,400360,800Input costs Input costsInvestment costs Investment costsGoat shed -82,250--Goat shed-164,500--Utensils -1,000--SS milking can-12,000--Sub-total Investment Costs -83,250--Utensils-1,500--Operating Costs Hoof trimmer-5,000--Goat fodder 3,5003,5005,3507,200Sub-total Investment Costs-183,000--Mineral blocks (goat) --398795Operating CostsMedicines --1,6003,200Goat fodder--6,25012,500Extension --125250Goat concentrate--238475Sub-total Operating Costs 3,5003,5007,47311,445Mineral blocks (goat)--1,5903,180Sub-total Input costs 3,50086,7507,47311,445Medicines--13,20026,400Income (Before Labor Costs) 17,700-65,55030,60343,505Extension--375750Labor costs Training--1,5003,000Management & maintenance 12,00012,00015,00018,000Sub-total Operating Costs--23,15346,305Income (After Labor Costs) 5,700-77,55015,60325,505Sub-total Input costs-183,00023,15346,305Income Before Labor: IRR = 27.4%, NPV = 109,888.38Income (Before Labor Costs)6,000-177,000160,247314,495Income After Labor: IRR = 21.1%, NPV = 66,740.88Labor costsManagement & maintenance6,0006,000112,800218,400Traditional Goats rearing (15 head) Activity Model ExistingIncome (After Labor Costs)--183,00047,44796,095YIELDS AND INPUTS TechnologyNew TechnologyIncome Before Labor: IRR = 122.2%, NPV = 2,052,100.52Unit1 to 15123 to 15Income After Labor: IRR = 44.3%, NPV = 524,183.22Main Production Goats rearing (22 head) Activity ModelExistingMilk (goat fresh) lt8080160240YIELDS AND INPUTSTechnologyNew TechnologyGoat (adult) kg5567Unit1 to 15123 to 15Culled animals (goats) unit444.55Main ProductionInvestment Milk (goat fresh)lt--300600Goat shed unit-0.5--Goat (adult)kg1010180350Utensils unit-1,000--Culled animals (goats)unit--2856Operating InvestmentInputs Goat shedunit-1--Goat fodder lumpsum3,5003,5005,3507,200SS milking canunit-2--Mineral blocks (goat) lumpsum--1.53Utensilsunit-1,500--Medicines head--1,6003,200Hoof trimmerunit-1--Extension '000 lt--125250OperatingLabor InputsManagement & maintenance md101012.515Goat fodderlumpsum--6,25012,500Goat concentratelumpsum--238475Mineral blocks (goat)lumpsum--612Medicineshead--13,20026,400Extension'000 lt--375750Traininglumpsum--1,5003,000LaborManagement & maintenancemd5594182 
25 
Backyard Traditional Poultry Activity ModelTable 21Backyard Poultry - New Semiintensive Activity ModelTable 22FINANCIAL BUDGET Existing\FINANCIAL BUDGET(In Local) TechnologyNew Technology(In Local)New Technology1 to 15123 to 15123 to 15Revenue RevenueEggs 24,00024,00050,00076,000Eggs-73,000146,000Culled birds 1,1251,1251,6882,250Culled birds-2,2504,500Poultry litter --100200Poultry litter-250500Sub-total Revenue 25,12525,12551,78878,450Sub-total Revenue-75,500151,000Input costs Input costsInvestment costs Investment costsPoultry shed -45,000--Poultry shed90,000--Wire mesh -10,000--Wire mesh20,000--Herb plots (mukunuwenna & kangkung) -900--Herb plots (mukunuwenna & kangkung)3,000--Poultry feeders and waterers -3,000--Poultry feeders and waterers3,000--Biological assets (25 layer birds) -4,000--Biological assets (25 layer birds)10,000--Sub-total Investment Costs -62,900--Sub-total Investment Costs126,000--Operating Costs Operating CostsEgg trays --250500Egg trays-250500Poultry feeders and waterers --390750Poultry feeders and waterers-7501,500Biological assets (25 layer birds) --1,2002,400Biological assets (25 layer birds)-2,8005,200Extension --150300Extension-375750Layer feed 1,5001,5003,0004,500Training-1,1252,250Minerals --300600Layer feed-2,5005,000Medicines --1,5003,000Minerals-1,0002,000Sub-total Operating Costs 1,5001,5006,79012,050Medicines-3,7507,500Sub-total Input costs 1,50064,4006,79012,050Sub-total Operating Costs-12,55024,700Income (Before Labor Costs) 23,625-39,27544,99866,400Sub-total Input costs126,00012,55024,700Labor costs Income (Before Labor Costs)-126,00062,950126,300Management & maintenance 18,00018,00027,60036,000Labor costsIncome (After Labor Costs) 5,625-57,27517,39830,400Management & maintenance-55,200109,200Income Before Labor: IRR = 55.8%, NPV = 250,411.49Income (After Labor Costs)-126,0007,75017,100Income After Labor: IRR = 34.0%, NPV = 120,473.13Income Before Labor: IRR = 78.2%, NPV = 793,544.09Income After Labor: IRR = 11.0%, NPV = 7,763.76Backyard Traditional Poultry Activity Model ExistingYIELDS AND INPUTS TechnologyNew TechnologyYIELDS AND INPUTSNew TechnologyUnit1 to 15123 to 15Unit123 to 15Main Production Eggs unit1,2001,2002,5003,800Main ProductionCulled birds unit334.56Eggsunit-3,6507,300Poultry litter kg--2040Culled birdsunit-612Investment Poultry litterkg-50100Poultry shed unit-0.5--InvestmentWire mesh unit-0.5--Poultry shedunit1--Herb plots (mukunuwenna & kangkung) lumpsum-0.3--Wire meshunit1--Poultry feeders and waterers unit-1--Herb plots (mukunuwenna & kangkung)lumpsum1--Biological assets (25 layer birds) unit-10--Poultry feeders and waterersunit1--Operating Biological assets (25 layer birds)unit25--Inputs OperatingEgg trays unit--0.51InputsPoultry feeders and waterers unit--0.130.25Egg traysunit-0.51Biological assets (25 layer birds) unit--36Poultry feeders and waterersunit-0.250.5Extension '000 lt--150300Biological assets (25 layer birds)unit-713Layer feed lumpsum1,5001,5003,0004,500Extension'000 lt-375750Minerals kg--300600Traininglumpsum-1,1252,250Medicines head--1,5003,000Layer feedlumpsum-2,5005,000Labor Mineralskg-1,0002,000Management & maintenance md15152330Medicineshead-3,7507,500LaborManagement & maintenancemd-4691 
26 
Farm Model 1: Commercial farmer (1.25 ha) FMFINANCIAL BUDGET (DETAILED)Table 23(In Local) /a Without ProjectWith Project1 to 20123456 to 20Main Production Paddy 116,840116,840154,100171,120171,120171,120171,120Greenchili 120,000120,000170,000180,000180,000180,000180,000Milk Fresh  58,50058,50087,750117,000117,000117,000117,000Calves 15,00015,00018,75022,50022,50022,50022,500Culled animals 25,00025,00031,50037,50037,50037,50037,500Sub-total Main Production 335,340335,340462,100528,120528,120528,120528,120On-Farm Consumption Paddy 23,00023,00023,00023,00023,00023,00023,000Milk Fresh  58,50058,50058,50058,50058,50058,50058,500Sub-Total On-Farm Consumption 81,50081,50081,50081,50081,50081,50081,500Net Value Of Production 253,840253,840380,600446,620446,620446,620446,620Production Cost Investment Cattle shed -236,000-----Operating Ploughing 10,68010,68012,76012,76012,76012,76012,760Weedicides 3,2003,2003,8003,7003,7003,7003,700Water Management 2,4002,4003,2003,2003,2003,2003,200Nursery Inputs 180180240240240240240Pesticides 5,1155,1156,3306,1206,1206,1206,120Harvest (combine harvester) 10,00010,00011,60011,60011,60011,60011,600Transport produce to stores 3,2903,2905,4706,6606,6606,6606,660Fodder --1,2502,5002,5002,5002,500Minerals --5,70011,40011,40011,40011,400Medicines 6,0006,0009,00012,00012,00012,00012,000Extension --1,8003,6003,6003,6003,600Artificial Insemination --7501,5001,5001,5001,500Rice seed 4,3014,3014,5704,0324,0324,0324,032Greenchilli seed 240240320320320320320TSP 2,9102,9103,3103,1003,1003,1003,100Urea 7,1257,1257,8007,1007,1007,1007,100MOP 1,2601,2601,3651,2601,2601,2601,260Specific fertilizer mix 2,8502,8503,8003,8003,8003,8003,800Sub-total Operating Costs 59,55159,55183,06594,89294,89294,89294,892Sub-Total Production Cost 59,551295,55183,06594,89294,89294,89294,892OUTFLOWS 59,551295,55183,06594,89294,89294,89294,892Cash Flow Before Financing 194,289-41,711297,535351,728351,728351,728351,728Farm Family Benefits Before Financing 275,78939,789379,035433,228433,228433,228433,228Financial Inflows Disbursements on Long Term Loan -150,002-----Transfer from Previous Period 2,9782,9784,1534,7454,7454,7454,745Contribution from own savings -135,372-----Grants -7,200-----Sub-Total Financial Inflows 2,978295,5514,1534,7454,7454,7454,745Financial Outflows Long Term Principal --34,80236,54238,36940,288-Long Term Interest --7,5005,7603,9332,014-Transfer to Next Period 2,9784,1534,7454,7454,7454,7454,745Sub-Total Financial Outflows 2,9784,15347,04747,04747,04747,0474,745Net Financing -291,398-42,894-42,302-42,302-42,302-Cash Flow After Financing 194,289249,687254,642309,426309,426309,426351,728Sub-Total Change in Net Worth --135,372-----Farm Family Benefits After Financing 275,789195,815336,142390,926390,926390,926433,228Returns per Family-Day of Labor 2,6571,8862,6822,8942,8942,8943,207IRR = 110.7%, NPV = 957,620\a 70% of the 3,500 commercial farmers to be reached (2,450) are assumed to succeed in adopting the model. On average they will receive  Rs 7,200 grant ($40).Main Production (ton) Paddy 2.543.353.723.723.723.723.72Greenchili 0.60.850.90.90.90.90.9Milk Fresh (lt) 9001,3501,8001,8001,8001,8001,800Calves (head) 11.251.51.51.51.51.5Culled animals (head) 0.50.630.750.750.750.750.75On-Farm Consumption Paddy 0.50.50.50.50.50.50.5Milk Fresh  900900900900900900900 
27 
Farm Model 2: Medium market led (minor irrigation) 0.8 ha FMTable 24FINANCIAL BUDGET (DETAILED) (In Local) /a Without ProjectWith Project1 to 20123 to 20Main Production Paddy 78,20078,20099,360110,400Greenchili 59,00059,000105,500112,000Milk (goat fresh) 16,00016,00032,00048,000Goat (adult) 3,0003,0003,6004,200Culled animals (goats) 2,2002,2002,4752,750Sub-total Main Production 158,400158,400242,935277,350On-Farm Consumption Paddy 23,00023,00023,00023,000Milk (goat fresh) 16,00016,00016,00016,000Sub-Total On-Farm Consumption 39,00039,00039,00039,000Net Value Of Production 119,400119,400203,935238,350Production Cost Investment Goat shed -82,250--Utensils -1,000--Sub-total Investment Costs -83,250--Operating Ploughing 7,2507,2508,5908,590Weedicides 2,2002,2002,4752,400Water Management 8008001,6001,600Nursery Inputs 6060120120Pesticides 3,2753,2754,4254,290Harvest (combine harvester) 6,6406,6407,4407,440Transplanting 246246246246Transport produce to stores 1,6201,6202,5202,550Medicines --1,6003,200Extension --125250Goat fodder 3,5003,5005,3507,200Mineral blocks (goat) --398795Rice seed 2,8672,8672,9382,592Greenchilli seed 296296376376TSP 1,6901,6901,9851,850Urea 5,1255,1255,6255,250MOP 840840878810Specific fertilizer mix 2,1102,1103,1803,300Sub-total Operating Costs 38,51938,51949,87052,859Sub-Total Production Cost 38,519121,76949,87052,859OUTFLOWS 38,519121,76949,87052,859Cash Flow Before Financing 80,881-2,369154,065185,491Farm Family Benefits Before Financing 119,88136,631193,065224,491Financial Inflows Transfer from Previous Period 1,9261,9262,4932,643Contribution from own savings -103,643--Grants -16,200--Sub-Total Financial Inflows 1,926121,7692,4932,643Financial Outflows Transfer to Next Period 1,9262,4932,6432,643Net Financing -119,276-149-Cash Flow After Financing 80,881116,907153,916185,491Sub-Total Change in Net Worth --103,643--Farm Family Benefits After Financing 119,88152,263192,916224,491Returns per Family-Day of Labor 2,9971,3073,6183,887IRR = 128.5%, NPV = 708,046.43\a 70% of the 24,500 market led farmers to be reached (17,150) are assumed to succeed in adopting the model.On average they will receive  Rs 16,200 grant ($90).Main Production (tons) Paddy 1.71.72.162.4Greenchili 0.2950.2950.52750.56Milk (lts goat fresh) 8080160240Goat (adult) 5567Culled animals (goats) 444.55On-Farm Consumption Paddy 0.50.50.50.5Milk (goat fresh) 80808080 
28 
Farm Model 3: Small rain fed  (supplementary irrigation) 0.5 ha FMTable 25FINANCIAL BUDGET (DETAILED)(In Local) /a Without ProjectWith Project1 to 201234 to 20Main Production Paddy 59,34059,34066,93074,52074,520Maize 12,96012,96014,17515,39015,390Manioc 34,65040,95040,95040,95040,950Eggs 24,00024,00050,00076,00076,000Culled birds 1,1251,1251,6882,2502,250Poultry litter --100200200Sub-total Main Production 132,075138,375173,843209,310209,310On-Farm Consumption Paddy 23,00023,00023,00023,00023,000Milk (goat fresh) 16,00016,00016,00016,00016,000Sub-Total On-Farm Consumption 39,00039,00039,00039,00039,000Net Value Of Production 93,07599,375134,843170,310170,310Production Cost Investment Herb plots (mukunuwenna & kangkung) -900---Poultry shed -45,000---Wire mesh -10,000---Poultry feeders and waterers -3,000---Biological assets (25 layer birds) -4,000---Sub-total Investment Costs -62,900---Operating Ploughing 6,8406,8406,8406,8406,840Weedicides 1,8001,8001,7251,6501,650Pesticides 840840750660660Harvest (combine harvester) 4,9204,9204,9204,9204,920Threshing 330330330330330Transport produce to stores 765765795825825Minerals --300600600Medicines --1,5003,0003,000Extension --150300300Layer feed 1,5001,5003,0004,5004,500Poultry feeders and waterers --390750750Biological assets (25 layer birds) --1,2002,4002,400Egg trays --250500500Seeder 938938938938938Rice seed 2,1502,1501,9581,7281,728Maize seed 869869869869869TSP 1,4101,4101,3431,2751,275Urea 3,9003,9003,6753,4503,450MOP 833833799765765Specific fertilizer mix 3,0753,0753,0753,0753,075Sub-total Operating Costs 30,17030,17034,80739,37539,375Sub-Total Production Cost 30,17093,07034,80739,37539,375OUTFLOWS 30,17093,07034,80739,37539,375Cash Flow Before Financing 62,9056,305100,036130,935130,935Farm Family Benefits Before Financing 101,90545,305139,036169,935169,935Financial Inflows Disbursements on Long Term Loan -17,010---Transfer from Previous Period 1,5081,5081,7401,9691,969Contribution from own savings -60,151---Grants -14,400---Sub-Total Financial Inflows 1,50893,0701,7401,9691,969Financial Outflows Long Term Principal --8,2988,712-Long Term Interest --851436-Transfer to Next Period 1,5081,7401,9691,9691,969Sub-Total Financial Outflows 1,5081,74011,11711,1171,969Net Financing -91,329-9,376-9,148-Cash Flow After Financing 62,90597,63590,659121,787130,935Sub-Total Change in Net Worth --60,151---Farm Family Benefits After Financing 101,90576,483129,659160,787169,935Returns per Family-Day of Labor 2,8542,1422,8973,0453,218IRR = 161.3%, NPV = 454,130\a 70% of the 7,000 commercial farmers to be reached (4,900) are assumed to succeed in adopting the model. On average they will receive  Rs 14,400 grant ($80).Main Production (ton) Paddy 1.291.291.4551.621.62Maize 0.240.240.26250.2850.285Manioc 0.8250.9750.9750.9750.975Eggs (units) 1,2001,2002,5003,8003,800Culled birds 334.566Poultry litter --204040 
29 
Farm Model 4: Improved milk production (9 head, 4 milking cows) FMTable 26FINANCIAL BUDGET (DETAILED)(In Local) /a Without ProjectWith Project1 to 20123456 to 20Main Production Milk Fresh  327,600327,600639,600951,600951,600951,600951,600Calves 15,00015,00022,50030,00030,00030,00030,000Culled animals 50,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,000Sub-total Main Production 392,600392,600712,1001,031,6001,031,6001,031,6001,031,600Production Cost Investment Cattle shed -472,000-----Milking machine --90,000-90,000--Grass chopper --75,00075,000---Drip irrigation kit --30,00030,000---Azzola ponds --30,00030,00010,00010,000-Sub-total Investment Costs -472,000225,000135,000100,00010,000-Operating Transport produce to stores 7,5607,56014,76021,96021,96021,96021,960Fodder --15,25030,50030,50030,50030,500Concentrate 108,000108,000159,900211,800211,800211,800211,800Minerals 30,78030,78030,78030,78030,78030,78030,780Medicines 18,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,00018,000Electricity 27,37527,37532,85038,32538,32538,32538,325Extension --14,00029,28029,28029,28029,280Training --5001,0001,0001,0001,000Artificial Insemination 2,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,0002,000Insurance --2,5005,0005,0005,0005,000Sub-total Operating Costs 193,715193,715290,540388,645388,645388,645388,645Sub-Total Production Cost 193,715665,715515,540523,645488,645398,645388,645OUTFLOWS 193,715665,715515,540523,645488,645398,645388,645Cash Flow Before Financing 198,885-273,115196,560507,955542,955632,955642,955Financial Inflows Disbursements on Long Term Loan -300,003-----Transfer from Previous Period 19,37219,37251,55452,36548,86539,86538,865Contribution from own savings -227,540-----Grants -118,800-----Sub-Total Financial Inflows 19,372665,71551,55452,36548,86539,86538,865Financial Outflows Long Term Principal --69,60473,08576,73980,576-Long Term Interest --15,00011,5207,8664,029-Transfer to Next Period 19,37251,55452,36548,86539,86538,86538,865Sub-Total Financial Outflows 19,37251,554136,969133,469124,469123,46938,865Net Financing -614,161-85,415-81,104-75,604-83,604-Cash Flow After Financing 198,885341,046111,145426,851467,351549,351642,955Sub-Total Change in Net Worth --227,540-----Farm Family Benefits After Financing 198,885113,506111,145426,851467,351549,351642,955Returns per Family-Day of Labor 2,1861,2476071,5581,7062,0052,347IRR = 105.6%, NPV = 2,522,262\a 70% of the 1,500 livestock farmers to be reached (1,050) would succeed in adopting the model. On average they receive  Rs 118,800 grant ($660).Main Production (tons)Milk Fresh 5,0405,0409,84014,64014,64014,64014,640Calves111.52222Culled animals1111111 
30 
Farm Model 5: Goat rearing (22 head) FMTable 27Farm Model 6: Backyard poultry FMTable 28FINANCIAL BUDGET (DETAILED) WithoutFINANCIAL BUDGET (DETAILED)(In Local) ProjectWith Project(In Local) /aWithout ProjectWith Project1 to 20123 to 201 to 201234 to 20Main Production Main ProductionMilk (goat fresh) --60,000120,000Eggs24,000-73,000146,000146,000Goat (adult) 6,0006,000108,000210,000Culled birds1,125-2,2504,5004,500Culled animals (goats) --15,40030,800Poultry litter--250500500Sub-total Main Production 6,0006,000183,400360,800Sub-total Main Production25,125-75,500151,000151,000Production Cost Production CostInvestment InvestmentGoat shed -164,500--Herb plots (mukunuwenna & kangkung)-3,000---SS milking can -12,000--Poultry shed-90,000---Utensils -1,500--Wire mesh-20,000---Hoof trimmer -5,000--Poultry feeders and waterers-3,000---Sub-total Investment Costs -183,000--Biological assets (25 layer birds)-10,000---Operating Sub-total Investment Costs-126,000---Medicines --13,20026,400OperatingExtension --375750Minerals--1,0002,0002,000Training --1,5003,000Medicines--3,7507,5007,500Goat fodder --6,25012,500Extension--375750750Goat concentrate --238475Training--1,1252,2502,250Mineral blocks (goat) --1,5903,180Layer feed1,500-2,5005,0005,000Sub-total Operating Costs --23,15346,305Poultry feeders and waterers--7501,5001,500Sub-Total Production Cost -183,00023,15346,305Biological assets (25 layer birds)--2,8005,2005,200OUTFLOWS -183,00023,15346,305Egg trays--250500500Cash Flow Before Financing 6,000-177,000160,247314,495Sub-total Operating Costs1,500-12,55024,70024,700Financial Inflows Sub-Total Production Cost1,500126,00012,55024,70024,700Transfer from Previous Period --463926OUTFLOWS1,500126,00012,55024,70024,700Contribution from own savings -70,500--Cash Flow Before Financing23,625-126,00062,950126,300126,300Grants -112,500--Financial InflowsSub-Total Financial Inflows -183,000463926Disbursements on Long Term Loan-34,020---Financial Outflows Transfer from Previous Period3030251494494Transfer to Next Period -463926926Grants-100,800---Net Financing -182,537-463-Sub-Total Financial Inflows30134,850251494494Cash Flow After Financing 6,0005,537159,784314,495Financial OutflowsSub-Total Change in Net Worth --70,500--Long Term Principal--16,59517,425-Farm Family Benefits After Financing 6,000-64,963159,784314,495Long Term Interest--1,701871-Returns per Family-Day of Labor 1,200-12,9931,7001,728Transfer to Next Period30251494494494_________________________________Sub-Total Financial Outflows3025118,79018,790494IRR = >100%, NPV = 2,153,707Net Financing-134,599-18,539-18,296-Main Production Cash Flow After Financing23,6258,59944,411108,004126,300Milk (lts goat fresh) --300600Residual value ofGoat (adult) 1010180350  Transfer to Next Period-----Culled animals (goats) --2856Farm Family Benefits After Financing23,6258,59944,411108,004126,300\a 70% of the 1,500 livestock farmers to be reached (1,050) are assumed to succeed in adopting the model. Returns per Family-Day of Labor1,575-9651,1871,388 On average they will receive  Rs 118,800 grant ($660).IRR = 263.8%, NPV = 685,775Main ProductionEggsunit1,200-3,6507,300Culled birdsunit3-612Poultry litterkg--50100\a 70% of the 3,730 livestock farmers to be reached (2,600) are assumed to succeed in adopting the model. On average they will receive  Rs 100,800 grant ($560). 
31 
Farm Model 7: Home gardens AM Table 29FINANCIAL BUDGET (AGGREGATED) Without(In Local) /a ProjectWith Project1 - 20123456 - 20Main Production Maize 4,5904,5905,1305,6705,6705,6705,670Black gram 3,3633,3633,7174,0714,0714,0714,071Cow pea --2,4922,8043,1153,1153,115Green gram --3,4133,7194,0254,0254,025Red Onion --13,10414,44815,79215,79215,792Manioc 23,10027,30027,30027,30027,30027,30027,300Potato --28,90028,90028,90028,90028,900Pumpkin 4,6205,2805,2805,2805,2805,2805,280Banana --2,4005,1207,4409,36010,160Eggs 4,8004,80010,00015,20015,20015,20015,200Culled birds 225225338450450450450Poultry litter --2040404040Sub-total Main Production 40,69845,558102,093113,001117,283119,203120,003Production Cost Investment Banana Plants -500500500500500500Herb plots (mukunuwenna & kangkung) -180-----Poultry shed -9,000-----Wire mesh -2,000-----Poultry feeders and waterers -600-----Biological assets (25 layer birds) -800-----Micro-irrigation set -90,000-----Fertilizers -275275275275275275Sub-total Investment Costs -103,355775775775775775Operating Ploughing 1,7371,7372,8712,8712,8712,8712,871Buffaloes work --9090909090Weedicides 255255343393443493493Water Management --614614614614614Pesticides 1681681,5581,5581,5581,5581,558Threshing 280280349354354354354Harvest and Drawing --5255585858Transport produce to stores 172172452452452452452Tools -252550505050Fertilizers --7501,5002,2503,0003,000Fuel --4284126168168Minerals --60120120120120Medicines --300600600600600Extension --3060606060Layer feed 300300600900900900900Poultry feeders and waterers --78150150150150Biological assets (25 layer birds) --240480480480480Egg trays --50100100100100Seeder 313313313313313313313Maize seed 305305282259259259259Black gram seed 155155155155155155155Cowpea seed --182182182182182Greengram seed --131131131131131Red onion seed --2,6582,6582,6582,6582,658Potato seed --8,4008,4008,4008,4008,400Pumpkin seed 609609609609609609609Fertilizers 3,0533,0955,5145,5505,5575,5575,557Sub-total Operating Costs 7,3457,41327,07529,01429,86630,70830,708Sub-Total Production Cost 7,345110,76827,85029,78930,64131,48331,483OUTFLOWS 7,345110,76827,85029,78930,64131,48331,483Cash Flow Before Financing 33,353-65,21074,24383,21286,64287,72088,520Net Financing -109,375-97-43-42--Cash Flow After Financing 33,35344,16674,14683,16986,60087,72088,520Change in Net Worth 3,0533,0955,5145,5505,5575,5575,557Sub-Total Change in Net Worth --38,401-----Farm Family Benefits After Financing 33,3535,76574,14683,16986,60087,72088,520Returns per Family-Day of Labor 2,9915083,1193,2173,2763,2633,262IRR = 162.4%, NPV = 375,041\a 70% of the 8,700 households to be reached (6,090) are assumed to succeed in adopting the model. On average they will receive  Rs 72,000 grant ($400). 
32 
Farm Model 8: Rice seed production (youth and women group) AMTable 30FINANCIAL BUDGET (DETAILED) Without(In Local) /a ProjectWith Project1 to 7123 to 7Main Production Paddy 116,840---Greenchili 120,000120,000170,000180,000Rice seed --100,800201,600Eggs 4,8004,80010,00015,200Culled birds 225225338450Poultry litter --2040Sub-total Main Production 241,865125,025281,158397,290Production Cost Investment Herb plots (mukunuwenna & kangkung) -180--Poultry shed -9,000--Wire mesh -2,000--Poultry feeders and waterers -600--Biological assets (25 layer birds) -800--Micro-irrigation set -90,000--Sub-total Investment Costs -102,580--Operating Ploughing 10,6801,80013,46024,520Weedicides 3,200-2,2404,480Water Management 2,4002,4003,2003,200Nursery Inputs 180180240240Pesticides 5,1153,4356,1907,800Harvest (combine harvester) 10,000-6,86013,720Transport produce to stores 3,2902,2504,7506,500Minerals --60120Medicines --300600Poultry feeders and waterers --78150Biological assets (25 layer birds) --240480Egg trays --50100Bags (50kg) --1,2882,520Rice seed 4,301-3,5847,168Greenchilli seed 240240320320TSP 2,9107502,7504,500Urea 7,1251,1255,0008,500MOP 1,260-7001,400Specific fertilizer mix 2,8502,8503,8003,800Sub-total Operating Costs 53,85115,33055,74091,078Sub-Total Production Cost 53,851117,91055,74091,078OUTFLOWS 53,851117,91055,74091,078Cash Flow Before Financing 188,0147,115225,418306,212Financial Inflows Transfer from Previous Period 2,6932,6932,7874,554Contribution from own savings -43,217--Grants -72,000--Sub-Total Financial Inflows 2,693117,9102,7874,554Financial Outflows Transfer to Next Period 2,6932,7874,5544,554Net Financing -115,123-1,767-Cash Flow After Financing 188,014122,238223,651306,212Sub-Total Change in Net Worth --43,217--Farm Family Benefits After Financing 188,01479,021223,651306,212Returns per Family-Day of Labor 4,0173,2934,5514,584IRR = 75.8%, NPV = 731,791\a 70% of the 50 households to be reached (35) are assumed to succeed in adopting the model. On average they will receive  Rs 72,000 grant ($400). 
33 
Farm Model 9: Protected agriculture (red bell pepper in 100 sq mt polytunnel) (youth and women group) AMFINANCIAL BUDGET (DETAILED) WithoutTable 31(In Local) /a ProjectWith Project1 to 20123456 to 20Main Production Red bell pepper --507,500507,500507,500507,500507,500Eggs 4,8004,80010,00015,20015,20015,20015,200Culled birds 225225338450450450450Poultry litter --2040404040Sub-total Main Production 5,0255,025517,858523,190523,190523,190523,190Production Cost Investment Purchased Inputs Herb plots (mukunuwenna & kangkung) -180-----Poultry shed -9,000-----Wire mesh -2,000-----Poultry feeders and waterers -600-----Biological assets (25 layer birds) -800-----Poly tunnel construction -621,600-----Bricks (for foundation -5,400-----Sub-Total Purchased Inputs -639,580-----Labor Skilled Labor -2,000-----Sub-total Investment Costs -641,580-----Operating Maintenance costs --62,16062,16062,16062,16062,160Tools -300300300300300300Funguicide -1,2001,2001,2001,2001,2001,200Harvest trays (bell pepper -12,00012,00012,00012,00012,00012,000Minerals --60120120120120Medicines --300600600600600Electricity -375375375375375375Extension --3060606060Layer feed 300300600900900900900Poultry feeders and waterers --78150150150150Biological assets (25 layer birds) --240480480480480Egg trays --50100100100100Nursery trays -780780780780780780Nursery growing media -2,4002,4002,4002,4002,4002,400Albert solution 10:52:10+TE -494949494949Grow bags -50,00050,00050,00050,00050,00050,000100 lt tank -400400400400400400Fertirrigation -34,00034,00034,00034,00034,00034,000Red pepper seed -1,1141,1141,1141,1141,1141,114Sub-total Operating Costs 300102,918166,136167,188167,188167,188167,188Sub-Total Production Cost 300744,498166,136167,188167,188167,188167,188OUTFLOWS 300744,498166,136167,188167,188167,188167,188Cash Flow Before Financing 4,725-739,473351,722356,002356,002356,002356,002Financial Inflows Disbursements on Long Term Loan -501,600-----Transfer from Previous Period 15158,3078,3598,3598,3598,359Grants -270,000-----Sub-Total Financial Inflows 15771,6158,3078,3598,3598,3598,359Financial Outflows Long Term Principal --113,814121,212129,091137,482-Long Term Interest --32,60425,20617,3278,936-Transfer to Next Period 158,3078,3598,3598,3598,3598,359Sub-Total Financial Outflows 158,307154,778154,778154,778154,7788,359Net Financing -763,308-146,471-146,418-146,418-146,418-Farm Family Benefits After Financing 4,72523,835205,251209,584209,584209,584356,002Returns per Family-Day of Labor 1,5754543,8653,8463,8463,8466,532IRR = None, NPV = 2,264,376\a 70% of the 350  12 youth/women groups to be reached (105) are assumed to succeed in adopting the model. On average they will receive  Rs 72,000 grant ($400).Financing Summary Inflows Grants -270,000-----Disbursements on Long Term Principal -501,600-----Transfer from Previous Period 15158,3078,3598,3598,3598,359Total Inflows 15771,6158,3078,3598,3598,3598,359Total Outflows 158,307154,778154,778154,778154,7788,359Net Financing -763,308-146,471-146,418-146,418-146,418- 
34 
Farm Model 10: Mango seedlings nursery (youth and women group) AMTable 32FINANCIAL BUDGET (AGGREGATED) Without(In Local) /a ProjectWith Project1 to2012345 to 20Main Production Mango seedlings ---900,0001,400,0001,900,000Eggs 4,8004,80010,00015,20015,20015,200Culled birds 225225338450450450Poultry litter --20404040Sub-total Main Production 5,0255,02510,358915,6901,415,6901,915,690Production Cost Investment Herb plots (mukunuwenna & kangkung) -180----Poultry shed -9,000----Wire mesh -2,000----Poultry feeders and waterers -600----Biological assets (25 layer birds) -800----Poly tunnel construction -621,600----Bricks (for foundation -5,400----Labor -2,000----Sub-total Investment Costs -641,580----Operating Purchased Inputs Maintenance costs --62,16062,16062,16062,160Granular Blue -12,60015,12018,90018,90018,900Funguicide -5,0006,0007,0007,0007,000Minerals --60120120120Medicines --300600600600Extension --30606060Layer feed 300300600900900900Poultry feeders and waterers --78150150150Biological assets (25 layer birds) --240480480480Egg trays --50100100100Compost -2,9754,1654,7604,7604,760Soil Cub -7509001,0501,0501,050Coir dust -4,5006,0007,5007,5007,500Labale -10,00012,50015,00015,00015,000Printed bag -45,40054,48063,56063,56063,560For grafting -2,1602,8803,6003,6003,600Polythene -3,6005,4007,2007,2007,200Mango seed -13,75021,25027,50027,50027,500Sand bed -5,0006,0007,0007,0007,000Wetfactant -220220220220220Insecticides -12,00013,50015,00015,00015,000Urea -5,0006,0007,5007,5007,500Sub-Total Purchased Inputs 300123,255217,933250,360250,360250,360Labor Labor -60,00090,000120,000120,000120,000Sub-total Operating Costs 300183,255307,933370,360370,360370,360Sub-Total Production Cost 300824,835307,933370,360370,360370,360OUTFLOWS 300824,835307,933370,360370,360370,360Cash Flow Before Financing 4,725-819,810-297,576545,3301,045,3301,545,330Net Financing -900,015381,482---Cash Flow After Financing 4,72580,20583,907545,3301,045,3301,545,330Residual value of   Transfer to Next Period ------Farm Family Benefits After Financing 4,72580,20583,907545,3301,045,3301,545,330Returns per Family-Day of Labor 1,5751941771,0612,0343,006IRR = None, NPV = 9,486,248\a 75% of the 12 youth/women groups to be reached (9) are assumed to succeed in adopting the model. On average they will receive  Rs 1,300,000 grant ($7,220). 
35 
Rice harvesting service providers Youth ModelTable 33FINANCIAL BUDGET (DETAILED) (In Local '000) With Project1234567 to 8910111213 to 1516 to 1819Main Production Harvesting rice service -2,7003,6004,0504,0504,0504,0504,0504,0502,7003,6004,0504,0504,050Production Cost Investment Combine harvesting machine 6,600-------6,600-----Operating Purchased Inputs Transport produce to stores -300400450450450450450450300400450450450Lubricants -27364141414141412736414141Maintenance costs -490490490490490490490490490490490490490Fuel -126168189189189189189189126168189189189Insurance -120120120120120120120120120120120120120Sub-Total Purchased Inputs -1,0631,2141,2901,2901,2901,2901,2901,2901,0631,2141,2901,2901,290Labor Skilled Labor --160240240240240240240-160240240240Sub-total Operating Costs -1,0631,3741,5301,5301,5301,5301,5301,5301,0631,3741,5301,5301,530Sub-Total Production Cost 6,6001,0631,3741,5301,5301,5301,5301,5308,1301,0631,3741,5301,5301,530OUTFLOWS 6,6001,0631,3741,5301,5301,5301,5301,5308,1301,0631,3741,5301,5301,530Cash Flow Before Financing -6,6001,6372,2262,5202,5202,5202,5202,520-4,0801,6372,2262,5202,5202,520Financial Inflows Disbursements on Long Term Loan 4,950-------4,950-----Transfer from Previous Period -536976767676761595369767676Contribution from own savings 642-------------Grants 1,008-------------Sub-Total Financial Inflows 6,600536976767676765,1095369767676Financial Outflows Long Term Principal -7798739771,0951,226---779873977--Long Term Interest -594500396278147---594500396--Transfer to Next Period 536976767676761595369767676-Sub-Total Financial Outflows 531,4421,4501,4501,4501,45076159531,4421,4501,45076-Net Financing 6,547-1,389-1,381-1,373-1,373-1,373--835,056-1,389-1,381-1,373-76Cash Flow After Financing -532488451,1471,1471,1472,5202,4389762488451,1472,5202,597Contribution from own savings -642-------------Farm Family Benefits After Financing -6952488451,1471,1471,1472,5202,4389762488451,1472,5202,597Returns per Family-Day of Labor -1,2404,2245,7365,7365,73612,60212,1894,8811,2404,2245,7366,2816,354IRR = 96.3%, NPV = 9,420Harvesting rice service (acre)300400450450300400450450450450450450450Financing Summary Inflows Grants 1,008-------------Contribution from own savings 642-------------Disbursements on Long Term Principal 4,950-------4,950-----Transfer from Previous Period -536976767676761595369767676Total Inflows 6,600536976767676765,1095369767676Outflows 531,4421,4501,4501,4501,45076159531,4421,4501,45076-Net Financing 6,547-1,389-1,381-1,373-1,373-1,373--835,056-1,389-1,381-1,373-76 
36 
Farmer organization - Agro-service Center FMTable 34FINANCIAL BUDGET (DETAILED) (In Local '000) /a With Project12345678910111213141516171819Main Production Harvesting rice service -2,7003,6004,0504,0504,0504,0504,0504,0504,0502,7003,6004,0504,0504,0504,0504,0504,0504,050Rice mechanical seeding  -540720810810810810810810810540720810810810810810810810Rice Transplanting mechanical -300450510510510510510510510300450510510510510510510510Weeding with machinery -360480540540540540540540540360480540540540540540540540Spraying mechanical -480640720720720720720720720480640720720720720720720720Rice Integrated Milling -1,8002,4002,7002,7002,7002,7002,7002,7002,7001,8002,4002,7002,7002,7002,7002,7002,7002,700Sub-total Main Production -6,1808,2909,3309,3309,3309,3309,3309,3309,3306,1808,2909,3309,3309,3309,3309,3309,3309,330Production Cost Investment Combine harvesting machine 6,600--------6,600---------2 Wheel Tractor with accesories 409-409------409-409-------4 Wheel Tractor with Trailer 3,295-3,295------3,295-3,295-------Weeder 101-101------101-101-------Rice Transplanter 661-661------661-661-------Seeder Multi-crop 203--------203---------Power sprayer 43-28------43-28-------Rice Mill Integrated 1,329--------1,329---------Office equipment (2 PCs, printer, etc.) 422--------422---------Office (40ft modified container) 810--------810---------Sub-total Investment Costs 13,873-4,494------13,873-4,494-------Operating Purchased Inputs Transport produce to stores -350600750840840840840840840350600750840840840840840840Lubricants -548190105105105105105105548190105105105105105105Maintenance costs -690860980980980980980980980690860980980980980980980980Fuel -252336378420420420420420420252336378420420420420420420Insurance -220250280280280280280280280220250280280280280280280280Sub-Total Purchased Inputs -1,5662,1272,4782,6252,6252,6252,6252,6252,6251,5662,1272,4782,6252,6252,6252,6252,6252,625Labor Skilled Labor -1,2001,9602,4002,4002,4002,4002,4002,4002,4001,2001,9602,4002,4002,4002,4002,4002,4002,400Sub-total Operating Costs -2,7664,0874,8785,0255,0255,0255,0255,0255,0252,7664,0874,8785,0255,0255,0255,0255,0255,025Sub-Total Production Cost 13,8732,7668,5814,8785,0255,0255,0255,0255,02518,8982,7668,5814,8785,0255,0255,0255,0255,0255,025OUTFLOWS 13,8732,7668,5814,8785,0255,0255,0255,0255,02518,8982,7668,5814,8785,0255,0255,0255,0255,0255,025Cash Flow Before Financing -13,8733,414-2914,4524,3054,3054,3054,3054,305-9,5683,414-2914,4524,3054,3054,3054,3054,3054,305Financial Inflows Disbursements on Long Term Loan 6,937-2,247------6,937-2,247-------Transfer from Previous Period -55127981011011011011012395512798101101101101101101Contribution from own savings 997------------------Grants 5,940------------------Sub-Total Financial Inflows 13,873552,374981011011011011017,176552,37498101101101101101101Financial Outflows Long Term Principal -1,2181,2971,7761,8922,015477508--1,2181,2971,7761,8922,015477508--Long Term Interest -4513724333181956433--4513724333181956433--Transfer to Next Period 55127981011011011011012395512798101101101101101101-Sub-Total Financial Outflows 551,7961,7672,3102,3102,310641641239551,7961,7672,3102,3102,310641641101-Net Financing 13,818-1,741607-2,213-2,210-2,210-541-541-1397,120-1,741607-2,213-2,210-2,210-541-541-101Cash Flow After Financing -551,6733162,2392,0952,0953,7643,7644,166-2,4481,6733162,2392,0952,0953,7643,7644,3054,406Contribution from own savings -997------------------Farm Family Benefits After Financing -1,0521,6733162,2392,0952,0953,7643,7644,166-2,4481,6733162,2392,0952,0953,7643,7644,3054,406IRR = 137.8%, NPV = 14,636\a Main income sources will be combined harvester, 4WT, Rice Trans Planter and Integrated Rice processing Mill.Financing Summary Grants 5,940------------------Contribution from own savings 997------------------Disbursements on Long Term Principal 6,937-2,247------6,937-2,247-------Transfer from Previous Period -55127981011011011011012395512798101101101101101101Total Inflows 13,873552,374981011011011011017,176552,37498101101101101101101Outflows 551,7961,7672,3102,3102,310641641239551,7961,7672,3102,3102,310641641101-Net Financing 13,818-1,741607-2,213-2,210-2,210-541-541-1397,120-1,741607-2,213-2,210-2,210-541-541-101 
37 
Milk collection center (180,000 lt/year) FMTable 35FINANCIAL BUDGET (DETAILED) (In Local) /a With Project1234567 to 20Main Production Milk Chilled -6,120,00012,240,00012,240,00012,240,00012,240,00012,240,000Production Cost Investment Chilling tank (500 lt) 500,000500,000-----Collection shed with utilities 150,000150,000-----Testing kit 100,000100,000-----Sub-total Investment Costs 750,000750,000-----Operating Transport produce to stores -10,98021,96021,96021,96021,96021,960Milk Fresh  -5,850,00011,700,00011,700,00011,700,00011,700,00011,700,000Electricity -19,17038,32538,32538,32538,32538,325Insurance -5,00010,00010,00010,00010,00010,000Sub-total Operating Costs -5,885,15011,770,28511,770,28511,770,28511,770,28511,770,285Sub-Total Production Cost 750,0006,635,15011,770,28511,770,28511,770,28511,770,28511,770,285OUTFLOWS 750,0006,635,15011,770,28511,770,28511,770,28511,770,28511,770,285Cash Flow Before Financing -750,000-515,150469,715469,715469,715469,715469,715Financial Inflows Disbursements on Long Term Loan 476,700476,700-----Transfer from Previous Period -117,169235,406235,406235,406235,406235,406Grants 300,000300,000-----Sub-Total Financial Inflows 776,700893,869235,406235,406235,406235,406235,406Financial Outflows Long Term Principal --221,200232,260243,873256,067-Long Term Interest -23,83547,67036,61024,99712,803-Transfer to Next Period 117,169235,406235,406235,406235,406235,406235,406Sub-Total Financial Outflows 117,169259,241504,276504,276504,276504,276235,406Net Financing 659,531634,628-268,870-268,870-268,870-268,870-Farm Family Benefits After Financing -90,469119,478200,845200,845200,845200,845469,715Returns per Family-Day of Labor -1,9911,6741,6741,6741,6743,914IRR = 167.8%, NPV = 2,530,865\a About 88 youth/women groups will be supported for agribusiness initiatives.Group (3-5 members) will receive a grant of Rs 600,000 ($3,330).Milk Chilled-90,000180,000180,000180,000180,000180,000Financing Summary Inflows Grants 300,000300,000-----Disbursements on Long Term Principal 476,700476,700-----Transfer from Previous Period -117,169235,406235,406235,406235,406235,406Total Inflows 776,700893,869235,406235,406235,406235,406235,406Outflows Long Term Repayments -23,835268,870268,870268,870268,870-Transfer to Next Period 117,169235,406235,406235,406235,406235,406235,406Total Outflows 117,169259,241504,276504,276504,276504,276235,406Net Financing 659,531634,628-268,870-268,870-268,870-268,870- 
38 
Project Summary Table 36ECONOMIC BUDGET (AGGREGATED) Without(In Local Million) ProjectWith Project1 to 2012345678910 - 20Main Production Yala & Maha Products 3,7473,7473,7564,0624,5445,0735,6366,1536,2566,2696,275Provision of Services ---49118194272350376385385Livestock Products 1,2251,2251,2242,3874,7386,9638,6979,89210,38810,38810,388Sub-total Main Production 4,9724,9724,9806,4999,39912,23114,60616,39417,02117,04317,049On-Farm Consumption Yala & Maha Products 564564564564564564564564564564564Livestock Products 496496496496496496496496496496496Sub-Total On-Farm Consumption 1,0601,0601,0601,0601,0601,0601,0601,0601,0601,0601,060Net Value Of Production 3,9123,9123,9215,4398,33911,17113,54615,33515,96215,98415,989Production Cost Investment Purchased Inputs Production costs --224554444Project Investments (SARP) --9401,2861,3081,2551,09114459252Fertilizers --011222222Sub-Total Purchased Inputs --9421,2891,3131,2611,09815065318Labor Labor --011111111Sub-total Investment Costs --9421,2901,3141,2621,09915167329Operating Purchased Inputs Production Costs 571571570614672731790843848850850Production costs 75757596139191252314344347348Livestock Products ---9232,7694,4575,6586,3676,6396,6396,639Project Investments (SARP) 77122030394753555555Production Inputs seeds & seedlings 898989102118135154175173173173Fertilizers 272272272280290299310321319319319Sub-Total Purchased Inputs 1,2331,2331,2392,2894,3396,2397,6568,5698,9008,9088,912Labor Labor 1,1861,1861,1891,3031,5041,7191,9402,1472,2192,2232,224Sub-total Operating Costs 2,4192,4192,4283,5925,8437,9589,59610,71611,11911,13111,136Sub-Total Production Cost 2,4192,4193,3704,8827,1579,22010,69510,86711,18611,16311,145Other Costs Other Costs -7881,7641,7611,5911,5311,443----OUTFLOWS 2,4193,2065,1346,6428,74810,75212,13910,86711,18611,16311,145Cash Flow 1,494706-1,213-1,203-4084201,4084,4684,7764,8214,844Net Economic Benefits 2,5531,766-154-1436511,4792,4675,5275,8355,8805,903_________________________________IRR = 18.6%, NPV = 6,488Project Summary PARTICIPATING AND FARM DISTRIBUTIONS With Project(In Units)1234567 to 20Participating Milk collection center (180,000 lt/year) -157314444518564564Farm Model 1: Commercial farmer (1.25 ha) -7001,7502,3102,4502,4502,450Farm Model 2: Medium market led (minor irrigation) 0.8 ha -2,1004,9008,40012,95017,15017,150Farm Model 3: Small rain fed  (supplementary irrigation) 0.5 ha -7001,4002,8004,2004,9004,900Farm Model 4: Improved milk production (9 head, 4 milking cows) -2314556799031,1271,127Farm Model 5: Goat rearing (22 head) -2174346518681,0851,085Farm Model 6: Backyard poultry -3570140210280280Farm Model 7: Home gardens -1,1332,5524,1415,9357,8897,889Farm Model 8: Rice seed production (youth and women group) -71421283535Farm Model 9: Protected agriculture (red bell pepper in 100 sq mt polytunnel) (youth and women group) -54124194229245245Farm Model 10: Mango seedlings nursery (youth and women group) -357999Rice harvesting service providers -183654729090Farmer organization - Agro-service Center -123455TOTAL-5,35612,05619,84428,37635,82935,829 
Sri Lanka
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience Project
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Document Date:
04/11/2019
Project No.
2000002583
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience (SARP) Project Design Report 
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review 
Note  
Document Date: 15/09/2019  
Project No. 
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department 
Annotated SECAP Review Note – Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience Project (SARP) 
1.  Introduction  
1.  The  goal  of  the  Smallholder  Agribusiness  and  Resilience  Project  (SARP)  is  to 
contribute  to  Sri  Lanka’s  smallholder  poverty  reduction  and  food  security  in  the  Dry 
Zone  provinces  of  Anuradhapura,  Kurunegala,  Mannar,  Matale,  Puttalam  and 
Vavuniya.  SARP  objective  is  resilience  building  and  market  participation  of  55,000 
rural  smallholder  households  in  the  project  area.  It  has  2  technical  components:  1) 
Component  1  “Capacity  building  for  climate  resilience  and  agribusiness 
development”  consisting  of  the  following  sub-components:  i)Sub-component  1.1 
Strengthening adaptive capacity for service providers and farmers for climate change; 
and  ii)  Sub-component  1.2  strengthening  capacity  for  farm  commercialization  and 
enterprise  development;  2)  The  Component  2  “Investments  for  climate 
resilience and agribusiness” has the following sub-components: i) Sub-component 
2.1.  Investments  in  climate  resilient  production  and  infrastructure;  and  ii)  Sub-
component 2.2. investments in farm commercialization and enterprise development. 
2.  The  SECAP  Preliminary  Review  Note  was  prepared  at  the  Concept  Note  stage  of 
project  design  in  order  to  identify  social,  environmental  and  climate  risks  to  the 
project and impacts of the project at an early stage of the design process. The overall 
objective  was  to  conduct  early  analysis  of  the  issues  so  that  solutions  and 
recommendations could  be incorporated into the project design and implementation. 
The  methodology  of  the  SECAP  review  note  consisted  of  meetings  with  key 
Government  entities,  Development  Partners,  individual  environmental  experts,  field 
visits  to  several  sites  in  the  dry  zone  of  the  country,  informal  discussions  with 
smallholder farmers and literature reviews.  
2.  Situational analysis and potential project impacts  
2.1  Socio-economic assessment 
3.  Economic  and  social  context:  Since  the  end  of  the  civil  war  in  May  2009,  the  Sri 
Lankan economy has grown at a steady rate, averaging 6-7 percent up to the present 
day  resulting  in  significant  poverty  reduction12.        Real  GDP  growth  was  recorded  at 
3.2  per  cent  in  2018,  compared  to  3.4  per  cent  in  the  previous  year3.  This  rapid 
economic growth rate has led to Sri Lanka being classified as a lower middle-income 
country with a per capita GDP of US$4,1044.   
4.  Sri  Lanka  is  currently  undergoing  a  structural  transformation  away  from  agriculture, 
with  agriculture  accounting  for  only  10  percent  of  GDP,  industry  (30.5  percent)  and 
services  (60.0  percent).  The  shift  is  a  result  of  productivity  growth  and  accelerating 
urbanization.  Agricultural  exports  as  a  share  of  GDP  have  also  declined  from  39 
percent  in  2000  to  21  percent  in  2016.  Remittances  from  Sri  Lankan  migrants 
working  abroad  and  tourism  play  an  important  role  in  offsetting  any  trade  deficit5. 
GDP  growth,  however,  dropped  slightly  to  a  rate  of  3.8  percent  in  the  first  half  of 
2017 as a result of drought affecting the agricultural and industrial sectors. However, 
this transformation is progressing relatively slowly and 30 percent  of the labor  force 
1 2015. WB. Systematic Country Diagnostic. 
2 2017. ADB. Country Partnership Strategy 
3 https://www.cbsl.gov.lk/en/news/the-annual-report-of-the-central-bank-of-sri-lanka-for-the-year-2018  
4 
https://www.cbsl.gov.lk/sites/default/files/cbslweb_documents/publications/annual_report/2018/en/3_KEI.p
df  
5 Remittances from migrant workers totaled around US$7 billion in 2015. 
remain in agriculture.  
5.  The  population  of  Sri  Lanka  in  2018  was  reported  at  21.6  million,  with  a  rural 
population  accounting  for  over  81  percent  of  the  total,  the  largest  share  in  South 
Asia6.      The  fertility  rate  is  relatively  low  compared  to  other  countries  in  the  region 
with annual population growth in 2016 reported as 1.1 percent, below the average for 
South Asia7.   
6.  Poverty situation: Extreme poverty is rarely found in Sri Lanka and where it exists 
is  concentrated  in  geographical  pockets.  Whilst  growth  has  contributed  to  poverty 
reduction,  some 32 percent  of the population remain  ‘nearly’ poor  or  ‘poor’ with the 
majority  living  in  the  rural  areas  and  estates  and  subsisting  slightly  above  the 
extreme  poverty  line  of  US$1.5  per  day.  The  population  groups  most  affected  by 
poverty  are  agricultural  smallholders,  plantation  workers,  underemployed  and 
landless labourers, particularly youth and women. Youth represent approximately 24 
percent  of  the  total  population,  and  are  the  group  with  the  highest  unemployment 
rate. 
7.  Sri Lanka, however, can be considered a development success story having surpassed 
many of the Millennium Development Goals8. Absolute poverty declined from 22.7 to 
4.1  percent  from  2002  to  2016  while  per  capita  consumption  of  the  bottom  40 
percent of the population grew at 3.3 percent a year, compared with 2.8 percent for 
the total population.9 This decline was mostly due to increased earnings linked to the 
shift to the industry and service sectors. Sri Lanka’s Human Development Index (HDI) 
also increased over the period 1990 and 2015, from 0.63 to 0.77, above the average 
for  this  category  of  countries.10  Sri  Lanka  was  ranked  73  out  of  188  countries, 
decisively  higher  than  other  lower  middle-income  countries.11  Primary  school 
enrollment  is  near  universal.  Secondary  and  tertiary  enrollment  has  substantially 
increased. Maternal and infant mortality rates are at very low levels. 
8.  These  achievements  at  the  national  level,  however,  hide  important  differences  by 
gender, age, ethnic group and geographic location.12 The 2012/13 poverty headcount 
index by district shows a wide disparity from 1.4 percent in Colombo to 28.8 percent 
in  the  Northern  Province  In  general,  pockets  of  poverty  can  be  found  mainly  in  the 
North  and  East.  The  income  gap,  according  to  the  Gini  coefficient,  is  high  (39.8  in 
2017) in comparison to other Asian countries.13  
9.  Over  the  last  three  decades,  the  food  security  situation  in  Sri  Lanka  has  improved 
significantly  but  in  2017  it  was  estimated  that  900,000  people  live  with  borderline 
food  consumption  levels.14  Whilst  availability  of  food  at  the  national  level  is  secure, 
this  does  not  necessarily  translate  to  food  and  nutrition  security  at  the  household 
level  for  all  segments  of  the  population,  especially  the  socially  and  nutritionally 
vulnerable  groups.  SARP  will  contribute  to  Sri  Lanka’s  smallholder  poverty  reduction 
and  food  security  in  the  Dry  Zone  region  through  its  gender,  targeting  and  social 
6 http://www.statistics.gov.lk/PopHouSat/VitalStatistics/MidYearPopulation/Mid-
year%20population%20by%20district.pdf  
7 In 1990, the total fertility rate in Sri Lanka was 2.48, whereas that in Bangladesh was 4.49 and 4.04 in 
India. In 2015 the figures were 2.06 in Sri Lanka, 2.14 in Bangladesh and 2.4 in India. 
8 IFPRI 2017. Agricultural Transformation in Sri Lanka. 
9 Based on the World Bank’s international poverty line for lower-middle income countries at US$3.2 per 
day.  
10 2016. UNDP. Human Development Report  
11.  Op cit. 
12 Department of Census and Statistics and Poverty Global Practice, World Bank Group, 2015. The Spatial 
Distribution of Poverty in Sri Lanka. 
13 World Bank databank. The Gini coefficient in some other lower middle-income countries in Asia was as 
follows: 39.5 for Indonesia (2013), 35.3 for Viet Nam (2016) and 35.1 for India (2011). 
14 Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the World Food Programme (WFP) Food Security study 
2017 
inclusion  strategy  focusing  on  nutrition  sensitive  approaches,  inclusion  of  youth, 
indigenous  people,  excluded  ethnic  groups,  marginalized  communities  and  people 
with disability in project activities as detailed in Appendix 8.  
10. Gender:  Sri  Lanka  is  ranked  75  out  of  149  countries  according  to  the  Gender 
Inequality Index. Over the last decade, Sri Lanka has made significant improvements 
with  respect  to  women’s  right.  According  to  the  RSPA,  Sri  Lanka’s  application  of 
gender equality ranks 2.8, with women still largely under-represented and unheard in 
decision  and  policy  making  bodies.  Although  the  gender  gap  in  agricultural 
employment  has  reduced  by  5  percent  over  the  period  2000-2017,  women  still 
represent 29 percent in 2017 (versus 24 percent for men) with a wage gap of over 43 
percent  compared  to  men.  Despite  the  notably  high  achievement  in  terms  of 
education  a  relatively  small  percentage  of  women  (30.2  percent)  participate  in  the 
labour market15.  
11. Women  play  an  important  role  in  agriculture  (in  addition  to  their  domestic  and 
reproductive  role)  comprising  53  percent  of  the  agricultural  labour  force  (often  as 
unpaid  family  labour)  and  women  headed  households  comprise  23  percent  of  rural 
households. The traditional norms, however, are biased in favour of men, resulting in 
obstacles  to  women’s  equitable  access  to  resources  (land,  capital–  including  credit) 
and markets, and the control of assets. SARP will aim to focus attention to women’s 
empowerment  and  voice  including  skills  and  capacities  (at  producer  organizational 
level,  and  within  communities  as  farmer  leaders)  and  the  promotion  of  economic 
activities  best-suited  to  them.  Particular  consideration  will  also  be  given  to  nutrition 
determinants for the potential to engage  with women and adolescent girls in project 
activities. 
12. SARP  places  greater  emphasis  on  nutrition  and  considering  the  multidimensional 
causes  of  malnutrition,  SARP  will  have  a  basket  of  nutrition  sensitive  activities. 
Nutrition  sensitive  approaches  including  selection  of  nutrition  sensitive  value  chains; 
nutrition-sensitive Farm Business School; increasing availability and dietary diversity 
through  nutritious  foods  (rice,  vegetables,  fruits,  legumes,  homestead  garden, 
poultry,  fishery  along  with  increased  productivity  and  diversified  income  through 
these  commodities  and  linking  the  farmers  to  local  markets  and  enterprises  will  be 
operationalized through SARP components. The project will closely work with WFP to 
address  malnourishment  challenges  in  the  Dry  Zones  focusing  on  increased 
production,  availability  and  consumption  of  diverse,  safe  and  nutritious  food.  The 
social inclusion strategy in Appendix 8, outlines a nutrition-sensitive approach with a 
situational  analysis  on  nutrition  of  the  targeted  beneficiaries  in  Dry  Zone  and 
activities  to  address  it.  SARP  will  enhance  awareness  and  nutritional  knowledge 
through  social  behaviour  change  communication  (SBCC  -good  nutrition  awareness, 
knowledge,  attitudes  and  practices)  on  nutrition  practices,  cooking  healthy  food 
platter, balanced diet and food diversity for all members of household. 
13. Only  16  percent  of  all  privately-owned  land  belongs  to  women  in  Sri  Lanka.  This 
inhibits  their  access  to  market,  subsidies,  credit,  irrigation  water  and  agricultural 
assets.  Among  the  paid  agriculture  labourers,  women  get  lesser  wages  than  their 
male  counterparts.  The  lack  of  substantial  source  of  income  and  absence  of  assets 
such  as  land  for  collateral  has  made  it  difficult  for  women  to  avail  high  value  loans 
that could enable them to move up the agricultural value chain. 
14. Historically, Sri Lanka had segregated male and female farmer organizations. This has 
resulted  in  limited  scope  for  women  to  share  a  common  platform  with  men  to 
participate  in  equal  decision-making  and  dialogue.  The  lack  of  social  capital  in  the 
agriculture sector, commercial spaces and markets, has created barriers for women’s 
involvement in trade and commerce. They are less involved in commercial agriculture 
15 About eighty percent of adult women in Sri Lanka have reached at least a secondary level of education 
with  no  significant  difference  with  men.  The  former  can  be  compared  to  35  percent  in  India  and  26.5 
percent in Pakistan. (2015 data). 
and medium-scale industries that could raise their incomes and profits16. 
15. A  majority  of  women-headed  households  are  involved  in  subsistence  farming  in  Sri 
Lanka.  Women  face  greater  resource  constraints  to  credit,  land,  etc.  than  men, 
despite  making  up  a  greater  percentage  of  the  overall  agricultural  labor  force.   
Women  are  overburdened  with  farming  and  household  activities.  Limited  mobility  is 
another  serious  constraint  to  access  to  necessary  inputs,  resources,  training  and 
markets. There has been a marked increase in Women Headed Households (WHHs) in 
post-war Sri Lanka. The 2012-13- Household and Income Expenditure Survey showed 
that in Sri Lanka, 1.2 million households or 23 percent of the households are WHHs 17.  
Taking  cognizance  of  the  economic  and  social  vulnerabilities  of  Women  Headed 
Households (WHHs), the Ministry of Women and Child Affairs supported technically by 
UNFPA is implementing a national action plan on WHHs. The targeting of WHHs will be 
aligned  with  IFAD’s  approach  of  supporting  government  programmes  and  policies. 
50% percent of SARP beneficiaries are women.  
16. The  gender  strategy  in  Appendix  8  details  the  project  activities  and  approaches 
towards  gender  equality  and  women's  empowerment.  Some  key  elements  of  it 
include  building  programme  staff  capacity  to  deliver  on  gender  responsive  and 
socially  inclusive  programme  implementation;  selection  of  gender  responsive 
agribusiness  and  climate  resilient  agribusiness  value  chains,  FBS,  gender  responsive 
M&E and gender sensitive selection of interventions to maximise returns to women’s 
labour,  reduce  drudgery  and  unpaid  work  and  support  their  social  and  economic 
empowerment  such  as  direct  targeting  of  homestead  gardening  interventions  and 
farm  production  to  local  markets  through  capacity  building  of  women,  youth  and 
marginalized  groups;  collectivised  women’s  groups  in  marketing,  advanced  value 
chains and rural enterprises; women as change agents and gatekeepers of NRM and 
rejuvenated water systems 
17. Youth:  between  the  ages  of  15-29,  represent  approximately  24  percent  of  the 
population of the country of which over 75 percent of whom live in rural areas. Youth 
continue  to  face  challenges  related  to  education,  civic  engagement,  political 
participation  and  employment  in  particular.  Unemployment  for  people  aged  between 
20-24  and  25-29  is  around  44  percent  and  34  percent,  respectively  (2014).  Sri 
Lanka’s  vulnerability  to  climate  change  has  a  strong  impact  on  youth  population, 
limiting  their  job  opportunities  and  income-generating  ability  in  agriculture.  The 
challenges  of  young  women’s  participation  in  the  labour  force  are  even  more 
pronounced.  Whilst  young  male  participation  is  around  74.8  percent,  only  35.8 
percent  of  young  females  participate  in  the  labour  force.    Other  factors  for  youth 
unemployment  include mismatched  skills,  limited  employment  creation in  the  formal 
private sector and lack of entrepreneurship. Self-employment is also constrained by a 
lack  of  business  skills  and  financial  literacy  and  the  inability  of  youth  to  access 
finance. In rural areas youth who are self-employed often have little to show in terms 
of  income  and  market  access.  The  trend  of  departure  of  youth  from  agriculture  and 
rural outmigration is seen across Sri Lanka. 
18. SARP will mainstream the participation of youth and incentivize their engagement in 
the  project  activities.  The  project  will  provide  tailor  made  activities  to  match  the 
aspirations  of  youth  through  youth  incubation  scheme,  agri-business  development 
16 2018. FAO. Country Gender Assessment of the Agriculture and Rural Sector in Sri Lanka 
http://www.fao.org/3/CA1516EN/ca1516en.pdf 
17  Government  of  Sri  Lanka,  MoW&CA,  National  Action  Plan  on  Women  Headed  Households  2017-  2019.  The  National 
Framework  for  Women  Headed  Households  (2017-  2019)  has  been  introduced  specially  to  improve  the  socio  economic 
situation  of  women  affected  by  the  conflict.  The  government  as  well  as  the  Banks  have  provided  credit  facilities  for 
enhancing livelihood development activities for galvanizing the national policy for eradication of poverty. A recent initiative 
of  the  Ministry  of  Women  and  Child  Affairs  is  the  directive  obtained  from  the  Treasury  to  allocate  a  minimum  of  25% 
investment for economic development of rural women. Programs are in place to encourage girls to enter into technological 
fields, which provide opportunities in accessing the labour market. 
along the value chains, mechanisation of agriculture, introducing new technology and 
innovation  models  and  building  capacities  as  change  agents,  training  and  skill 
development in agriculture. The project aims to train and build capacities of youth, to 
generate  employment  opportunities  along  the  value  chain  and  facilitate  their  access 
to rural finance, rural organizations, knowledge, skills and markets (Refer to Appendix 
8 for more details on youth focused interventions). 
19. Indigenous  People:    The  principles  of  IFAD’s  policy  on  “Engagement  with 
Indigenous  people”  will  be  fully  adhered  to  by  SARP.    The  project’s  approach  to 
engaging  with  indigenous  people  includes  the  free  and  informed  consent  of  all  its 
beneficiaries  and  that  there  is  a  focus  on  the  principle  of  community-driven 
development,  valuing  local  knowledge,  access  to  markets,  gender  equality  and 
promoting  climate-resilient  agriculture.  SARP  is  guided  by  social  inclusion  strategy, 
whereby  specific  emphasis  to  these  groups  during  the  community  mobilization.  The 
project  would  ensure  that  these  communities  engage  in  village  level  activities  and 
that  they  are  not  left  behind  from  the  benefits  of  the  project.  The  project  at  the 
outset  will  seek  to  identify  and  determine  the  extent  of  IP's  in  the  project  sites  and 
based  on  this  will  ensure  their  active  engagement  in  SARP.  It  should  however  be 
noted that the extent of IP populations in the project sites has not been determined 
at the design stage. Sri Lanka has small number of indigenous communities. 
20. The  forest-dwelling  Wanniyala-Aetto  (also  referred  to  as  Vedda)  comprise  a  very 
small  community  of  indigenous  people.  Their  deep-rooted  connections  to  their 
ancestral lands enabled them to maintain their cultural and spiritual traditions. They 
are  distinguished  by  their  hunting  and  gathering  way  of  life,  by  their  unwritten 
language,  which  is  closely  related  to  but  distinct  from  Sinhalese,  by  their  beliefs  in 
traditional gods and ancestor  spirits, and by the importance  of ancestral lands to all 
aspects  of  their  life.  They  lived  mostly  as  nomadic  forest-dwellers  in  the  remote 
eastern  parts  of  the  country.  Currently,  the  entire  community  is  in  danger  of 
extinction and has been facing the brunt of marginalisation, landgrabbing, relocation 
and  exclusion.  Labelled  as  poachers  and  alienated  from  their  ancestral  land,  they 
have  taken  up  to  Sinhala  and  have  had  marriages  for  their  self-preservation  and 
involuntary  assimilation.  Sinhala-speaking  Veddas  are  found  primarily  in  the 
southeastern part of the country, especially in the vicinity of Bintenne in Uva District. 
There  are  also  Sinhala-speaking  Veddas  who  live  in  Anuradhapura  District  (project 
area)  in  the  North  Central  Province.  The  Project  through  its  social inclusion  strategy 
would include them as beneficiaries if they are present in the areas of intervention of 
SARP. 
21. People  with  disabilities:  The  social  inclusion  strategy  of  SARP  recognizes  the 
vulnerabilities  faced  by  people  with  disabilities.  The  exclusion  and  vulnerabilities  are 
more  pronounced  for  elderly,  single  women,  widows,  ex-combatants  and  youth  with 
disabilities.  SARP  will  pay  specific  emphasis  to  these  groups  during  the  community 
mobilization for their inclusion in project activities. The project implementation team 
will be trained to ensure access and benefits of the project to people with disabilities.  
22. Nutrition: Under-nutrition remains a concern in Sri Lanka, with around 20 percent of 
children under  five years  of age regarded as  stunted. Additionally, 13  percent  suffer 
from wasting and 33 percent are underweight. More than 50 percent of children and 
women  suffer  from  anaemia,  with  more  than  9  percent  of  the  female  population 
affected  by  severe  chronic  energy  deficiency.  The  high  rate  of  low  birth  weight  (18 
percent) is also a major predictor of under nutrition. Although, the level of stunting is 
lower than other countries in the region (ranked at 44 out of 132 countries) there is 
significant  inter-provincial  variation.  More  than  33  percent  of  women  and  nearly  37 
percent  of  men  suffer  from  food  deficiency.  According  to  the  RSPA,  Sri  Lanka’s 
nutrition policies are prioritizing nutrition as a key national development strategy with 
a  rank  of  4.8,  achieving  satisfactory  outcomes.  The  infant  mortality  rate  has 
decreased from 10 to 7.5 deaths per 1,000 live births over the period 2010-2017, and 
life  expectancy  increased  up  to  75  years18.  The  selection  of  the  project  districts  was 
based on a combination of vulnerability and household data on poverty; vulnerability 
and  sensitivity  to  shocks  and  stresses  (drought  and  flood);  food  insecurity  and 
malnutrition  and  land  degradation,  agro-ecological  zone  (dry  zone)  and  others.  The 
project would aim at increasing incomes and food security of the farmers through its 
activities following a nutrition sensitive approach which is detailed in Appendix 8. 
2.2 
Environment and climate context, trends and implications 
a. 
Environmental assessment 
23. Sri Lanka is a moderate-sized, continental island, listed as the 25th largest island in 
the world (Calder, 2009).  Sri Lanka lies just  south of the Tropic  of  Cancer between 
5˚ 55’ and 9˚ 51’ North Latitude and 79˚ 41’ and 81˚ 54’ East Longitude.  Sri Lanka 
is  endowed  with  a  coastline  of  1,620  km.    it  covers  a  total  area  of  65,610  km2, 
including  62,705  km2  of  land  area  and  2,905  km2  of  inland  water  bodies  (C&SD, 
2009)19. 
24. The relief of the country is characterized by the existence of central hills and, in cross 
section,  a  step-like  arrangement  referred  to  as  peneplains.    The  first  peneplain 
extends  from  0  metres  above  sea  level  to  300  metres.    The  second  peneplain  rises 
from 301 to 1,500 metres.    In these areas, the land rises gently, with low, rounded 
hills  and  are  a  special  place  for  the  development  of  the  ancestral  Cascade  system 20 
that augment water supply for crop production. 
25. Biodiversity.    Due to the isolation of the island for the greater part  of the past 20 
million  years,  Sri  Lanka’s  biodiversity  is  characterized  by  an  outstanding  degree  of 
endemism among the  wild flora and faunal communities and is considered to be the 
richest  per  unit  area  in  the  Asian  region  with  regard  to  mammals,  reptiles, 
amphibians,  fish  and  flowering  plants21.  Additionally,  it  is  considered  one  of  25 
biodiversity  hotspots  in  the  world.    Under  the  Fauna  and  Flora  Protection  Ordinance 
and  the  Forest  Conservation  Ordinance  Sri  Lanka  has  a  total  area  declared  as 
protected  areas  of  around  2.3  million  ha,  representing  about  35%  of  the  total  land 
area  (DWC,  FD,  2016).  A  number  of  protected  areas  are  located  in  the  Project 
Districts,  as  shown  in  the  figure  1  (natural  parks  and  protected  areas  under  the 
jurisdiction  of  the  Forest  Department).  They  notably  host  elephant  sanctuaries,  but 
there are also other wild animals like monkeys close to the project sites.  To address 
this 
in  close 
proximity/adjacent to Protected Areas (see paragraph 54 below). 
the  project  selection  criteria  exclude 
interventions 
issue 
Figure  1:  Protected  Areas  of  Sri  Lanka  (under  the  Jurisdiction  of  the  Forest  Department  and 
Department of Wildlife Conservation) (Source for PAs under the jurisdiction of the FD: MoE, 2012a; 
source for PAs under the jurisdiction of the DWC: DWC, 2015)22 
18 FAO Statistics & Global Nutrition Report, 2016 
19 2nd Communication to the UNFCCC 
20 FAO, together with the Ministry of Agriculture, has developed a proposal for Declaration of the Cascade 
Tank-Village System (CTVS) as a globally important agricultural heritage systems (GIAHS) 
21  Ministry of Environment, Climate Change Secretariat, 2010.   Strengthening Capacity for Climate Change Adaptation.  
ADB TA 7326 (SRI) 
22 Ministry of Mahaweli Development and Environment. 2015. National Biodiversity Strategic Action Plan 2016-2022 
Figure 2: Results of a countrywide survey of Asian elephant Elephas maximus distribution in Sri 
Lanka  over  2,714    5  ×  5  km  grid  cells.  (d) 
Severity of human–elephant conflict23. 
 The survey of the Endangered Asian 
elephant (Fernand, P et al, 2019) highlights 
the fact that most of elephant-human 
conflicts coincides with that 
of elephant presence outside protected 
areas (Figure 2). The project Districts are 
the one where the severity of human-
elephant conflict is very important (in red 
on the map).  
The survey results highlight the failure of 
the approach consisting in the segregation 
of people and elephants at a landscape 
level, by confining elephants to protected 
areas. According to this study the only 
option is to manage elephants in situ 
through a human– 
elephant coexistence model that promotes 
stakeholder 
awareness and mitigates conflict by 
protecting villages and 
cultivations with barriers such as electric 
fences. 
26. Forests.   Sri Lanka has a land area of 6,561,000 hectares and a total of 1,951,473 
hectares  of  natural  forests  covering  29.7%  of  land  area24.    In  addition,  there  are 
about 75,000 hectares of Forest Plantations comprising of Teak, Mahogany, and other 
local species which accounted for nearly 1% of the land area.  Most  of the fuel wood 
(Eucalyptus  camaldulensis,  E.  tereticornis  and  Acacias),  and  teak  plantations  are 
located  in  the  dry  zones  of  Sri  Lanka25.      Rubber  and  Coconut  Plantations  and  other 
agro-forestry  systems  such  as  home  gardens,  cover  approximately  another  20%  of 
the land area.  In Sri Lanka agricultural activity has been identified as a key driver of 
23 Fernando, P., De Silva, M., Jayasinghe, L., Janaka, H., & Pastorini, J. (2019). First country-wide survey of the 
Endangered Asian elephant: Towards better conservation and management in Sri Lanka. Oryx, 1-10. 
doi:10.1017/S0030605318001254 
24 http://www.forestdept.gov.lk/index.php/en/#    
25   http://www.fao.org/3/ad678e/AD678E04.htm 
deforestation26 (UNREDD, 201668) among others.  The estimated extents of forest by 
forest cover class and by District in the project area are presented in the table below. 
Furthermore,  due  to  deforestation  and  agricultural  encroachment  the  human-wildlife 
conflict  has  worsened  in  the  country  and  especially in  the  dry  zone  areas  where  the 
elephant herds and their routes exist. 
Table 1: Estimated extents of forest by forest cover class and by District in the SARP area27 
Source: Forest Department 
District 
Total of 
land area 
of the 
district 
(ha) 
Dense 
forest 
Open 
and 
sparse 
forest 
Mangrove  Savannah 
Total 
Percentage 
of district 
area 
Project area 
Anuradhapura  
717900 
173317 
85006 
Kurunegala 
481600 
7873 
13845 
0 
0 
Mannar  
199600 
106958 
17799 
1351 
Matale 
199300 
60711 
11797 
0 
Puttalam 
307200 
58283 
23937 
1958 
Vavuniya  
196700 
104385 
18435 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
258393 
36 
21718 
4.50 
126108 
63.20 
72508 
36.40 
84178 
27.40 
122820 
62.40 
27. Water.  Sri Lanka's inland wetland ecosystems comprises flood plains, swamps, lentic 
waters  (tanks/reservoirs  and  ponds)  (169,941  ha),  river  basins  (5,924,500  ha)  and 
wet villu grasslands (12,500 ha).  There are 103 radial river basins in Sri Lanka with 
considerable  variations  in  hydrological  characteristics.    The  Mahaweli  river  system  is 
the  longest  originating  from  central  highlands  and  flowing  through  north  central  dry 
zone to the eastern coast.  Sri Lanka depends primarily on its surface water resources 
for  agricultural,  domestic  and  industrial  uses.    Agriculture  is  largely  sustained  by 
direct  rainfall  and  irrigation  water  extractions  from  rivers.      The  traditional  Tank 
Cascade  System,  a  network  of  small  tanks  to  large  reservoirs  that  exist  in  the  Dry 
Zone, is aimed at recycling and re-using of water through a network of small to large 
scale tanks.  More than 12,000 operational tanks and reservoirs have been identified 
within  the  Dry  Zone,  and  a  similar  number  still  remains  abandoned28.  These 
reservoirs provide services such as irrigation, domestic water, hydroelectricity power 
and fresh water fishery.  The reservoirs also contribute to ecological services such as 
ground  water  recharge,  maintenance  of  aquatic  ecosystems  and  biodiversity29.  
Groundwater  use  is  less  than  5%  of  the  total  water  stocks.    Water  for  agriculture  is 
drawn  from  monsoon  precipitation  and  the  extensive  irrigation  system  of  reservoirs.  
Agro-wells tap the sub-surface water resources. 
Table 2: Number of Tanks in the project area 
Source: DAD, 2019 
 District 
Anuradhapura 
Kurunegala 
Mannar 
Mapped 
DAD total 
4278 
6204 
735 
3479 
5545 
491 
Figure 1: Reservoirs of Sri Lanka (Source: 
DAD, 2011) 
26 The annual deforestation rate is 1.14% according to FAO estimates 
27 Natural Resources Management Division, Ministry of Environment and Renewable Energy, 2014.  
National Action Program (NAP) For Combating Land Degradation in Sri Lanka 2015 – 2024 
28 GOSL. Climate Smart Irrigated Agriculture Project: Environmental Assessment & Management 
Framework. 2018 
29 Biodiversity Secretariat, Ministry of Mahaweli Development and Environment.  National Biodiversity Strategic Action 
Plan 2016-2022 
Project area 
Matale 
Puttalam 
Vavuniya 
Total 
400 
1548 
957 
430 
1296 
733 
14122 
11974 
28. The  dry  zone  is  dotted  with  more  than  16,000  ancient  irrigation  reservoirs  (tanks), 
relics  of  an  ancient  hydraulic  civilization,  extending,  in  total,  over  nearly  60,000  ha, 
and providing perennial and seasonal sources of water (Survey Dept., 2007)30. 
29. The  project  needs  to  consider  the  possible  negative  impact  on  biodiversity    and  the 
environment  (such  as  the  negative  impact  on  environment  of  rehabilitation  of  roads 
and  the  rehabilitation/construction  of  infrastructures)  and  take  necessary  steps  to 
mitigate  it  under  the  foreseen  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Framework 
(ESMF)      For  example,  where  possible,  project  activities  can  include  reforestation  or 
biodiversity corridors along agricultural lands, cultivate crops that are less likely to be 
damaged  by  elephants  and  other  large  mammals  (example  of  crops  avoided  by 
elephants  are  listed  in  the    figure  2  below),  and  maintain  buffer  zones  between 
national parks/protected areas and farmlands.  
Figure 2. Cultivated crops avoided by wild elephants in agricultural areas31 
30. The overuse of agrochemicals is a major problem in the country, resulting in illnesses 
and affecting soil quality and water pollution. The agricultural intensification activities 
of  the  project  may  exacerbate  this  issue  and  therefore  it  is  imperative  to  conduct 
training  workshops  for  farmers  and  extension  workers  on  safe  and  sustainable 
agricultural practices and where possible to promote organic farming.   
31. The wastage and overuse of water for agricultural lands is another issue which needs 
attention.  With  the  construction  of  canals  and  other  infrastructure  works,  the 
recharge  of  aquifers 
is  less  thereby  affecting  the  groundwater  table.  The 
infrastructure  component  of  this  project  such  as  the  development  of  access  roads 
may worsen this issue.  
30 Biodiversity Secretariat, Ministry of Mahaweli Development and Environment.  National Biodiversity 
Strategic Action Plan 2016-2022 
31 Santiapillai, Charles & Wijeyamohan, Shanmugasundaram & Bandara, Ganga & Athurupana, Rukmali & 
Dissanayake, Naveen & Read, Bruce. (2010). An assessment of the human-elephant conflict in Sri Lanka. 
J. Sci. (Bio. Sci.). 39. 21-33. 10.4038/cjsbs.v39i1.2350. 
32. Waste  management  is  a  major  problem  in  Sri  Lanka  where  daily  3700  tons  of 
municipal solid waste is generated and most of this is dumped in open sites causing 
health  hazards  and  degrading  ecosystems5.  The  project  should  consider  initiatives 
such  as  the  use  of  compostable  packaging  instead  of  plastics  especially  in  the 
commercializing component, and encourage households to make organic compost, in 
order to improve waste management.  
b. Climate trends and impacts 
33. Sri Lanka’s climate is characterised by the tropical moonson system, and the rainfall 
pattern  is  of  primary  significance  in  defining  the  island’s  climate.      Based  on  the 
variation in precipitation, Sri Lanka’s climate is generally divided into four seasons:  
  First inter-monsoon season (FIM): March –April  
  Southwest monsoon season (SWM): May –September 
  Second inter-monsoon season (SIM): October-November  
  Northeast monsoon season (NEM): December- February  
34. Sri  Lanka  has  traditionally  been  generalized  into  three  climatic  zones:  i)  the  ‘wet 
zone’  in  the  Southwestern  region  including  central  hill  country  (mean  annual  rainfall 
over  2,500  mm  without  pronounced  dry  periods);  the  ‘dry  zone’  covering  the 
Northern  and  Eastern  parts  of  the  country  (mean  annual  rainfall  of  less  than  1,750 
mm  with  a  distinct  dry  season  from  May  to  September);  iii)  and  the  ’Intermediate 
Zone’, along the central hills except in the South and the West.  Sri Lanka has been 
further  divided  into  46  agroecological  regions  that  take  into  account  the  monthly 
rainfall  amount  and  distribution  in  addition  to  the  parameters  considered  for 
identifying climate zones.   
Observed change 
35. Temperature.  The annual mean surface air temperature is in the range 20o C-30o C, 
with an average of about 27o C.   The analysis of the meteorological data during the 
period  1960-2000  show  that:  number  of  warmer  days  has  increased;  number  of 
warmer nights has increased; number of colder days has decreased; number of colder 
nights has decreased32.  
Figure 3.  Observed warming trends in mean annual temperature (Source: Zubair et al. 2005). 
32 2nd Communication to the UNFCCC, 2012 
36. Precipitation.  No  clear  trend  has  been  observed  in  precipitation.    However,  many 
researchers agree that the variability of rainfall has increased over time, especially in 
Yala  season  (Chandrapala  2007b;  Eriyagama  et  al.    2010;  Punyawardena  et  al., 
2013b).    Moreover,  the  number  of  consecutive  dry  days  has  increased  and  the 
consecutive  wet  periods  have  decreased  (Premalal,  2009;  Ratnayake  and  Herath, 
2005).    Some  studies  suggest  changes  in  distribution  can  even  lead  to  shifting  of 
agro-ecological  boundaries  (Eriyagama  et  al.,  2010;  Mutuwatte  and  Liyanage, 
2013)33. Indeed, the comparison of average precipitation during 1911-1940 and 
1961-1990  (see  figure  4)  indicates  an  expansion  of  the  dry  zone  (MAP  < 
1,750 mm). 
Figure4. A comparison of average precipitation during (a) 1911-1940, and (b) 1961-1990, 
indicating expansion of the dry zone (MAP < 1,750 mm) (Source: Imbulana et al. 2006) 
33 National Adaptation Plan for Climate Change Impacts in Sri Lanka.  2016 
(Prepared by U. R. Ratnayake, Department of Civil Engineering, University of Peradeniya, 
Sri Lanka)34. 
37. It has been observed an increase in frequency and intensity of climatic events along 
the  last  decades.  The  Dry  Zone  was  particularly  affected  by  these  natural  disasters.  
For  example,  the  table  below  show  the  number  of  damaged  tanks  within  the  SARP 
area in 2012 and 2014 because of floods. 
Table 3: Village Irrigation Systems in the SARP project area damaged in 2012 and 2014 floods 
by district.  (Source: Department of Agrarian Development) 
Year 
2012 
2014 
District 
Damaged 
Reservoirs  & 
diversions 
Area 
affected 
Damaged 
reservoir
s 
Damaged 
Diversions 
Area affected ha 
Anuradhapura 
113 
10,595 
253 
Kurunegala 
Mannar 
Matale 
Puttalam 
Vavuniya 
84 
46 
136 
85 
78 
2,328 
758 
1,136 
3,628 
2,927 
22 
- 
21 
18 
30 
2 
- 
- 
8 
8 
4 
28,018 
9,286 
486 
5,037 
1,893 
Increase in mean annual temperature of 0.2°C per decade between 1961 and 1990. 
Increase in mean daytime maximum temperatures of 1°C between 1961 and 2001. 
Increase in mean nighttime minimum temperatures of 0.7°C between 1961 and 2001. 
Climate trends include: 
 
 
 
  Decrease in island-wide mean annual precipitation of 144 mm between 1961 and 1990. 
 
 
Increase in frequency and intensity of floods. 
Increase in frequency and intensity of droughts. 
34 Eriyagama, N.; Smakhtin, V.; Chandrapala, L.; Fernando, K. 2010. Impacts of climate change on water 
resources and agriculture in Sri Lanka: a review and preliminary vulnerability mapping. Colombo, Sri 
Lanka: International Water Management Institute. 51p. (IWMI Research Report 135). 
doi:10.5337/2010.211 
  Uncertain rates of sea level rise around Sri Lanka, specifically, but accelerated rates across Asia 
with increases of 3.1 mm per year from 1993 – 2003, compared to 1.7 mm to 2.4 mm per year 
for the 20th century35.   
Projected trends 
38. According  to  the  National  Adaptation  Plan  for  Climate  Change  Impacts  in  Sri  Lanka 
2016 - 202536key global projections applicable to Sri Lanka are projections for Asia in 
fourth and fifth assessments reports (AR4 and AR5) of IPCC.  Some of the predictions 
with  high  confidence  (very  likely)  applicable  for  South  Asia  are:  mean  annual 
temperature will increase by greater than 3o Celsius; increase in precipitation by mid-
21st  century;  increased  precipitation  extremes  related  to  monsoons,  and;  oceans 
getting warmer in tropical Asia (Hijioka et al., 2014).   
39. Projections  are  less  certain  about  the  changes  in  rainfall  pattern.    However,  locally 
downscaled  models  have  predictions  on  change  in  precipitation  towards  both 
directions - increasing as well as decreasing mean annual rainfall.  Some studies have 
projected  increased  rainfall  in  wet  zone,  intermediate  zones  and  north  and  south-
western  dry  zones  and  decreased  rainfall  in  other  areas  of  dry  zone  by  2050 
(Basnayake  and  Vithanage,  2004).  Recent  projection  has  predicted  that  climate 
pattern in Sri Lanka is getting more polarized where the Dry zone becomes drier and 
Wet zone becomes wetter in years to come (Marambe et al., 2015; Punyawardena et 
al., 2013 a).   
40. The  figures  below  present  the  predicted  temperature  change  and  the  predicted 
precipitation change over Sri Lanka by PRECIS RCM in combination with ECHAM4 GCM 
for B2 scenario37. 
Figure 4: Predicted temperature change over Sri Lanka by PRECIS RCM in combination 
with ECHAM4 GCM for B2 scenario. 
35 USAID, 2018. Climate Risk in Sri Lanka: Country Risk Profile.  
36 Climate Change Secretariat, Ministry of Mahaweli Development and Environment. 2016. National 
Adaptation Plan for Climate Change Impacts in Sri Lanka 2016 - 2025 
37 UNDP, 2016. Technical Feasibility: Report Strengthening the resilience of smallholder farmers in the Dry 
Zone to climate variability and extreme events through an integrated approach to water management. 
Figure 5: Predicted precipitation change over Sri Lanka by PRECIS RCM in combination 
with ECHAM4 GCM for B2 scenario 
Projected changes include: 
 
 
Increase in mean annual temperature of between 0.8°C and 2°C by 2060. 
Increase in both daily maximum and minimum temperatures of between 0.7°C and 0.8°C by 
2050. 
  Projections  of  change  in  precipitation  vary,  with  some  predicting  decreases  and  some 
increases, but generally, indicate an increase in variability and extreme events. 
Increase in cyclone frequency and intensity. 
Increased frequency and severity of floods, drought incidence, and landslides. 
 
 
  Total sea level rise of between 0.2 and 0.6 meters by mid-century, compared to 1971-2010 
levels.38 
c. Climate change adaptation measures 
41. The  National  Climate  Change  Policy  of  Sri  Lanka  of  2011  has  been  developed  to 
provide  guidance  and  directions  to  address  the  adverse  impacts  of  climate  change 
efficiently  and  effectively.  Its  main  objectives  are  to:  1)  Sensitize  and  make  aware 
the communities periodically on the country’s vulnerability to climate change; 2) Take 
adaptive  measures  to  avoid/minimize  adverse  impacts  of  climate  change  to  the 
people, their livelihoods and ecosystems; 3) Mitigate greenhouse gas emissions in the 
path  of  sustainable  development.;  4)  Promote  sustainable  consumption  and 
production;  5)  Enhance  knowledge  on  the  multifaceted  issues  related  to  climate 
change  in  the  society  and  build  their  capacity  to  make  prudent  choices  in  decision 
making; 6) Develop the country’s capacity to address the impacts of climate change 
38 USAID, 2018. Climate Risk in Sri Lanka: Country Risk Profile. 
effectively  and  efficiently;  7)  Mainstream  and  integrate  climate  change  issues  in  the 
national  development  process.  The  National  Adaptation  Plan  to  Climate  change  has 
identified  and  listed  adaptation  measures  for  the  different  priority  socio-economic 
sectors.   
42. It  is  worth  noting  that  SARP  is  fully  aligned  on  the  proposed  adaptation  measures.  
The table below lists all the adaptation measures proposed by the Adaption Plan that 
SARP has already integrated in its foreseen activities.  In addition, and in coherence 
with  the  recommendations  of  the  National  Adaptation  Plan,  SARP  will  develop  a 
participatory  approach  as  well  as  an  integrated  river-basin  approach  that  considers 
the multiple uses of water and risks to such multiple users.   
43. It  is  also  planned  to  timely  communicate  on  climate  extreme  events  to  at-risk 
communities. To this end the project will promote the use of modern communication 
methods (SMS/texts,  free call-in services) to connect  farmers to information  centres 
on  climate  smart  agriculture,  marketing  information  and  early  warning  for  climatic 
hazards.    In  the  field  of  Agriculture-Research  SARP  will  also  contribute  to  fill  the 
identified  gap  related  to  new  methods  to  improve  water  use  in  agriculture,  and  how 
to  enhance  the  adoption  of  such  knowledge,  and  use  new  cultivars  and  improved 
seeds,  especially  in  those  regions  that  are  currently  facing  water  deficits  during  the 
dry seasons. 
Table 4: Adaptation options39 already integrated in SARP  
Sectors 
Adaptation options 
  Educational  and  outreach  activities  to  change  management  practices  to 
those  suited  to  a  changing  and  more  variable  climate.    Extend  agro-
forestry  especially  in  uplands  to  increase  climate  resiliency,  provide 
different  sources  of  income,  and  reduce  land  erosion,  especially  in 
uplands  and  with  very  steep  slopes,  through  Ecosystem  Based 
Approaches (EBA) like integrated water resource management (IWRM) 
  Enhance  irrigation  efficiency  and/or  expand  irrigation,  through:  i)  the 
rehabilitation of the traditional village irrigation systems where the quality 
of  the  works  is  paramount;  ii)  the  promotion  of  an  integrated,  holistic 
approach  to  enhancing  water  and  land  management  through  the 
interconnected elements of irrigation systems 
  Promote  Conservation  Agriculture  (CA)  as  a  sustainable  agriculture 
production  system  whose  farming  and  soil  management  techniques 
protect  the  soil  from  erosion  and  degradation,  improve  its  quality  and 
biodiversity, and contribute  to the preservation  of the natural resources, 
water and air.  
  Make  farmers  aware  of  climate  change  and  inform  them  about  different 
adaptation options including showcasing through “demonstration farms”. 
 
Increase productivity in the plantation and minor export crop sectors, and 
diversify agricultural production and food crop choices. 
  Develop  drought-resistant  and,  if  possible,  fast-growing  rice  varieties  to 
reduce the risk of yield losses from variable and unpredictable rains. 
 
Increase  agricultural  productivity  by  introducing  improved  varieties  and 
improved management practices. 
 
Introduce and promote water harvesting techniques. 
  Upgrading  of  village 
irrigation  systems, 
the  upstream 
catchments, based on cascade level natural resource development plans. 
The interventions will include: (i) reforesting the watershed (ii) restoring 
the reservoir bund (dam), spill, sluice and canals supplying the fields, and 
(iii) introducing low-cost drip irrigation technologies 
including 
Agriculture/Food 
Security 
Water resources 
  Encourage  minor  storage  reservoirs  and  promote  participatory  micro-
39 GFDDR.  Vulnerability, Risk Reduction, and Adaptation to Climate Change SRI LANKA.  In Climate Risk 
and Adaptation Country Profile.  April 2011 
watershed management. 
  Decrease  water  demands,  e.g.    by  increasing  efficiency,  reducing  water 
losses, water recycling, changing irrigation practices. 
 
Increase  water  supply,  e.g.    by  using  groundwater,  improving  or 
stabilizing watershed management, de-silting the reservoir bed,   
Energy 
Industry 
and 
  Promote renewable energy technologies in place of fossil-fuel fired plants 
wherever  they  are  technologically  and  economically  feasible;  local  and 
low-cost technologies for rural areas. 
Increase the use of biogas technologies, especially in rural areas. 
 
  Prepare baseline maps of disaster risk areas for specific extreme weather 
events. 
  Develop  early  warning  systems  (using,  for  instance,  GIS  techniques)  for 
Health /Safety 
monitoring of natural disasters. 
  Develop and establish RS/GIS/early warning systems in vulnerable areas 
2.3  Target groups profile 
44. The goal of the SARP is to contribute to Sri Lanka’s smallholder poverty reduction and 
food security in the Dry Zone region. The development objective is to build resilience 
and  market  participation  of  40,000  rural  smallholder  households  (1,80,000)  in  the 
project  area.  The  duration  of  the  project  will  be  six  years.40    Women  constitute  50 
percent (90,000) and youth 20% (36,000) of the total beneficiaries.  
45. SARP will target: (i) landless farmers and food insecure smallholder farmers, most of 
whom  cultivate  between  1  to  2  hectares  of  farm  and  but  with  potential  for 
productivity  increases;  (ii)  marginal  farmers  with  holding  sizes  of  less  than  1.0  ha.; 
(iii) small farmer organisations set up to manage on-farm water use with the potential to 
graduate into social and business enterprises; (iv) women (at least 50% of beneficiaries) 
and youth (at least 20% of beneficiaries) involved in value adding and service-based 
enterprises  and  as  smallholder  farmers;  and  (v)  other  vulnerable  groups  including 
households  suffering  severe  malnutrition,  people  with  disabilities  ,  indigenous 
communities,  single  women,  women-headed  households,    and  ex-combatants  who 
will  receive  specific  attention  to  facilitate  their  social  integration  in  agricultural 
production  and  economic  activities.  The  target  beneficiaries  will  be  40,000 
smallholder farmers, with a focus on women, youth as well as other rural vulnerable 
groups.  Value chain actors who are not directly involved in farming will not be direct 
target beneficiaries but might from project activities.  
46. The  farm  families  can  be  divided  into  three  categories  of  households  –  the  extreme 
poor,  poor  with  potential  to  sell  in  local  markets  and  more  commercially  oriented 
smallholder  farmers.  The  extreme  poor  are  non-labour  constrained  households  that 
are  rainfed  producers,  with  small  fragmented  holdings,  as  well  as  the  landless,  who 
are  food  insecure.  The  project  during  the  initial  stage  of  implementation  through  it 
community  mobilisation  strategy  will  ensure  that  they  are  made  aware  of  project 
components,  proactively  participate  and  benefit  from  project  activities.    The  main 
category  of  farmers  will  be  vulnerable  and  moderately  poor  households  that  are 
economically  active  in  agriculture  and  are  located  in  cascades  with  minor  irrigation 
systems. These farmers produce surpluses of rice, depending on the water availability 
and  during  the  Yala  season  some  cash  crops,  albeit  the  level  of  marketed  sales  is 
usually low. The households are often food secure but at risk of slipping back into the 
lower ranks of poverty due to climate and economic shocks.  
40 The estimated number of households to be reached was derived from previously implemented projects 
linked  to  the  overall  budget  of  the  project  and  adjusted  for  the  dry  zone  rural  population  that  is  more 
dispersed than the potential areas.  
47. The  better-off  farmers  and  other  value  chain  actors  are  more  commercially  oriented 
and play an important role in value chain development. SARP will draw the better off 
farmers together with the moderately poor households, youth and other  value chain 
actors  into  selected  value  chains  with  links  to  processors  and  other  private  sector 
buyers.  An  attempt  was  made  to  estimate  the  number  of  farm  households  in  each 
category  through  expert  consultative  processes.  Some  10%  of  the  households  were 
defined  as  better-off  more  commercially  oriented,  70%  regarded  as  poor  with 
potential and 20% as the most vulnerable and food insecure. Using an average of 4.5 
people  per  household,  this  translates  into  a  total  of  1,80,000  direct  beneficiaries. 
SARP will reach at least 50 percent women and 20 percent youth as beneficiaries. The 
project  will 
that  promote  gender  equality,  women 
empowerment  and  social inclusion.  The  targeting  strategy  as  detailed  in  appendix  8 
provides  detailed  vulnerability  analysis,  profile  targets,  risk  mitigation  measures, 
inclusion strategies. The vulnerability analysis provides an overview of the challenges 
faced by farmers including landlessness, smallholding, remoteness and inaccessibility 
to markets, institutions and inputs, meagre coverage under social protection, limited 
household incomes and assets, indebtedness,  food insecurity, limited access to rural 
finance  and  enterprises,  climate  change  vulnerability  and  social  and  economic 
marginalization faced by ethnic, indigenous, disabled, youth and women farmers.The 
main target subgroups are described below (Refer to Appendix 8) 
introduce  approaches 
48. Food  insecure  smallholder  farmers.  The  primary  livelihood  of  over  85%  of  the  rural 
population  in  the  proposed  districts  is  small  scale  subsistence  farming  which  is 
associated with high climatic risks. This is the most representative of the agricultural 
producer groups found  in the area.  Farmers  rely on timely rains as the major water 
source  for  the  farming.  Failures  of  and/or  delays  in  the  monsoon  rains,  erratic  and 
insufficient  rains,  prolonged  dry  months  as  well  as  floods  negatively  affect  their 
agriculture-based  livelihoods.  There  are  considerable  risks  associated  with increased 
investment  on  higher  value  crops  given  the  uncertainty  of  water  availability 
throughout the production period and the vagaries  of the market. Most of the crops 
rely on seasonal rains and without sufficient water for irrigation production is severely 
impeded.  Water  conservation  practices  are  also  not  adequately  followed  by  them. 
Significant  water  loss  is  happening  in  surface  irrigation.  Water  is  critical  to  the 
livelihoods  of  farmers  and  attention is  consequently  given  towards  the  rehabilitation 
of  the  traditional  village  irrigation  systems  where  the  quality  of  the  works  is 
paramount.  Risks of crop losses and reduced productivity are high when irrigation is 
insufficient.  Significant  numbers  of  community  water  harvesting  systems  (minor 
irrigation  schemes)  in  the  project  area  are  in  dilapidated  status,  thereby  at  reduced 
functional  capacity  to  store  sufficient  rain  water  for  irrigation.  The  main  causes  for 
the  damages  are  erratic  rainfalls,  poor  maintenance  due  protracted  civil  war  and  in 
some  cases,  requirement  of  high  investment  to  restore  to  functional  status.  Food 
insecure  smallholder  farmers  account  for  approximately  70%  of  the  project  area 
population. These households are essentially characterised by: (i) low production and 
productivity of the main crops (rice, maize etc.); (ii) vulnerability to climate change; 
(iii)  lack  of  or  low  access  to  production  factors  (land,  improved  inputs,  water  and 
capital); (iv) limited access to mechanisation; (v) weak organisational capacity; and 
(vi)  low  income  levels.  In  general,  they  do  not  produce  enough  to  cover  their  food 
needs  at  times  of  climate  shocks.  The  objective  for  these  farmers  is  to  increase 
production  for  home  consumption  and  sales  in  local  markets  through  adapted 
production technologies, improved access to water and inputs and enhanced income 
generation.  
49. Market  oriented  family  farms  with  some  level  of  organisation.  These  are  family 
farmers  with  diversified  farming  systems  that  comprise  around  10%  of  the  farming 
population  in  the  project  area.  Some  of  these  households  have  up  to  2  ha  of  farm 
land  and  are  able  to  produce  for  the  market.  They  are  able  to  access  agricultural 
inputs  and  mechanical  traction  and  operate  irrigated  or  partially  irrigated  systems. 
The objective for this group is to stabilise production through the more efficient use of 
water and the introduction of climate-smart technologies. By increasing the regularity 
of supplies and the quality and volume of agricultural production stronger links will be 
made to market outlets.  
50. Women.  Women  make  up  about  51%  of  the  population  and  in  rural  areas  they  are 
mainly involved in agricultural production and the keeping of small livestock. Women 
do  farm  work  such  as  tillage,  weeding,  planting,  harvesting,  transportation  and 
processing,  and  also  take  care  of  the  family  nutrition  as  well  as  the  reproductive 
roles.  Women  heads  of  household,  widows  and  young  women  are  socially,  culturally 
and  economically  disadvantaged  but  are  responsible  for  ensuring  the  well-being  of 
their  families  and  agricultural  activities.  Many  women-headed  households  regard 
farming  as  an  important  option.  They,  however,  face  the  following  challenges:  (i) 
unequal  access  to  resources  (land,  water,  credit);  (ii)  lack  of  business  development 
and  management  skills;  and  (iii)  limited  voice,  leadership  and  decision-making 
capacity  in  farmer  organizations  and  other  groups.  SARP  will  promote  specific 
activities  for  women  organized  into  groups  for  processing  (using  labour  saving 
technologies), marketing and service provision. Specific training to enhance women’s 
empowerment  and  effective  participation  in  activities  and  household  welfare  will  be 
included  in  the  FBS  curricula.  Other  activities  targeting  women  concern  nutrition, 
where women are at the centre of food preparation for the family. 
51. Youth:  Youth  are  leaving  agriculture  as  it  is  unattractive  to  them.  Interest  in 
agriculture is diminishing as it is not regarded as a modern sector and it fails to bring 
a  respectable  and  secure  income.  The  lack  of  incentives  in  the  agricultural  sector 
(lack of land and capital to invest) leads to a large number of rural youth migrating to 
urban areas in search of formal employment. SARP will develop an incubation system 
to  address  the  paucity  of  youth  skills  in  farming  and  related  value  chain  activities. 
Both  technical  and  entrepreneurial  skills  of  young  people  will  be  developed 
culminating  in  the  preparation  of  business  plans  for  implementation,  which  may  be 
co-financed  by  a  matching  grant  following  specific  eligibility  criteria  and  approval 
procedures.  It  will  also  educate  women  and  men  on  the  effects  of  ownership  and 
inheritance  rights,  including land.  In  areas  where  female  groups  and  youth’s  groups 
do  not  exist,  the  project  will  conduct  gender  awareness  training  at  community  level 
and set up women’s and youth-based self-help groups for knowledge-sharing on GAP 
and  SLM  practices.  Youth  entrepreneurship  will  also  be  promoted  through  the  Farm 
Business School.  
52. Extreme poor. This includes a significant disadvantaged group due to their economical 
and social exclusion, physical or mental disabilities. The ex-combatants are generally 
more elderly, between the ages of 50 and 80, and are both socially and economically 
disadvantaged.  There  are  also  landless  and  smallholder  farmers  trapped  in 
indebtedness with little or no social protection.  They will be targeted through training 
and capacity building activities linked to service provision, income-generation and off-
farm income opportunities.  
3.  Institutional analysis 
A. Institutions 
53. Sri  Lanka’s  institutional  framework  for  service  provision  is  complicated  by  multiple, 
and  at  times,  overlapping  levels  of  government.    A  large  number  of  institutions 
provide different services in the water, agriculture, and disaster management areas, 
including  water  resources  planning  and  management,  groundwater  management, 
agricultural  extension,  research,  provision  of  agriculture-related  services,  drinking 
water supply and the management of watersheds.  
54. For  example,  the  National  Ministries  in  charge  of  the  different  sectoral  policies 
(environment,  agriculture,  disaster  management…)  work  in  the  field  through  their 
own  decentralized  arms  that  align  with  District  and  Divisional  Secretariats.    In 
parallel, through the 13th Amendment to the Constitution in 1987, Provincial Councils 
run  their  own  Cabinet  of  Ministers.  As  a  result,  some  technical  subjects,  such  as 
agriculture  and  irrigation,  are  devolved  to  these  Provincial  Councils  without  a  clear 
delimitation  of  responsibilities  with  the  decentralized  bodies.  It  explains  why  the 
irrigation  systems  in  a  cascade  are  often  managed  by  several  organizations  based 
nationally or provincially. A recent  study highlighted the  fact that he  water sector in 
Sri Lanka is heterogeneous and saddled with complex socio-political issues involving a 
multiplicity  of  state  institutions41.  The  study  indicates  that  the  absence  of  clear 
national  and  sectoral  policies  is  a major  constraint  for  planning  water  sector 
interventions and investments. The same nature of institutional constraints has been 
identified  in  the  Agriculture  sector:  institutional  fragmentation,  low  capacity,  lack  of 
strategic  policy  direction,  policy  distortions,  and  structural  constraints42.The  strategy 
adopted by SARP to address these challenges is to:  
i) 
Strengthen coordination at three levels: national, regional and local.  
a.  The Secretary to the Presidential Secretariat will oversee the SARP National 
Steering  Committee  (NSC)  and  a  Steering  Committee  will  comprise 
representatives  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  Ministry  of  Planning  and  the 
respective departments of the Ministry of Agriculture as well as the Forest 
and  Wildlife  Departments  of  the  Ministry  of  Mahawelli  Development  and 
Environment.  Coordination  will  be  made  with  the  Ministry  of  Mahawelli 
Development  and  Environment  which  has  responsibility  for  forestry  and 
wildlife.  
b.  At  District  Level  coordination  will  be  conducted  through  the  District  Multi-
Stakeholder  Committees,  Chaired  by  the  District  Secretary.  Members  will 
include  the  Director  Planning,  Asst.  Commissioner,  DAD  &  Land,  the 
Provincial-District  Director  Agriculture,  Provincial-District  Engineer,  the 
Irrigation  Department,  Provincial-District  Director  Animal  Production  and 
Health,  District  Forest  Officer,  District  Director  Wildlife,  Environment 
Officer, a representative from the Chamber of Commerce and Project staff 
– of SARP and collaborating projects (UNDP, WFP).  
c.  At  local  level,  Coordination  Committees  will  be  set  up  at  the  level  of  the 
include  project  staff, 
Instructor, 
Agrarian  Service  Centre  and  members  will 
counterpart  ARPAs/  AIs, 
representatives of FOs and the private sector.;  
the  Livestock  Development 
ii) 
Give priority to capacity building of local services. The project will mainly 
support the Agrarian Service Centres to transform them into a one-stop-shop 
facility for advisory and support services. They will be equipped and trained to 
deliver  integrated  planning  and  implementation  services  for  climate  smart 
water and agricultural management in cascade systems.  
55. The  main  relevant  institutes  are:  i)  The  Institute  of  Policy  Studies  of  Sri  Lanka 
(IPS),  an  autonomous  institution  that  aims  to  contribute  to  socio-economic 
development  through  high  quality,  policy-oriented  economic  research;  ii)  The 
International  Water  Management  Institute  (IWMI),  a  non-profit,  scientific 
research organization focusing on the sustainable use of water and land resources in 
developing  countries.    IWMI  is  the  lead  centre  for  the  CGIAR  Research  Program  on 
Water,  Land  and  Ecosystems  (WLE);  iii)  The  Natural  Resources  Management 
Centre  (NRMC),  mandated  to  optimize  the  use  of  land  and  water  resources  on 
scientific basis to improve national agricultural productivity in a sustainable manner; 
41 Samad, Madar & Aheeyar, Mohamed & Royo Olid, Jaime & Arulingam, Indika. (2016). The Political and 
Institutional Contexxt of the Water Sector in Sri Lanka. An overview. 10.2871/115395. m. 
42GOSL. 2018. Climate Smart Irrigated Agriculture Project: Environmental Assessment & Management Framework 
iv)  The  Central  Environmental  Authority  (CEA)  administers  provisions  of  the 
National Environmental Act, conducts environmental studies, specifies standards, and 
works to increase public awareness.  
B. Policies, strategies and plans  
56. SARP’s  interventions  are  consistent  with  key  national  policies  and  strategies  that 
address disaster management, climate change, and biodiversity conservation. 
57. The key relevant legislation, policy and plans are the following: 
  The Constitution of Sri Lanka establishes the principle that the State shall protect, 
preserve  and  improve  the  environment  for  the  benefit  of  the  community.  The  13th 
amendment to the constitution introduced a new level of institution for environmental 
protection  and  management:  the  provincial  government  also  has  legislative  and 
executive  power,  the  North  Western  Provincial  Environmental  Authority  to  control, 
prevent and monitor all environmental related activities; 
  The National Environmental Act.  No.  47 of 1980 & its amendments provides 
conservation  and  development  guidelines  for  natural  resources  including  water,  soil, 
fisheries resources, forest, flora and fauna in Sri Lanka; 
  The  Environmental  Protection  License  (EPL),  Sri  Lanka’s  major  regulatory 
program for control of industrial pollution; 
  The  State  Land  Ordinance  Act  No  13  of  1949  provides  necessary  guidelines  to 
the protection of any public stream, the protection of springs, reservoirs, lakes ponds 
lagoons,  creeks,  canals,  aqueducts, the  construction  or  protection  of  roads,  as well as 
the prevention of the erosion of soil; 
  The  Flood  Protection  Ordinance  Act  No.22  of  1955  has  provisions  to  prepare 
schemes for protection of a flood area, and regulations for management of flood area 
and acquisition of land for the purpose of the ordinance;  
  The  Fauna  &  Flora  Protection  Ordinance  Act  No.    49  of  1993  and  its 
amendments provides for the protection, conservation and preservation of the fauna 
and flora of Sri Lanka and identifies five categories of protected areas: Strict Nature 
Reserves, National Parks, Nature Reserves, Jungle Corridors and Intermediate Zones 
including sanctuaries; 
  The  Sri  Lanka  Land  Reclamation  &  Development  Corporation  (SLLRDC)  Act 
No.  15 of 1968 provides for the formation of the SLLRDC;  
  The Mines and Mineral Act No.33 of 1992 which states that mining falls within the 
purview  of  the  Geological  Survey  and  Mines  Bureau  (GSMB).    Exploitation  for 
minerals, including sand, must be licensed under the Act by the GSMB; 
  The Water Resources Board Act No.  29 of 1964, key player in the formulation of 
national  policies  relating  to  the  control  and  use  of  water  resources,  as  well  as 
coordination  of  projects  undertaken  by  Government  departments,  local  authorities 
and  public  corporations  relating  to  the  conservation,  utilization  development  of  the 
subterranean water resources; 
  The  Forest  Ordinance  No.    16  of  1907,  including  Amendments,  deals  with 
forest  management/forest  conservation  (Forest  Reserves,  protection  of  forest 
and forest Produce); 
  The National Wetland Policy (2005) give effect to the National Environment Policy 
and  other  relevant  national  policies,  while  respecting  national  commitments  towards 
relevant  international  conventions  on  wetland  protection  to  which  Sri  Lanka  is  a 
party;  
  The  Mahaweli  Authority  of  Sri  Lanka  Act  (Act  No.23  of  1979)  establishes  the 
Mahaweli  Authority  of  Sri  Lanka,  which  is  the  authority  responsible  for  the 
implementation  of  the  Mahaweli  Ganga  Development  Schemes  including  the 
construction  and  operation  of  reservoirs,  irrigation  distribution  systems  and 
installations for the generation and supply of electrical energy; 
  The  Antiquities  Ordinance  (Revised  in  1956  &  1998)  is  the  main  legislation 
dealing with the preservation of cultural assets in Sri Lanka: 
  The  Disaster  Management  Act  No.    13  of  2005  includes  the  formulation  of  a 
National Policy and Program on the management of disasters which shall provide for 
the  protection  of  life  of  the  community  and  environment  and  the  maintenance  and 
development of disaster affected areas; 
  The  Disaster  Management  Policy  of  Sri  Lanka  (2013)  advocates  for  a 
participatory,  multi-agency,  multi-stakeholder  engagement  in  line  with  national  and 
international standards for effective disaster relief and response; 
  The World  Heritage  Convention  aims  at  assuring  the  effective  implementation  of 
any measure to protect designated World Heritage properties. 
58.  Regarding Climate Change and biodiversity issues the Government of Sri Lanka has 
adopted a set of instruments to fulfill its commitments as Party to the UNFCCC and to 
the  UNCBD,  and  to  put  in  practice  such  commitments.  Legal  texts  adopted  in  this 
connection  include  :  The  National  Climate  Change  Policy  (NCCP)(2011,  which 
promotes  climate  change  adaptation  and  mitigation  within  the  framework  of 
sustainable  development;  The  National  Climate  Change  Adaptation  Strategy 
(NCCAS),  2011–2016;  the  Intended  Nationally  Determined  Contribution 
(INDC)(2016);the  National  Adaptation  Plan  for  Climate  Change  Impacts  in 
Sri  Lanka  2016  –  2025,  and  the  National  Biodiversity  Strategic  Action  Plan 
2016 – 2022, which ensures that Sri Lanka’s rich biodiversity is conserved and used 
in a sustainable manner 
4.Social category 
59. The  project  will  have  positive  impacts  on  the  environment  by  developing  an 
integrated  watershed  approach  through  the  rehabilitation  of  the  existing  traditional 
Tank Cascade System in the target areas, conducive to greater water retention in the 
dry zones and a more  climate resilient agriculture.   Following the screening exercise 
(Annex  7,  part  A)  the  environmental  and  social  category  assigned  to  SARP  is 
B.    
60. The  project  will  be  carried  out  in  different  Districts  that  include  protected  areas 
(national  parks  and  their  buffer  zones,  wildlife/nature  reserves,  areas  of  high 
cultural/religious  significance).  The  project  took  this  situation  into  account  by 
integrating  the  following  criterion  in  the  list  of  criteria  for  the  selection  of  project 
sites:  “Existence  of  Protected  Areas:  the  project  sites  must  not  be  in  close 
proximity/adjacent to the Protected Areas” (PDR, § 54).  
61. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be conducted to set 
out the principles, rules, guidelines and procedures to assess the  environmental and 
social  risks  and  impacts  for  the  project.    The  annexed  ESMP  details  the  actions 
needed  to  implement  the  measures,  in  accordance  with  national  and  international 
rules on this matter.  
5.  Classification  
62. The climate risk classification for SARP is High.  The project is located in areas 
where rural development projects have experienced significant weather-related losses 
and  damages:  flood  events  have  negatively  impacted  roads,  bridges  and  irrigation 
schemes;  droughts,  prolonged  dry  spells  and  floods  have  adversely  affected  the 
targeted smallholders.  The Dry Zone reflects mainly rain-fed cropping systems which 
are  subject  to  significant  annual  variations  in  rainfall,  and  therefore  productivity 
fluctuations.    The  project  relies  also  on  water-based  (groundwater  and/or  surface 
water)  development  in  areas  where  significant  depletion  and/or  reduced  flow  has 
occurred from the effects of climate change and/or from overutilization. 
63. An  in-depth  climate  risk  analysis  climate  vulnerability  analysis  will  be  conducted 
during project implementation to further inform the adaptation measures that SARP is 
expected to bring, including improvements in cropping technology, which will increase 
farmer’s  resilience  to  climate  variability  and  associated  climate  change  impacts.  The 
study will be submitted for OPR review during project implementation. 
6.  Recommendations for project design and implementation  
64. As  the  environmental  categorization  of  the  project  is  B  any  activity  that  falls  within 
the list below should be prohibited: 
  No  single  activity  should  be  engaged  in  the  protected  area  or  area  proposed  for 
protection  or  area  of  known  high  conservation  value  or  nearby  an  area,  which  is 
known  to  be  a  critical  wildlife  habitat  (irrespective  of  whether  or  not  inside  a 
protected area).  
  Critical  wildlife  habitats  would  essentially  include  habitats  of  globally  threatened 
species  as  per  the  red  list  prepared  by  the  IUCN  and  those  that  are  listed  as  totally 
protected  species  in  the  Fauna  and  Flora  Protection  Ordinance  (FFPO),  or  project/ 
activity that depend on resources from those areas. 
  Any activity that involves cutting of trees or land clearance within 100m on either side 
of the banks  or edge of the rivers, streams, water  courses  or water  sources kept as 
riparian reserve for conservation 
  Any activity that involves significant conversion or degradation of critical forest areas 
or related critical natural habitats 
  Any  activity  that  may  adversely  impact  nationally  and/or  internationally  renowned/ 
listed physical cultural resource (within 50 m of its premise). 
  Activities that could lead to invasion or spread of invasive weeds and feral animals or 
the use of toxic chemicals such as intensive use of pesticides. 
  Activities  that  could  dangerously  lead  to  the  exposure  of  sensitive/critical/vulnerable 
habitats 
  Activities  that  would  increase  human-wildlife  conflict  –  especially  human-elephant 
conflict. 
  Construction  of  large  new  infrastructure  within  or  directly  adjacent  (in  buffer  zones) 
to protected areas 
  Water  irrigation  schemes  rehabilitation  and/or  development  with  more  than  100 
hectares per scheme 
  Construction/  rehabilitation/upgrade  of  roads  that  entail  a  total  area  being  cleared 
above 10 km long 
  Extraction  of  material  such  as  gravel,  sand,  metal,  etc.  from  protected  areas. 
Extraction  of  these  resources  outside  the  protected  areas  are  subject  to  an 
Environmental  Impact  Assessment  in  conformity  with  the  national  laws  and 
regulations. 
65. These  recommendations  must  be  considered  during  the  project  implementation 
phase: 
  Awareness  and  stakeholder  engagement 
in 
relation 
to  sustainable  and 
environmentally appropriate and climate resilient farming, land and water systems. 
  Participatory  approach,  awareness  campaign,  capacity  building  and  facilitation  for 
government and community leaders for community participation and inclusiveness.  
  Capacity building and technical support for government and farmers on best practices 
of farm and irrigation management and land development and management, and how 
to reduce impact to the environment and ensure community management of land and 
water systems.  
  Promote water efficient irrigation and water management through integrated climate-
risk  informed  water  management  plans  for  260  tanks  and  mobilization  of  cascade 
level  water  committees  that  will  include  men,  women  and  youth  from  communities 
and the local field officers 
  A  proper  diagnostic  analysis  will  be  conducted  to  assess  current  and  water  land  use 
and  ownership  rights  and  ensure  that  existing  arrangements  are  not  infringed  and 
proposed investments are made with community consent.  
  Development  of  an  independent  grievance  redress  mechanism  to  ensure  that 
communities  can  reach  the  project  implementing  agencies  in  case  the  activities 
deviates from its stated objectives or causes increases risks and vulnerabilities to the 
communities and the ecosystem.   
66. The  SARP  Component  1  Capacity  building  for  climate  resilience  and 
agribusiness  development  already  addresses  climate  change  adaptation  by 
building providers and farmers’ capacity on SLM, water utilization and climate resilient 
production.  It  is  recommended  that,  under  the  sub-component  1.2  Strengthening 
capacity  for  farm  commercialization  and  enterprise  development,  climate 
change adaptation and environment issues to be also included in the training content 
on  business  management  and  marketing,  particularly 
focusing  on  youth 
entrepreneurs. 
67. The  Component  2  Investments  for  climate  resilience  and  agribusiness  takes 
into  account  climate  change  adaptation  in  all  the  activities  related  to  tank 
information 
rehabilitation, 
management. 
include  crop 
diversification  and  livelihood  diversification,  introduction  of  climate  resilient  seed 
varieties, and promoting soil and water conservation measures. The planning process 
for  both  natural  resource  management  and  livelihoods  development  will  have  to  be 
community led and participatory. 
irrigation,  production  diversification  and  climate 
It 
that  adaptation  measures 
recommended 
is 
68. Investments  in  road  rehabilitation  will  follow  national  environmental  rules  and 
regulations as well as IFAD safeguards processes. In addition, it is proposed that the 
project  develop  an  in-depth  Climate  Risk  Analysis  and  an  Environment  and  Social 
Management  Framework  (ESMF)  to  inform  the  adaptation  measures  that  SARP  is 
expected  to  bring,  and  to  formalise  them  into  the  ESMF  and  its  Environmental  and 
Social Management Plan (ESMP). 
69. Potential  partnerships.    The  mission  did  not  identify  financial  opportunities 
under  the  green  climate  funds  to  co-finance  SARP.  However,  SARP  will  build 
partnerships and look for synergies and complementarity with other important 
actors  dealing  with  the  same  development  objectives  and  active  in  the  Dry 
Zone.  UNDP  is  implementing  the  “Climate  Resilient  Integrated  Water  Management 
Project (CRIWMP)”, a USD 38,084,000 GCF funded project started in June 2017.  The 
CRIWMP is implemented in the Dry Zone, in some areas overlapping with SARP target 
areas.  The CRIWMP objective is to strengthen the resilience of smallholder farmers, 
particularly  women,  in  the  Dry  Zone  through  improved  water  management  to 
enhance  lives  and  livelihoods.    The  project  will  invest  in  improving  the  community 
irrigation  water  infrastructure  and  associated  agricultural  practices,  scaling-up 
decentralized  drinking  water  systems,  and  strengthening  Early  Warnings  (EWs)  and 
forecasting for flood-response and water management.  The project will also provide 
direct investments in drinking water systems. 
70. Discussions  held  with  UNDP  highlighted  very  promising  complementarities  and 
synergies  between  SARP  and  CRIWMP,  these  two  projects  have  in  common  the 
adoption of an integrated approach to watershed management.  In addition, the SARP 
added-value  will  rely  on  the  development  of  the  Value  Chain.    Indeed,  SARP  will  be 
innovative  by  strengthening  capacity  for  farm  commercialization  and  enterprise 
development (SARP, subcomponent 1.2), and investing in farm commercialization and 
enterprise  development  (SARP,  subcomponent  2.2),  These  activities  will  make  a 
difference  with  regard  to  smallholders’  resilience  to  climate  change.    By  training 
service providers, farmers and youth in business management, marketing as well as 
in  post-harvest  and  value  addition,  by  investing  in  the  development  of  rural  and 
small-scale  enterprise,  promoting  a  market  information  system,  linking  producers  to 
markets,  SARP  will  contribute  to  securing  farmers  products  commercialization  and, 
though, consolidating their capacity to adapt to climate change. 
71. The  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  is  also  active  in  the  water  management 
sector.  The  Integrated  Water  Productivity  Improvement  Project,  an  ADB  170.00 
Million USD loan to Sri Lanka, will focus on river basins located within two provinces: 
North  Western  Province  and  Uva  Province.  These  river  basins  straddle  the  dry  and 
intermediate  climatic  zones  and  are  identified  as  areas  (i)  vulnerable  to  climate 
change; (ii) requiring interventions in irrigation and water resources management to 
develop resilience to climate change;15 and (iii) not currently covered by ongoing or 
planned interventions. The objective is to reach: (i) optimum harnessing of available 
water  by  increasing  reservoir  capacity,  enhancing  water  conveyance  capacity,  and 
introducing  climate  change  adaptation  investment  and  technologies;  and  (ii) 
improving  the  governance  of  national  water  management.  The  project  ’s  value 
addition  focuses  on  knowledge  transfer,  introduction  of  new  technologies  such  as 
modern  river  basin  planning  and  management  procedures,  irrigation  systems,  asset 
management, crop diversification, and farming systems. 
72. The  World  Bank  has  an  over  six-decade  partnership  with  Sri  Lanka.  The  ongoing 
projects directly linked to agriculture and climate resilience are listed in the following 
table.  It  is  worth  noting  that  the  World  Bank  Climate  Smart  Irrigated  Agriculture 
Project  has  the  same  global    objective  than  SARP  (improving  the  productivity  and 
climate  resilience  of  smallholder  agriculture).  It  would  therefore  be  interesting  to 
exchange  on  common  themes  such  as  the  adoption  of  Climate  Smart  Agriculture 
(CSA) and marketing. 
Table 5: List of ongoing WB projects in Sri Lanka 
Project Title 
Country 
Project 
ID 
Commitment 
Amount 
Status 
Approval 
Date 
Climate Resilience Multi-
Phase Programmatic 
Approach 
Sri 
Lanka 
Climate Mitigation Action 
Support 
Sri 
Lanka 
Climate Smart Irrigated 
Agriculture Project 
Sri 
Lanka 
Ecosystem Conservation 
and Management  
Sri 
Lanka 
Climate Resilience 
Improvement Project 
Additional Financing  
Climate Resilience 
Improvement Project 
(CRIP)  
Sri 
Lanka 
Sri 
Lanka 
P160005 
310.0 
Active 
P160552 
1.8 
Active 
P163742 
125.0 
Active 
P156021 
45.0 
Active 
P157392 
42.0 
Active 
P146314 
110.0 
Active 
June 25, 
2019 
April 5, 
2019 
March 7, 
2019 
April 25, 
2016 
March 21, 
2016 
April 22, 
2014 
73. The FAO 2018 – 2022 Country Programming Framework (CPF) has 3 results expected 
:1)  the  contribution  of  food  systems  to  food  and  nutrition  security  and  income 
generation  is  increased  ;  2)  The  environment,  natural  resources,  forests  and 
ecosystems  are  more  sustainably  managed  taking  account  of  climate  change,  and 
increasing  resilience  of  the  most  vulnerable  to  shocks,  natural  disasters  and  climate 
variability; 3) the capacity of concerned stakeholders to undertake policy formulation 
and  to  collect,  analyze  and  utilize  data  and  information  for  evidence  based  decision 
making is increased.  
74. The  project  should  look  for  a  cooperation  with  FAO  based  on  FAO  expertise.  This 
could cover the implementation of the component 1, sub-component 1.1 (training of 
farmers  in  SLM,  water  utilization  and  climate  resilient  production)  and/or  the 
component 2, sub-component 2.1 (soil conservation, climate resilient production and 
climate smart agriculture).  
75. In  the  same  spirit  a  potential  partnership  could  be  built  with  WFP  who  is  active  in 
building  resilience  of  the  most  vulnerable  families  to  recover  better  from  recurrent 
climate-induced  shocks.  In  13  disaster-prone  and  food  insecure  districts,  WFP 
supports 
land 
rehabilitation, water harvesting, and skills training for livelihood support. 
including  environmental  conservation, 
locally-driven  projects, 
76. The  International  Water  Management  Institute  (IWMI)  is  the  lead  centre  for 
the  CGIAR  Research  Program  on  Water,  Land  and  Ecosystems  (WLE).  IWMI  is 
involved  in  UNDP  and  WB  projects  in  Sri  Lanka  because  of  its  unique  expertise,  its 
knowledge on land and water resources management, and because of all the land and 
water data collected and processed by this institution. It is thus recommended that, 
rather than issuing a contract with IWMI for punctual studies, the project should look 
for a long-term contractual partnership with this institution. The rationale would be to 
rely  on  its  expertise  to  both  undertake  specific  studies,  on  request,  and  to  play  the 
role of technical advisor for the scientific monitoring of SARP activities. 
77. With regard to potential partnerships with national institutions it is recommended that 
the  project  invest  in  capacity  building  of  key  actors  in  the  sector,  particularly  the 
Department  of  Agrarian  Development  (DAD)  and  its  Agrarian  Services 
Centres. These Centres are located at subdistrict levels and provide technical advice, 
provide  farmer  subsidies,  strengthen  farmer  organizations  and  manage  the  Farmers 
Bank.  They  are  key  actors  for  the  success  and  sustainability  of  SARP  activities. 
Strengthening their capacity is also a mean to secure sustainability in the framework 
of  the  exit  strategy.  It  will  be  important  for  the  project  to  liaise  with  the  National 
Climate Secretariat, who has the mission to lead the country to take  comprehensive 
action  to  contribute  towards  local,  regional  and  global  efforts  in  combating  climate 
change.  This  will  ensure  that  SARP  activities  addressing  climate  change  are 
acknowledged  as  a  contribution  to  the  implementation  of  the  National  Policy  on 
Climate Change. 
7.  Monitoring and evaluation  
78. As  a  resilient  project  SARP  has  already  listed  the  following  indicators,  linked  to 
environment and climate change issues, that will be regularly documented. 
Table 6: SARP Logical framework CC and NRM related indicators 
Results Hierarchy 
Objective 
Build resilience and market participation of 
rural households in geographical areas 
affected by climate change 
 Outcome 
Climate  resilient  investments  and  capacity 
built 
Output 
Service providers and producers' groups 
created and capacitated for better land and 
Indicators 
%  of  individual  entrepreneurs  and  HH  report  a  > 
50% 
(data 
disaggregated by gender of household heads) 
resilience 
increase 
score 
in 
%  of  water  user  associations  and  producer 
organizations  supported 
to  manage  climate-
related risks 
No.  of  households  reporting  improved  access  to 
water  resources  for  productive  and  domestic  use 
(data  disaggregated  by  gender  of  household 
heads) 
No.  of  HH  applying  climate  resilient  technologies 
and practices (data disaggregated by gender) 
No.  of  group  members  trained  in  land  and  water 
management 
water management 
Output 
Minor irrigation tanks and water harvesting 
infrastructure constructed or rehabilitated 
No.  of  hectares  of  farmland  under  water-related 
infrastructure constructed or rehabilitated 
79. However,  some  indicators  are  mandatory  for  projects  which  make  specific 
investments  to  address  climate  change  issues.  It  is  proposed  to  add  the  following 
indicators to the already existing list of indicators:  
 
 
 
Indicator  1:  Number  of  groups  supported  to  sustainably  manage  natural  resources 
and climate- related risks; 
Indicator 2: Number of persons provided with climate information services; 
Indicator 3: Number of hectares of land brought under climate-resilient management; 
The detailed indicators sheets are presented in Annex 2. 
8.  Further studies needed  
80. Further  to  the  environmental  categorization  of  the  project  the  following  studies  are 
requested: 
  An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), 
  An  in-depth  climate  vulnerability  analysis  to  be  done  at  the  initial  phase  of  the 
project  implementation.  However,  the  main  climate  risks  and  project  mitigation 
measures are already listed in Annex 4. 
The 
ESMP/climate 
risk 
table 
is 
presented 
in 
Annex4.
REFERENCES 
CDKN. 2014. The IPCC’s Fifth Assessment Report:  What’s in it for South Asia 
Climate Change Secretariat, Ministry of Mahaweli Development and Environment. 2016. National 
Adaptation Plan for Climate Change Impacts in Sri Lanka 2016 - 2025 
De Silva, Christina & Rodríguez Díaz, Juan. (2011). Spatial Impacts of Climate Change on Major 
Climatic Factors in Sri Lanka. Sabragamuwa University Journal. Vol 10. 60-75 
Eriyagama, N; Smakhtin, V.; Chandrapala, L.; Fernando, K. 2010. Impacts of climate change on water 
resources and agriculture in Sri Lanka: a review and preliminary vulnerability mapping. Colombo, Sri 
Lanka: International Water Management Institute. 51p. (IWMI Research Report 135). 
doi:10.5337/2010.211  
Fernando, P., De Silva, M., Jayasinghe, L., Janaka, H., & Pastorini, J. (2019). First country-wide 
survey of the Endangered Asian elephant: Towards better conservation and management in Sri 
Lanka. Oryx, 1-10. doi:10.1017/S0030605318001254 
GFDDR. April 2011. Vulnerability, Risk Reduction, and Adaptation to Climate Change SRI LANKA.  In 
Climate Risk and Adaptation Country Profile.   
GOSL. 2018. Climate Smart Irrigated Agriculture Project: Environmental Assessment & Management 
Framework 
M.M. Aheeyar, August 2012 Climate change adaptation in water management for food security: 
Recent developments in Sri Lanka-A review of Existing Knowledge and Information 
Ministry of Agriculture Development and Agrarian Services. 2007. Sri Lanka Agriculture Policy.  
Ministry of Disaster Management, 2014. Sri Lanka Comprehensive Disaster Management Programme 
(SLCDMP) 2014 - 2018 
Ministry of Disaster Management. 2014. Sri Lanka Comprehensive Disaster Management Programme 
(SLCDMP) 2014 – 2018.  
Ministry of Environment and Renewable Energy. 2014. National Action Program (NAP) For Combating 
Land Degradation in Sri Lanka 2015 – 2024 
Ministry of Environment. 2011.  Sri Lanka’s Second National Communication on Climate Change 
Ministry of Environment, Climate Change Secretariat. 2010. Sector Vulnerability Profile on Biodiversity 
and Ecosystem Services.  
Ministry of Environment, Sri Lanka. January 2011. Climate Change Vulnerability Data Book.  
Ministry of Environment. 2012. National Climate change Policy 
Ministry of Land and Land Development “Mihikatha Medura”. 2014. National Policy on Protection and 
Conservation of Water Sources, their Catchments and Reservations in Sri Lanka  
Ministry of Mahaweli Development and Environment. 2016. National Adaptation Plan for Climate 
Change Impacts in Sri Lanka 2016 – 2025 
Ministry of Mahaweli Development and Environment. 2015. National Biodiversity Strategic Action Plan 
2016-2022 
Ministry of Mahaweli Development and Environment. 2011. National Climate Change Adaptation 
Strategy 2011-2016  
Ministry of Mahaweli Development and Environment. 2016. Intended Nationally Determined 
Contributions.  
Nalaka Geekiyanage, D.K.N.G. Pushpakumara. 2013. Ecology of ancient Tank Cascade Systems in 
island Sri Lanka. Journal of Marine and Island Cultures (2013) 2, 93–101 
Presidential Task Force on National Food Production. September 2015. Food Production National 
Programme (2016-2018)  
R.D. Chithranayana; B.V.R. Punyawardena Identification of drought prone agro-ecological regions in 
Sri Lanka. In Drought prone agro-ecological regions in Sri Lanka 2008 36 (2):  117-123 
Samad, Madar & Aheeyar, Mohamed & Royo Olid, Jaime & Arulingam, Indika. (2016). The Political 
and Institutional Context of the Water Sector in Sri Lanka. An overview. 10.2871/115395. m. 
Santiapillai, Charles & Wijeyamohan, Shanmugasundaram & Bandara, Ganga & Athurupana, Rukmali 
& Dissanayake, Naveen & Read, Bruce. (2010). An assessment of the human-elephant conflict in Sri 
Lanka. J. Sci. (Bio. Sci.). 39. 21-33. 10.4038/cjsbs.v39i1.2350. 
UNDP. 2016. GCF funding proposal: Strengthening the resilience of smallholder farmers in the Dry 
Zone to climate variability and extreme events through an integrated approach to water management 
UNDP. 2016. Technical Feasibility Report. Strengthening the resilience of smallholder farmers in the 
Dry Zone to climate variability and extreme events through an integrated approach to water 
management 
USAID. November 2018. Climate Risk in Sri Lanka: Country Rik Profile  
World Bank. May 2016. Country Partnership Framework for the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri 
Lanka for the period FY17–FY20.  
Appendix 1 
A. Environment, Social and Climate Risk Screening  
Guiding questions for environment and social screening  
Project title: 
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience Programme  
IFAD project no.: 
Country: 
Sri Lanka  
Checklist prepared by (name, 
title and institution) 
Version of 
checklist:  
Date of this 
version: 
02/07/2019 
Guiding questions for environment and social screening 
Yes/no  Comments/explanation 
Category A – the following may have significant and often irreversible or not readily remedied adverse 
environmental and/or social implications. 
Project location 
1.  Would the project develop any wetlands? (Guidance 
statement 1) 
2.  Would the project cause significant adverse impacts to 
habitats and/or ecosystems and their services (e.g. 
conversion of more than 50 hectares of natural forest, loss of 
habitat, erosion/other form of land degradation, fragmentation 
and hydrological changes)? (Guidance statements 1, 2 and 
5) 
3.  Does the proposed project target area include ecologically 
sensitive areas,43 areas of global/national significance for 
biodiversity conservation, and/or biodiversity-rich areas and 
habitats depended on by endangered species? (Guidance 
statement 1) 
No 
No 
No 
The project will be carried out in 
different Districts in the Dry 
Zone and sites within the 
districts that will exclude those 
in close proximity/ adjacent to 
the protected areas. 
In any event the project will be 
developed in accordance with 
the relevant legislations such as 
the National Environment Act, 
Antiquities Ordinance, Fauna 
and Flora Protection Ordinance 
Act, Forest Ordinance and 
National Heritage Wilderness 
Areas Act. 
4.  Is the project location subjected to major destruction as a 
result of geophysical hazards (tsunamis, landslides, 
earthquakes, volcanic eruptions)? 
No 
Natural resources 
5.  Would the project lead to unsustainable natural resource 
No 
management practices (fisheries, forestry, livestock) and/or 
result in exceeding carrying capacity. For example, is the 
development happening in areas where little up-to-date 
43 “Sensitive areas” include: protected areas (national parks, wildlife/nature reserves, biosphere reserves) and their buffer zones; 
areas of global significance for biodiversity conservation; habitats depended on by endangered species; natural forests; 
wetlands; coastal ecosystems, including coral reefs and mangrove swamps; small island ecosystems; areas most vulnerable to 
climate change and variability; lands highly susceptible to landslides, erosion and other forms of land degradation, areas that 
include physical cultural resources (of historical, religious, archaeological or other cultural significance), and areas with high 
social vulnerability. 
Guiding questions for environment and social screening 
Yes/no  Comments/explanation 
information exists on sustainable yield/carrying capacity? 
(Guidance statements 4, 5 and 6) 
6.  Would the project develop large-scale44 aquaculture or 
No 
mariculture projects, or where their development involves 
significant alteration of ecologically sensitive areas? 
7.  Would the project result in significant use of agrochemicals 
which may lead to life-threatening illness and long-term 
public health and safety concerns? (Guidance statement 
14) 
8.  Does the project rely on water-based (groundwater and/or 
surface water) development where there is reason to 
believe that significant depletion and/or reduced flow has 
occurred from the effects of climate change or from 
overutilization? (Guidance statement 7) 
No 
No 
9.  Does the project pose a risk of introducing potentially 
No 
invasive species or genetically modified organisms which 
might alter genetic traits of indigenous species or have an 
adverse effect on local biodiversity? (Guidance statement 
1) 
10.  Does the project make use of wastewater (e.g. industrial, 
mining, sewage effluent)? (Guidance statement 7) 
No 
Infrastructure development 
11.  Does the project include the construction/ 
No 
rehabilitation/upgrade of dam(s) and/or reservoir(s) 
meeting at least one of the following criteria?  
-  more than 15 metres high wall;  
-  more than 500 metres long crest;  
-  more than 3 million m3 reservoir capacity; or  
-  incoming flood of more than 2,000 m3/s  
(Guidance statement 8) 
12.  Does the project involve large-scale irrigation schemes 
No 
rehabilitation and/or development (more than 100 hectares 
per scheme)?45  
(Guidance statement 7) 
The project aims at increasing 
water use efficiency to address 
the decline of available water in 
the Dry Zone as a result of the 
recurring droughts. This will be 
achieved through, notably, the 
rehabilitation, construction and 
maintenance of small-scale 
water infrastructure facilities 
(minor reservoirs, small tanks) 
and water 
Harvesting 
Most smallholder farmers of 
the Dry Zone cultivate under 
“Village Irrigation Systems”, 
which consist of small 
reservoirs and water 
diversions, each irrigating 
less than 80 ha of land. 
44 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary based on the country 
context and fragility of specific locations. Some countries have regulations on minimum size (usually ranging from a unit 
area of 10 to 50 hectares) and these will be adopted where they exist. However, where there are no standards, it is 
proposed to use 25 hectares as an aquaculture unit size to trigger an ESIA. 
45 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary based 
on the country context and fragility of specific locations. Some countries have regulations determining size 
of irrigation development requiring a full ESIA and these will be adopted where they exist. However, where 
there are no standards, it is proposed to use 100 hectares as an irrigation development unit size to trigger 
an ESIA. 
Guiding questions for environment and social screening 
Yes/no  Comments/explanation 
The SECAP put a threshold 
avoiding 
rehabilitation/upgrade of 
roads that entail a total area 
being cleared above 10 km 
long (SECAP § 64) 
13.  Does the project include construction/ 
No 
rehabilitation/upgrade of roads that entail a total area being 
cleared above 10 km long, or any farmer with more than 
10 per cent of his or her private land taken? (Guidance 
statement 10). Will the works entail temporary and/or 
permanent resident workers?  
14.  Does the project include drainage or correction of natural 
No 
waterbodies  
(e.g. river training)? (Guidance statement 7) 
15.  Does the project involve significant 
No 
extraction/diversion/containment of surface water, leaving 
the river flow below 20 per cent environmental flow plus 
downstream user requirements?  
(Guidance statement 7) 
Social 
16.  Would the project result in economic displacement46 or 
No 
physical resettlement of more than 20 people, or impacting 
more than 10 per cent of an individual household’s assets?  
(Guidance statement 13) 
17.  Would the project result in conversion and/or loss of 
physical cultural resources? (Guidance statement 9) 
18.  Would the project generate significant social adverse 
risk/impacts to local communities (including disadvantaged 
and vulnerable groups, indigenous people, persons 
vulnerable to GBV and sexual exploitation and abuse and 
people with disabilities) or other project-affected parties?  
(Guidance statement 13) 
Other 
19.  Does the project include the manufacture and transportation 
of hazardous and toxic materials which may affect the 
environment? (Guidance statement 2) 
20.  Does the project include the construction of a large or 
medium-scale industrial plant? 
21.  Does the project include the development of large-scale 
production forestry?  
(Guidance statement 5) 
Rural finance 
22.  Does the project support any of the above (Question 1 to 
Question 21) through the provision of a line of credit to 
financial service providers? (Guidance statement 12) 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Category B – the following may have some adverse environmental and/or social implications which can be 
readily remedied. 
Location 
23.  Does the project involve agricultural intensification and/or 
Yes 
expansion of cropping area in non-sensitive areas that may 
have adverse impacts on habitats, ecosystems and/or 
livelihoods?  
(Guidance statements 1, 2 and 12) 
Natural resource management 
24.  Do the project activities include rangeland and livestock 
development?  
(Guidance statement 6) 
The production activities will 
potentially entail intensification 
of cropping areas 
Yes 
Some small livestock activities 
are included in the Programme  
46 Economic displacement implies the loss of land, assets, access to assets, income sources, or means of 
livelihoods (guidance statement 13). 
Guiding questions for environment and social screening 
Yes/no  Comments/explanation 
25.  Does the project involve fisheries where there is 
No 
information on stocks, fishing effort and sustainable yield? 
Is there any risk of overfishing, habitat damage and 
knowledge of fishing zones and seasons?  
(Guidance statement 4) 
26.  Would the project activities include aquaculture and/or 
agriculture in newly introduced or intensively practiced 
areas? Do project activities include conversion of wetlands 
and clearing of coastal vegetation, change in hydrology or 
introduction of exotic species? (Guidance statement 4) 
27.  Do the project activities include natural resource-based 
value chain development? (Guidance statements 1, 6 and 
12) 
No 
Yes 
28.  Do the project activities include watershed management or 
Yes  
rehabilitation? 
29.  Does the project include large-scale soil and water 
No 
conservation measures? (Guidance statements 1 and 5)  
Infrastructure 
30.  Does the project include small-scale irrigation and 
drainage, and small and medium dam subprojects (capacity 
< 3 million m3)? (Guidance statements 7 and 8) 
31.  Does the project include small and microenterprise 
Yes 
Yes 
development subprojects? (Guidance statements 12 and 
13) 
32.  Does the project include the development of agro-
No 
processing facilities?  
(Guidance statements 2, 6 and 12) 
33.  Would the construction or operation of the project cause an 
increase in traffic on rural roads? (Guidance statement 10) 
Yes 
Social 
34.  Would any of the project activities have minor adverse 
impacts on physical cultural resources? (Guidance 
statement 9) 
No 
35.  Would the project result in physical resettlement of 20 
No 
people or less, or impacting less than 10 per cent of an 
individual household’s assets  
(Guidance statement 13)? 
36.  Would the project result in short-term public health and 
No 
safety concerns?  
(Guidance statement 14) 
37.  Would the project require a migrant workforce or seasonal 
workers (for construction, planting and/or harvesting)? 
(Guidance statement 13) 
Yes 
Rural finance 
38.  Does the project support any of the above (Question 23 to 
Question 37) through the provision of a line of credit to 
financial service providers? (Guidance statement 12) 
No 
 The project will strengthen 
small farmers to improve small 
scale farms production to 
access market 
The project will develop a 
watershed management 
approach including the 
rehabilitation of the Tank 
Cascade Systems in the 
targeted areas. 
Small scale irrigation will be 
developed 
Youth-led enterprises will be 
supported  
Rural roads will be rehabilitated 
and the value chain 
development and market 
linkages will result in increased 
traffic 
Increased agricultural 
production and 
construction/rehabilitation 
activities will require seasonal 
workers 
Guiding questions for climate risk screening 
Yes 
No 
Additional explanation of 
“yes” response* 
√ 
√ 
√ 
1.  Is the project area subject to extreme climatic events, 
such as flooding, drought, tropical storms or heat 
waves? 
2.  Do climate scenarios for the project area foresee 
changes in temperature, rainfall or extreme weather that 
will adversely affect the project impact, sustainability or 
cost over its lifetime? 
3.  Would the project make investments in low-lying coastal 
areas/zones exposed to tropical storms? 
4.  Would the project make investments in glacial areas 
and mountains zones? 
5.  Would the project promote agricultural activity in 
marginal and/or highly degraded areas that have 
increased sensitivity to climatic events (such as on 
hillsides, deforested slopes or floodplains)? 
6.  Is the project located in areas where rural development 
projects have experienced significant weather-related 
losses and damages in the past? 
7.  Would the project develop/install infrastructure in areas 
with a track record of extreme weather events? 
8.  Is the project target group entirely dependent on natural 
resources (such as seasonal crops, rainfed agricultural 
plots, migratory fish stocks) that have been affected by 
in the last decade by climate trends or specific climatic 
events? 
9.  Would climate variability likely affect agricultural 
productivity (crops/livestock/fisheries), access to 
markets and/or the associated incidence of pests and 
diseases for the project target groups? 
10.  Would weather-related risks or climatic extremes likely 
adversely impact upon key stages of identified value 
chains in the project (from production to markets)? 
11.  Is the project investing in climate-sensitive livelihoods 
that are diversified? 
12.  Is the project investing in infrastructure that is exposed 
to infrequent extreme weather events? 
13.  Is the project investing in institutional development and 
capacity-building for rural institutions (such as farmer 
groups, cooperatives) in climatically heterogeneous 
areas? 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Sri Lanka has experienced 
floods and droughts that have 
adversely affected livelihoods 
and the economy 
Increased temperatures and 
variable rainfall are predicted 
Floods and droughts have 
resulted in crop losses in the 
recent past 
Flood events have negatively 
impacted roads, bridges and 
irrigation schemes 
Droughts, prolonged dry spells 
and floods have adversely 
affected the targeted 
smallholders 
Crops and livestock are included 
in the targeted value chains and 
will be affected by increasingly 
variable rainfall 
Droughts and floods are likely to 
affect the production and market 
access stages of the value 
chains 
The project will invest in 
conservative agriculture and 
climate smart agriculture while 
diversifying the  
Floods have adverse impacts on 
the rural roads and irrigation 
schemes  
The project will invest in 
institutional development and 
capacity building of different 
categories of actors. Farmer 
Organisations, public and private 
Yes 
No 
14.  Does the project have the potential to become more 
resilient through the adoption of green technologies at 
a reasonable cost? 
15.  Does the project intervention have opportunities 
to strengthen indigenous climate risk management 
capabilities? 
16.  Does the project have opportunities to integrate 
climate resilience aspects through policy dialogue to 
improve agricultural sector strategies and policies? 
17.  Does the project have potential to integrate climate 
resilience measures without extensive additional costs 
(e.g. improved building codes, capacity-building, or 
including climate risk issues in policy processes)? 
18.  Based on the information available would the project 
benefit from a more thorough climate risk and 
vulnerability analysis to identify the most vulnerable 
rural population, improve targeting and identify 
additional complementary investment actions to 
manage climate risks?  
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Additional explanation of 
“yes” response* 
advisory services, Agrarian Service 
Centres, climate information 
services will be strengthened to 
ensure that communities are resilient 
to climate variability and climate 
change, particularly within the Dry 
Zone region, and that the relevant 
institutions are able to provide the 
necessary support and services. In 
addition, sustained water 
infrastructures will be assured by 
capacitating Water User 
Associations. 
The project will promote access and 
use of renewable energy such as 
solar energy. The climate smart 
technologies to be implemented by 
the project will include specific 
technologies matching the various 
agro-ecological conditions in the 
target districts, such as rainwater 
harvesting techniques, crop 
diversification and livestock 
integration, mulching and micro-
irrigation. 
Capacity building on climate risk 
management has been included 
in the project activities 
The project foresees to provide 
support for policy dialogue through 
studies to be conducted during 
implementation, and in 
collaboration with other agencies.  
Component 1 of the project is 
mainly dedicated to capacity 
building for resilience, through 
trainings in climate risk 
management for government 
technicians, service providers and 
farmers; The project foresees to 
strengthen climate information 
services and to support the 
elaboration of Natural Resource 
Management Plans at the local level, 
including climate change adaptation 
measures. 
Appendix 2. 
List of proposed additional Climate Change Adaptation and NRM related 
indicators 
Indicator 1 
Number of groups supported to sustainably manage natural resources and climate- 
related risks 
Definition 
Refers to the number of groups (whether or not formally registered and including  indigenous 
peoples’ communities) involved in the management of natural resources (rangelands, common 
property  resources,  water  resources,  forests,  pastures,  fishing  grounds  and  other  natural 
resources) for agricultural production that have received project support, either during the past 
12  months  (annual  reporting)  or  since  project  start-up  (cumulative  reporting),  to  improve  the 
sustainability of services provided to the resource base and to manage climate-related risks. 
Natural  resource  management  groups  involved  in  promoting  technologies  and  practices  for 
environmental protection, combating deforestation and desertification, or promoting soil/water 
conservation initiatives to prevent or increase resilience to climate-related risks should also be 
considered. 
Climate-related risks are those resulting from climate change that affect natural and human 
systems  and  regions.  Direct  climate  change  risks  are  expected  especially  for  productive 
sectors  that  rely  heavily  on  natural  resources,  such  as  agriculture,  fishing  and  forestry.  The 
aim  of  such  engagement  is  ultimately  to  enable  these  individuals/groups  to  take  better  and 
more resilient decisions that can avoid losses and damage to their livelihoods resulting from 
climate-related events. 
Additional 
indicators 
The following additional indicators are to be reported upon: 
  Number of members in the groups supported (disaggregated by sex, youth, 
indigenous peoples) 
  Number of groups with women in leadership positions 
  Number of groups with indigenous peoples in leadership positions 
Data to be recorded by service providers or external trainers (if support is provided by external 
entities) or project staff (if support is provided by them). 
Project records should track the following data at least: training; /support date; type of support 
or  training  topic;  number  of  groups  supported;  number  of  group  members;  number  of 
women/indigenous peoples in leadership positions. 
Note:  (a)  If  the  same  group  has  received  more  than  one  type  of  support  during  the  past  12 
months  or  since  project  start-up,  this  group  should  be  counted  only  once  in  order  to  avoid 
double-counting;  (b)  groups  formed  or  supported in  earlier  years,  but  that  have  not  received 
any additional support in the past 12 months, should not be counted for annual 
reporting. 
Outreach 
Modified  current  RIMS  indicator  1.6.11;  Mandatory  indicator  for  projects  which  make 
specific  investments  to  address  climate  change  issues  (this  includes  all  projects  with 
ASAP cofinancing). 
Data source 
Related 
intervention 
type 
Comment 
Indicator 2 
Number of persons provided with climate information services 
Refers to the number of individuals reached by weather, climate or seasonal forecasts and/or 
disaster  early-warning  information,  either  during  the  past  12  months  (annual  reporting)  or 
since  project  start-up  (cumulative  reporting),  according  to  the  procedures  agreed  upon  by 
government and other data providers. Households that have received advice in the past 12 
months  regarding the expected  climate  impacts  on  crops, livestock  and  fisheries,  to  enable 
better  choices  as  to  the  type,  timing  and  location  of  agricultural  practices  and  to  prevent, 
reduce and/or manage risks, should also be included. 
This  indicator  only  refers  to  climate  information  services  provided  through  extension 
workers,  disaster  preparedness  or  response  teams,  community  volunteers  or  community 
leaders. Of the modern communications media, only the recipients of SMS messages are to 
be  considered.  Persons  reached  through  mass  media  (radio  or  television)  are  not  to  be 
reported under this indicator. 
-  Sex 
-  Youth 
-  Indigenous peoples 
Data  to  be  collected  from  service  providers,  who  should  record,  at  least,  the  number  of 
individuals  included  in  their  message  recipient  lists  and  regularly  contacted,  or  those  using 
the service. 
Services and training 
Modified current RIMS indicator 1.1.15; Mandatory indicator for projects which make specific 
investments to address climate change issues (this includes all projects with ASAP 
cofinancing). 
Definition 
Disaggregation 
dimensions 
Data source 
Related 
intervention 
type 
Comment 
Indicator 3 
Number of hectares of land brought under climate-resilient management 
Refers to the number of hectares of land in which activities were started, either during the past 
12  months  (annual  reporting)  or  since  project  start-up  (cumulative  reporting),  to  restore  the 
productive and protective functions of the land, water and natural ecosystems and/or reverse 
degradation processes. 
Examples of  climate-resilient practices or adaptation investments that reverse the process 
of degradation and protect agricultural land and production infrastructure include targeted farm 
and  landscape  management  practices  (e.g.  reforestation,  afforestation,  improved  rangeland 
management,  watershed  management,  erosion  control,  agroforestry,  removal  of  non-native 
species  and  weeds,  reintroduction  of  native  species);  soil  and  water  conservation 
infrastructure  (terraces  and  other  contour  bunds  and  natural  hedges  constructed/planted  or 
rehabilitated  with  project  support,  preventing  soil  erosion  and  sustaining  soil  moisture);  the 
establishment  and  management  of  ecological  buffer  zones  to  reduce  the  impact  of  climate 
hazards  (e.g.  mangrove  greenbelts,  sand  dunes,  flood  retention  zones,  storm  breaks, 
groundwater  recharge  zones,  shelter  belts);  and  the  establishment  of  protected  areas  and 
biodiversity corridors to restore the biological diversity and ecosystem services of endangered 
landscapes. 
Natural resource management 
Modified current RIMS indicator 1.1.17; Mandatory indicator for projects which make specific 
investments to address climate change issues (this includes all projects with ASAP 
cofinancing). 
Definition 
Related 
intervention 
type 
Comment 
Appendix 3 
Terms of reference for a detailed climate risk analysis 
Background 
A. 
The International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) is an international financial institution and 
a specialized United Nations agency dedicated to eradicating poverty and hunger in the rural areas of 
developing  countries.  Working  with  poor  rural  people,  governments,  donors,  non-governmental 
organizations  and  other  partners,  IFAD  is  one  of  the  largest  sources  of  development  financing  for 
agriculture and rural development in many developing countries. 
IFAD acknowledges climate-related risks as one of the factors affecting rural poverty and as one of the 
challenges  it  needs  to  address. While  climate  change  is  a  global  phenomenon,  its  negative  impacts 
are more severely felt by poor people in developing countries who rely heavily on the natural resource 
base  for  their  livelihoods.  As  the  most  vulnerable  and  marginalized  people  in  rural  societies, 
smallholder farmers and herders are especially exposed to climate change. 
They  inhabit  some  of  the  most  vulnerable  and  marginal  landscapes,  such  as  hillsides,  deserts  and 
floodplains.  They  often  lack  secure  tenure  and  resource  rights,  relying  directly  on  climate-affected 
natural resources for their livelihoods. 
Responding to this prioritization, the IFAD  Strategic Framework 2016-2025 proposes an overarching 
goal to enable poor rural people to improve their food security, raise their incomes and strengthen their 
resilience.  Consistent  with  this  approach,  IFAD’s  Environment  and  Natural  Resource  Management 
Policy  also  recommends  greater  attention  to  climate-related  risks  and  resilience  in  order  to  manage 
environment and natural resource related shocks. 
For  investment  projects  with  a  projected  high  sensitivity  to  climate  hazards,  IFAD  requires  a  climate 
vulnerability  analysis,  which  can  help  to  improve  the  targeting  of  investment  actions  to  include  the 
most vulnerable and least resilient target groups. 
The analysis can help: 
 
 
  avoid  investment  actions  which  inadvertently  increase  vulnerability  to  climate  hazards  over  the 
improve the robustness of development investments from climate-related hazards; 
increase the resilience of development outcomes; and 
longer term. 
Description of services provided 
B. 
The objective of the consultancy is to analyse: 
 
the occurrence of climate-related hazards in the prospective target area of the project (including a 
historical analysis of hazard types, intensities, frequencies and associated losses and damages); 
the physical exposure of livelihoods, ecosystems and critical infrastructure in different locations to 
the most prevalent climate hazards (“hot spots” mapping); 
the  key  properties  that  determine  the  susceptibility  of  livelihoods,  ecosystems  and  critical 
infrastructure in the target area to the most prevalent climate hazards (sensitivity analysis); and 
impact of climate change along the value chain, as required. 
 
 
 
In addition to this basic vulnerability analysis, the consultancy is expected to summarize: 
  projected  climate  change  impacts  in  the  target  area,  based  on  representative  ensembles  of 
 
climate models and scenarios; 
the  impacts  of  climate  change  on  health  in  project-affected  communities,  indicating  those 
communities or groups who may become more vulnerable to health risks as a result of the project; 
and 
  preliminary recommendations on how climate risks in the target area can be addressed in a larger 
investment programme. 
Supervision 
C. 
The  consultants  will  work  under  the  joint  responsibility  of  IFAD’s  regional  climate  and  environment 
specialist and the country programme manager. 
D. 
Tasks, results and deliverables 
The consultants will undertake the following tasks: 
  collection  and  synthesis  of  available  biophysical  and  socio-economic  maps  and  data  at  the 
targeted level (national, provincial or district); 
  surface topography; 
  surface  hydrology  (drainage  patterns,  catchment  areas,  wetness  index,  water  availability  and 
quality); 
flood risk areas; 
 
  groundwater (levels, yield, water quality); 
  vegetation  cover  (including  woody  and  herbaceous  layers)  and,  if  available,  vegetation  cover 
 
trends (minimum 250 m resolution); 
rainfall  variables  (number  of  days  with  precipitation,  rainfall  intensity,  mean  annual  precipitation, 
frequency of extreme events such as floods, droughts); 
temperature variables (annual temperature ranges, minimum/maximum temperatures); 
infrastructure (road networks, irrigation systems, rural roads at flood and/or erosion risk); 
 
 
  at-risk local communities and small producers; 
  collection  and  analysis  of  historical  meteorological  data  to  delineate  hazard  trends  and 
occurrences; 
Where possible, use the same information as that presented in the Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment  (ESIA)  and/or  ensure  consistency  in  the  data  between  the  ESIA  and  the  climate  risk 
analysis. 
  collection and analysis of loss and damage data in relation to climate-related hazards; 
  as necessary, discuss the findings with local stakeholders in climate-risk hot spots; and 
 
integration  of  findings  with  other  specialist  studies  and  the  ESIA  team  through  meetings  and 
workshops. 
The consultancy is expected to achieve the following results: 
  A set of georeferenced and GIS-compatible baseline maps outlining the exposure and sensitivity 
of  vulnerable  livelihood  systems  and  people  in  the  target  area  to  prevalent  climate  shocks  and 
stresses; 
  An  analysis  of  available  future  climate  scenarios  for  the  project  area.  As  necessary,  this  can  be 
based  on  the  development  of  regional  climate  models  at  a  scale  of  less  than  50  km,  based  on 
statistical or dynamic downscaling. The analysis of climate change impacts should be based on a 
representative ensemble of climate models and focus on implications for the programming context 
(e.g. climate change impacts and implications on production, harvesting, post-harvesting, access 
to markets and wider landscape characteristics); 
  Recommendations to reduce risks to extreme events and adapt to climate variability and change. 
These recommendations are expected  to include specific practices and technologies to increase 
climate  resilience  of  the  targeted  farming  or  value  chain  systems,  and  should  be  verified  by 
consultations with key stakeholders in situ to solicit bottom-up recommendations and validate the 
findings from the analysis. 
Based  on  the  above  work  and  analysis,  the  consultants  will  provide  IFAD  with  the  following 
deliverables: 
  A  vulnerability  map  with  a  preliminary  assessment  of  the  locations  and  populations  within  the 
project  areas  that  are  particularly  vulnerable  under  present  climate  variability  and  projected 
climate change. This map should enable prioritization of geographic areas for IFAD  interventions. 
The set of baseline maps used for the production of this vulnerability map needs to be annexed to 
the analysis. 
  A technical report explaining how the maps were produced, including key data sources, modelling 
assumptions, consultations undertaken and limitations of the methodology. 
  A short (maximum 10 pages) analytical report  with  a set of preliminary recommendations on the 
measures  that  are  proposed  to  reduce  climate  risks  and  vulnerabilities  in  the  proposed  project 
context. The findings of this report can be assimilated into the ESIA report, as necessary. 
E. 
Timing 
The  activities  will  be  carried  out  in  a  time  period  of  eight  weeks  between  [insert  dates],  including 
documentation, a field mission [insert dates], consultations and validation activities, writing and editing. 
The final version of the report must be submitted no later than [insert dates]. 
F. 
Responsiveness 
Timely responses to inquiries from IFAD are a part of the contractor’s standard client service. IFAD will 
be  kept  informed  on  an  ongoing  basis  of  any  significant  developments  that  occur  at  the  contractor, 
which may affect the provision of services. 
The  contractor’s  staff  will  respond  to  all  enquiries  within  24  hours  through  the  use  of  the  most 
appropriate  communication  channel  as  agreed  between  the  contractor  and  IFAD.  If  further 
investigation  is  required,  the  contractor  will  promptly  notify  IFAD  that  further  action  is  required  with 
periodic updates on the status of the enquiry. 
G. 
Profile of the service provider 
  Proven experience in disaster risk reduction, climate risk management, climate change adaptation 
or environmental and natural resource management. 
  Relevant university degree or higher education. 
 
In-depth  understanding  of  climate  and  disaster  risks  in  country  X,  including  existing  risk 
management policies, frameworks and strategies. 
  Previous experience in conducting risk and vulnerability assessments. 
  Previous experience with participatory, community-based consultation methods. 
  Experience with GIS-based mapping and the management of georeferenced data. 
  Familiarity with climate change concepts, models and scenarios. 
  Proven track record in related consultancy work. 
  Excellent writing and editing skills (in the relevant language). 
  Good analytical and strategic thinking. 
  Ability to work under pressure and meet deadlines. 
Consequence
s of project 
activities 
Cut and fill 
Activities 
Erosion 
SECAP – Appendix 4    
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
4.1 Environmental and Social Management Matrix 
Potential Impacts 
Mitigation Measure 
Schedule 
of 
Impleme
ntation 
Monitoring 
Indicators 
Authority 
Responsible 
Budget 
source 
Roads rehabilitation/ Tanks rehabilitation/Infrastructures 
Pre-Construction Phase 
Cutting  of  hill  slope 
and earth removal from 
"borrow"  areas  could 
result  in  soil  erosion 
and landslides 
  Designs shall ensure that all cut and 
fill activities follow local and other 
regulations relating to extraction 
and are monitored at ensure 
compliance 
 
Design 
Phase 
Increased  runoff  and/or 
velocities 
increased 
which  could 
to 
additional soil loss 
lead 
Design 
Phase 
Constructio
n phase 
 
  To reduce the impacts of erosion, 
engineering designs shall ensure: 
  The side slopes of cuttings and 
embankments will be designed to 
reflect soil strength and other 
considerations as included in the 
project specifications in order to 
reduce slips or erosion;  
  The Contractor will be responsible 
for ensuing: 
  Material that is less susceptible to 
erosion will be selected for 
placement around bridges and 
culverts; and 
  Re-vegetation of exposed areas. 
  An emergency response plan which 
will cover containment of hazardous 
materials, and work-site accidents 
shall be prepared. The plan will 
detail the process for handling, and 
subsequently reporting, 
emergencies, and specify the 
organizational structure (including 
responsibilities of nominated 
personnel). 
Emergency 
Response 
Plan 
Production of 
hazardous materials, 
and work side accidents 
Hydrology 
Impact on surface water    The Contractor shall ensure that no 
tools or machinery are washed in 
any water source or areas that shall 
drain into an existing watercourse, 
stream, or canal. 
  The Contractor shall ensure that rain 
runoff from the construction sites is 
not deposited directly into any 
watercourse, stream, or canal. 
  The Contractor shall construct, 
maintain, remove and reinstate as 
necessary temporary drainage works 
and take all other precautions 
necessary for the avoidance of 
damage by flooding and silt washed 
down from the Works.  
  All roadway embankments, bridges 
and drainage structures shall be 
designed to prevent potential 
impacts from high water levels and 
flood events. 
Hydrology 
Impacts to structures 
PMU/Contract
or 
Contractor   
Contractor 
Implemented 
by 
Contractor 
with  oversight 
from the PMU 
Review of 
technical 
document to 
make sure the 
issues are 
considered in 
the document 
Review of 
technical 
document to 
make sure the 
issues are 
considered in 
the document  
Status of 
ground 
cover in 
constructed 
areas 
Review  of  the 
document  
Prior  to  the 
start 
of 
constructio
n activities 
The  contractor 
and  will  be 
approved 
by 
PMU/ 
Contractor 
Constructio
n phase. 
Water quality. 
Nature of 
surface 
runoff from the 
site 
Implemented 
by 
Contractor 
with oversight 
from PMU 
Contractor  
PMU 
Contractor 
Implemente
d  at  design 
stage 
Review 
of 
design package 
to  make  sure 
that 
hydrological 
Air Quality 
Dust and Emissions that 
may increase respiratory 
disease among the local 
people 
 
Chemicals  and 
fuels 
Poor management of 
chemicals and fuels 
Quarry 
Operations 
and rock 
crushing 
Spills/leaks 
Quarry  operation  and 
its  potential  effect  on 
landslide, 
instability, 
pollution, 
water 
damage 
farmland, 
to 
disturbance  in  natural 
drainage 
Producing of hazardous 
materials,  oil  spills  and 
work side accidents 
Construction 
activities  (waste 
generation)  
Air Quality 
Improper disposal of 
construction wastes 
may lead to soil 
contamination in 
surrounding 
environment. 
Construction Impacts 
Chemicals and 
fuels 
Poor management of 
chemicals and fuels 
 
 
 
Preparation of a dust suppression 
plan by the contractor. The plan will 
detail the action to be taken to 
minimize dust generation (e.g. 
spraying un-surfaced roads with 
water, covering stock-piles, and 
blasting with use of small charges 
etc.) and will identify the type, age 
and standard of equipment to be 
used. 
Prepare spill management plan 
addressing measures 
recommendati
ons  considered 
into 
deign 
package   
Review of dust 
suppression 
plan  and  make 
sure  it  is  part 
of 
project 
package  
Prior  to  the 
of 
start 
constructio
n activities 
Contractor 
Prepared 
by 
the  Contractor 
and  approved 
by the PMU 
Prior  to  the 
start 
of 
constructio
n activities 
Review of spill 
management 
plan 
by 
Prepared 
the  Contractor 
and  approved 
by the PMU 
Contractor 
Construction Phase 
Prior to opening of any quarry or 
rock crushing facility, the 
Contractor will require approval 
from the relevant local authorities 
and the PMU to ensure that the sites 
are not located in an area likely to 
cause significant detriment to the 
local environment.  
  Contract documents will contain 
provisions requiring contingency 
plans for actions in the event of 
contamination due to spills or 
hazardous materials. 
  Construction wastes will be stored 
and covered to avoid run off due to 
rain fall and contamination of soil 
and water bodies. The solid wastes 
will be collected and disposed off in 
designated sites. 
Potential air quality impacts in the 
construction stage of the Project 
will be mitigated by implementation 
of the following controls: 
  Construction equipment being 
 
maintained to a good standard and 
fitted with pollution control devices.  
  Ensuring that all vehicles 
transporting potentially dust-
producing material are not 
overloaded and are adequately 
covered during transportation; 
  Material stockpiles being located in 
sheltered areas and be covered with 
tarpaulins or other such suitable 
covering to prevent material 
becoming airborne; 
  Regular watering/spraying of un-
surfaced project roads and all un-
surfaced roads being used for 
haulage of materials during the dry 
season; and 
Store and handle all chemicals, 
fuels, oils and potentially hazardous 
materials as specified in relevant 
standards and guidelines, as well as 
 
Contractor 
Contractor 
0.Afs 
Contractor 
Constructio
n phase. 
Throughout 
constructio
n phase. 
Constructio
n phase. 
Constructio
n phase.  
Implemented 
by 
contractor 
with oversight 
from the PMU 
Implemented 
by 
Contractor 
with oversight 
from the PMU 
Contractor 
Implemented 
by 
Contractor 
with oversight 
from the PMU 
Site 
observation 
and 
reporting 
and  make  sure 
the  quarry  Ops 
is 
properly 
going on 
Spot checks by 
ESMU/PMU 
Solid waste 
disposal to 
landfill is 
verified 
- Visible 
particulate 
matter  in  the 
air; 
- Increase 
upper 
respiratory 
tract ailments;  
in 
Constructio
n phase 
of 
Storage 
hazardous 
materials  and 
availability  of 
Implemented 
by 
Contractor 
with oversight 
Contractor 
emergency 
clean up kits 
verified 
from the PMU 
in IFAD Guidance Statement 2- 
Agrochemicals and Guidance 
statement 14 – Community health . 
All hazardous materials to be 
approved for use onsite. All 
hazardous materials and 
construction fuel will be stored in 
appropriate storage facilities (e.g. 
fuel and chemicals will be stored in 
a bunded area).  
  Hydrocarbon wastes shall be stored 
in color coded and labelled drums 
placed around fueling depots and 
disposed of.  
  Where possible, fuel and chemical 
storage and handling shall be 
undertaken at central fuel and 
chemical storage facilities, such as 
petrol stations/site depot.  
  Onsite storage of fuel and chemicals 
shall be kept to a minimum.  
  Emergency clean up kits for oil and 
chemical spills will be available 
onsite and in all large vehicles.  
  Refueling activities to preferentially 
occur off site however if required 
onsite ensure refueling activities 
occur in designated areas of the site 
where appropriate temporary 
protection measures have been 
designed/located and are no less 
than 20 meters from surface waters 
and drainage lines. 
Tree plantation 
is verified. 
Constructio
n phase and 
operation 
phase  
Implemented 
by 
Contractor 
with oversight 
from the PMU 
Contractor  
Flora 
Destruction of flora 
  Contract documents should ensure 
that: 
  Vegetation clearance during 
construction activities, especially of 
trees and along the road-side, will 
follow national relevant regulation 
on this matter; 
  The contractor shall make every 
 
effort to avoid removal and/or 
destruction of trees, including those 
of religious, cultural and aesthetic 
significance. 
If such action is unavoidable the 
Engineer shall be informed in 
advance to verify and report on the 
technical justification for the trees 
that will be required to be removed. 
  The following steps are to be 
followed if trees are identified for 
removal during the rehabilitation of 
the road. 
Identify and document the number 
of trees that will be affected with 
girth size & species type 
 
  Trees shall be removed from the 
construction sites before 
commencement of construction with 
prior permission from the concerned 
department. 
  Compensatory plantation by way of 
Re-plantation of at least twice the 
number of trees cut should be 
carried out in the project area. 
Health & Safety  Health and Safety 
Impacts 
Noise 
Construction noise 
Labor 
  The contractor shall adhere to the 
guidelines and recommendations 
made by the Central Environmental 
Authority, if any with regard to 
felling of trees and removal of 
vegetation. 
  Removed trees of economic value 
must be handed over to the Timber 
Corporation. 
  Work safety measures and good 
workmanship practices are to be 
followed by the contractor to ensure 
no health risks for laborers; 
Provision of protective clothing for 
laborers handling hazardous 
materials,  
 
  Availability of safe drinking water 
 
for the workers; 
Flammable and combustible liquids 
bunding/storage areas to be 
designed in accordance with 
appropriate international standards 
  Extinguishers are to be available 
within all site vehicle  
  No open fires are permitted within 
the project area  
  No cigarette butts are to be disposed 
of onto the ground throughout the 
project area, all smokers must carry 
a portable disposal bin to reduce the 
risk of a spot fire starting and 
general litter  
Stockpiles of mulch are not to 
exceed two meters in height and 
width and must be turned regularly.  
 
  Train all staff in emergency 
 
preparedness and response (cover 
health and safety at the work site)  
  Check and replenish First Aid Kits 
  Contract provisions shall ensure: 
 
Source Controls, i.e., requirements 
that all exhaust systems will be 
maintained in good working order; 
properly designed engine enclosures 
and intake silencers will be 
employed; and regular equipment 
maintenance will be undertaken; 
Site Controls, i.e., requirements that 
stationary equipment will be placed 
as far from sensitive land uses as 
practical; selected to minimize 
objectionable noise impacts; and 
provided with shielding 
mechanisms where possible; 
  Contractor shall comply with the 
requirements for safety of the 
workers as per the ILO Convention 
No. 62 and Safety & Health 
Regulations of the Factory 
Ordinance of Sri Lanka to the extent 
that those are applicable to the 
project 
  The contractor should give priority 
to hiring labor from the surrounding 
areas to avoid the need for labor 
camps. 
Throughout 
constructio
n phase. 
Protected 
workers 
sites. 
at 
Contractor 
Implemented 
by 
Contractor 
with oversight 
from the PMU 
Throughout 
constructio
n phase. 
Not to exceed 
40 working 
Hours/per 
week. 
.  
Implemented 
by 
Contractor 
with oversight 
from the PMU 
Contractor 
Throughout 
constructio
n phase. 
Contractor  
Implemented 
by 
Contractor 
with oversight 
from the PMU 
  The location, layout and basic 
facility provision of the labor camp 
must be submitted to Engineer of 
the relevant managing department 
prior to their construction. 
  The construction will commence 
only upon the written approval of 
the Engineer. 
  The contractor shall maintain 
necessary living accommodation 
and ancillary facilities in a 
functional and hygienic manner and 
as approved by the Engineer. 
  All temporary accommodation must 
be constructed and maintained in 
such a 
fashion that uncontaminated water 
is available for drinking, cooking 
and washing.. 
 
Post Construction 
Clearing/Closure  of 
Construction  Site/Labor 
Camps 
Environmental 
Enhancement/ 
Landscaping 
  On completion of the works, all 
temporary structures will be cleared 
away, all rubbish cleared, excreta or 
other disposal pits or trenches filled 
in and effectively sealed off and the 
site left clean and tidy, at the 
contractor’s expenses 
  Landscape plantation, including 
turfing of shoulders, slopes, edge 
treatment of water bodies shall be 
taken up as per either detailed 
design or typical design guidelines 
given as part of the Bid Documents. 
  The contactor also shall remove all 
debris, piles of unwanted earth, 
spoil material, away from the dam 
site and from other work places and 
disposed at locations designated or 
acceptable to the Engineer  
Site clean 
Constructio
n phase and 
operation 
phase 
Constructio
n phase and 
operation 
phase 
Landscape  as 
design 
per 
guidelines 
Contractor 
Contractor 
Implemented 
by 
Contractor 
with oversight 
from the PMU 
Implemented 
by 
Contractor 
with oversight 
from the PMU 
Land 
degradation 
Soil erosion; Landslide, 
soil nutrient loss, 
erosion leading to 
shallow soil and hence 
low water holding 
capacity 
Water resource 
management 
Water scarcity due to 
climate change; 
Negative impact on the 
environment and on land 
productivity 
Environment /Climate risk 
  Vegetative bunds, afforestation, soil 
conservation, Soil test based 
nutrient application;  
  Extend agro-forestry to increase 
climate resiliency through 
Ecosystem Based Approaches 
(EBA) like integrated water 
resource management (IWRM); 
Preparation of environmental 
guidelines for selected districts/sites 
of the projects 
 
  Enhance irrigation efficiency and/or 
expand irrigation;  
  Rehabilitation of the traditional 
village irrigation systems;  
Promote water efficient irrigation 
Introduce and promote water 
harvesting techniques. 
 
 
  Encourage minor storage reservoirs;  
 
Promote participatory micro-
watershed management 
  Decrease water demands, e.g.  by 
increasing efficiency, reducing 
water losses, water recycling, 
changing irrigation practices 
Crop yield, 
Conservative 
Agriculture 
practices 
adapted Soil 
Health 
To be 
prepared in 
advance of 
project 
interventio
ns and 
implement
ation  
Number of 
village 
irrigation 
systems 
rehabilitated; 
Use of water 
harvesting 
techniques 
To be 
prepared in 
advance of 
project 
interventio
ns and 
implementa
tion to be 
monitored 
at quarterly 
intervals 
thereafter 
PMU 
Project  
PMU 
Project 
Climate 
shocks, low 
adaptive 
capacity 
Loss of crop leading to 
income loss, 
malnutrition 
Intensive use of 
fertilizers and 
pesticides 
Environmental and 
water pollution by 
chemicals 
Energy  
Use of non-renewable 
energy 
 
Increase water supply, e.g.  by using 
groundwater, de-silting the reservoir 
bed,   
  Capacity building and technical 
 
 
 
 
support for government and farmers 
on best practices of farm and 
irrigation management and land 
development and management, and 
how to reduce impact to the 
environment and ensure community 
management of land and water 
systems, 
Strengthen smallholder associations, 
water harvesting, heat tolerant crop 
variety, 
Set up a system for climate smart 
information collection and 
dissemination to provide climate 
change adaptation options that will 
complement the Environmental and 
Social Management Plan (ESMP) 
Promote Climate Smart Agriculture 
(CSA) practices avoiding use of 
pesticides, avoiding/reducing use of 
fertilizers 
Promote CSA technologies through 
the Farmer Field School (FFS) to 
the benefit of farmers 
Provide trainings in CSA to DoA 
Agricultural Instructors (AIs), and 
DAD Agrarian Research and 
Productivity Assistants (ARPA) to 
deliver FFS services  
Provide trainings in CSA to public 
and private advisory services. 
Set up a system for climate smart 
information collection and 
dissemination to provide climate 
change adaptation options that will 
complement the Environmental and 
Social Management Plan (ESMP); 
  Where appropriate develop organic 
farming and non-chemical fertilizer 
and pesticides. 
Promote efficient and 
environmentally sound management 
systems of fertilizers and pesticides.  
Investment in climate smart 
technologies (solar pumps, 
irrigation, water harvesting) 
 
 
 
 
 
Proximity to 
Protected 
Area/ 
biodiversity 
hotspots 
Encroachment on 
Protected areas or 
biodiversity hotspots 
  Environmental guidelines and 
selection criteria which exclude 
interventions in close 
proximity/adjacent to Protected 
Areas 
PMU 
Project 
Number of 
farmers/ 
smallholder 
Associations 
trained 
To be 
prepared in 
advance of 
project 
interventio
ns and 
implement
ation  
Amount of 
fertilizers used 
PMU 
Project  
To be 
prepared in 
advance of 
project 
interventio
ns and 
implement
ation 
PMU 
Project 
PMU  
Project 
Number of 
solar pumps 
water 
harvesting 
techniques 
used 
to be 
monitored at 
regular 
intervals  
To be 
prepared in 
advance of 
project 
interventio
ns and 
implement
ation 
To be 
prepared in 
advance of 
project 
interventio
ns and 
implement
ation  
Impacts on 
cultural 
heritage. 
Destruction of cultural 
and archeological sites 
  If archeological findings or other 
chance finds appear on or near 
construction site immediate work 
suspension and local authorities 
notification is required; 
Included in 
constructio
n works 
Included in 
supervision 
No cost 
Contractor 
 In case of 
finding 
cultural 
heritage, 
supervision is 
implemented 
by the 
competent 
institution 
4.2 Sub-project Screening  
Screening  for  environmental  and  social  impacts  using  the  Rapid  Assessment  Checklist (Attachment 
A)  will  be  introduced  for  all  sub-projects  before  implementation.  The  screening  process  will  include: 
assessing  impacts;  examining  alternatives  to  minimize  the  negative  impacts;  enhancing  positive 
impacts; and compensating for adverse impacts.  If the Rapid Assessment Checklist indicates that the 
possible  negative  impacts  from  implementation  of  the  subproject  would  be  minimal  and  that  the 
positive impacts  would  certainly  outweigh them, no further action  with  respect  to environmental  and 
social  safeguards  will  not  be required upon  approval  of  the Checklist  results by  PMU.  If the  negative 
impacts  are  more  than  minimal  or  irreversible  according  to  the  Checklist,  an  Environmental  Impact 
Assessment must be conducted and an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)  developed 
to mitigate the negative impacts. 
Attachment A: Rapid Assessment Checklist 
4.  “Additional Information” field must be completed when negative impact is identified or 
expected. For the purpose of allowing examination from various angles, some impacts are 
addressed more than once through different questions. 
Section A: Project Siting 
Screening Questions 
Answer to Questions 
Yes  No 
Not 
Applicable 
Additional Information 
  Project/subproject stage 
for addressing the impact 
Responsibility for 
addressing the impact 
Budget implications 
Other 
Of the project/subproject  The approximate size? 
area covered by rapid 
The GPS co-ordinates? 
assessment, what 
The main physical delimitation (e.g., river, lake, 
is/are: 
altitude, slope, rainfall)? 
The estimated number of population (male, 
female, aged over 70, aged under 15)? 
The dominant environmental feature (e.g., 
rainforest, dry forest, savannah, barren land, 
agricultural land, pasture, other)? 
The likelihood of recurrent natural disasters (e.g., 
drought, flood, wild fire, strong wind)? 
The level of capacity to absorb waste? 
The level of economic resilience? 
Is the project/subproject  Densely populated 
area in or close to: 
areas? 
Cultural heritage sites?   
Protected areas? 
Wetlands? 
Mangroves? 
Estuarine? 
Buffer zones of 
protected area? 
Special areas for 
protecting biodiversity? 
Other 
Will the project/subproject require support 
facilities? 
Does the project involve large-scale 
irrigation schemes rehabilitation and/or 
development (more than 100 hectares 
per scheme)?   
Does the project include construction/ 
rehabilitation/upgrade of roads that 
entail a total area being cleared above 
10 km long, or any farmer with more 
than 10 per cent of his or her private 
land taken? 
Will the works entail temporary and/or 
permanent resident workers? 
When is the rapid assessment conducted? 
Section B: Environmental Impacts 
Screening Questions 
Answer to Questions 
Yes  No 
Not 
Applicable 
Additional Information 
  Project/subproject stage 
for addressing the impact 
Responsibility for 
addressing the impact 
Budget implications 
Other 
Will the 
project/ 
subproject 
cause: 
Ecological disturbances or loss 
of ecological functions due to 
infrastructure construction? 
Environmental degradation from 
any of interventions? 
Environmental degradation from 
construction activities and 
equipment? 
Accidental release of hazardous 
chemicals? 
Increase in generation of solid 
waste? 
Occupational health hazards 
due to exposure to dust, 
hazardous material, noise, etc. 
Public health risks from solid, 
liquid, gaseous waste 
discharges? 
Changes in water flows? 
Eventual degradation of surface 
water bodies? 
Eventual degradation of 
groundwater bodies? 
Soil contamination? 
Soil erosion? 
Siltation? 
Decrease in soil fertility? 
Air pollution? 
Section C: Social Impacts 
Screening Questions 
Answer to Questions 
Yes  No 
Not 
Applicable 
Does the 
project/ 
subproject: 
Operate where property rights 
on resources (e.g., land tenure) 
are legally recognized? 
Cause changes to land tenure, 
land use, access to or use of 
resources? 
Require land acquisition? 
- 
How will the cost be shared between the project 
and the landowner? 
Additional Information 
  Project/subproject stage 
for addressing the impact 
Responsibility for 
addressing the impact 
Budget implications 
Other 
Obtain private land with 
community funding and through 
willing-buyer-willing-seller 
arrangement? 
Involve dislocation or involuntary 
resettlement of inhabitants? 
Cause modification in 
technology and land uses, which 
affect current socioeconomic 
activities? 
Increase unemployment? 
Cause influx of laborers from 
other areas? 
Create a possibility of 
uncontrolled in-migration of 
people and overloading of 
infrastructure from improved 
transportation system? 
Have disproportionate impacts 
on the vulnerable groups (e.g., 
the poor, women, children, 
indigenous peoples, disabled)? 
Involve or be complicit in 
alteration, damage or removal of 
cultural heritage? 
Section D: Other Considerations 
Screening Questions 
Answer to Questions 
Yes  No 
Not 
Applicable 
Additional Information 
  Project stage for 
addressing the impact 
Responsibility for 
addressing the impact 
Budget implications 
Other 
Does the national regulation in country/countries 
affected by the project/subproject require EIA or 
ESIA for the activities under the project? 
Does local capacity exist for fulfilment of EIA and 
ESIA requirements in country/countries affected 
by the project? 
Does the project address issues that have also 
been addressed by other projects or approaches? 
Does the project/subproject generate cumulative 
or long-term impacts? 
Is it possible to isolate the impacts from the 
project/subproject for monitoring? 
5.  Attachment  B:  Suggested  Methodology  and  Structure  of Environmental 
and  Social 
Management Plans 
An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) will be prepared for each 
subproject will be where initial screening demands preparation of such a plan. 
Suggest
ed 
Structur
e 
A suggested structure of ESMF 
is as follows: 
1.  Executive Summary 
A summary of the contents and key findings written in a way that is easily understood 
by the general public. It should be concise, about 3 to 5 pages. 
2.  Background 
Subproject specific background information will be included 
in this section. 
3.  Subproject Overview 
This section will provide an overview of the subproject and its relation to the project 
to which the subproject belongs. 
4.  Objectives 
The section will list the objectives of the Environmental and Social Management Plan 
specific to the subproject, based on its detailed information provided by the 
appropriate Project Management population Unit. The project and subproject details 
should include their precise nature and scope, site location, activities to be 
undertaken, and timing and scheduling. 
5.  Scope of Work 
This section should list and describe all national, provincial legislations and regulations 
as well as World Bank policies that give rise to the Environmental and Social 
Management Plan. The scope should take into account the nature and the magnitude 
of the potential impacts in addition to the project location and size. 
6.  Screening of Environmental and Social Impacts 
This section will contain the assessment results of anticipated impacts of the project 
activities on the environment and the people, including the list of key concerns and 
potential impacts of the subproject on the environment and the people. The 
assessment will be the base for deciding whether any auxiliary plan would be 
required: 
Baseline information  
This section will describe proposed sites and their immediate surroundings with 
texts, maps, photographs as well as key environmental and social aspects of the 
sites and surroundings, such as demography, ethnicity, socio economic activities, 
occupation and livelihoods, land form and land use, land ownership, water 
resources, settlements, critical habitat or protected areas, formal and informal 
groups,   methods of communication and transport, cultural heritage sites or 
graveyards, sensitive receptor such as schools, hospitals and access routes. The 
section will also include baseline data necessary to monitor all key environmental 
and social impacts identified through screening. 
7.  Environmental and Social Impacts 
This section will outline both positive and negative impacts, including cumulative ones, 
of the subproject by each type of intervention, assess the severity of these impacts 
and the range of measures required to avoid (mitigate, in case avoiding is not 
possible) the negative impacts and enhance positive ones. 
8.  Stakeholder Consultations and Information Disclosure 
This section will describe the objective, process, and outcome of the stakeholder 
consultations---with community members, relevant local and provincial officials, and 
NGOs with experience in the area-- 
-that are carried out during the ESMP preparation. The emphasis will be on the 
concerns and suggestions regarding the subproject and its potential impacts. 
This section will also list all project and subproject information shared with the 
stakeholders during 
the preparation of the plan and arrangements for disclosing subproject 
information. 
Mitigation and 
Monitoring Plan 
The section will describe all impacts (including cumulative ones), mitigation measures 
for each impact, indicators for each impact, the parties responsible for implementing 
each mitigation measure, and the parties responsible for monitoring each indicator. A 
single indicator may be monitored in different ways by multiple stakeholders to allow 
maximum participation of various stakeholders, and subsequently enhanced ownership 
and implementation of the project. 
9.  Capacity Assessment and Training 
This section will detail capacity assessment among the relevant officials and other 
stakeholders on implementing environmental and social management plan. It will also 
include a plan to enhance the capacity of the stakeholders while implementing the 
subproject and the ESMP. 
10. Cost Estimates and Sources of Funds 
The section will indicate cost estimates and sources of funds for institution development 
activities, training programs for implementation teams and local institutions, technical 
assistance to authorities, costs for preparation of ESMP and other safeguard documents, 
and their implementation. 
Sri Lanka
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience Project
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Document Date:
04/11/2019
Project No.
2000002583
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience (SARP) Project Design Report 
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
Document Date: 11/10/2019  
Project No. 
Sri Lanka- 
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience  
- SARP 
Project Design Report (PDR) 
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
Summary Annual Work Plan and Budget for the first eighteen months year 1 (2020) and year 
2 (2021) 
Presented in this section are tables giving an overall picture of financial resources required and 
key summary activities for the first 18 months SARP AWPB. The budget information is presented 
by  component  and  categories  of  expenditure.  The  first  year  of  project  implementation  is  2020 
commencing  around  June  2020  and  for  the  AWPB,  the  total  budget  is  estimated  at  USD  12.5 
million.  
Table  1:  SARP  2020/2021  18  month  Annual  Work  Plan  &  Budget  (in  ‘000  US$)  by 
Components and Subcomponents 
Sri LankaSmallholder Agricultural Commercialisation and Resilience Project (SARP)First 18 Months Annual Work Plan and the Budget (AWPB)Aggregate SummaryIFAD (USD 000)Other (USD 000)Component 1: Capacity building for climate resilience and inclusive value chainsSub-component 1.1:Capacity building climate resilience9,1392,075,6201,226,6652,362940Sub-component 1.2:Capacity building inclusive value chain1018128100124800241063.891Component 2: Climate sensitive investments for climate resilience and inclusive value chainsSub-component 2.1: Investing in climate resilience 40,47917,7003,264,3881,3331,949Sub-component 2.2 Investment in inclusive value chains15,1592,268,6001,922,9802,3581,834Component 3: Project management and coordination 3,7201,141,600321,0001243.21219.39Grand Total69,5155,631,6206,859,8339,7065,007FinanciersComponent & Sub ComponentActivitiesDesign Total Budget (USD 000)Year 1 ( 4Quarters) Year 2 ( 2 Quarters)  
Table 2: SARP 2020/2021 18 month Annual Work Plan & Budget (in ‘000 US$) by Expenditure 
Categories  
Categories  
Service providers 
TA-Studies 
Training-w-shops 
CW 
Equipment 
Grants 
O&M 
Salary-DSA 
Vehicles 
Total 
Year 1 (USD) 
Year 2 (USD) 
Total  
5.5 
1806 
917 
220 
67 
0 
15 
315 
24 
3369.5 
1 
938 
880 
254 
2178 
3499 
8 
158 
0 
7916 
6.5 
2744 
1797 
474 
2245 
3499 
23 
473 
24 
11285.5 
Sri Lanka Smallholder Agricultural Commercialisation and Resilience Project (SARP) First 18 Month Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)Component 1: Capacity building for climate resilience and inclusive value chainsTable 1.1. Sub-component 1.1:Capacity building climate resilienceDetailed Costs  ActivitiesQ1Q2Q3Q4Q5Q6IFAD Loan + Grant (USD)Other (USD)A. Community organizatIon, planning and mentoring   Awareness raising and community organization Social inclusion/ institutions teamTraining-w-shops326No.3505050501005050350930              250              100              232,500       93,000         325,500         276,675       48,825         Training of agro-enterprise promotersAgro-enterprise expertTraining-w-shops3No.311131,000           3                  -               3,000           -               3,000             2,550           450              Training of project, AI and ARPA staff in watershed planning Watershed development teamTraining-w-shops4No.4111141,000           4                  -               4,000           -               4,000             3,400           600              Training of community members and preparation of watershed plansWatershed development teamTraining-w-shops600No.1200100100100150150600500              300              300              150,000       150,000       300,000         255,000       45,000         Watershed management guidelines and planningWatershed development teamTraining-w-shops63No.2505050505050250250              150              100              37,500         25,000         62,500           53,125         9,375           Training of producer group organization managementAgro-enterprise teamTraining-w-shops500No.500343434341361,500           68                68                102,000       102,000       204,000         173,400       30,600         Training of FOs in O&MTraining-w-shops127No.357303565357              -               65                -               23,205         23,205           19,724         3,481           Technical assistance -               -               -               -               Institutions and social development expertPMUTA-Studies86p-m72333333181,200           12                6                  14,400         7,200           21,600           18,360         3,240           Social inclusion and gender facilitatorsPMUTA-Studies50p-m14466666636350              24                12                8,400           4,200           12,600           10,710         1,890           Agroenterprise promoters 1/PMUTA-Studies151p-m432181818181818108350              72                36                25,200         12,600         37,800           32,130         5,670           Incentives for ARPAs  2/ -               -               -               -               Full time ARPA paid by projectPMUTA-Studies497person-month2160909090909090540230              360              180              82,800         41,400         124,200         105,570       18,630         Part time ARPAs paid by projectPMUTA-Studies164person-month216090909090909054076                360              180              27,360         13,680         41,040           11,512         29,528         687,160       472,285       1,159,445      962,156       197,289       B. Climate smart technology Training in FFS-climate smart technologies for technical staffAgriculture team120No. 81111415,000         2                  2                  30,000         30,000         60,000           51,000         9,000           Training in FFS-climate smart technologies for extension  staff + youthAgriculture teamTraining-w-shops180No. 12123331215,000         6                  6                  90,000         90,000         180,000         153,000       27,000         Training of master trainers 3/Agriculture teamTraining-w-shops6No21123,000           2                  -               6,000           -               6,000             5,100           900              Establishment of FFS Agriculture teamTraining-w-shops150No300252550500              -               50                -               25,000         25,000           21,250         3,750           Training of FFS facilitators 4/Agriculture teamTraining-w-shops50No. 10334105,000           10                -               50,000         -               50,000           42,500         7,500           Technical assistance-               -               -               -               Natural Resource Management expertPMUTA-Studies86person-month72666666361,200           24                12                28,800         14,400         43,200           12,118         31,082         Agriculture + livestock specialistPMUTA-Studies86person-month72666666361,200           24                12                28,800         14,400         43,200           12,118         31,082         Agricultural Officers 5/PMUTA-Studies181person-month432181818181818108420              72                36                30,240         15,120         45,360           12,723         32,637         Rice specialistPMUTA-Studies18person-month1522233121,200           6                  6                  7,200           7,200           14,400           4,039           10,361         Water resource engineers 6/PMUTA-Studies127person-month14466666636880              24                12                21,120         10,560         31,680           8,886           22,794         Natural resource management officers 7/PMUTA-Studies173person-month28812121212121272600              48                24                28,800         14,400         43,200           12,118         31,082         Incentives for AIs at ASC level 8/PMUTA-Studies756person-month2160909090909090540350              360              180              126,000       63,000         189,000         53,015         135,986       Ai incentives one third at ASC level 9/PMUTA-Studies324person-month2160909090909090540150              360              180              54,000         27,000         81,000           22,721         58,280         500,960       311,080       812,040         410,587       401,453       C. Livelihood resilience building  training programmesHome gardensHome garden trainingAgric/ Ag. enterprise teamTraining-w-shops136No.113551055301,200           20                10                24,000         12,000         36,000           30,600         5,400           Aquaculture-               -               -               -               -                -               -               Fish Farming in the inland water reservoirs in selected seasonal and perennial tanks 10/Agric/ Ag. enterprise teamTraining-w-shops60No.505523151,200           10                5                  12,000         6,000           18,000           15,300         2,700           Livestock farming-               -               -               -               -                -               -               Semi intensive small scale dairy farming 11/Agric/ Ag. enterprise teamTraining-w-shops100No.8355101,200           -               10                -               12,000         12,000           10,200         1,800           Goat Rearing (semi-intensive goat management) 12/Agric/ Ag. enterprise teamTraining-w-shops107No.8966121,200           -               12                -               14,400         14,400           12,240         2,160           Commercial level Backyard Poultry 13/Agric/ Ag. enterprise teamTraining-w-shops116No.9755101,200           -               10                -               12,000         12,000           10,200         1,800           Agriculture and livelihoods-               -               -               -               -                -               -               Mushroom cultivation 14/Agric/ Ag. enterprise teamTraining-w-shops35No.291231,200           -               3                  -               3,600           3,600             3,060           540              Agri-machinery and equipment repair center (pick best trainers from VTC)Agric/ Ag. enterprise teamTraining-w-shops11No.91121,200           -               2                  -               2,400           2,400             2,040           360              Controlled agriculture 15/Agric/ Ag. enterprise teamTraining-w-shops89No.743361,200           -               6                  -               7,200           7,200             6,120           1,080           Agri- Small scale poultry hatchery 16/Agric/ Ag. enterprise teamTraining-w-shops10No.8111,200           -               1                  -               1,200           1,200             1,020           180              36,000         70,800         106,800         90,780         16,020         D. Nutrition and genderTraining extension workers on nutritionSocial inclusion Training-w-shops60No.1211135,000           2                  1                  10,000         5,000           15,000           -               15,000         Training in social behavioural changes 17/Social inclusion Training-w-shops225No.31175,000         1                  -               75,000         -               75,000           -               75,000         Training in nutrient preserving techniques 18/Post harvest & VA specialistTraining-w-shops280No.4012323117,000           6                  5                  42,000         35,000         77,000           -               77,000         Technical assistance0-               -               -               -               -                -               -               Nutrition expertPMUTA-Studies15Months32135,000           3                  -               15,000         -               15,000           12,750         2,250           -               -               -               -               182,000         12,750         169,250       -               -               -               -               F. Contracting service providers-               -               -               -               IWMI technical support 19/PMUService providers215Ls10.50.250.251215,000       1                  1                  107,500       107,500       215,000         182,750       32,250         Climate Risk Analysis consultancy PMUService providers40Month22220,000         2                  -               40,000         -               40,000           34,000         6,000           Environmental and Social Management Framework PMUService providers12Month11112,000         1                  -               12,000         -               12,000           10,200         1,800           VAM targeting and planningPMUService providers100Ls10.50.51100,000       1                  -               100,000       -               100,000         85,000         15,000         NGO SPs - community development, NRM etc. 20/PMUService providers2700Ls60.250.250.250.250.250.251.5450,000       1                  1                  450,000       225,000       675,000         573,750       101,250       Service providers851,500       372,500       1,042,000      885,700       156,300       GRAND TOTAL91392,075,620    1,226,665    3,302,285      2,361,973    940,312       TotalDesign total targetsDesign total budget (USD 000)IFAD expend. CategoryResponsibilityFinanciers Unit Price (USD) Total Budget (USD)Unit18 Months Plan Period YEAR 1Year 2Total Year 1Total Year 2Component 1: Capacity building for climate resilience and inclusive value chainsTable 1.2. Sub-component 1.2:Capacity building inclusive value chainDetailed CostsActivitiesQ1Q2Q3Q4Q5Q6 IFAD (USD Other (USD)A.  FBS organization and trainingTraining of core team of trainers 1/FBS trainerTraining-w-shops3No.1113,000   3,000      2,550      450         Adaptation of training materials 2/FBS trainerTraining-w-shops10Lump sum11110,000 10,000    8,500      1,500      Training of service providers 3/ FBS trainerTraining-w-shops8No.411242,000   8,000      6,800      1,200      Training of farmers  4/ 5/FBS teamTraining-w-shops278No.755555203,700   74,000    50,320    23,680    Subtotal95,000    68,170    26,830    B. Market appraisal, post harvest and value additionTraining of extension workers in post-harvest/ GAPPost harvest expertTraining-w-shops18No.91111142,000   8,000      6,800      1,200      Training of farmers in post harvest/ GAPPost harvest expertTraining-w-shops40No.20231282,000   16,000    12,240    3,760      Refresher training for extenson workersPost harvest expertTraining-w-shops12No.602,000   -          -          -          Value chain/ market studies, design and supervisionValue chain expertTA-Studies18No61123,000   6,000      5,100      900         Technical assistance1. Post harvest technologistPMUTA-Studies25p-m212212281,200   33,600    28,560    5,040      2. Value chain and marketing specialist  PMUTA-Studies29p-m2433301,200   36,000    30,600    5,400      99,600    83,300    16,300    C. Skills development training in Agriculture for Youth Study to explore income opportunitiesAgroenterprise expertTA-Studies2Lump sum1112,000   2,000      1,700      300         Mapping of incubatorsAgroenterprise expertTA-Studies2Lump sum1112,000   2,000      1,530      470         Agroenterprise expertTraining-w-shops153No.4501010252570340      23,800    16,184    7,616      Business training and preparation of business plans 8/Agroenterprise expertTraining-w-shops350No.50025252575700      52,500    44,625    7,875      Subtotal80,300    64,039    16,261    -          D. Technical assistance-          Agro-enterprise, finance, youth specialistPMUTA-Studies23person-month1922222101,200   12,000    10,200    1,800      Farm business management training specialistPMUTA-Studies47person-month3933333151,200   18,000    15,300    2,700      Subtotal30,000    25,500    4,500      GRAND TOTAL1018304,900  241,009  63,891    Youth incubator training  7/ ResponsibilityIFAD expend. CategoryDesign total budget (USD 000) Total Budget (USD) FinanciersDesign total targetsUnitTotal Unit Price (USD) 18 Months Plan Period Smallholder Agricultural Commercialisation and Resilience Project (SARP)First 18 Month Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)Component 2: Climate sensitive investments for climate resilience and inclusive value chainsTable 2.1. Sub-component 2.1: Investing in climate resilience Detailed CostsActivitiesQ1Q2Q3Q4Q5Q6IFAD (USDOther (USD)A. Cascade water resource infrastructure developmentTank rehabilitation (tank, anicut diversons, spillway, bund, canal) 1/Civil Engineer and watershed teamCW17550No.260101020675001,350,000         459,000            891,000            Survey, design, construction and supervision 2/Civil Engineer and watershed teamTA-Studies5200No.26010102020000400,000            204,000            196,000            Catchment agroforestry and soil conservation 3/Watershed deve. teamCW2600Ha.130050501002000200,000            102,000            98,000              Mechanical works - repair/ improvement 4/Watershed deve. teamCW598No.260101020230046,000              23,460              22,540              Level gaugesWater resources engineersEquipment195No.13001010201503,000                1,530                1,470                Rainfall measuring gaugesWater resources engineersEquipment12No.144202040803,200                1,632                1,568                Evaporation pans in particular GN area. Water resources engineersEquipment174No.30010152558014,500              7,395                7,105                Watershed development Water resources engineersCW60Ha.2001015253007,500                3,825                3,675                Technical assistanceCivil engineer (chartered)PMUTA-Studies58person-month48333312120014,400              7,344                7,056                Subtotal2,038,600         810,186            1,228,414         B. Household water harvesting, irrigation and soil conservation0Farm pond construction (includes water pump & 0.25 acres micro-irrigationWater resources engineersCW236hh225555520105021,000              12,495              8,505                Micro-irrigation demonstrationWater resources engineersEquipment504hh480404080105084,000              49,980              34,020              Low cost irrigation systems (pitcher and bucket kits) 0.25 ac.Water resources engineersEquipment1136hh800025025050014271,000              42,245              28,755              Soil conservation (bund) 5/Natural resource managementEquipment2050hh183007507501500112168,000            71,400              96,600              Subtotal344,000            176,120            167,880            C. Household resilience and nutritionHome gardens 6/Agriculture teamGrants431HH2200010010020019639,200              26,656              12,544              Home gardens + micro irrigation for 0.25 acAgriculture teamGrants176HH250010152570217,550              11,934              5,616                Nutritive rich home gardensSocial inclusion team + agricultureGrants36HH1201010203006,000                4,080                1,920                Fingerlings 7/Agriculture teamGrants63HH21007575150304,500                2,295                2,205                Aquaculture 8/Agriculture teamGrants133HH95035407514010,500              5,355                5,145                Semi-intensive small scale dairy farmingAgriculture teamGrants1650HH1500075751501100165,000            84,150              80,850              Semi-intensive goat productionAgriculture teamGrants1650HH1500075751501100165,000            84,150              80,850              Income generating enterprisesAgriculture and agro-enterprise Grants748HH680050501001100110,000            56,100              53,900              Subtotal517,750            274,720            243,030            D. Climate resilient farming practices 9/Demonstration plots for improved rice 10/Agriculture team + rice specialistGrants144No6033611236,738                4,009                2,729                Commercial farmer model Agriculture teamGrants700HH35000250250500200100,000            17,000              83,000              Market led farmer model 11/Agriculture teamGrants3675HH2450007507501500150225,000            38,250              186,750            Rainfed farmer model 11/Agriculture teamGrants700HH7000025025050010050,000              12,450              37,550              Subtotal381,738            71,709              310,029            GRAND TOTAL404793,282,088         1,332,735         1,949,353         Unit Price (USD)Total Budget (USD)FinanciersResponsibilityIFAD expend. CategoryDesign total budget (USD000)Design total targetsUnitTotal18 Months Plan Period Sri LankaSmallholder Agricultural Commercialisation and Resilience Project (SARP)First 18 Month Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)Component 2: Climate sensitive investments for climate resilience and inclusive value chainsTable 2.2. Sub-component 2.2 Investment in inclusive value chainsDetailed CostsQ1Q2Q3Q4Q5Q6IFAD Loan (USDIFAD-GRANTOther (USD)A. Feeder road rehabilitation and maintenance1. Rehabilitation Design and Supervision 1/Civil engineerCW408600Km303030301515150680102,000     43,350        58,650          Feeder roads rehabilitation works 2/Civil engineerCW5100600Km303030151512085001,020,000  433,500      586,500        Construction of structures/crossings 3/Civil engineerCW22.545No.87155007,500         3,188          4,313            Subtotal1,129,500  480,038      649,463        B. Agrarian Service Centre and market Infrastructure   1. Strengthening of Agrarian Service Centres   a. ASC strengthening and knowledge hub 5/Civil engineerEquipment240030No.555520800001,600,000  1,224,000   376,000        b. Agrarian service centre capacity developmentPMUTraining-w-shops5025No.23128200016,000       10,880        5,120            c. Review of ASCs and Agrarian Rural Banks  6/Rural Finance ExpertTA-Studies101Study111000010,000       8,500          1,500            d. MIS system investments  7/Rural Finance ExpertEquipment7620No.123380011,400       9,690          1,710            e. Training for bank staffRural Finance ExpertTraining-w-shops80020No.12340,000120,000     81,600        38,400          Technical assistanceRural finance trainingPMUTA-Studies1916Person-31412004,800         4,080          720               Subtotal1,762,200  1,338,750   423,450        2. Construction of market centres and facilitiesa. Design and SupervisionCivil engineerTA-Studies1313Ls11131,0003,000         747             1,530         723               b. Construction of local markets + collection pointsCivil engineerCW1806No.113000030,000       7,470          15,300       7,230            c. Construction of farmer's marketsCivil engineerCW6724No.11168000168,000     41,832        85,680       40,488          d. Multi stakeholder platforms for value chain actorsValue chain expertCW40020No.1122000040,000       -              13,600       26,400          Subtotal241,000     50,049        116,110     74,841          C. Commercial and Value Adding EnterprisesAgri- Processing and value adding businessPost harvest/ VA expertGrants340200HH121224170040,800       20,808        19,992          4-P business modelsValue chain expertGrants55010No115500055,000       28,050        26,950          Social enterprise business modelsValue chain expertGrants56010No.115600056,000       28,560        27,440          Subtotal151,800     77,418        74,382          D. Youth and women's enteprisesLocal nurseries 8/Agro-enterprise teamGrants16812No1121400028,000       14,280        13,720          Agri-machinery and equipment for hire service providers 9/Agro-enterprise teamGrants700125No6612560067,200       45,696        21,504          Protected agriculture interventionAgro-enterprise teamGrants875350HH152035250087,500       44,625        42,875          Quality seed productionAgro-enterprise teamGrants28050No123560016,800       8,568          8,232            Aggregator business model for gherkin Agro-enterprise teamGrants165No1132003,200         1,632          1,568            Semi-intensive small scale dairy production 3 cows + shedAgro-enterprise teamGrants616110HH51015560084,000       42,840        41,160          Goat production 15-20 goatsAgro-enterprise teamGrants5550HH5511005,500         2,805          2,695            Commercial backyard poultry Agro-enterprise teamGrants248400HH12122462014,880       7,589          7,291            Subtotal307,080     168,035      139,045        E. Climate and market information service 10/PMUTA-Studies6001Ls11600000600,000     127,500      472,500        Grand total151594,191,580  2,241,789   116,110     1,833,681     Unit Price (USD)Total Budget (USD)FinanciersActivitiesResponsibilityIFAD expend. CategoryDesign total budget       (USD 000)Design total targetsUnitTotal18 Months Plan Period Component 3: Project management and coordination Table 3.0 Component 3   Project management and coordinationDetailed CostsActivitiesQ1Q2Q3Q4Q5Q6IFAD Loan (USDOther (USD)1. Investment CostsA. Project Management Unit1. PMU EquipmentComputer and PrinterPMUEquipment16set1010-10160010-16000016,000          13,600         2,400         LaptopsPMUEquipment15set1010-101,50010-15000015,000          12,750         2,250         Other office equipmentPMUEquipment20lump sum11-120,0001-20000020,000          17,000         3,000         Accounting softwarePMUEquipment30unit11-130,0001-30000030,000          25,500         4,500         MIS/M&E system upgradePMUEquipment20lump sum11-120,0001-20000020,000          17,000         3,000         2. VehiclesPMUVehicles240unit44-4600004-2400000240,000        204,000       36,000       3. PMU Training /1PMUTraining-w-shops60lump sum6112100002-20000020,000          17,000         3,000         4. PIM Manual /2PMUTA-Studies10lump sum11-1100001-10000010,000          8,500           1,500         Subtotal30-3710000371,000        315,350       55,650       B. M&E and Knowledge Management 1. Workshops/Forums for policy EngagementStart-Up Workshop /3PMUTraining-w-shops20number11-1200001-20000020,000          17,000         3,000         Sensitization and Education Workshops /4Technical expertsTraining-w-shops60number622410,0004-40000040,000          34,000         6,000         Annual Stakeholders Planning/Review WorkshopPMUTraining-w-shops30number6115000-1050005,000            4,250           750            2. Studies and Surveys--00Baseline/Annual Outcome/Impact Survey /5M&E specialistTA-Studies140survey71120,0001-20000020,000          17,000         3,000         3. Knowledge Management --00Information and Communication Materials /7M&E TeamTraining-w-shops60lump sum61121000011100001000020,000          17,000         3,000         Training ManualsTechnical expertsTraining-w-shops150set311250,000115000050000100,000        85,000         15,000       Subtotal14000065000205,000        174,250       30,750       C. Area and district officesVehiclesPMUVehicles120No.22260000201200000120,000        102,000       18,000       MotorbikesPMUVehicles63No.181818350018063000063,000          53,550         9,450         ComputerPMUEquipment20No.141414100014014000014,000          11,900         2,100         PrintersPMUEquipment18No.61414400140560005,600            4,760           840            Office equipmentPMUEquipmentNo.6630006018000018,000          15,300         2,700         Subtotal5402206000220,600        187,510       33,090       Total Investment Costs796,600        677,110       119,490     2. Recurrent costsA. Project Management UnitSalariesProject directorPMUSalary-DSA108person-month7233333318150012618000900027,000          22,950         4,050         Senior finance/ admin specialistPMUSalary-DSA86person-month7233333318120012614400720021,600          18,360         3,240         Senior procurement specialistPMUSalary-DSA86person-month7233333318120012614400720021,600          18,360         3,240         Assistant financePMUSalary-DSA72person-month7233333318100012612000600018,000          15,300         2,700         Assistant procurement PMUSalary-DSA43person-month72333333186001267200360010,800          9,180           1,620         Finance/ administration officersPMUSalary-DSA130person-month216999999546003618216001080032,400          27,540         4,860         Monitoring and evaluation specialistPMUSalary-DSA86person-month7233333318120012614400720021,600          18,360         3,240         DriversPMUSalary-DSA115person-month28812121212121272400482419200960028,800          24,480         4,320         Office assistantsPMUSalary-DSA58person-month1446666663640024129600480014,400          12,240         2,160         SecretaryPMUSalary-DSA43person-month72333333186001267200360010,800          9,180           1,620         Subtotal1929613800069000207,000        175,950       31,050       B. Area and district offices Area Coordinators (NRM specialists)PMUTA-Studies144person-month1446666663610002412240001200036,000          30,600         5,400         M&E Assistants /9 PMUSalary-DSA86person-month14466666636600241214400720021,600          18,360         3,240         Drivers /10 (2)PMUSalary-DSA58person-month1446666663640024129600480014,400          12,240         2,160         Office assistants/11  PMUSalary-DSA173person-month4321818181818181084007236288001440043,200          36,720         6,480         Subtotal1447276,80038,400115,200        97,920         17,280       C. AllowancesTravel and AllowancesPMUSalary-DSA300lump sum611250,000115000050000100,000        85,000         15,000       Honorarium to NSC participantsPMUSalary-DSA36No. meetings6011136002112006001,800            1,530           270            Subtotal325120050600101,800        86,530         15,270       D. Operation and MaintenanceVehicle operating costsPMUO&M340vehicle34121111710,00052500002000070,000          59,500         10,500       Motor bike operating costsPMUO&M284lump sum611250000115000050000100,000        85,000         15,000       Other equipmentPMUO&M68lump sum611212,00011120001200024,000          20,400         3,600         Office premises and rentsPMUO&M156Per office39111111640004216000800024,000          20,400         3,600         Office operational expenses /12PMUO&M156Per office39111111640004216000800024,000          20,400         3,600         Subtotal158144,00098,000242,000        205,700       36,300       Total Recurrent Costs666,000        566,100       99,900       Grand total37201,141,600321,0001,462,600     1,243,210    219,390     Unit Price (USD)Total Budget (USD)FinanciersResponsibilityIFAD expend. CategoryDesign total budget (USD 000)Design total targetsUnitTotal18 Months Plan Period YEAR 1Year 2Total Year 1Total Year 2 
Sri Lanka
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience Project
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Document Date:
04/11/2019
Project No.
2000002583
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience (SARP) Project Design Report 
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months 
Document Date: 11/10/2019  
Project No. 
Estimate LKR MNEstimate USD '000Procurement MethodPre/ post reviewFinalised onDate no objectionBid invitation dateBid closing openingBid evaluation reportIFAD NOLPC ApprovalContracted amount LKR (000')Date contract awardDate contract signaturePlanned20.10.202005.11.202005.12.202015.12.202020.12.202022.12.202024.12.202002.01.20210.5253LSPostRevisedActualPlanned20.10.202005.11.202005.12.202015.12.202020.12.202022.12.202024.12.202002.01.20210.563.2LSPostRevisedActualPlanned20.10.202005.11.202005.12.202015.12.202020.12.202022.12.202024.12.202002.01.20212.537514.5LSPostRevisedActualPlanned20.08.202030.08.202001.10.202015.10.202025.10.202028.10.202001.11.202030.05.202114.784NCBPostRevisedActualPlanned20.09.202030.09.202001.11.202015.11.202025.11.202028.11.202001.12.202030.05.202112.42571NCBPostRevisedActualPlanned29.4168RevisedActualPlanned20.09.202005.10.202005.11.202015.11.202020.11.202023.11.202025.11.202002.12.20201.99511.4NCBPostRevisedActualPlanned10.01.202005.02.202005.03.202015.03.202020.03.202023.03.202025.03.202031.03.20206.336NCBPostRevisedActualPlanned10.01.202005.02.202005.03.202015.03.202020.03.202023.03.202025.03.202031.03.20202.62515NCBPostRevisedActualPlanned10.01.202005.02.202005.03.202015.03.202020.03.202023.03.202025.03.202031.03.20206.6538NCBPostRevisedActualEstimate LKR MNEstimate USD '000Procurement MethodPrior/ post reviewFinalised onDate no objectionBid invitation dateBid closing openingBid evaluation reportIFAD NOLPPC ApprovalContracted amount LKR (000')Date contract awardDate contract signaturePlanned20.01.202005.02.202005.03.202015.03.202020.03.202023.03.202025.03.202031.03.20205.2530NCBPostRevisedActualPlanned20.01.202005.02.202005.03.202015.03.202020.03.202023.03.202025.03.202031.03.20203.520NCBPostRevisedActualPlanned15.01.202020.01.202005.02.202020.03.202030.03.202010.04.202020.04.202023.04.202025.04.202025.05.202063360ICBPriorRevisedActualPlanned15.01.202005.02.202005.03.202015.03.202020.03.202023.03.202025.03.202031.03.202011.02563NCBPostRevisedActualPlanned140800ICBPriorRevised05.01.202007.01.202010.01.202025.02.202010.03.202025.03.202008.04.202017.04.202020.04.202030.06.2021ActualPlannedRevisedActualNote :   1 and 2  Since these items categorised as equipment in the AWPB, entire amount has been treated under the Procurement of Goods3.  As this item (Bund) refer to civil works though it has been catergorised in AWPB as equipment it was included under the "Works" of th PP.4 and 5  Since the total value of vehicles exceeds the NCB threashold PMU will have to follow International bidding procedure if they want to procure entire stock at once.1500hhVehicles / 4Motorbykes91011121314Other office equipments (to be specified)Accounting softwareMIS/M&FE system upgradeDescription3No.241071MIS system investmentsComputers and printersLaptops6ASC strenghening Equipment / 5Soil conservation bund./3IFAD Loan No                    :  Period                                  :  from 1st January 2020 to June 2021Exchange Rate                  :  USD 1 = LKR 175SL No.AWPB Ref.DescriptionLot No/QTYBasic dataPlan Vs ActualCompletion dateBid documentsBid periodBid evaluation reportContract finalization20 nos.40 nos.25 nos.80 hh500 hhProcurement Plan - 2020/21GOODSCountry                               :  Sri LankaProject / Programme     :  Smallholder Agribusiness Resilence ProjectLevel GaugesRainfall measuring gaugesEvaporation pansMicro-irrigation demonstration Equip. /1Low cost irrigation systems./212345Completion date20 Nos.Contract finalizationPlan Vs ActualBid documentsBid periodBid evaluation report618Lot No/QTYBasic data115SL No.AWPB Ref.87EstimateLKR MNEstimate USD '000Procurement MethodPrior / Post ReviewBid DocumentApproval by PCNo objectionAdvert/ Invitation of  bidsClosing/Openinig bidsEvaluatedPC DecisionDate of AwardSigned contractContract amount in LKR MPlanned 20.10.202025.10.202030.10.202030.11.202010.12.202015.12.202023.12.202031.12.202030.06.20213.999823NCBPostRevisedActualPlanned 35200Com procPostRevisedActualPlanned 8.0546Com procPostRevisedActualPlanned 1.31257.5Com proc.PostRevisedActualPlanned 3.67521Com proc.PostRevisedActualPlanned 17.85102Direct6Prior RevisedActualPlanned 1.48758.5Com. ProcPostRevisedActualPlanned 1.31257.5Com procPostRevisedActualPlanned 20.11.202025.11.202004.12.202005.01.202115.01.202120.01.202125.01.202130.01.202130.06.20215.2530NCBPostRevisedActualPlanned 20.11.202025.11.202030.11.202004.12.202005.01.202115.01.202120.01.202122.01.202125.01.202130.01.202130.06.202129.4168NCBPrior RevisedActualPlanned 25.09.202030.09.202004.10.202005.11.202016.11.202022.11.202025.11.202030.11.202030.06.2021740NCBPostRevisedActualPlanned 29.4168PriorRevisedActual1For tank rehabiitation will be contract out and Unit cost is sum of LKR 200,000 per tank23 Community contribution 4-5 ha. petank (5ha @ USD 2300 per ha.); 2,3,4,5,  - Assumed that  work will be undertaken by the Community as there is a substantiol contribution  is expected from them6It is the usual practice to entrust Design and supervision of Rural access roads to the Technical officers at Pradeseeya saba or Divisional secrtariates at  an agreed percentage750% contribution by the Coomunity. Same point given in above 2 is applicable.12Soil conservation bund /71500hhSoil conservation cost - 50% by Community (Unit = cost 5 ha @ USD 2000 per ha.). A suitable Community procurement procedure need to be devised based on the strenght of community organisations.(Per tank LKR 1.75 Mln.)Construction of local markets + collection pointsConstruction of farmers marketsMulti stakeholder platforms for value chain actors Period                                 :  from 1st January 2020 to June 2021Procurement Plan - 2020/21WORKSProject / Programme     :  Smallholder Agribusiness Resilence ProjectIFAD Loan No                    :  Feeder Road Design and supervisionFeeder roads rehabilittion worksConstruction or structures/crossingsTank rehabilitation (LKR 200,000 per Tank) 1Catchment agroforestry & soil conservation 2 (USD 10,000 per tank)Mechanical works -repair improvement 3Watershed development4Farm pond construction5 (includes water pump & 0.25 acres micro-irrigation)Completion datePreparaton /Approval of Bidding processNo objectionExchange Rate                  :  1 USD =LKR175SL NoAWPB Activity No.DescriptionLot No/QtyBasic dataPlan Vs ActualContract finalization678123459101120 Nos.100 ha20 Nos.25 ha.20 ha.2150 km.120 km.15 Nos.1 No.1NOL for EOIDate publishedClosing DateDate proposedDate no objectionPC approvalNOL for RFP/BidPC appl.Invitation dateClosing/opening dateSubmitted evaluation report  NOL for evaluation report (T)Opening financial proposalSubmitted evaluation report (T) &(F) NOL  for evaluation report (T) & (F)Date of PC approvalContract amount LKR (000')Date awardedContract SignaturePlanned 10.01.2015.01.2015.01.2020.01.2015.02.2025.02.2028.02.2005.03.2010.03.20RevisedActualPlanned 10.01.2015.01.2015.01.2020.01.2015.02.2025.02.2028.02.2005.03.2010.03.20RevisedActualPlanned 10.01.2015.01.2015.01.2020.01.2015.02.2025.02.2028.02.2005.03.2010.03.20RevisedActualPlanned 10.01.2015.01.2015.01.2020.01.2015.02.2025.02.2028.02.2005.03.2010.03.20RevisedActualPlanned 10.01.2015.01.2015.01.2020.01.2015.02.2025.02.2028.02.2005.03.2010.03.20RevisedActualPlanned 31.01.2005.02.2005.02.2010.02.2005.03.2015.03.2020.03.2025.03.2001.04.20RevisedActualPlanned 10.01.2015.01.2015.01.2020.01.2015.02.2025.02.2028.02.2005.03.2010.03.20RevisedActualPlanned 10.01.2015.01.2015.01.2020.01.2015.02.2025.02.2028.02.2005.03.2010.03.20RevisedActualPlanned 15.01.2020.01.2025.01.2031.01.2027.02.2005.03.2010.03.2015.03.2020.03.20RevisedActualPlanned 02.01.2003.01.2003.01.2010.01.2010.02.2015.02.2020.02.2028.02.2005.03.2010.03.2015.03.20RevisedActualPlanned 02.05.2003.05.2003.05.2006.05.2005.06.2015.06.2020.06.2025.06.2001.07.20RevisedActualPlanned 25.10.2001.11.2001.11.2005.11.2005.12.2010.12.2015.12.2020.12.2001.01.21RevisedActualPlanned 01.03.2005.03.2005.03.2010.04.2005.05.2015.05.2020.05.2025.05.2030.05.2005.06.2010.06.20RevisedActualPlanned 10.06.2015.06.2015.06.2020.06.2020.07.2025.07.2005.08.2015.08.2020.08.2025.08.2001.09.20RevisedActualNOL for EOIDate publishedClosing DateDate proposedDate no objectionPC approvalNOL for RFP/BidPC approvalInvitation dateClosing/opening dateSubmitted evaluation report  NOL for evaluation report (T)Opening financial proposalSubmitted evaluation report (T) &(F) NOL  for evaluation report (T) & (F)Date of PC approvalContract amount LKR (000')Date awardedContract SignaturePlanned 01.03.2005.03.2005.03.2010.04.2005.05.2015.05.2020.05.2025.05.2001.06.20RevisedActualPlanned 01.03.2005.03.2005.03.2010.04.2005.05.2015.05.2020.05.2025.05.2001.06.20RevisedActualPlanned 10.03.2015.03.2010.04.2015.03.2020.03.2025.03.2026.04.2002.05.2010.05.2015.05.2030.05.2002.06.2010.06.2015.06.20RevisedActualPlanned 01.04.2005.04.2005.04.2010.05.2005.06.2015.06.2015.06.2020.06.2025.06.2001.07.20RevisedActualPlanned 10.03.2015.03.2010.04.2015.03.2020.03.2025.03.2026.04.2002.05.2010.05.2015.05.2030.05.2002.06.2010.06.2015.06.20RevisedActualPlanned 03.01.2005.01.2005.01.2010.01.2010.02.2020.02.2020.02.2025.02.2027.02.2001.03.20RevisedActualPlanned 05.04.2010.04.0225.04.2001.05.2001.06.2010.06.2015.06.2020..06.2025.06.2001.07.20RevisedActualCQSPlanned 10.01.2015.01.2015.01.2020.01.2015.02.2025.02.2028.02.2005.03.2010.03.20RevisedActualPlanned 01.03.2005.03.2005.03.2010.03.2005.04.2010.04.2010.04.2016.04.2020.04.2025.04.2001.05.20RevisedActualPlanned 10.01.2015.01.2010.03.2015.03.2020.03.2025.03.2026.04.2002.05.2010.05.2015.05.2020.05.2001.06.2005.06.20RevisedActual1. Surve, Design and supervision cost need to be separated to estimate the cost of consultancy and decide the threshod for prior review by IFAD2. Cost of the service need to be re-checked ? Cant we catergorised this as a service? Can'twe catergorised as Services ?22MM366.336PostPostPostPostPriorPriorPostPostMM1214.4CQS2.52TimeClimate & Market information services / 21600Farm business management training specialist15Date ComletedPrior/post -reviewPlan Vs ActualTerms of referenceBid evaluation Technical (T) and Financial (F)Date ComletedRequest for EOIBid proposal/RFPContract FinalizationPostPostPostPostPostPostPostPostPostPostPostPostPostPostBaseline/Annual Outcome/Impact SurveyQCBSNo.23.520Contract FinalizationArea coordinators (NRM specialists)PostPostAgroenterprise promotors (1  per district)21.63610812.637.818Institutions and social development expertSocial inclusion and gender facilitators 3.782.20523PIM ManualCQSLump sum11.7510SL NoAWPB Activity CodeDescriptionSelection methodLump-sum or time-basedUnitQuantityEstimate LKR MNEstimate USD '000Period                                  :  from 1st January 2020 to June 2021Procurement Plan - 2020/21CONSULTANCIESCountry                               :  Sri LankaProject / Programme     :  Smallholder Agribusiness Resilence ProjectIFAD Loan No                    :  Exchange Rate                  :  USD 1 = LKR 175SL NoAWPB Activity CodeDescriptionSelection methodLump-sum or time-basedUnitQuantityEstimate LKR MNEstimate USD '000Prior/post -reviewPlan Vs ActualRequest for EOITerms of referenceBid proposal/RFPBid evaluation Technical (T) and Financial (F)6.615MMMMMMNutrition expert3152.625Natural Resource Mnaagement (4 officers)7343.243.243.214.4Water resource engineers (1 per hub)3631.6Natural Resource Management expertAgriculture + livestock specialistRice specialist(CSA - AWD - IPM)3636125.537.56Value chain and marketing specialist636Agro-enterprise, finance, youth specialist1012Value chain/market studies, design & supervision26Post harvest technologist933.6CQSCQSCQS1.055.886.32.1TimeTimeMMMM18Survey, design, construction & supervision /120400CQSQCBS3.1570Time123456Design and supervision Market centres3QCBS0.525Lump sumReview of ASCs and Agrarian Rural Banks 110QCBSCQS1051.75UnitTechnical assistance ; Civil engineer (Chartered)CQSCQSCQSCQSCQSCQSCQSCQSCQS7.567.562.52No.MMMMMM202421QCBS10111215161718191314789MMMMMMMMNo.MMNo.TimeTime basedTime basedTime basedTime basedTime basedTime basedTime basedNo.Time basedTime basedlump sumlump sum0.352QCBSStudy to explore income opportunities20.35QCBSMapping of incubatorsNOL for EOIDate publishedclosing dateDate proposedDate No objectionPC approvalNOL for RFP/BidPC approvalinvitation dateClosing/opening dateSubmitted evaluation reportNOL for evaluation report (T)Opening financial proposalSubmitted evaluation report (T) & (F)NOL for evaluation report (T) & (F)Date of PC approvalContract amount LKR '000Date awardedContract SignaturePlanned 15.01.2020.01.2021.02.2016.03.2020.03.2023.03.2025.03.2030.03.2005.04.2010.04.2016.04.2018.04.20RevisedActualPlanned 20.01.2015.02.2020.02.2025.02.2025.03.2030.03.2005.04.2010.04.2016.04.2020.04.2025.04.20RevisedActualPlanned 20.01.2015.02.2020.02.2025.02.2025.03.2030.03.2005.04.2010.04.2016.04.2020.04.2025.04.20RevisedActualPlanned 05.01.2010.01.2005.02.20*15.02.2020.02.2025.02.2025.03.2030.03.2005.04.2016.04.2021.04.2026.04.2030.04.2005.05.2010.05.20RevisedActualPlanned 05.01.2010.01.2005.02.20*15.02.2020.02.2025.02.2025.03.2030.03.2005.04.2016.04.2021.04.2026.04.2030.04.2005.05.2010.05.20RevisedActual*NOL for shortlisted bidders should be obtained.37.6372.117.5118.1priorpostpostpriorpriorPeriod                                  :  from 1st January 2020 to June 2021Procurement Plan 2020/21 SERVICES (Non Consultancy)Country                               :  Sri LankaProject / Programme     :  Smallholder Agribusiness Resilence ProjectIFAD Loan No                    :  Exchange Rate                  :  USD 1= LKR 175SL NoActivityDescriptionSelection methodLump-sum or time-basedUnitQuantityEstimate LKR MNEstimate  USD '000Request for EOITerms of ReferenceBid proposal / RFPCompledprior/post reviewPlan Vs ActualBid evaluation Technical (T) and Financial (F)Contract Finalization12345QCBS QCBSQCBSLump-sum Lump-sum IWMI technical supportClimate Risk Analysis consultancyEnvirenmental and social Management frameworkQCBSTime basedMMVAM targetting and planningNGO SPs - community development, NRM etc.,QCBSMMLump-sum 215401210067512112Nos.Time basedMM 
Sri Lanka
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience Project
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Document Date:
04/11/2019
Project No.
2000002583
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience (SARP) Project Design Report 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Document Date: 15/09/2019  
Project No. 
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department 
0 
Sri Lanka - 
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience Project Design Report 
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
1. Background  
1.  Sri  Lanka  has  abundant  water  resources  but  the  water  distribution  is  skewed  in  both  time  and 
space. Most rain falls during two distinct monsoons: during the period December to February and 
May  to  September  as  well  as  spatially,  in  the  southwest  and  central  highlands  areas.  In 
comparison, the country’s lowlands are dry, particularly in the dry zone region where in the north 
mean annual rainfall is less than 1,500 mm and there are regular droughts. The dry zone covers 
70 percent of Sri Lanka’s land area and is the country’s agricultural heartland and the main area 
where the staple rice crop  is grown. The freshwater available per capita, on an  annual  basis,  is 
less  than  half  of  the  national  average  and  below  the  level  that  denotes  water  stress.  Water 
scarcity  in  the  region  is  further  deteriorating  due  to  the  increasing  population  and  climate 
changes.  Small-scale farmers with land holdings of less than 2 hectares dominate agriculture  in 
the region. 
2.  Climate-related  hazards  pose  a  significant  threat  to  economic  and  social  development.  Extreme 
variability  of  rainfall  and  droughts  are  already  a  defining  feature  of  Sri  Lanka’s  climate.  Climate 
projections indicate an increasing rainfall trend in the wet zone and a decreasing rainfall in the dry 
zone.  The  implications  are  that  the  risks  associated  with  water-related  hazards  are  likely  to 
increase.  Climate  change  is  expected  to  continue  to  impact  the  agricultural  sector  and  in 
particular smallholder farmers in the dry  zone. The  World Bank-CIAT Climate  Smart Agriculture 
(CSA)  country  profile  for  Sri  Lanka  (2015)  points  to  critical  vulnerabilities  related  to  an 
overreliance  on  rain-fed  systems,  limited  access  to  irrigation  and  limited  diversification  with  a 
reliance on paddy rice. 
3.  Over the past millennia, local communities have managed this water stress by constructing small 
cascade  systems  of  reservoirs,  transfer  canals  and  irrigation  schemes.  The  dry  zone  is  a  hard 
rock  region  with  naturally-occurring  shallow  groundwater  which  limits  the  opportunities  for 
irrigation  and  relies  on  rain-fed  agriculture.  Historically,  the  cascade  system  evolved  from  the 
construction  of  small  individual  tanks  followed  by  the  construction  of  larger  tanks  with  greater 
storage capacity which resulted in a cascade of tanks with stored water moving from highland to 
lowland areas. The Tank Cascade System (TCS) mitigates the negative consequences of chronic 
and  recurrent  droughts,  seasonal  flooding  and  land  degradation.1  Currently,  the  livelihood  of  a 
large  population  in  the  dry  zone  depends  on  small  tank-based  irrigated  farming.  The  limited 
availability of water resources constrains the agricultural and commercial production of the region 
and suppresses its social and economic development.  
4.  A  number  of  studies  have  confirmed  that  smallholder  farmers  cultivating  under  village  irrigation 
systems are poorer and more vulnerable than dry  zone counterparts  who have  access to major 
irrigation. These farmers are much more vulnerable to the impacts of climate change than farmers 
cultivating under larger irrigation systems. As productivity and crop  yields decline with low water 
availability  and  unseasonal  rains,  resulting  from  climate  variability  and  extreme  events, 
smallholder farmers are dragged deeper into poverty and face food deficits which have to be met 
by  buying  food  for  consumption,  increasing  the  level  of  indebtedness  and  further  eroding  their 
capacity to cope with climate risks.  
5.  The  dry  zone,  however,  has  significant  scope  for  agricultural  productivity  growth  both  through 
traditional  and  non-traditional  agriculture  and  the  potential  for  better  linkages  to  domestic  and 
export markets for fresh and value-added production.2 Given the centrality of tanks to the agrarian 
1Geekiyanage, N.; Pushpakumara, D.K.N.G. Ecology of ancient Tank Cascade Systems in island Sri Lanka. J. Mar. Isl. 
Cult. 2013, 2, 93–101 
2 IFAD, 2015. Project Appraisal Document, Agricultural Sector Modernization Project in Sri Lanka. Washington DC: IFAD. 
1 
livelihoods of dry  zone farmers, their current levels of neglect and the increasing vulnerability  of 
these  areas  to  both  droughts  and  floods  in  quick  succession  with  consequent  impacts  on 
agricultural production and incomes, the rehabilitation of tank-based irrigated agricultural systems 
is  key  to  improving  the  resilience  of  these  areas  and  the  agrarian  communities  that  depend  on 
them. The Hot-Spot area development approach  aims to enhance resilience of these areas and 
those  who  depend  on  it  for  their  livelihoods  by  (1)  the  flexible  and  adaptive  management  of 
existing  and  improved  irrigation  water  storage  and  delivery  structures  to  make  irrigation  more 
reliable  in  the  face  of  rising  climatic  variability;  (2)  better  agricultural  inputs,  techniques  and 
practices  that,  along  with  the  additional  water  assist  farmers  to  better  stabilize  their  crop  yields 
and reduce crop losses in the light of climatic variability; and (3) better access new markets and 
higher  prices  through  better  post-harvest  management  and  value  addition  and  inclusion  in 
competitive  value  chains.  Climate  Smart  Irrigated  Agriculture  (CSIA)  addresses  some  of  these 
challenges  by  addressing  climate  change  adaptation  whilst  ensuring  food  security.  The  urgency 
and rationale for climate resilient economic development to benefit dry zone farmers is extremely 
relevant.   
6.  Since all dry zone areas cannot be taken up at the same time, the project approach is to work in 
climatically-vulnerable ‘hot spot’ areas, which are hydrologically defined (i.e., a catchment within a 
river  basin),  containing  several  tank  cascades  and  individual  tanks  and  also  housing  rain-fed 
farmers, especially in the higher-elevation areas of the catchment. 
2. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups 
7.  The goal of SARP is to contribute to Sri Lanka’s smallholder poverty reduction and food security 
in the dry zone region. The development objective is to build resilience and market participation of 
40,000 rural smallholder households in the project area (180,000 persons) with women and youth 
constituting  50  percent  (90,000)  and  20%  (36,000)  of  the  total  beneficiaries,  respectively.  The 
duration of the project is six years.3  
8.  Geographic area of intervention:  
9.  SARP will focus on priority districts in the North, North Central, Central, and North West provinces 
of the  dry  zone. The project will  target selected cascades  in  three river  basins  – the Malwathyu 
Oya, Mi Oya and Deduru Oya - that were identified by the Department of Agrarian Development 
(DAD) as most vulnerable, ecologically  and socially.  DAD classifies sub-watersheds and Village 
Tank  Cascades  (VTCs)  according  to  their  resilience  to  climate  change.  The  selected  cascades 
are  located  in  so  called  ‘hot  spot’  geographical  areas  covering  an  average  of  25,000  ha.  where 
farmers  and  farming  livelihoods  are  highly  exposed  and  vulnerable  to  increasing  climatic 
variability. The criteria used for the selection of hot spots are: (a) the impact of drought and floods 
on  crop  losses  and  expenditures  on  drinking  water  and  relief  supplies;  (b)  the  current  climate 
vulnerability  as  reflected  by  income  poverty,  source  of  drinking  water  and  participation  in  safety 
net  programs;  and  (c) future  climate  vulnerability  based  on  an  index  of  42  indicators  measuring 
exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity4. Cascades and VTCs have been selected during the 
design to avoid duplication of locations  where  the on-going World Bank projects are  operating.5 
Additionally,  decisions  have  been  taken  to  include  cascades  and  micro-catchments  where 
synergies can be developed with on-going UNDP and WFP projects to demonstrate the impact of 
an integrated watershed development6.  
3 The estimated number of households to be reached was derived from previously implemented projects linked to 
the overall budget of the project and adjusted for the dry zone rural population that is more dispersed than the 
potential areas.  
4 The hotspots are hydrologically defined as a catchment within a river basin that contains several Village 
Tank Cascades (VTCs) and individual tanks. 
5 Agriculture Sector Modernization Project covering  7 districts and the Climate Smart Irrigation Project 
covering 11 districts and 17 river basins. 
6 The UNDP project, “Strengthening the resilience of smallholder farmers in the Dry Zone” covers three 
river basins, 16 cascades in 7 districts. The WFP project, “Building Resilience Against Recurrent Natural 
Shocks through Diversification of Livelihoods for Vulnerable Communities in Sri Lanka”, covers 5 districts.  
2 
10.  The selection of project sites took into account:   
  household data on poverty;  
 
 
 
vulnerability and sensitivity to shocks and stresses (drought and flood);  
food insecurity and malnutrition;  
land  degradation,  agro-ecological  zone  (dry  zone),  seasonality  and  livelihood,  prepared 
through the World Food Programme, Vulnerability Analysis and Mapping (VAM) system;  
  geographical  advantage  of  working  on  cascade  systems  and  rejuvenating  the  water  tanks 
with the potential to provide perennial water sources for the rural communities;  
 
concentration of farmers engaged in the production of selected value chains; 
  potential for agricultural diversification, agribusiness and market access; 
  Selections  aimed  at  avoiding  duplication  of  activities  with  World  Bank  projects  and  to  build 
synergies with UNDP (5 common target districts) and WFP (3 common target districts). 
  Existence of Protected Areas: the project sites must not be in close proximity/adjacent to the 
Protected Areas 
11.  These elements were overlaid  in order to select tentatively target divisions within districts where 
WFP and UNDP are operating. The hot spots and selected cascades traverse six districts in two 
clusters - Anuradhapura, Vavuniya, Matale, Mannar, Puttalam, Kurenagala - some of which have 
been targeted by UNDP and WFP and others suggested by DAD. Additional work will be needed 
to extend to the remaining districts. 
12.  Farmers  located  in  the  vicinity  of  the  cascades  are  supported  by  extension  staff  located  in  the 
Agrarian Service Centres. In the selected districts there is a total of 111 ASCs that cover a farming 
population  of  more  than  231,000  farm  households.  The  total  number  of  village  tanks  in  these 
districts are in excess of 8,400 with a command area of 98,000 hectares.  
District 
No. ASCs 
No. tanks 
Matale 
Puttalam 
Kurunegala 
Mannar 
Vavuniya 
Anaradhapura 
9 
9 
41 
12 
8 
32 
237 
871 
4435 
112 
621 
2141 
3 
Command area 
(Hectares) 
No. of farm 
families 
Av. Farm size 
command area 
(ha) 
3422 
8554 
31878 
3564 
13901 
36930 
11153 
16603 
113503 
17000 
13072 
60464 
0.307 
0.515 
0.281 
0.210 
1.063 
0.611 
Cluster locationsDistrictDAD - CASCADE 1/WFP 2/UNDPWorld BankRiver basinCluster 1Anuradhapura++++Malwathu oiaVavuniya,++Malwathu oiaMannar ++YanCluster2Puttalam+++Mii oiaMatale+Kurenagala+++Mii oiaFootnote: 1/ Districts where cascades selected by the Department of Agrarian Development where river basin analyses have been carried out and priority is given to development 2/ WFP is implementing its resilience project in two districts. In Anuradhapura work is being conducted on rice fortification  
Total 
111 
8417 
98250 
231795 
0.42 
Source: Department of Agrarian Development 
2. Targeting and Mainstreaming Priorities 
13.  The social inclusion strategy for  SARP provides measures to  ensure meaningful participation of 
youth, people with disabilities, indigenous people in the project activities and provides a nutrition 
sensitive approach to ensure food security for the beneficiaries. The strategy  provides guidance 
on  operationalization  of  mainstreaming  priorities  of  IFAD.  The  targeting  and  mainstreaming 
priorities are elaborated on in Annex 1. 
Target groups:  
14.  The target beneficiaries can be divided into three categories of households – the extreme poor, 
poor with potential to sell in local markets and more commercially oriented smallholder farmers. 
The extreme poor are non-labour constrained households that are rainfed producers, with small 
fragmented  holdings,  as  well  as  the  landless,  who  are  food  insecure.  The  main  category  of 
farmers  will  be  moderately  poor  households  that  are  economically  active  in  agriculture  and  are 
located  in  cascades  with  minor  irrigation  systems.  These  farmers  produce  surpluses  of  rice, 
depending on the water availability and during the yala season some cash crops, albeit the level 
of  marketed  sales  is  usually  low.  The  households  are  often  food  secure  but  at  risk  of  slipping 
back into the lower ranks of poverty due to climate and economic shocks. The better-off farmers 
and other value chain actors are more commercially oriented and play an important role in value 
chain  development.  SARP  will  bring  the  better  off  farmers  together  with  the  moderately  poor 
households,  youth  and  other  value  chain  actors  into  selected  value  chains  linking  them  with 
processors  and  other  private  sector  buyers.  Other  vulnerable  groups  including  households 
suffering  severe  malnutrition,  disabled  persons  and  ex-combatants  who  will  receive  specific 
attention to facilitate their social integration in agricultural production and economic activities. 
14.  Through  the  cascade/  tank  targeting  process  around  13,000  farm  households  have  been 
identified as located in the command area of the tanks and a further 18,300 in upstream locations 
and  adjacent  areas.  An  attempt  was  also  made  to  estimate  the  number  of  farm  households  in 
each  category  through  an  expert  consultative  process.  Some  10%  of  the  households  were 
regarded as better-off and more commercially oriented, 70% regarded as poor with potential and 
20% as the most vulnerable and food insecure. Using an average of 4.5 people per household, 
this translates into a total of around 154,000 persons. A further 8,700 beneficiary households will 
lie  outside  the  catchment  areas.  SARP  will  reach  at  least  50%  women  and  20%  youth  as 
beneficiaries.  The  project  will  introduce  approaches  that  promote  gender  equality,  women 
empowerment and social inclusion.7  
Targeting Strategy: 
15.  SARP will ensure the participation of the more marginal rural households, whilst being inclusive of 
so-called  ‘better-off’  smallholder  farmers  and  specific  vulnerable  groups.  The  mechanisms 
include: (i) geographic targeting, (ii) self-targeting; and (iii) direct targeting. SARP design includes 
empowering,  enabling  and  procedural  measures  to  promote  sustainable  socio-economic 
development  with  particular  focus  on  the  youth,  women,  indigenous  people,  women  headed 
households,  single  women,  widows  and  other  vulnerable  groups  (ex-combatants  and  the 
disabled). 
7 The targeting strategy as detailed in appendix 8 provides detailed vulnerability analysis, profile targets, 
risk mitigation measures, inclusion strategies. The vulnerability analysis provides an overview of the 
challenges faced by farmers including landlessness, smallholding, remoteness and inaccessibility to 
markets, institutions and inputs, meagre coverage under social protection, limited household incomes and 
assets, indebtedness, food insecurity, limited access to rural finance and enterprises, climate change 
vulnerability and social and economic marginalization faced by ethnic, indigenous, disabled, youth and 
women farmers. 
4 
16.  The  World  Food  programme’s  VAM  system8  will  be  used  to  target  specific  numbers  of  sub-
categories  of  households  that  could  include:  a)  women  headed  households;  b)  young 
unemployed  women;  c)  households  with  disability  or  kidney  diseases  as  a  result  of  CGD;  d) 
conflict displaced/resettled persons; e) households affected by floods over the last five years; and 
f) families with children/women displaying low nutrition (underweight/ anaemic).   
17.  Direct  targeting  will  be  used  to  choose  activities,  taking  into  consideration  where  the  most 
vulnerable  farmers  can  be  found.  A  differential  approach  will  be  used  to  ensure  accessibility, 
relevance and impacts of different technological packages for women, men, youth, and the most 
vulnerable.  Quotas  will  ensure  the  effective  participation  of  the  different  vulnerable  groups  in 
project  activities.  Self-targeting  will  occur  through  participation  in  the  FFS  and  FBS  and  direct 
targeting will be used for specific activities directed to women, youth, ex combatants, the disabled 
and  other  vulnerable  groups  in  the  communities.  Mentoring  will  be  done  to  ensure  proper 
participation, achievement and sustainability of interventions, especially for the extreme poor, and 
specific disadvantaged groups – women headed households and the disabled.  
18.  The  combined  approach  has  three  important  aspects:  (a)  ensure  the  availability  of  water, 
increasing  the  cropping  intensity  and  diversifying  the  farming  system  to  introduce  high  value 
priority commodities. (b) focusing on value adding activities for women and  youth including post 
production,  the  provision  of  support,  advisory  and  information  services;  and  (c)  reaching  the 
extreme poor through cash for assets and other cash transfers, graduating the beneficiaries into 
small income generating activities and building capacities. 
19.  Nutrition  will  be  mainstreamed  through  the  selection  of  nutrition  sensitive  value  chains. 
Awareness  raising  and  behavioural  change  regarding  nutrition  will  be  an  integral  part  of  the 
approach that will include social marketing and home gardening activities at community level. As 
many  households  are  loosely  organized  into  groups  and  this  mechanism  is  widely  used  for  the 
receipt  of  government  subsidised  inputs,  SARP  will  engage  directly  with  rural  producer 
organizations to strengthen their capacity, governance and inclusivity whilst developing social and 
economic enterprises amongst those groups with potential.   
20.  An effective and well-defined social mobilization process will facilitate the inclusive and effective 
delivery  of  SARP  activities.  It  will  ensure  that  the  project  is  able  to  effectively  target  and  fully 
engage it its intended beneficiaries. It will also enable project activities to be fine-tuned to respond 
to  the  local  context,  opportunities  and  the  priorities  of  the  households.  The  project’s  social 
mobilization and inclusion approach will involve selecting a community mobilisers for each target 
community (50  percent  women and 20 percent  youth) from within the  local communities. These 
mobilisers will be supported by Social Inclusion and Gender Facilitators trained and tasked with 
using PRA techniques to undertake social and economic mapping of the communities to identify 
project  beneficiaries  for  different  activities  and  ensure  their  inclusion  in  project  activities.  The 
social mobilization team will be key to mobilizing and incentivizing the community to participate in 
project activities, build the capacity of women and men farmer groups to function more effectively 
and  delivering  empowerment  and  nutrition  training  as  well  as  establishing  an  effective 
communication  channel  between  the  project  beneficiaries  and  project  implementers.  The 
community facilitators will be supported by community development service providers and project 
staff working at the Agrarian Service Centres. 
The main target subgroups are described below: 
21.  Smallholder  farmers  (poor  with  potential).  The  primary  livelihood  of  over  70  percent  of  the  rural 
population in the proposed districts is small scale farming associated with high climatic risks. This 
is  the  most  representative  of  the  farmers  found  in  the  area.    In  general,  they  do  not  produce 
enough  to  cover  their  food  needs  at  times  of  climate  shocks. These  households  are  essentially 
characterized  by:  (i)  low  production  and  productivity  of  the  main  crops  (rice,  maize  etc.);  (ii) 
vulnerability  to  climate  change;  (iii)  lack  of  or  low  access  to  production  factors  (land,  improved 
inputs, water and capital); (iv) limited access to mechanization; (v) weak organizational capacity; 
8     IFAD will work closely with WFP and government agencies to utilise the existing geographical and household 
targeting VAM system  
5 
and  (vi)  low  income  levels.  The  objective  for  these  farmers  is  to  increase  production  for  home 
consumption  and  sales  in  local  markets  through  adapted  production  technologies,  improved 
access to water and inputs and enhanced income generation.  
22.  Commercially oriented smallholder farms with some level of organisation. These are smallholder 
farmers  with  diversified  farming  systems  that  are  more  commercially  oriented  and  comprise 
around 10 percent of the farming population in the project area. Some of these households have 
up  to  2  ha  of  farm  land  and  are  able  to  produce  for  the  market.  They  are  able  to  access 
agricultural inputs and mechanical traction and operate irrigated or partially irrigated systems. The 
objective for this group is to stabilise production through the more efficient use of water and the 
introduction of climate-smart technologies. By increasing the regularity of supplies and the quality 
and volume of agricultural production stronger links will be made to market outlets.  
23.  Women. Women make up about 51 percent of the population and in rural areas they are mainly 
involved in agricultural production and the keeping of small livestock. Women do farm work such 
as  tillage,  planting,  harvesting,  transportation  and  processing,  and  also  take  care  of  the  family 
nutrition  as  well  as  the  reproductive  roles.  Women  heads  of  household,  widows  and  young 
women are socially, culturally  and economically  disadvantaged but are responsible for ensuring 
the well-being of their families and agricultural activities. Many women-headed households regard 
farming as an important option. They, however, face the following challenges: (i) unequal access 
to resources (land, water, credit); (ii) lack of business development and management skills; and 
(iii)  limited  voice,  leadership  and  decision-making  capacity  in  farmer  organizations  and  other 
groups.  SARP  will  promote  specific  activities  for  women  organized  into  groups  for  processing 
(using labour saving technologies), marketing and service provision. Specific training to enhance 
women’s  empowerment  and  effective  participation  in  activities  and  household  welfare  will  be 
included  in  the FBS curricula. Other activities targeting  women concern nutrition,  where  women 
are at the centre of food preparation for the family. Some 45 percent of the beneficiaries will be 
women. 
24.  Youth:  Youth  are  leaving  agriculture  as  it  is  unattractive  to  them.  Interest  in  agriculture  is 
diminishing as it is not regarded as a modern sector and it fails to bring a respectable and secure 
income. The lack of incentives in the agricultural sector (lack of land and capital to invest) leads to 
a large number of rural youth migrating to urban areas in search of formal employment. SARP will 
develop an incubation system to address the paucity of youth skills in farming and related value 
chain  activities.  Both  technical  and  entrepreneurial  skills  of  young  people  will  be  developed 
culminating  in  the  preparation  of  business  plans  for  implementation  which  may  be  financed  by 
combination  of  loans  and  grants  following  specific  eligibility  criteria  and  approval  procedures.  It 
will  also  educate  women  and  men  about  ownership  and  inheritance  rights,  including  land.  In 
areas  where  female  groups  and  youth  groups  do  not  exist,  the  project  will  conduct  gender 
awareness training at community level and set up women’s and youth based self-help groups for 
knowledge-sharing  on  GAP  and  SLM  practices.  Youth  entrepreneurship  will  also  be  promoted 
through the FBS. Some 25 percent of the beneficiaries will be youth. 
25.  Extreme  poor.  This  includes  the  most  vulnerable  and  food  insecure  households  of  which  a 
significant  group  is  disadvantaged  due  to  their  economic  and  social  exclusion  which  include 
people  with  physical  or  mental  disabilities.  Ex-combatants  have  also  been  included  in  this 
category as they are generally more elderly, between the ages of 50 and 80, and are also socially 
and  economically  disadvantaged.  There  are  also  landless  and  smallholder  farmers  trapped  in 
indebtedness  with  little  or  no  social  protection.    They  will  be  targeted  through  training  and 
capacity  building  activities  linked  to  service  provision,  income-generation  and  off-farm  income 
opportunities.  
6 
3. Value chain development 
26.  A broad range of crops and livestock enterprises are grown in all parts of the dry zone. Fruits and 
vegetables  with  a  wide  national  coverage  are  more  prominent  in  North  central,  North  Western, 
and  Eastern  provinces.  The  dairy  sector  is  widely  distributed  nationally  across  many  provinces 
with  large  numbers  of  farms  in  the  North  and  Eastern  provinces  and  goat  production  is  more 
widely found in the dry zone. With regard to the farming population involved in these broad sub-
sectors, data is imprecise and not generally available. Estimates, however, can be made based 
on the area of land under cultivation for some of these products. The average farmer has a less 
than  1  ha.  of  land,  and  on  this  basis  the  area  under  cultivation  can  be  used  to  estimate  the 
farming  population  involved  in  each  product  sector  in  the  dry  zone.  Discussions  held  with 
technical staff at the Department of Agriculture suggest that for maize there are around 130,000 
farmers,  vegetables  600,000  farmers  and  ground  nuts  around  47,000  farm  households.  Many 
farmers,  however,  in  the  dry  zone  have  small  plots  comprising  several  products  so  errors  of 
double counting predominate.  
27.  A  part  of  the  project  targeting  and  inclusion  strategy  is  the  sound  selection  of  the  suitable 
commodities  to  be  supported.  The  project  being  limited  to  the  dry  zone  is  based  on  the  VCs 
available  in  that  area.  The  following  table  was  compiled  by  technical  experts  with  knowledge  of 
the  farming  systems  in  the  target  districts.  The  predominant  cropping  patter  includes  rice,  chili, 
legumes, vegetables and fruit. Goat and dairy production predominate. Potential new crops that 
could  be  considered  for  diversification  are  Alovera,  Moringa,  big  onion  (seed  production)  and 
groundnut seed.  
28. 
The  numbers  of  farmers  under  major  and  minor  irrigation  schemes  per  district  were  compiled 
from  district  level  agricultural  statistics.  Over  95,000  farm  households  can  be  found  in  the  area 
under  major  and  minor  irrigation  schemes  with  over  72  percent  under  major  irrigation  and  28 
percent  minor  irrigation.  The  number  of  rainfed  farmers  –  the  most  vulnerable  category  -  are 
unknown  from  the  official  statistics.  SARP  will  focus  on  those  farmers  currently  under  minor 
irrigation  schemes  as  well  as  those  in  catchment  areas  where  there  is  potential  rehabilitate  the 
tank system.  
29.  A set of criteria was used for the selection of potential value chain commodities. These are:  
7 
  potential for market growth demonstrated by unmet market demand either in the domestic or 
export markets;  
  production potential demonstrated by current level of production and productivity;  
  Suitability for climate adaptation  
  potential outreach of smallholder households (current number of smallholder producers);  
  profitability (net returns on investment/per worker); 
  potential for inclusion of women, youth and other marginalized groups;  
  nutrition sensitivity;  
  enabling institutional and business environment for market-led development  
30.  A  consultative  workshop  was  organised  for  Ministry  of  Agriculture  technical  experts  who  are 
knowledgeable about the dry zone conditions. A long list of products was developed and ranked 
by  the  experts  on  a  continuum  ranging  from  1  to  10  with  the  higher  score  more  favourably 
addressing  the  criteria  set.      The  findings  show  from  the  overall  weighted  score  the  following 
value chains predominate:   finger millet, green gram, groundnut, chili, passion fruit, cashew and 
low  country  (off  season)  vegetables  and  seed  crops  (chili,  onion  and  groundnut).  Of  particular 
interest  are  the  specialised  crops  –  aloe  vera  and  moringa.  The  highest  ranking  livestock  value 
chains are semi-intensive goat, backyard poultry and dairy.  From a nutrition sensitive value chain 
perspective livestock, fruit and vegetables stand out suggesting the need to focus on agroforestry 
and small livestock around the homestead as a livelihood strategy. From an adaptation to climate 
perspective sorghum, legumes, cashew, aloe vera and moringa are particularly attractive.  
31.  These  commodities  may  be  added  during  the  project  subject  to  capacity,  resources  and 
opportunities for impact. To ensure the sustainability of benefits for small-scale farmers, capacity 
of farmers will be continuously built to look for new market opportunities rather than be tied to a 
single VC product. 
8 
Annex 1 provides details on some of the value chain products identified for promotion. 
32.  Based  on  the  above  criteria,  the  table  below  summarises  the  commodities  short-listed  for 
possible  inclusion  in  the  project  and  provisional  estimates  of  potential  outreach  in  each  via  the 
project. These are based on the data and information gathered during the detailed design mission 
and will need to be verified during finalization of the design.  
9 
Value ChainPotential for market growthProduction potentialSuitability for Climate AdaptationPotential smallholder outreachPotential profitability              /IncomePotential for inclusion of women/ youthNutrition sensitivityEnabling institutional & business environment for market led developmentTotalWeights1010151520101010100CerealsRice                        5                          7                           3                          8                        3                              4                      4                           2 445Maize                        8                          8                           5                          8                        8                              7                      4                           7 695Kurakkan (Finger Millet)                        8                          8                           9                          8                        7                              7                      9                           6 775Sorghum                        7                          7                           9                          8                        5                              8                      8                           6 715SpicesTumeric                        8                          9                           7                          8                        8                              7                      5                           6 735Ginger                        7                          2                           3                          4                        3                              4                      2                           2 335Field cropsChilli                        9                          9                           6                          9                        9                              8                      3                           7             765 Big Onion                        8                          8                           6                          7                        8                              7                      3                           6 675Black gram                        8                          7                           9                          7                        7                              7                      8                           5 730Green gram                        9                          8                           9                          7                        9                              8                      9                           5 810Soya                        8                          8                           9                          7                        6                              7                      8                           5 720Groundnut                        9                          9                           9                          8                        8                              8                      8                           5 805Sesame                        7                          8                           8                          8                        8                              7                      7                           5 740Cowpea                        8                          7                           9                          7                        7                              7                      8                           5 730FruitsLime                        8                          7                           9                          7                        8                              5                      4                           7 710Mango                        9                          8                           8                          7                        7                              6                      7                           8 745Papaya                        9                          8                           5                          8                        8                              6                      8                           8 745Passion                      10                          9                           8                          9                        9                              6                      8                           9 855Banana                        7                          8                           7                          9                        8                              7                      8                           7 770Guava                        9                          8                           8                          7                        8                              5                      8                           7 755Cashew                        8                          7                         10                          7                        9                              7                      9                           9 835Pomegranate                        9                          7                           9                          6                        9                              5                      9                           7 775Water melon                        9                          8                           5                          8                        8                              6                      8                           8 745VegetablesLow Country Vegetables                        9                          8                           7                          8                        8                              9                      9                           7 805Specialized cropsAloe vera                        9                          9                           9                          8                        8                              8                      6                           6 795Moringa                        8                          8                           9                          8                        8                              8                      9                           6             805 LivestockDairy88787897765Backyard Poultry78897898795Semi intensive Goat88978896790SeedsChilli9885998794onion8885998783Paddy9777778733Vegetables9875888744Ground nuts9985888772 
Candidate commodities and indicative expected outreach9  
Commodity 
Goat 
Dairy 
Paddy 
Maize 
Chili 
Vegetables 
Fruit 
Legume seeds 
Total 
Livestock 
Crops 
Outreach smallholders 
23,000 
9,000 
45,700 
9,900 
14,000 
25,000 
15,000 
9,000 
150,600 
33.  A  gender  and  youth  analysis of commodities  was conducted  during  SARP design,  warranting  a 
gender  balanced  approach  of  commodities  for  which  there  is  appetite  in  the  market.    It  is 
expected  that  sufficient  opportunities  will  be  available  for  female  and  male  adults  and  youth  to 
participate in line with rates referred to above. 
Table 1: Social screening of commodities considered in SARP design. 
Commodities  
Suitability for Men 
Suitability for 
Women 
Suitability for Male 
Youth 
Suitability for 
Female Youth 
Crops 
Vegetables 
- men most 
interested in 
commercial scale 
production 
Vegetable seeds 
Legume seeds 
Land based crops, 
well suited to un-
irrigated and 
marginal land 
Very low entry 
costs if have 
access to land, so 
well suited to 
poorer farmers, but 
need to collaborate 
in group for 
processing, 
certification and 
marketing of seed.  
Fruit 
- men most 
interested in 
commercial scale 
- Generally cultivated 
by women 
- moderate labour 
intensity 
- only small areas of 
land needed, so can 
be seen as 
compliment not a 
replacement to other 
cropping by men 
May be well suited to 
women-headed 
households and 
women with access 
to un-irrigated land 
but willing to work 
together for 
processing, 
certification and 
marketing. 
Opportunities for 
mechanization can 
further reduce the 
labour required per 
ha., providing 
opportunities to 
offset lack of (male) 
labour. 
- Generally cultivated 
by women around 
- Short cycle; quick and steady returns. 
- lower levels of initial investment are 
feasible if aggregating output as part of a 
larger producer 
- Only requires small areas of land 
- opportunities in grading, packaging and 
marketing of producer from group as 
regular year round supply 
Requires larger 
areas of land and 
so primary 
production not likely 
to be very 
accessible to young 
youth 
Requires larger 
areas of land and 
so primary 
production not 
likely to be very 
accessible to 
young youth 
Seed sector 
requires significant 
post- harvest 
grading and 
packaging suited to 
youth employment 
opportunities 
Seed sector 
requires 
significant post- 
harvest grading 
and packaging 
suited to youth 
employment 
opportunities 
- Short cycle; quick and steady returns. 
- lower levels of initial investment are 
9 Data source – Republic of Sri Lanka Agricultural Statistics (2018) and expert consultation 2019 
10 
Commodities  
Suitability for Men 
production 
Suitability for 
Women 
homestead 
- moderate labour 
intensity 
- only small areas of 
land needed, so can 
be seen as 
complement not a 
replacement to other 
cropping by men 
Suitability for Male 
Youth 
Suitability for 
Female Youth 
feasible if aggregating output as part of a 
larger producer 
- Only requires small areas of land 
- opportunities in grading, packaging and 
marketing of producer from group as 
regular year round supply 
Livestock 
Dairy 
- Potential for 
producing quality 
animal feed 
- Dairy is 
predominantly 
owned by men.  
Likely to constitute 
the first entry group 
to cattle fattening 
opportunities 
- Cattle owned in 
very few numbers, 
but goats more 
widely owned 
- Emerging dairy  
opportunities could 
be detached of the 
cultural baggage 
associated with 
cattle rearing at HH 
level by men  
- some men are 
familiar with cattle 
-  Could provide 
specific support 
services to owners 
such as with 
accessing 
veterinary drugs  
- Potential for 
producing quality 
animal feed 
Goat 
Raised by men and 
women 
Raised by men and 
women 
- Moderate cycle; requires little and not 
very good quality land 
- requires moderate level of initial 
investment 
- opportunities also in livestock 
production services for well-trained youth 
- raised at the 
homestead, enabling 
production to be 
combined with other 
household activities 
- modern production 
and feeding systems 
provide further 
opportunities for 
women to take lead 
in household goat 
fattening/breeding  
34.   For  the  more  commercial  products  -  vegetables,  fruit,  legume  and  vegetable  seeds,  dairy  and 
goats  -SARP  will  catalyse  the  emergence  of  competitive  clusters.  These  products  have  a 
confirmed market potential and comparative advantage for smallholder  production in the project 
locations. Specifically, product clusters will be prioritized which have:  
  Clear, current market demand sufficient to absorb the expected increase in production;  
Substantial confirmed interest from  
farmers, including smallholders and younger farmers, to expand and improve their 
production;  
traders and agribusinesses to increase their sourcing from smallholders and 
producer groups in the cluster locations;  
  Opportunities  for  competitive,  profitable  and  sustainable  smallholder  production  raising 
current low levels of agricultural production and productivity;  
the  project 
Practical 
development of the particular industry and local cluster. 
intervention  opportunities 
for 
to 
facilitate 
the  accelerated 
11 
35.  To  be  genuinely  inclusive,  there  must  be  profitable  and  realistic  "investment  pathways"  for  the 
poorer  and  younger  farmers  to  become  successful  players  in  a  cluster.  This  means  that  the 
minimum  initial  investments  by  the  target  beneficiaries  for  all  supported  products  must  be 
affordable and lead to sufficient incremental incomes to enable reinvestment of part of the profits 
from  each  cycle  back  into  the  supported  enterprise  until  it  generates  sufficient  income  at  levels 
that  are  attractive.  For  the  young,  it  is  also  essential  that  they  see  the  first  benefits  quickly  and 
feel they are on an upward path. 
36.  The  fruit  and  vegetable  sub-sectors  represents  attractive  opportunities  for  women  and  youth  to 
engage and in the latter case enjoy quick and timely benefits. However, there are challenges that 
need to be met. These are listed below, together with potential solutions and entry points. Social 
mobilization 
Opportunities for impact & Key Entry Points for fruits and vegetables: 
Problem/Opportunities 
Vulnerability for climate change 
Solutions/entry points 
 
Introduction of climate smart practices into cultivation (Ex: 
Protected agriculture, micro irrigation etc.) 
  Enhance the availability of water by rehabilitation of minor tanks 
Prevalence of pest and diseases 
Post-harvest loss 
and sustainable cascade management. 
Incorporation of Integrated Pest Management (IPM) practices. 
 
  Possibility of introduction of GAP certification (Good Agricultural 
Practices) under the purview of Department of Agriculture. 
Implementation of safe handling practices, cleaning, sorting, 
grading, and packing methodologies. 
Implementation of safe transportation technologies (Temperature 
regulated transport) 
 
 
Unavailability  of  proper  distribution 
network 
High  price  gap  between  farmer  and 
consumer 
  Crate usage to trace back quality mismatches to the producer. 
  Well-coordinated & integrated supply chain system aiming to 
distribute production to meet demand assuring equitable 
distribution of perishables. 
  Reduction of excessive intermediary involvement along the supply 
chain. 
  Redistribution of profits to key stakeholders of the value chain 
including farmers, transporters and retailers. 
12 
5. Project components and activities 
Component 1: Capacity Building for Climate Resilience and Inclusive Value Chains 
Sub-component 1.1 Strengthening adaptive capacity of service providers and farmers to 
climate change 
A. Community Organization, Planning and Mentoring:   
37.  A  social  mobilization  process  will  be  followed  that  develops  self-reliance  among  community 
members.  As  a  starting  point,  a  savings-first  approach  should  be  adhered  to  together  with  the 
establishment of revolving  cash and  in-kind grant schemes. The social mobilisation  process  will 
involve  targeting  strategies  that  include  the  disabled  and  the  other  vulnerable  groups  identified 
previously.  The  social  mobilisation  process  will  be  led  by  a  Social  Inclusion  and  Institutions 
Specialist  –  national  consultant  -who  will  lead  a  field  team  comprising  two  Social  Inclusion  and 
Gender Facilitators and volunteer community mobilisers selected from within  local communities. 
The Social Inclusion and Institutions Specialist will lead the field team as well as provide technical 
support  to  local  service  providers  (NGOs).  The  community  facilitators  will  be  responsible  for 
mentoring  farmer  and  community  groups  (interest  and  solidarity  groups)  and  individuals 
comprising  the  most  vulnerable  households  (women  headed  households,  youth  and  the 
disabled).  Support  for  social  mobilization  will  also  come  from  the  local  NGOs  selected  and 
contracted for this purpose. However, as capacity among local NGO potential partners is limited 
SARP will develop and strengthen their skills. The Social Inclusion and Gender facilitators will be 
directly  responsible  for  community  organization  and  the  establishment  and  strengthening  of 
farmer organizations, self-help groups and other organizational forms. A cadre of Agro-enterprise 
Promoters will also be recruited as project staff from within local communities and will support the 
field  team  as  needed.  As  capacity  amongst  some  of  the  local  NGOs  in  social  development  is 
13 
likely  to  be  weak,  SARP  staff  will  provide  technical  assistance  to  them.  The  local  NGOs  will  be 
sub-contracted  for  when  specialised  inputs  are  required  such  as  functional  numeracy  skills, 
gender and nutrition, amongst others. 
38.  An  effective  way  of  building  self-reliance  and  reducing  dependency  is  to  clarify  from  the  outset, 
the roles and responsibilities of the project and those of members of the rural community. Clear 
Terms  of  Partnership  will  be  formed,  setting  out  the  responsibilities  and  obligations  of  both 
parties: the project and the beneficiary. The purpose  of this activity  is to establish a partnership 
between  SARP  the  communities  and  farmer  organizations  within  the  communities  to  prepare 
local  level plans at  village  and cascade  level. The local level  plans can take the form of natural 
resource  management  plans  as  well  as  covering  village/  community  activities.  The  complete 
process will involve the preparation and appraisal of a plan that includes water and land resource 
management  and  livelihoods  activities  at  household/  group  level.  The  process  will  consist  of  a 
phase of community and cascade organization followed by a planning process that includes the 
preparation  of  micro-project  proposals  that  will  need  to  be  prepared,  appraised  and  monitored.  
The successful conclusion of the “Community Organization” process is a pre-requisite for starting 
the  planning  process.  Each  stage  of  planning  will  be  conducted  in  partnership  with  community 
members.  The  social  mobilisation  cum  planning  process  should  be  made  up  of  a  series  of 
meetings  between  the  project  and  community  members.  The  planning  process  for  watershed 
development/  natural  resource  management  is  elaborated  below.  As  part  of  the  community 
organization  process  the  community  development  team  will  encourage  community  members  to 
set up  
39.  Community  Development  Forums  (CDF),  which  would  serve  as  a  venue  for  all  households 
members of the community to participate and where development decisions regarding community 
members will be discussed. This will be an important mechanisms to ensure inclusivity.  
40.  Prior to formation of a CDF, the Social Inclusion and Gender Facilitators shall with the help of the 
voluntary  community  facilitators  and  other  selected  members  of  the  community,  prepare  a 
community profile containing basic data on the population, including the number of men, women, 
children and disabled people. The community profile would include a poverty profile, that should 
at a minimum, identify households that are destitute, very poor, poor, well to do and better off with 
respect  to  the  impact  experienced  of  droughts  and  floods.  The  criteria  set  will  need  to  be 
understood  and  accepted  by  the  community.  The  community  profile  should  be  compiled  and 
presented  to  the  Agrarian  Service  Centre  committees  (or  technical  sub-committees)  in  their 
regular monthly meetings.   
41.  Once the community agrees to set up a CDF and designate representatives to identify problems 
and priorities, the social inclusion team will present the type of interventions that SARP has been 
designed  to  implement.  The  technical  support  team  should  at  this  stage  prepare  Terms  of 
Partnership  for  each  community  level  activity  that  appears  in  the  PDR.  Individual  members/ 
households will be in the position to make choices from the activities and enterprises on offer or 
alternatively  identify  other  activities  to  which  they  have  an  interest.  In  all  cases  SARP  will  be 
demand  responsive.  Priorities  for  technical  assistance  and  training  will  also  be  identified  during 
this  planning  process.  In  the  case  of  natural  resource  and  water  management  measures  at 
cascade level support will be provided by the technical project staff in collaboration with members 
of  the  communities  located  in  the  catchment  area.    Planned  interventions  should  be  discussed 
with  the  community  to  determine  whether  they  are  willing  to  implement  them  according  to  the 
Terms  of  Partnership  set.  It  is  important  to  make  clear  to  the  community  members  (men  and 
women) that they are the final decision makers and that selection of activities/ measures will take 
place together with them based on feasible solutions and local constraints.  
14 
The formal Terms of Partnership need to be drawn up with the community as a prerequisite to implementation. 
The Terms of Partnership require a commitment of the project and the community to act in good faith with respect 
to each other’s responsibilities and to adopt all reasonable measures to ensure the realisation of the objectives of 
the project. 
The principles of the partnership could be: 
Joint participatory planning and sequential micro-project package for effective poverty alleviating 
Transparency in financial dealings 
•  Adjusting leadership skill and social cohesion 
•  Raising awareness and sense of ownership on development intervention 
• 
•  Community contribution and resource sharing in implementation 
• 
•  Honesty in transactions 
•  A joint commitment to assist the poorer members of the community 
•  Effort to help women and the disadvantaged. 
•  Establishment of community level institutions and coordinating body, 
•  Set indicators for participatory monitoring on performance and output. 
• 
The convening of community assembly forums to transfer information and exchange experiential learning to 
and within community members 
Catchment planning 
42.  This  activity  is  designed  to  improve  the  capacities  of  local  level  actors  -  field  officers,  farmer 
organizations  and  women’s  groups  -  to  develop  integrated  climate-risk  informed  water 
management  plans  for  260  tanks.  The  plans  and  guidelines  will  be  implemented  through  the 
establishment  of  cascade  level  water/land  management  committees  that  should  include  men, 
women  and  youth  from  communities  supported  by  technical  staff  at  district  and  ASC  level. 
Overall,  the  preparation  of  cascade  level  natural  resource  management  plans  will  include:  a) 
Training of trainers: The training programme will comprise  provincial, district  and  ASC technical 
staff in the process of plan preparation; b) Develop technical guidelines: On climate resilient water 
management  at  sub-basin/cascade  level  with  standard  operating  procedures  (SOPs)  agreed 
between  Departments  of  Agrarian  Development,  Irrigation,  and  Agriculture;  (c)  Training  of 
farmers: Training for district, ASC and FO officials/ lead farmers across 30 cascades to plan and 
implement  VIS  taking  climate  change  risks  into  account  including  financial  and  maintenance 
planning  for  viability  of  these  systems  beyond  the  project  lifetime.  The  training  of  farmers  will 
ensure  quality  design,  effective  implementation,  and  O&M  management  of  the  Village  Irrigation 
Systems (VIS); (d) Plan preparation: Development of a detailed climate change risk informed sub-
basin  or  cascade-level  water  resources  development  plan  with  full  participation  of  all  relevant 
local  government  officials,  ASCs,  FOs,  and  other  CBOs  in  each  village  system;  and  (e)  Form 
cascade  water  committees:  This  is  vital  for  coordinated  climate  change  risk  informed  water 
management at sub-basin level and implementation of the water resources plan developed.  
43.  The  community  planning  process  will  culminate  in  the  preparation  of  cascade  level  Natural 
Resource  Management  Plans  (NRMPs).  The  approach  will  be  to  develop  community  resource 
management plans on the  basis of identified problems and challenges  in land,  water and forest 
resource  use,  in  order  to  develop  a  vision  of  the  future  and  ownership  of  the  approach.  SARP 
staff will work with nominated community members to carry out site visits, identify those farmers 
or  groups  interested  in  cascade  rehabilitation  and  meet  with  them  to  understand  their  situation 
and  identify  measures.  The  community  driven  NRMP  will  allow  communities  to  effectively  map 
their  available  resources  and  outline  agreed  approaches  to  achieve  the  common  objective  of 
sustainable  management10.    A  first  stage  of  preparation  of  the  NRM  plan  is  an  agro-ecosystem 
10 A first stage of preparation of the NRM plan is an agro-ecosystem analysis where farmers are expected 
to better understand their ecosystem, and the consequences of poor management practices and 
opportunities that could arise from better management of the system. The approach will be to develop a 
vision of the future to ensure community ownership. Agreement will have to be reached by the various 
15 
to  better  understand 
their  ecosystem,  and 
farmers  are  expected 
the 
analysis  where 
consequences  of  poor  management  practices  and  opportunities  that  could  arise  from  better 
management of the system. Once agreement is reached the catchment/ community plan will be 
finalised.  The  plan  should  consist  of  identified  interventions,  a  development  plan  map  and  a 
schedule of phased development. A schedule setting out the expected time for completion should 
also  be  drawn  up.  The  overall  activity  plan  would  be  broken  down  into  annual  or  seasonal 
operational  plans  for  implementation.  A  calendar  of  operations  will  be  prepared  listing  the 
sub-activities  to  be  undertaken  in  the  community  during  the  year.  The  plan  would  be  used  to 
guide the implementation process during the year. In general the larger community level schemes 
should be implemented first in order to generate community commitment and interest.  
44.  This stage will also involve the preparation of feasibility studies for the irrigation schemes where 
costs  and  benefits  are  estimated.  The  community  should  also  be  encouraged  to  form  a 
Catchment  Management  Forum  (CMF),  in  the  watershed  catchment  areas.  As  part  of  the 
process, it will be necessary to prepare schemes for tank design and construction as well as land 
use/ capability maps that identify measures needed in the upland catchment area.  
45.  On  approval  of  the  watershed  and  community  plans,  MOUs  should  be  prepared  between  the 
project and the farming community. The terms of the contract should reflect the original Terms of 
Partnership.  Contracts  could  be  drawn  up  between  the  community  as  represented  by  the 
Community Development Forum or smaller interest groups. This is necessary to ensure that each 
party is aware of its obligations and responsibilities. The formal contracts are used to legally bind 
the different parties in implementation. A commitment on the part of all of the parties concerned to 
make sure that the planned developments actually take place is a sine qua non for this to work 
effectively. 
46.  The  expected  output  will  be  the  development  of  at  least  65  cascade  level  community  natural 
resource  management  plans.  Community  led  monitoring  and  evaluation  will  also  play  an 
important  part 
forms  (farmer  
organisations, self-help groups etc.), will be encouraged to create and manage their own in-kind 
and cash revolving funds as a source of financial support in O&M.  
this  process.  Producer  organisations 
their  various 
in 
in 
47.  Livelihoods analyses 
48.  The  planning  process  will  also  involve  the  preparation  of  simple  Micro-Project  Proposals  for 
livelihoods  diversification  for  women  and  youth  in  groups  or  individually  that  will  set  out  the 
objective of project and its coverage, cost and expected impact. The project field staff and service 
providers will assist in this process.  
49.  Steps in the planning process 
50.  The detailed steps in the process are outlined below:  
a)  Preparation  of  community  based  participatory  planning:  There  are  many  ways  to  conduct 
participatory  planning,  ranging  from  extremely  complex  and  time,  resource,  and  capacity  intensive 
community members, which will require the active engagement of community leaders as part of a 
participatory process. The outputs of the planning process will be: a) a community map highlighting the 
agriculture and NRM features that will influence the types of production and NRM management activities 
implemented by SREP; and b) a prioritised list of both group based and individual 
16 
approaches,  through  to  simpler  and  more  rapid  techniques.  Preparation  of  community  based 
development plans will need to be quick and simple but ensuring sufficient time for dialogue, listening 
and engaging with the communities, observing the area and conducting transect walks and producing 
simple maps. The  process  should  also  include  adequate  time  for  negotiations  with  the  communities 
on  aspects  such  as  targeting,  community  responsibility  in  restoring  assets  and  self-help  efforts, 
amongst  others.  The  activities  should  include  conducting  a  participatory  situation  analysis 11 
(community-based resource mapping and planning), identification and assessment of existing groups 
(such as farmer groups, self-help groups, and others that may have been formed through government 
or  NGO  schemes);  wealth  ranking  and  identification  of  vulnerable  households;  identification  and 
ranking  of  main  livelihood  sources  and  income  generating  opportunities;  and  identification  and 
selection of vulnerable households for mentoring.  
The selection criteria for those households eligible for individual mentoring are: 
-  Willingness and capacity to respond to the mentoring process 
-  Possession of few household assets 
-  Many dependants, including caring for orphans, the chronically ill, persons with disabilities and/or the elderly 
-  Headed by women or children 
- 
-  Access to land and/or other natural resources that are not being used productively 
-  Poor nutrition and shelter, malnourished children, and socially isolated from community and development 
Limited or no income-generating activities 
activities 
-  Women and children are the main sources of family labour 
-  School dropouts (before completing primary school) 
 Clear criteria will be needed to identify the community development facilitators as mentors. These 
could include the following: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical competence in thematic areas (for example, finance, natural resource management); 
Interest and the time available to undertake this work on a full time basis; 
Good communication skills, including the ability to listen, build rapport, show respect for 
different opinions and address sensitive issues constructively; 
Empathy with the people they work with, and their hopes and challenges; 
Motivation and skills to support group members in their change process and to share the 
process with new households; 
Commitment to supporting an individual’s change process; 
Ability to work equitably with both male and female household members (including youth and 
people with disabilities) in a participatory and inclusive manner; and 
Ability to network and provide linkages to other services, such as health, credit. 
The  community  planning  process  could  take  up  to  3  days  and  should  cover  the  six  year 
implementation  horizon  of  the  project.12 The  outcomes of  the  planning  process  will  be  a  community 
11IFAD 2009, Good Practice in participatory mapping, A review prepared for IFAD – http://www.ifad.org/pub/map 
IFAD 2010, The IFAD adaptive approach to participatory mapping: Design and deliver of participatory mapping projects. 
IFAD 2010, Participatory mapping and communication: A guide to developing a participatory communication 
strategy to support participatory mapping. 
IFAD 2011, Evaluating the impact of participatory mapping activities: Participatory monitoring and evaluation 
IFAD 2013, adaptation in practice: Increasing adaptive capacity through participatory mapping. 
12 The following are sources that  could be useful for better  understanding  some of the participatory tools that could be 
used in the Community Based Planning Process: 
Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) tools: Provides interesting definitions and tools for PRA, recommending its use largely 
on problem identification rather than actual planning of interventions. available at: http://goo.gl/1W3GWF. 
The Opportunities and Obstacles to Development - A Community Participatory Planning Methodology Hand Book(Tanzania, 
2007)  This  handbook  offers  an  easy  to  read  set  of  principles,  definitions  and  procedures  for  local  level  planning.  United 
Republic  of  Tanzania,  2007.  The  Opportunities  and  Obstacle  to  Development:  A  Community  Participatory  Planning 
Methodology Handbook. Available at: http://goo.gl/jCeaIT. 
17 
map  highlighting  the  watershed  and  natural  management  features  that  will  influence  the  design  of 
tank rehabilitation systems together with land management measures at sub-watershed level;  
Steps in preparing the community plans: 
Step 1: Pre-planning (district and ASC level) 
-  Selection of priority communities 
-  Sensitization of traditional community leaders, local administrators, etc. 
-  Organization of planning work & technical support, materials, logistics, etc 
. 
Step 2: Community sensitization on the purpose of the project and Terms of Partnership for implementation.  
-  Awareness meeting + followed by a series of community dialogues13 
- 
-  Selection and organization of a community planning team or focal points 
Introduction of SARP planning team to community and explanation of planning steps 
Step 3: Problem identification, vulnerability / wealth ranking & planning team composition 
-  Vulnerability ranking exercise (by the community) 
- 
-  Problem identification & ranking exercise (gender sensitive) 
Formation of a representative community level planning team 
Step 4: Socio-economic conditions & seasonal livelihood analysis 
- 
Information on crop production, livestock, water, shocks, etc. 
-  Seasonal calendar & discussion (hardships, expenditure periods, labour, etc.) 
-  Gender dynamics, tenure issues, specific challenges & opportunities description 
Step 5: Community area mapping & description of agro-ecological systems 
-  Map of the area (e.g. ground drawing map, google mapping, topomaps, etc.) 
-  Main climate/landscape features (e.g. land use, watershed boundaries, drainage) 
-  Profiling through transect walks & description; homestead sketching 
Step 6: Identifying activities and design 
- 
- 
-  Specific in depth technical design for physical and other activities planned 
Identify main potential actions, linkages between specific problems & solutions 
Technical discussion on specific community asset activities, and their design 
Step 7: Resource requirements, incl. capacity development 
-  Estimate work norms for proposed communal intervention and cash transfers, essential equipment, materials 
and tools 
Training & supervision requirements - including period for preparation/delivery 
- 
-  Estimate budget (this step is completed after detail surveys are done) 
b)  Household  profiling  and  selection:  The  household  assessment  will  be  conducted  as  part  of  the 
community level participatory planning process but could be undertaken in tandem. The assessment 
will  be  led  by  the  Agro-enterprise  Promoters  together  with  ARPAs  who  will  be  trained  as  social 
mobilisers cum facilitators. The team will use the services of the village level community facilitators to 
conduct participatory targeting methods, such as vulnerability mapping, to identify the most vulnerable 
households  (economically  and  socially),  households  with  signs  of  malnutrition,  female-headed 
households, individuals with disabilities and youth. The findings of these analyses should be shared 
with  the  local  community  and  government  representatives  in  the  ASCs.  The  assessment  could  be 
incorporated as part of the baseline study and the M&E system design. The outcome of this process 
will be a set of micro-project proposals of individual and groups on livelihood cum income generating 
options for each category of the project beneficiaries.  
At  ASC  level  a  Technical  Working  group  (TWG)  will  be  set  up  composed  of  ASC  technicians  and 
community representatives to oversee the process. Selected beneficiaries will be registered and given 
identification to prove their participation and  entitlements.  Selection criteria,  once agreed, should  be 
the same across all communities participating in SARP. 
13 The sensitization meetings will need to ensure that all community members have the opportunity to participate 
in the development process. 
18 
c)  Capacity building support: Capacity building for AIs, ARPAs, service providers and farmer leaders 
who will participate in the community planning processes will take place during the first 3 months of 
implementation. To strengthen capacities and facilitate the role of government institutions in leading 
livelihood  assets  building,  a  Technical  Support  Core  Team  (TSCT)  to  plan  and  implement  the 
community, group and household activities. The TSCT will be composed of technical experts (project 
and government staff) and small field level technical teams will be set up in each District. The TSCT 
would become a permanent reference group established to support the field activities over the course 
of project implementation.  
The activities are summarised below: 
Activity 
Responsibility  
Social mobilization + dialogue 
Training of field staff in community planning 
Preparation of community development plans 
Training  of  field  staff  in  watershed  development/  natural 
resource management  
Preparation  of  watershed/  natural  resource  management 
plans 
Preparation of micro-project proposals 
Social  inclusion  team  +  community 
mobilisers  
Social development experts + others 
NRM field staff + community 
NRM team  
team,  service  providers  + 
NRM 
community 
Agro-enterprise 
providers + community 
team, 
service 
51.  Technical support: The community, natural resource management planning process will be led by 
the  SARP  technical  experts  with  a  natural  resource  management  background  supported  by  the 
SARP  Technical  Assistance  team:  the  Area  Coordinator  and  the  national  experts  in  watershed 
development  and  natural  resource  management.  Additionally,  funding  will  also  be  available  to 
sub-contract  local NGO service providers to assist in planning  and implementation. The service 
providers  will  be  competitively  selected  but  must  possess  watershed/  natural  resource 
management skills to support the community level natural resource management process.  SARP 
technical  staff  will  provide  training  and  support  to  DOA,  DOI  and  DAD  technical  and  extension 
staff  and  contracted  service  providers  as  needed.  Capacity  building  for  service  providers  would 
be  phased  to  precede  the  community  mobilization  and  participatory  mapping  and  planning 
process. Alternative approaches could also be used such as contracting trainers of trainers (ToT) 
to develop a cascade training programme for field staff and/or contracting implementing partners 
who would recruit and train their own staff to provide training directly to farm households/ groups. 
B. Climate Smart Technologies  
52.  Climate  smart  agricultural  technologies  will  be  promoted  through  Farmer  Field  Schools14.  The 
FFS  approach  will  be  facilitated  by  AIs,  ARPAs  and  government  and  project  technicians  and 
service  providers.  The  AIs,  the  ARPA  cadre  of  animators  will  be  trained  in  the  FFS  process. 
Backstopping  mentoring  and  coaching  support  will  be  available  from  a  Core  Team  of  Trainers. 
The  project  will  also  provide  technical  assistance  support  through  the  recruitment  of  national 
agricultural  officers  supported  by  a  national  expert  with  experience  in  FFS.    The  training 
programme will also invest in awareness raising, knowledge generation, and learning for climate-
14 DoA has listed a set of climate smart agricultural (CSA) practices based on successful interventions carried out in 
other countries and tried and tested in Sri Lanka. The practices with high adoption rates include planting with the 
onset of rains, land preparation for rice utilizing ranfall in Yala, agroforestry and crop diversification (in home 
gardens), climate resilient crop varieties for paddy, short and ultra-short duration varieties, cover cropping and 
mulching and mechanised land preparation for rice, reducing fertiliser and pesticide use by mulching and 
agroforestry systems that promote good water and soil quality.    
19 
risk management including understanding and analysis of impacts and options for adaptation in 
the context of  water management and  agriculture planning (e.g. input and crop  selection based 
on climatic conditions and seasonal forecasts). Approximately 300 schools will be established for 
6,000 Dry Zone farmers. For each district it is expected that 50 schools will be set up. 
53.  The  FFS  methodology  involves  training  a  cadre  of  Master  Trainers,  elaborating  a  training 
curriculum, and the establishment of FFS groups (25-35 members in each) in each of the target 
districts.  The  training  curriculum  will  be  designed  together  with  experts  to  match  the  social  and 
agro-ecological  challenges  that  they  will  face.  The  Master  Trainers  will  train  the  Farmer  Field 
School Facilitators, drawn from the ranks of the AIs and ARPAs assigned to the project. The training 
of  facilitators  will  have  a  3-4  week  duration  but  could  be  broken  down  into  a  series  of  shorter 
durations.  The  core  training  will  be  followed  up  by  periodic  refresher  training.  One  to  two  FFS 
facilitators  will  be  selected  for  each  school.  The  facilitators  could  form  a  two  person  team  to 
implement  the  FFS  curriculum  in  the  field.  The  FFS  facilitators  will  be  supported  and  mentored/ 
coached by the Master Trainers and project technical staff. 
54.  A typical FFS is expected to follow a cycle of 24 months over a two year period. The content of 
the  FFS  is  expected  to  evolve  from  facilitated  sessions  in  basic  crops  and  participatory 
diagnostics  of  constraints  to  increasing  productivity  towards  production  improvements  and  crop 
diversification utilising climate smart technologies. The process will culminate in training contents 
that  deal  with  farm  commercialisation.    The  evolutionary  process  is  intended  to  provide  an 
opportunity to establish viable and sustainable commercial farmer based organizations (producer 
groups, cooperatives and/ or associations).  
55.  Each FFS group will receive a grant of USD 500 at the start of the first cycle which will allow them 
to purchase the necessary learning materials and field inputs  needed for the school to operate. 
Part of the funds will be used to set up a communal field/ plot to generate income for the group to 
continue  activities  over  future  learning  cycles.  Beneficiaries  are  expected  to  make  in-kind 
contributions to the FFS. The training is expected to be conducted within the community using the 
common  plot  as  a  learning  venue.  Women  farmers  should  comprise  around  50  percent  of  all 
trainees.  
56.  The  first  cycle  will  start  with  basic  production  techniques  such  as  seeding  and  weeding, 
progressively  tackling  more  complex  matters,  such  as  soil  fertility  management,  aspects  of 
conservation  agriculture,  nutrition  and  social/organizational  issues.  The  content  of  the  FFS, 
however,  will  need  to  be  modified  to  match  the  training  needs  of  their  members  that  match  the 
agro-ecological conditions of the target districts. Attention will be given to incorporate sessions on 
options  for  climate  change  adaptation  including  soil  and  water  management,  conservation 
agriculture and adaptive planning of the cropping calendar (what, when and where to plant), crop 
diversification,    intercropping,  and  sequencing  planting  times  to  spread  risks.15  Nutrition 
awareness  could  also  be  mainstreamed  into  the  programme  to  promote  food  security  and 
diversification  of  the  household  diet.  For  these  sessions  all  family  members  will  be  invited  to 
participate  recognizing  in  particular  the  role  of  women  in  the  decision-making  on  what  families 
eat. The nutrition education activities will focus on: a) promoting healthy crop and animal protein 
choices in own production and healthy food purchases using increased incomes; b) joint cooking 
and  exchange  of  local  and  new  innovative  recipes  using  local  nutritious  produce;  and  c)  food 
preservation sanitation and hygiene practices. The available curriculum on Food and Nutrition will 
be  reviewed  and  updated  by  a  consultant  (nutrition  expert).  Special  strategies  could  also  be 
applied  to  support  the  establishment  of  women  FFS  (reaching  at  least  50  percent  women 
beneficiaries). Some consideration should also be given to include  youth and vulnerable groups 
15It should be pointed out that the FFS training curriculum should focus on subject areas of common interest to their 
members. More specialised technical training will be required for specific interest groups particularly in support of 
livelihood diversification activities. The proposed TA will be expected to cover these specialised trainings. 
20 
through Junior FFS approaches. When needed functional literacy and numeracy training and will 
also be included in FFS curricula.   
57.  Field activities to directly support FFS implementation will be led by the team of Master trainers 
mainly  issued  from  the  technical  support  team.  FFS  facilitators  will  comprise  extension  workers 
(AIs/  ARPAs)  as  well  as  selected  farmers  with  capacity  and  interest  to  facilitate  a  school.  For 
effective  implementation  of  FFS,  the  ministry  will  need  to  ensure  that  each  ASC  participating  in 
the project has at least three extension specialists – AIs and ARPAs – to support the programme.  
58.  The  FFS  activities  will  be  led  by  a  National  Consultant  –  Agriculture  (Farmer  Field  School) 
specialist. The expert will provide on the job-training, coaching and supervision to participating AI 
and ARPA staff, service providers and FFS facilitators. 
The activities are summarised below: 
Activity 
Identification  of  NGOs,  organizations,  experts  with 
capacity to lead specialised trainings 
Development of basic FFS curriculum 
Training of master trainers in FFS 
Training of field staff in FFS 
Establishment of FFS 
Roll-out of FFS training  
Identification of specialised subjects 
Backstopping support 
Refresher training 
C. Livelihoods Resilience Building Training 
Responsibility  
PMU + FFS team 
Agriculture  (FFS)  expert  +  technical  staff  + 
community members 
FFS expert  
FFS master trainers 
Field level extension staff 
Field level extension staff 
FFS team 
FFS master trainers 
FFS team 
59.   The  skills  and  capacities  required  amongst  women  in  particular  will  be  strengthened  to  ensure 
that communities become more resilient to climate-related shocks and that the necessary support 
services  to  communities  and  households  will  be  readily  available.  The  capacity  building 
programme  will  involve  a  three  step  process  of  awareness  raising  of  the  potential  benefits  of 
agro-enterprises,  experiential  training  and  workshops  and  exposure  visits  to  successful 
enterprises  for  knowledge  sharing  and  learning  from  practitioners.    A  possible  menu  of 
interventions  have  been  defined  that  include  aquaculture,  livestock  development  and  other 
diversified activities. A total of 550 short training programmes have been programmed.  
60.  The table below describes the details of the training programmes for selected activities and sub-
activities that have been tried and tested under the WFP and UNDP dry zone project areas.  
Activity 
Sub Activity 
Programme description 
Awareness creation 
programmes 
Trainings / workshops 
Exposure visit 
Culture  based 
inland 
fisheries 
in  the  selected 
and 
seasonal 
perennial tanks 
and 
Resources 
opportunities 
and 
conduct  a  Participatory 
Rapid  Appraisal  (PRA) 
to  analyse  the  present 
condition of the selected 
Rural 
Fisheries 
Organization (RFO) 
Legal 
available  on 
act 
provisions 
fisheries 
inland 
related 
to 
Tank 
plan 
business 
preparation with the RFO 
a 
visit 
Exposure 
to 
well-
functioning  tank 
knowledge 
for 
and 
sharing 
learning 
from 
practitioners  – 
the 
based  on 
Reservoir 
fisheries 
management, fish species 
and its behaviour, feeding 
21 
Activity 
Sub Activity 
Programme description 
Fish  Farming  in 
the inland water 
reservoirs 
Awareness creation 
programmes 
fisheries 
Importance  of  business 
planning, 
record 
keeping, 
stocking  & 
harvesting schedule 
Fish 
handling  of 
technology transfer 
postharvest 
fish  and 
Fingerling 
rearing  nursery 
business 
– 
floating 
pond, 
cages 
fingerling 
Sustainable 
rearing 
nursery 
business  and  benefits 
among the potential HH 
Introduction  of 
improved 
method 
curing 
(smoked 
production) 
of  
fish 
fish 
(smoked 
Improved 
fish  curing 
fish 
method 
production) and benefits 
among  the  existing  and 
potential HH 
Semi-intensive 
small 
dairy farming 
scale 
semi 
scale 
Small 
intensive  dairy  farming 
and  benefits  among  the 
potential HH 
22 
Trainings / workshops 
Exposure visit 
requirement 
culture 
and feeding habits, inland 
fisheries 
/ 
management 
Record 
simple 
management 
keeping 
cash 
and  
flow 
at 
cash 
days 
locally 
cages, 
practices 
trainings  on 
for 
management 
fingerling 
nursery 
Follow-up 
good 
sustainable operation 
Fingerling  rearing  nursery 
management, 
& 
construction 
maintenance  of  ponds  / 
floating 
fish 
species  and  its  behaviour 
residential 
(5 
training 
NAQDA 
Dambulla/ 
Feed  preparation  using 
the 
available 
feeding  and 
materials, 
feeding  habits,  diseases 
and 
treatments, 
harvesting,  packing  and 
marketing 
Record keeping and small 
business 
flow 
management 
Good 
practices  on 
rearing 
management 
Construction, 
operation 
and  maintenance  of  FTT 
Thiaroye Kiln Unit 
Preparation  of 
smoking, 
maintenance, 
packing and marketing 
Record keeping and  cash 
flow management 
Improved 
practices 
dairy 
Semi-intensive 
and 
management 
construction of cattle shed 
& maintenance 
Feeding 
and 
establishment 
pasture/ fodder units 
Clean  milk  production 
cattle 
improved 
management  practices  to 
increase milk yield 
Synchronization,  Artificial 
insemination  &  calving 
management 
Post 
Disease 
& 
management,  Deworming 
& Vaccination 
Record 
simple 
for 
quality 
smoking, 
Management 
of 
keeping 
cash 
and 
flow 
smoking 
fish 
& 
a 
for 
visit 
well-
Exposure 
to 
functioning 
nursery 
knowledge 
and 
sharing 
learning 
from 
practitioners  – 
the 
based  on 
requirement 
a 
visit 
well-
Exposure 
to 
functioning 
smoking unit for 
knowledge 
and 
sharing 
learning 
from 
practitioners  – 
based  on 
the 
requirement 
a 
visit 
Exposure 
to 
well-
functioning  farm 
knowledge 
for 
and 
sharing 
learning 
from 
practitioners  – 
based  on 
the 
requirement 
Activity 
Sub Activity 
Programme description 
Awareness creation 
programmes 
Trainings / workshops 
Exposure visit 
Livestock 
Farming 
Goat  Rearing 
(semi-intensive 
goat 
management) 
Small 
semi 
scale 
intensive  goat  rearing 
and  benefits  among  the 
potential HH 
Commercial 
level  Backyard 
Poultry 
(chicks/quail) 
Commercial  level  BYP 
farming  &  quail  farming 
and  benefits  among  the 
potential HH 
Mushroom 
cultivation 
Mushroom 
cultivation 
and  benefits  among  the 
potential HH 
Agri-machinery 
and  equipment 
center 
repair 
(pick 
best 
trainers 
from 
VTC) 
scale 
Agri-
Small 
and 
machinery 
repair 
equipment 
services 
business 
management among the 
potential 
/ 
youths 
vocational trainees 
Micro/ 
scale 
enterprises 
Small 
agri-
Protected 
agriculture 
intervention 
Protected 
agriculture 
and  benefits  among  the 
potential HH 
23 
/ 
/ 
good 
good 
and 
flow 
keeping 
cash 
management 
Improved 
management practices 
Construction  of  elevated 
goat shed & maintenance 
Goat  Management,  Pest 
&  Disease  management, 
castration,  Deworming  & 
Vaccination 
Record 
simple 
management 
Improved 
management practices 
Construction 
and 
maintenance  of  BYP  & 
quail  shed,  sustainable 
BYP  &  Quail  hatching  & 
rearing practices 
Feed  preparation  using 
available 
locally 
the 
feeding, 
& 
materials 
vaccination,  diseases  and 
treatments,  packing  and 
marketing of eggs 
keeping 
Record 
cash 
simple 
management 
Refresher 
improved 
management practices 
Mushroom  cultivation  and 
shed 
fruiting 
room/ 
construction 
& 
maintenance 
Record keeping and small 
business 
flow 
management 
Improved 
management practices 
training 
and 
on 
good 
and 
flow 
good 
cash 
/ 
cash 
business 
business 
Small 
management 
Record keeping and small 
business 
flow 
management 
Improve 
management practices 
Cultivation 
environment 
maintenances 
shelter 
Record keeping and small 
flow 
business 
management 
Improved 
management 
cultivation practices 
in  protected 
and 
the 
good 
and 
cash 
of 
/ 
a 
visit 
well-
Exposure 
to 
functioning 
small scale goat 
for 
farm 
knowledge 
and 
sharing 
learning 
from 
practitioners  – 
the 
based  on 
requirement 
visit 
Exposure 
to  Makadura,  a 
government 
mushroom 
training  center 
which 
has 
modern 
facilities 
mushroom 
cultivation 
based  on 
requirement 
– 
the 
of 
Exposure 
visit 
to  a  protected 
agriculture  site 
–  based  on  the 
requirement 
Activity 
Sub Activity 
Programme description 
Awareness creation 
programmes 
Trainings / workshops 
Exposure visit 
Agri  base  value  addition 
and  cereals  processing 
(at  IPHT  or  Cathy  Rich 
food processing center) 
Agri- 
Processing  and 
value 
adding 
business 
Agri- 
scale 
Small 
Processing  and  value 
adding 
business 
management among the 
potential  youths  /  other 
HH 
Agri- 
scale 
hatchery 
Small 
Poultry 
scale 
Small 
hatchery 
among 
youths / other HH 
poultry 
business 
the  potential 
business 
record 
small 
flow 
Small 
management, 
keeping 
business 
management 
Improved 
management practices 
and 
cash 
business 
Small 
poultry 
scale 
hatchery  operation  and 
maintenance 
Poultry  mother 
stock 
rearing and management 
business 
Small 
record 
management, 
small 
keeping 
flow 
business 
management 
Improved 
management practices 
and 
cash 
business 
Skills 
development 
training 
Agriculture 
Youth 
in 
for 
Skills 
development 
training on Agri-
machinery  and 
equipment 
repair 
maintenance 
and 
Vocational 
Agri-machinery 
equipment 
maintenance 
training  on 
and 
repair  and 
Source: based on tested practices through the WFP Koica project 
61.  An integral part of the training methodology is exposure visits to successful agro-enterprises to be 
seen as in class benchmarks. The Success Case Replication (SCR) methodology, based on the 
principles  of  farmer  to  farmer  learning,  and  developed  by  FAO,  will  be  applied  by  SARP.  SCR 
was  born  from  the  observation  that  among  the  rural  poor  there  are  always  innovators  that  are 
able to identify new income generating activities and successfully exploit particular market niches. 
As these niches may be untapped in other local markets, there is scope to promote and support 
the  transfer  and  replication  of  the  experience  of  these  individuals  and  groups  for  the  benefit  of 
others. According to SCR this can be effectively done by motivating the original innovators to train 
other  aspiring  micro-entrepreneurs.  The  essence  of  the  methodology  is  summarised  in  the  box 
below.  The  methodology  has  primarily  been  used  to  address  the  needs  of  low-income  rural 
households. 
Success Case Replication  
Objective:  
To  facilitate  the  dissemination  of  new  profitable  micro-enterprises  through  a  “horizontal”  farmer  to 
farmer learning. In order to avoid market saturation and over-competition among micro-entrepreneurs 
the transfer is oriented towards local markets where there is a potential demand for the new products.  
Process of implementation:  
24 
1. Identification of success cases: Field visits are conducted to collect information from key informants 
to identify innovators of micro enterprises. The so-called success cases are approached to act as a 
trainer for others rural households to learn from his/ her experience16.  
2. Assessing the viability of the enterprise in new markets: An analysis of the potential demand for the 
new  product  and  of  the  potential  costs  and  benefits  of  the  replicated  enterprise  is  conducted. 
Feasibility studies are carried out with the assistance of the trainer-entrepreneur. If enough elements 
are  collected  showing  that  replication  might  be  successful,  a  practical  training  program  is  designed. 
This  normally  consists  in  a  number  of  short  on-the-job  training  sessions  spread  over  the  whole 
production cycle. 
3. Selection of trainees: On average between 5 to10 trainees will take part in the training. Candidates 
would need to show a strong motivation to participate with determination to succeed. They should 
also own the capital assets required to start up the activity (land and other natural resources, labour 
force, tools and equipment and funds or access to credit).  
4. Assess farmer willingness to become a trainer: Once a new enterprise is established and whenever 
the local market was found capable to absorb the increased production, new entrepreneurs are asked 
to train other people in different locations.  
5. Establish practical training programme: Training would be tailored to suit the enterprise or activity to 
be replicated. Most agricultural activities require training at various points in the production process, 
with time gaps in between, 
6. Supervise training: The main purpose in attending training is to assure that all the trainees receive 
all  the  information  that  is  necessary  to  succeed  at  their  new  enterprise.  This  includes  the  three  key 
elements  of  any  enterprise:  a)  raw  material  supply,  b)  production  process,  including  what  might  go 
wrong, and c) marketing of the produce. 
Source:  Orsini,  JB;  (2000).  Success  Case  Replication:  a  manual  for  increasing  farmer  household 
income. ESCAP/FAO. 
D. Nutrition Education and Training  
62.   Poor  dietary  diversity  will  be  addressed  by  increasing  the  availability  and  consumption  of 
nutritious and diverse foods and enhancing income to ensure healthy eating and improved family 
diets.  The  focus  will  be  on  training  extension  workers  and  service  providers  and  through  them 
members  of  the  communities  to  understand  the  relevance  of  better  nutrition  to  climate  resilient 
productivity  and  livelihoods  diversification.  SARP  will  target  40  farmer  organizations  from  within 
the 6 districts to support them with various nutrition-related activities to improve their diet diversity 
and over all diet quality. Firstly, as post-harvest losses remain problematic in Sri Lanka, adversely 
affecting  food  security  and  nutrition  through  both  restricted  food  availability  and  access, 
participating 
the 
implementation  of  a  nutrient-preserving,  value  adding  technology  (i.e.  drying  facility).  This  will 
directly link to the project’s objective to diversify livelihood of the targeted beneficiaries.  Specific 
interventions  will  vary  from  one  village  to  the  next,  based  on  community  needs  and  market 
assessments which will take into consideration market demand and supply. This initiative will be 
particularly  beneficial  in  its  ability  to  increase  income  not  only  through  a  reduction  in  losses  but 
also  by  value  addition.  Similarly,  these  nutrition  preservation  techniques  will  increase  the 
farmers’  organizations  will  receive 
technical  support 
financial  and 
for 
16 This is a sensitive step in the SCR process because the successful micro-entrepreneur might be 
frightened by the threat that competition can create to his/her own business. Notwithstanding, program 
experience has shown that if persuasive assurances are given that replication will not take place within 
the immediate market outreach of the enterprise, the enhanced public recognition deriving from the being 
recruited as a trainer and/or the additional income that can be obtained through training fees are enough 
to motivate many petty-entrepreneurs to collaborate to the transfer program. 
25 
availability of these products in the community. Both of the aforementioned pathways have shown 
to positively impact food security and nutrition. 
63.  Evidence informed Behaviour Change Communication (BCC) activities, adapted from WFP’s on-
going work, will be implemented in all 6 districts to complement and promote positive behaviour 
changes  related  to  improved  nutrition  and  diet  quality.  BCC  initiatives  have  been  shown  to 
increase  beneficiary  knowledge  of  nutrition,  which  is  sustained  for  years  after  an  intervention 
ends  and  have  the  potential  to  contribute  to  spillover  effects  in  that  the improved  nutrition 
knowledge and behaviours are also witnessed among the neighbours of beneficiary households. 
As a result, BCC is recognized globally as one of the essential actions to improve nutrition. 
64.  Technical Assistance 
65.  The training programmes will be supported by a Nutrition Expert to be recruited on a short term 
basis to train and support the social development team in the field.  
E. Action research for policy dialogue 
66.  SARP will take the ecosystem development approach as an example of what can be achieved if 
the implementation strategies are in order. This approach should be viewed as a paradigm shift 
for  the  project  in  that  it  promotes  an  integrated,  holistic  approach  to  enhancing  water  and  land 
management  through  the  interconnected  elements  of  irrigation  systems,  soil  conservation, 
agroforestry combined with improved farming practices. It will be the first time that an integrated 
approach to catchment management is being advanced incorporating climate change concerns, 
understanding linkages across river basins/sub-river basins, and including multiple uses of water.  
67.  It  is  expected  that  evaluation  studies  combined  with  other  international  experiences  will  provide 
the  input  into  a  number  of  workshops  at  national  to  discuss  and  debate  the  impact  of  the 
approach. It is envisaged that policy dialogue will take place together with other agencies working 
on  similar  themes  in  the  dry  zone  and  at  policy  level.  Collaborators  will  include  UNDP,  WFP, 
World Bank and FAO.  
F. Background studies:  
68.  A process for the selection of sub-basins and tanks will be followed to ensure the maximization of 
the  returns  on  water  infrastructure  investments.  The  approach  will  involve  a  combination  of 
collection  and  analysis  of  socio-economic  and  biophysical  data.  The  process  will  follow  three 
steps: 
i) 
ii) 
an assessment of the water availability in the sub-catchments/ tanks; 
an analysis to see if the available water quantity is sufficient to meet the existing demands for 
water from different sectors (irrigation, drinking water, environment, etc.); and  
iii) 
detailed hydrological and water allocation modelling of the sub-basins selected.  
69.   The last step  in the  process involves a checklist to verify the sociological,  economic, technical, 
institutional and environmental suitability of the sub-basins/tanks as a guide for sustainability. The 
programme of work although commencing immediately will be spread over two years. 
73.  Other  preliminary  studies  expected  to  be  undertaken  for  start-up  include  a)  a  Climate  Risk 
26 
Analysis  consultancy;  b)  preparation  of  the  Environmental  and  Social  Mapping  Framework;  c) 
VAM targeting and planning to be conducted by WFP. 
74.  Currently in Sri Lanka, only 2 percent of farms are covered by weather index insurance policies. 
To  fill  this  gap,  SARP  will  build  on  work  undertaken  by  the  GIZ  funded,  Small  and  Medium 
Enterprise project in collaboration with Sri Lanka's Agricultural & Agrarian Insurance Board (AAIB) 
and  the  Global  Index  Insurance  Facility  (GIIF)  in  the  field  of  commercial  agricultural  insurance. 
The  GIZ  funded  project  has  introduced  innovative  technologies  utilising  drones  with  satellite 
imagery for claims assessments. This is combined with the digitization of insurance policies and 
claim processes through the development of a mobile app which has already shown first results in 
the  dry  zone.  There  are  considerable  opportunities  for  SARP  to  extend  the  innovations  to  other 
parts of the region under a public-private partnership arrangement that aims to introduce weather 
index based insurance combined with a price-index model for farmers to be assured of minimum 
prices for crops produce sold.  
75.  The IFAD hosted Platform for Agricultural Risk Management (PARM), which embeds the Weather 
Risk  Management  Facility  will  provide  the  insurance  sector  with  capacity  development  and  TA 
together  with  other  development  organizations  in  Sri  Lanka  (GIZ,  Desjardins  and  FAO)  to  bring 
tested innovative crop insurance schemes to scale.  
76.  IWMI will also be viewed as a potential partner building micro insurance systems from its existing 
flood and drought monitoring systems to manage water risks at farm, tank and project-wide levels. 
Building  on  the  flood  and  drought  monitoring  systems  developed  and  supported  by  IWMI,  the 
organization could support implementation of index-based agricultural insurance for water-related 
risks, as well as associated innovations in bundling of insurance products with climate information 
services for farmers and seed technologies. At the initial inception phase of implementation these 
potential services will need to be aligned with the needs and priorities of SARP. 
Sub-component 1.2 Strengthening capacity for inclusive value chain development 
This sub-component will provide the essential capacity building to ensure effective implementation of 
sub-component  2.2.  Activities  will  include  the  roll  out  of  the  Farm  Business  School  approach,  
establishment of a youth incubation scheme and conducting value chain and market analyses.  
A.  Farm business school  
77.  The  FBS  methodology  will  be  used  as  a  main  instrument  for  reaching  target  individuals  –  men, 
women and youth - within the community. The FBS aims to develop the business skills of farmers, 
considered an essential basis for value chain commercialisation.  The Farm Business School was 
introduced  to  Sri  Lanka  by  FAO  in  2010  and  has  been  scaled  up,  albeit  to  a  limited  extent, 
through  the  World  Bank  Modernization  Project17.  A  total  of  10,974  farmers  have  accessed  this 
training  in  the  past  and  the  majority  have  been  women.  The  FBS  has  been  regarded  by  the 
Department  of Agriculture  as  a  ‘good  practice’  to  be  rolled  out  to  scale,  but  shortages  of  funds 
have  been  a  constraint.  SARP  will  support  DOA  and  DAD  to  adapt  the  FBS  methodology  and 
establish a further 75 schools in the Dry Zone, where it will link the participants to value chains. 
The  aim 
those  areas  where 
commercialisation opportunities exist.  
farmers  predominantly 
total  of  2,000 
to  reach  a 
in 
is 
78.  The  FBS  trains  farmers  and  non-farm  VC  actors  to  enhance  their  understanding  of  the  market 
demands  such  as  preferred  varieties,  quality  criteria,  quantity  and  timing,  required  post-harvest 
practices,  as  well  as  gross  margin  calculations  to  assess  profitability  and  plan  production 
accordingly.  Emphasis  is  put  on  the  basics  of  Farm  Business  skills  i.e.  record  keeping  and 
calculation  of  break-even  point,  that  are  a  pre-requisite  to  enable  farmers  to  take  informed 
decisions on investments in the context of commercialisation. A specific module on CSA practices 
will  be  included  in  the  FBS  training  curriculum.  This  module  will  be  provided  with  the  help  of 
District  Agricultural  Officers.  The  focus  of  the  module  will  be  on:  (i)  how  to  take  into  account 
Climate Change aspects in production planning; (ii) how to estimate and mitigate Climate Change 
risks, highlighting the role of weather information and the extension service support; and (iii) the 
17 The FBS activities are expected to reach 1,776 farmers in 47 FB schools 
27 
costs  of  adopting  VC  specific  climate  smart  agricultural  practices/technologies  with  a  particular 
emphasis on their sustainability over time.  
79.  SARP  will  ensure  that  DOA,  DOD,  DOI  frontline  staff  are  trained  on  this  slightly  expanded  FBS 
approach through a Training of Trainers programme. They will then be involved in conducting the 
training  to  ensure  spill-over  effect  and  sustainability  beyond  the  project’s  life.  Furthermore,  an 
innovation that was introduced in other countries in the region – the Philippines, Pakistan, Nepal - 
and  has  worked  well, entails that participating  lead farmers selected from farmer/VC groups  will 
be expected to teach their  own  g r o u p   m e m b e r s   after  each  FBS  session  on  the  same  topics 
(on  average  two  lead  farmers/VC  actors  from  a  group  participate  and  train  the  10  members  of 
their group). This  not only  fosters their  deeper  understanding, but  also enables further  outreach 
beyond the direct FBS participants. Consequently, graduation of farmers and non VC actors from 
the FBS is contingent to successful training of their own group members. 
80.  The  skills  and  capacities  of field  level  staff social  mobilisers  and  agribusiness  facilitators  will  be 
developed to ensure that the necessary support to communities and households will be available 
to  help  them  become  more  market  oriented.  This  will  be  done  through  the  Training  of  Trainers 
programme  with  backup  coaching  support  from  a  Core  Team  of  Trainers.  The  spillover  and 
second generation impacts have not been assessed.  
81.  The activities to be supported include: (i) Selection of lead farmers from farmer organizations to 
enrol in the Farmer Business Schools (FBS); (ii) develop modules on CC and finance, (iii) train a 
team of master trainers that includes the cadre of Agro-enterprise Promoters; (iv) conduct an FBS 
ToT  for  AIs  and  ARPAs  and  selected  District  staff  and  farmers;  (iv)  graduate  AIs  and  ARPAs 
together with the Agro-enterprise Promoters will conduct the FBS training programme for farmers; 
(v)  provide  regular  coaching  and  mentoring  support  to  the  front  line  FBS  trainers;  (vi)  facilitate 
community  level  review  meetings  with  FBS  instructors  and  Lead  Farmers;  and  vii)  facilitate 
exchange visits of FBS member groups for knowledge sharing and learning. 
Technical support 
82.  Technical  assistance  will  be  available  from  the  Agro-enterprise  development  team  comprising  a 
dedicated Agro-enterprise  specialist and Farm Business School lead trainer. The cadre of agro-
enterprise promoters will be trained in group organization, business management and marketing 
as background to their participation in the FBS.  
B. Skills development training for youth 
83.  SARP  recognizes  the  various  challenges  that  hinder  youth  from  participating  fully  in  agriculture 
and agri-business. The project will employ innovative mechanisms to address the challenges with 
the  aim  of  employment  creation,  rural  youth  empowerment  and  improving  their  livelihoods. 
Support will be given to develop a youth incubation scheme to address the various challenges of 
youth  participation  in  agriculture/  agri-business.  SARP  will  use  innovative  interventions,  such  as 
Advanced  Agri-Business  mentorship  (ABS)  through  incubators  and  access  to  financial  services. 
Youth led groups or SME’s will be linked to the Enterprise Sri Lanka programme that offers loans 
to  finance  product  upgrade,  volume  increases  and  new  product  development,  supported  by 
business service providers/coaches to assist them to develop business plans.18 19 SARP will also 
draw from and build on lessons from SAP and other IFAD-supported projects to identify concrete 
areas of support for youth.  
18 Enterprise Sri Lanka by the Department of Development Finance includes interest subsidy loan 
schemes, which are supposed to be implemented by all 19 public and private sector banks using their 
own funds while the interests are fully or partially subsidized by GOSL. For youth beneficiaries, GIZ is 
providing technical support to incorporate companies, maintain books and records, negotiations with FSPs 
and access to markets. The loan facility through state banks comes with a 75% loan installment paid by 
GOSL. SARP will explore the opportunity of participating in that scheme for youth beneficiaries of the 
entrepreneurial incubation support. The ADB grant for Women Entrepreneur Finance Initiative (We-Fi) for 
technical assistance and an extra grant for women in less developed regions, such as the dry zone, 
blended with a credit line (80% of the investment costs), would allow to build synergies for the support of 
women entrepreneurs targeted by SARP 
19 This aligns  with the focus of IFADs priority areas outlined in the Rural Youth Action Plan. 
28 
84.  Business  Incubation:  SARP  will  use  the  business  incubation  model  to  strengthen  capacity 
of youth as agripreneurs and for employment creation. Owing to the limits of funds, this can be 
regarded as a pilot intervention to be tested throughout the duration of the project. The model will 
engage incubators to train, coach and mentor selected youth. Some 2,500 young people will be 
targeted for this activity. During the first half year of project implementation, SARP will procure a 
two  part  study  to  first  identify  a  pool  of  potential  Incubators  and  secondly  select  mature 
incubators  in  the  region.  The  incubators  will  be  identified  through  a  mapping  exercise  to  be 
conducted  for  project  readiness.  The  mapping  will  also  assess  support  required  for  the 
incubators.  Identification  of  Incubators  will  be  based  on  the  following  criteria:  (i)  ongoing 
operations  in  the  specific  value  chains  prioritized  for  the  project;  (ii)  clear  linkage  from  the 
business  operation  to  higher  value  and  higher  volume  off-  takers  (markets);  (iii)  clear  linkage 
from the business operation to reliable service and input suppliers; (iv) physical premises for the 
business; and (v) willingness to coach and mentor young agripreneurs.  
85.  Apprentices  will  originate  from  within  the  dry  zone  but  preferably  from  communities  where  the 
Incubators have been selected.  Each Incubator will support one to five eligible Apprentices for a 
six month business cycle of the Incubator's enterprise.  The selection of Apprentices will begin 
with the identification of eligible candidates be based  on the following criteria: (i)  SARPs target 
group  that  includes  men  and  women  between  the  ages  of  18  and  35;  or  women  with  children 
under  the age of 15  years; (ii) residents of the  dry  zone districts; (iii) ready,  willing and  able to 
undertake  apprenticeship  in  the  particular  enterprise;  (iv)  willing  to  agree  to  sell  a  prescribed 
portion  of  their  output  to  the  Incubator  as  part  of  developing  and  maintaining  the  mentoring 
relationship. Selection of Apprentices will be done from among those considered eligible from the 
process  above.    To  realize  this,  SARP  will  engage  a  service  provider  to  assist  in  the  first  two 
screenings of applicants in consultation with the Incubators and other key stakeholders such as 
community  based  organisations,  service  provider  organizations  and  ASC  representatives.  The 
final  decision  of  Apprentices  will  rest  with  the  Incubator  based  on  his/her  confidence  that  the 
candidate has the tangible commitment to learn and replicate the business.   
86.  There  will  be  three  levels  of  assistance:  (i)  market  linkage  assistance  for  Incubators  and 
Apprentices;  (ii)  technical  assistance  to  the  Incubators  and  Apprentices;  and  (iii)  capacity 
building  assistance  to  strengthen  the  enterprises.  The  Apprentices  will  be  taken  through  an 
advanced  FBS  training  to  develop  their  entrepreneurship  skills  before  joining  the  incubation 
process. Within the  incubation period, agro-enterprises emerging from the system will continue 
to  receive  technical  assistance  to  sustain  their  profitability.  Some  of  the  new  generation 
enterprises could develop into Incubators to scale up the project's on jobs creation. 
87. 
Incubation  process:  Youth  will  be  paired  with  incubators  based  on  their  selected  value  chain 
/enterprise.  This  will  be  an  important  step  to  establish  commitment  of  both  Apprentice  and 
Incubators.  The  apprentices  will  receive  a  business  orientation  training  through  SARP  prior  to 
incubation.  By  the  end  of  this  training  including  the  practical  working/  training  period  with  the 
incubator, the Apprentices will prepare a business plan to guide their actual operations following 
their  graduation.  The  Apprentices  will  be  paid  USD60  per  month  for  the  six  month  incubation 
period to cover  living costs and sundries. The Apprentice  will start-up  an enterprise, supported 
with  seed  capital  from  SARP,  combined  with  loans  through  the  Enterprise  Sri  Lanka  or  other 
programmes.  The  grant  will  be  paid  back  following  the  first  sales  cycle.  The  Incubator  will  be 
expected  to  provide  technical  and  marketing  support  to  the  youth  enterprises  through  re-
negotiated off-taker contracts. 
B.  Market appraisal and value chain analysis 
88.  A mapping and characterization of value chain actors and opportunities will be undertaken in the 
6  Districts  of  the  dry  zone.  This  will  facilitate  the  identification  of  viable  value  chains  for 
investments with potential for inclusion of small farmers’ organised into business oriented POs. 
The  analysis  will  identify  areas  of  sound  investment  that  should  generate  sustainable  rates  of 
returns and benefits for the groups/ organizations. At the same time the value chain studies will 
identify  opportunities  for  facilitating  economic  partnerships  between  beneficiary  POs  and  other 
value  chain  actors  including  linking  POs  and  individuals  with  PFIs  (banks  and  non-bank 
microcredit institutions) to facilitate access to their services.   
29 
89.  The value chain analyses would include:  
  assessments of existing POs and other value chains actors in the 6 target districts; 
  background market studies and technical studies; 
 
identification of value chain stakeholders and an assessment of their performance 
  assessment of support service organizations – financial institutions and banks as well as non-
financial services  
 
identification of opportunities to enhance business to business coordination, respond to 
farmer needs, and add value by better managing the process 
  organisational audits and the screening of POs proposing business ideas for selecting POs 
complying with eligibility criteria, before embarking on a full scale business plan preparation;  
  establishment of economic partnerships with large buyers/input suppliers that could become 
major of supply/output for POs benefiting from investment support;  
  organisation of partnership meetings and dialogue platforms.  
90.  The  studies  will  map  existing  actors,  identify  market  opportunities  and  help  define  support  for 
production,  storage  and  marketing  that  should  be  prioritised  at  (private)  PO  level  as  well  as 
(public)  market  access  investments.  The  studies  will  also  assess  whether  large  agribusiness 
companies  might  consider  smart  subsidies  in  the  form  of  cost-sharing  and  contracting  farming 
arrangements.  
91.  Both  the  information/sensitization  activities  and  assessment  of  actors,  supply  and  demand  in 
targeted value chains will facilitate the identification and selection of potential beneficiary POs that 
would be likely to comply with the PO eligibility criteria (see below) and would propose sound sub-
project proposals (business plans).  
92.  Taking  into  account  the  findings  of  the  value  chain  studies,  existing  POs  and  interest  groups, 
committed  to  take  on  investments  in  improving  their  farming  business,  will  be  supported  with 
further training and technical assistance. The aim is to enable them to meet the eligibility criteria 
for investment matching grants (see below).  
Technical support 
93.  The value chain analysis and upgrading plans will be supported technically by a value chain and 
marketing  specialist  on  a  part-time  basis.  The  expert  will  be  expected  to  provide  support  to  the 
Agro-enterprise team.  
D. Post harvest and value addition  
94.  This  activity  involves  developing  the  technical  skills  of  women,  youth  and  the  most  vulnerable 
households  through  practical  training  in  post-harvest  management  and  GAP.  Training  activities 
will  include  piloting  and  demonstrating  new  post-harvest  management  (PHM)  and  value  adding 
(VA)  technologies.  Training  programmes  will  be  designed  for  district  and  ASC  technical  and 
extension staff who will be expected to organize a cascade training programme for farmers in all 6 
districts.  Some  20  training  programmes  at  field  level  will  be  organized.  Entrepreneurs  with 
successful value adding businesses will be invited as resource cum training persons. Small PHM 
investment grants will be offered to households to fund investments in new PHM or value adding 
technologies that are not commercially available or accessible 
Technical support 
95.  A Post harvest expert will be employed on a part time basis to train front line staff and facilitate 
linkages  with  other  specialist  sources  of  support  which  could  be  available  under  contract.  The 
SCR methodology will be adapted and applied.  
Implementation process 
30 
Activity 
Responsibility  
support 
to  POs 
in  organizational 
Training of project staff in value chain analysis 
Value  chain  analyses  conducted  with  support  from 
contractors  
Training of project staff in business management  
Training  of  service  providers 
in  organizational 
management, and business skills development (FBS)  
Establishment of FBS and training roll-out 
Mentoring 
management, business skills development (FBS) 
Mapping of youth incubators 
Identification of apprentices 
Advanced business management training of youth 
Mentoring support to Incubators and apprentices 
Training  of  agro-enterprise  promoters  and  service 
providers  in  post-harvest  management  and  value 
addition 
Identification  of  specialised  trainers  in  value  adding 
technologies 
Beneficiary  training  using  the  SCR  methodology  for 
roll out of post-harvest and value adding enterprises 
VC specialist + Agro-enterprise specialist 
VC specialist 
Agro-enterprise & FBS specialists  
FBS specialist 
Agro-enterprise development specialist 
FBS team 
FBS team 
Agro-enterprise team/ contract 
Agro-enterprise team 
Agro-enterprise team 
Agro-enterprise team 
Post-harvest/ VA specialist 
Agro-enterprise promoters 
Agro-enterprise promoters 
D. National policy engagement  
96.  Policy engagement will also be encouraged on the issues of youth employment in agriculture and 
micro-insurance. As  part  of  the  integrated  approach  to  smallholder  agribusiness  and  resilience 
development,  micro-insurance  can  build  resilience  against  risks.  The  IFAD  hosted  Platform  for 
Agricultural Risk Management (PARM), which embeds the Weather Risk Management Facility will 
provide  insurance  sector  training  and  TA  together  with  other  development  organizations  in  Sri 
Lanka  (FAO,  GIZ  and  Desjardins)  to  test  innovative  crop  insurance  schemes.  SARP  will  try  to 
combine insurance with other tools and services, create public-private partnerships between the 
GOSL,  financial  sector  and  agribusinesses,  and  include  micro-insurance  approaches  in  national 
strategies  to  support  an  enabling  environment  for  insurance  programme  designs  and  sharing 
lessons for scaling-up. 
31 
Component 2: Investments for Climate Resilience and Inclusive Value Chains    
Sub-component 2.1 Investments for climate resilient production and infrastructure 
A. Cascade water resource infrastructure development  
97.  Cascade  water  resource  development  attempts  to  build  climate  resilience  in  the  agriculture 
production systems through a series of activities aimed at harnessing flood water to address dry 
spells  and  drought  whilst  increasing  crop  yields  during  the  periods  of  climatic  stress.  It  is 
necessary  to  build  supportive  irrigation  infrastructure  to  promote  more  efficient  use  of  surface 
water for agriculture, complemented with more sustainable use of groundwater, for improving both 
the  availability  and  quality  of  water  at  farm  level.  Increased  water  will  result  in  improved  yields 
providing buffers against climate variability. 
98.  IFAD resources and government co-financing will be used to support the design and upgrading of 
the Village Irrigation Systems (VIS) and incorporate elements needed to enhance the resilience of 
these systems to climate change risks and impacts. About 260 village irrigation systems, including 
the  upstream  catchments,  will  be  upgraded  based  on  the  cascade  level  natural  resource 
development  plans.  The  interventions  to  upgrade  the  irrigation  systems  include:  (a)  the 
restoration,  rehabilitation,  modernization,  repair  and  operation  and  maintenance  (O&M)  of 
cascade  tanks  and  individual  villages  tanks,  catchment  clearance  and  de-silting  of  supply 
channels of tanks, lining of water distribution channels in the tank commands and construction of 
recharge wells in tank beds; (b) drainage and flood control systems and agro-wells at the end of 
field and distribution canals; and (c) small water impounding structures in the upper catchment of  
the tanks to provide supplementary  irrigation for rain-fed crops. These upgrades will  incorporate 
climate risks and combine traditional and new design elements and practices including partial de-
silting  to  deepen  reservoirs  close  to  the  bund  and  retain  more  water  during  dry  seasons, 
intensified reforestation of the catchment with multi-purpose trees, creating ponds and diversions 
for run-off capture in the catchment.  
99.  Preliminary  studies  will  be  supported  by  IWMI  to  provide  the  rationale  for  the  selection  of  sub-
basins and tanks for rehabilitation, to maximize the returns on the investments. The process for 
prioritization  of  tanks  for  selection  will  consist  of  three  steps.  1)  Assessment  of  the  water 
availability  in  the  sub-catchments  or  the  tanks,  which  is  the  most  important  basic  criteria;  2) 
Validate  if  the  available  water  quantity  is  sufficient  to  meet  the  existing  demands  from  different 
sectors (irrigation, drinking, environment, etc.); and 3) Detailed hydrological and water allocation 
modelling  of  the  sub-basins  under  scrutiny.  These  preliminary  studies  were  elaborated  in 
subcomponent 1.1.  
100. Following  these  studies  the  process  of  preparation  of  natural  resource  management  plans  for 
each sub-watershed will be needed. The catchment plans will be developed in the early stages of 
implementation  to  provide  a  foundation  framework  for  undertaking  project  activities  in  the  field. 
The  catchment  plans  will  be  prepared  using  a  combination  of  science  based  information  and 
Indigenous  Technical  Knowledge,  as  described  in  sub-component  1.1.  The  objectives  of  this 
component  are  to  facilitate  (a)  planning  for  water  and  land  infrastructure  necessary  to  support 
climate-resilient  irrigated  agriculture,  (b)  construction  of  the  planned  infrastructure  and  (c)  co-
management  of  this  infrastructure  by  the  district  level  technical  staff  and  local  communities  to 
ensure adequate water storage and delivery.  
101. Upstream  interventions  to  redress  land  degradation  will  include  undertaking  soil  conservation 
measures i.e. bunds and contour drains and agroforestry measures to prevent erosion. The main 
elements of erosion control is the presence of a good vegetation cover that reduces water splash 
and maximizes water infiltration, thereby reducing surface water volume and the velocity of runoff. 
Only  when  runoff  is  excessive  and  destructive  soil  and  water  conservation  measures  will  be 
needed. Soil conservation and runoff control measures are lacking in many of the cascade areas 
and  will  be  required  to  ensure  that  full  replenishment  of  the  aquifers  will  occur.  Soil  and  water 
conservation  measures  will  be  identified  through  the  preparation  of  the  community  level  natural 
resources management plans. Some of the good practices of community-based natural resources 
management  and  climate  change  adaptation  will  be  introduced  at  both  micro-catchment  and 
32 
household level. Attention will be given to the design and implementation of low cost physical and 
biological  soil  and  water  conservation  measures  on  communal  and  cultivated  land.  These 
measures could include contour stone bunds, multi-purpose vegetative bunds, micro basins and 
trenches,  and  agroforestry.  Catchment  organization  will  be  set  up  and  supported  to  ensure 
sustainability  and  to  avoid  possible  conflicts.  Cash  for  Assets  will  be  used  to  engage  the  most 
vulnerable  households  related  to  water  tank  renovation  and  maintenance  drawing  on  the 
experience of WFP20.  
102. 
Selection of measures:  
103.  Interventions  will  be 
through 
identified 
the  participatory  catchment/  natural  resource 
management  planning.  Grants  of  up  to  $10,000  per  cascade  would  be  offered  to  support  soil 
and  water  conservation  and  forestry  activities.    The  plans  developed  by  the  community/ies 
should provide sufficient options, which can be costed and considered for incremental funding. 
This means in practice that communities can be supported in both cash and kind.  Selection of 
land management measures will stem from the survey work conducted at watershed level and 
the  local  community  natural  resource  management  planning  process  described  above.  The 
community led natural resource management methodologyas laid out in section 1.1 will include 
the  following  steps:  a)  meeting  the  community  and  organising  a  planning  team;  b)  identifying 
micro-watersheds;  c)  conducting  biophysical  and  socio-economic  surveys;  d)  identifying  and 
prioritizing  interventions;  e)  approval  of  interventions  by  the  community;  and  f)  preparing  the 
plans for implementation (mapping, input requirements, action plan). 
104. 
Cash for assets 
105. WFP has been involved in a Cash for Assets programme under their KOICA project. The Cash 
for Assets intervention cannot be regarded as an employment programme but rather set up to 
provide vulnerable able-bodied people with a cash transfer to cover assessed food consumption 
gap faced by them. The cash for work activity neither provides employment or a salary/transfer 
for other needs, but the assets created are expected to create or enhance self-employment by 
being  combined  with  small  enterprises.  This  graduation  process  will  be  encouraged  through 
SARP.   
106.  The  cash  for  assets  activity  will  need  to  establish  work  norms  for  cash  transfer  payments. 
Although some work norms have been set for reservoir rehabilitation/ improvements and some 
downstream  activities  more  needs  to  be  done  for  the  upstream  catchment  areas.  A 
compendium  of  work  norms  and  technical  standards  will  need  to  be  developed  locally. Work 
norms should be set to cover the number of units to be constructed/ rehabilitated/ maintained 
per day or week, the expected number of working hours each day and the number of working 
days per week. The work norms will be needed to organize the work on site, help to monitor 
progress and help to raise participants’ productivity in line with technical standards taking into 
account the local context. They will be needed to provide the basis for the provision of cash-
based transfers to targeted beneficiaries. 
107.  The work norms could vary slightly depending on the type of soils and climate. In setting the 
work  norms  consideration  needs  to  be  made  of  the  work  time  that  participants  may  have 
available. This needs to be taken into account when establishing the productivity work-norms, 
the timing of interventions during the day, and the transfer value per day. Work norms should 
further  be  established  through  a  gender  and  nutrition  lens.  WFP,  ILO,  IFAD  and  other 
organizations have produced guidelines for work norms that can be used as reference21.  
20 Owing to the tight time line for rehabilitation of the tanks – over the dry period – the manual cash for work activities 
will be complemented by mechanized operations.  
21 The following sources could be used to benchmark and set work norms: 
Introduction to labour-based approaches and labour-based work for the Food for Assets and Sustainable Employment 
project.269  
http://docustore.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/other/wfp042701.pdf 
Report on the establishment of Work Norms in Ethiopia.270  
http://docustore.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/manual_guide_proced/wfp238161.pdf 
Community-based Participatory Watershed Development Guidelines in Ethiopia.271  
http://docustore.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/manual_guide_proced/wfp239381.pdf 
33 
Technical Assistance 
108. 
A  critical  activity  will  be  to  enhance  local  capacities  and  put  in  place  the  coordination 
necessary  to  plan,  manage  and  maintain  the  systems  for  improved  climate-resilience  of 
agricultural  production  in  the  future.  As  such  technical  assistance  in  the  form  of  a  Civil 
Engineer  -  water  (1  full  time),  Water  Resource  Engineers  (2  full  time),  Natural  Resource 
Management expert (1 full time) and Natural Resource Management officers (4 full time) will 
be  deployed  to  support  the  planning,  construction,  maintenance  and  management  of  the 
measures. The Civil Engineer supported by Water Resources team will be responsible for 
contract  preparation  and  implementation  of  water  resource  surveys  and  feasibility  studies 
for irrigation works. 
B. Household water harvesting, irrigation and soil conservation 
109. 
110. 
111. 
that 
incorporate 
This activity covers the rehabilitation of minor irrigation schemes. Small scale irrigation will 
be  extended  through  low-cost  technologies  that  are  easy  to  operate  and  maintain. 
Household  level  measures  will  include  creating  small  ponds  in  home  gardens  to  capture 
intense rainfall as well as low-cost drip irrigation technologies. These and other small scale 
irrigation/  water  harvesting  structures  will  be  developed  to  increase  water  quality  and 
availability  for  multi-purpose  use.  Larger  schemes  will  be  funded  based  on  investment 
feasibility  studies,  detailed  design,  and  environment 
proposals 
management plans. No infrastructure investments will be made before the local authorities 
confirm the beneficiaries’ land and water user rights. The site- or scheme-specific ESMP (to 
be  prepared  after  the  site/design  details  are  known)  need  to  consider  the  interests  of 
downstream water users as well as environmental flow requirements. Criteria for selecting 
targeted 
schemes  will 
commodities);  (ii)  hydrology  (existence  of  sufficient,  good  quality  water);  (ii)  agronomy 
(potential for high production/productivity, existing agronomic practices and farming system, 
etc.);  (iv)  topography  (use  of  irrigation  by  sprinkler  or  drip,  potential  area  covered  due  to 
optimum alignment of canals, use of cost effective technology, etc.); (v) land tenure system 
(existing  of  a  certificate  of  property);  (vi)  socio  cultural  environment  (existing  irrigation 
practices, good level of adoption of irrigation, potential for farmers’ mobilisation, etc.); and 
(vii) accessibility to the scheme (connection to markets). 
include:  (i)  existing  markets 
to  absorb  production  of 
the 
Low cost drip irrigation systems and water harvesting measures at household level will be 
appraised following the preparation of a sub-project/ micro project proposal. The appraisal 
should 
financial  profitability  and 
technical 
environmental soundness.  
include  an  assessment  of 
feasibility, 
WUGs  will  be  set  up  or  existing  groups  strengthened  to  ensure  sustainability  in 
management  and  to  avoid  potential  conflicts.  New  groups  to  be  established  will  follow  a 
‘bottom up’ consultative process in order to ensure effective management and sustainability. 
Each group will be expected to draw up a constitution with rules and regulations that clarify 
the roles and responsibilities of the group organization and their members. Key functions of 
the WUG will include: 
  Monitoring water availability and use; 
  Operating and maintaining a water service or structure (such as  a  well, small dam, or 
largr irrigation system); 
  Managing the water distribution system, including setting tariffs and collecting fees; 
  Resolving conflicts related to water use and manage penalties. 
WFP-FAO-EU, 2010. Technical report on work norms for FFW and FFT (Guatemala).272  
http://docustore.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/manual_guide_proced/wfp238004.pdf   
34 
  Respecting the collective-choice where all members should have the opportunity to play 
a  role  in  changing  the  rules.  All  those  directly  involved  should  be  able  to  voice  their 
opinions and vote.  
C. Household resilience and nutrition:  
112.  Supporting  activities  at  household  level  will  include  the  development  of  multi-purpose  home 
gardens,  nurseries,  aquaculture  and  small  scale  livestock  development  (goats  and  dairy  cows) 
and miscellaneous income generating activities. The objective of small livestock development is 
to build new livestock assets as a means to secure the livelihood of women and other vulnerable 
persons. Individuals in farm households and groups will be eligible for assistance from SARP to 
develop and diversify their livelihoods through a number of options that have been proven to be 
successful  in  the  region.  These  include  backyard  poultry,  semi  intensive  small  scale  dairy 
farming  and  semi-intensive  goat  production  as  a  general  strategy  as  well  as  aquaculture  in 
specific locations where suitable.  For the more vulnerable households with restricted access to 
land, or limited opportunities to support themselves, the basic package will provide an essential 
safety net and a graduation from the Cash for Assets activities.  
113.  Small  stock  are  found  around  the  farm  homesteads  for  the  dual  purpose  of  providing  animal 
protein  and  easy  liquidation  to  access  cash  for  household  needs.  The  packages  will  utilize  the 
genetic  potential  of  local  breeds  upgrading  them  through  minor  improvements  in  feeding.  In 
some situations,  the very  vulnerable households  will  be introduced  to the small  species for the 
first time so the programme will be accompanied by a support package that includes training for 
beneficiaries in livestock management.22  
114. Consideration will also be given to supporting 2,450 home gardens and 120 nutritive rich home 
gardens. The latter will be implemented in collaboration with WFP. Households that will receive 
commercial  home  gardening  support  will  simultaneously  receive  technical  support  to  produce 
nutrition  dense  products  for  home  consumption.  The  nutritional-dense  products  have  the 
potential  to  improve  diet  quality  on  two  fronts,  directly  by  increasing  home  consumption  of  the 
high-nutritional value products and indirectly through increased income from commercial-related 
activities.  In  this  way  the  activity  will  enhance  their  purchasing  power  for  a  higher  quality  diet 
whilst  addressing  other  underlying  causes  of  malnutrition.  In  those  districts  where  WFP  is 
operating, some of the home garden activities  will be integrated in the GoSL run Home-Grown 
School Feeding programme, which is a collaborative endeavour between WFP and the Ministry 
of Agriculture, Ministry of Health and Ministry of Education. The programme’s objective is to link 
the existing national school meals programme to smallholder farmers.23 These activities will be 
complemented by the Behaviour Change Communication (BCC) activities referred to under sub-
component 1.1 
115.  In  all  cases  the  IGA  packages  and  support  for  off-farm  activities  should  not  exceed  a  financial 
ceiling  of  US$1,100  per  household.  Recipient  households,  however,  may  decide  to  come 
together  as  a  group  for  ease  of  implementation.  For  goat  rearing  and  fattening  schemes  the 
livestock  recipients  may  be  organised  into  small  groups  of  5-15  households  in  order  to 
participate in a pass-on scheme which will strengthen social bonds between member households 
with peer pressures used to ensure that Project rules are followed.24 
116.  Selection of activities will be demand driven drawn from the menu of options as described above 
and  presented  during  the  community  planning  process.  Communities  will  be  informed,  through 
22 Local breeds will be distributed through the programme as they are better adapted to local conditions, 
traditional management practices and feed availability and are likely to be more resistant to local 
diseases. They are also be the breeds that the beneficiaries are familiar with. 
23 WFP is starting this activity in 2 districts - Moneragala and Anuradhapura which could be scaled up under SARP 
implementation.  
24 Criteria for selection of households for the pass-on scheme are: a) willingness and interest to participate 
in the activity; b) experience and skills in keeping livestock; c) size and make-up of the household; d) 
access to adequate feed and water for the animals; e) agreement to keep the livestock until full repayment 
is made; f) agreement to report any sickness or death to Animal Health Workers; and g) agreement to 
keep records for health control.   
35 
awareness  creation  campaigns,  about  the  menu  of  options  and  the  associated  terms  of 
partnership for each activity.  By  offering households  the choice of technical packages, they  will 
be  able  to  select  an  activity  that  matches  their  skills,  resources  and  market  demands.  Local 
leadership and community members will be instrumental in selecting the beneficiary households, 
ensuring  effective  participation  and  transparency.  Funds  have  been  set  aside  to  sub-contract 
local NGOs to oversee implementation of the livestock based activities. The livestock packages 
will target 3,700 households25. 
117.  Examples  of  the  menu  of  income  generating  options  –  based  on  the  experience  of WFP  and 
UNDP  are  summarised  below. These  activities  together  with  others  will  form  the  basis  for  the 
project policy on grants and loans and inputs into the development of specific technical Terms of 
Partnership  for  each  activity  which  should  be  developed  prior  to  the  start  of  the  community 
planning process.  
Semi-intensive poultry production:  
Inputs: Each household will receive 40 1 ½ month old BYP chicks and 2 feed and watering units, 2 
bags of feed for the chicks and necessary vitamins and medicines for the initial stages of growth. The 
poultry  package  will be  provided  as a  grant. The other livestock packages will be offered as a loan/ 
multiplier system with repayment in cash or kind. 
Selection criteria 
  Should be an existing poultry farmer 
  Women headed household is preferred. 
  Availability of adequate place. 
  Acceptability to extend the number of birds by self-hatching. 
  Large family size (minimum 4 members). 
  Monthly income should be less than district poverty line. 
  Should be ensured the environmental protection / not to the daily labour families. 
  Availability of veterinary supporting facility. 
  Availability of marketing facility. 
  Committed to continue improved management practices. 
  Recommended by DAPH. 
Steps in implementation: 
  Awareness creation on commercial level BYP farming chick & quail farming and benefits among 
the potential HHs. 
  Select beneficiaries according to defined selection criteria. 
  Collect baseline information required to measure the outcome of the intervention. 
  Prepare basic business plan for the commercial level backyard poultry business. 
  Organize and conduct trainings and workshops. 
  Assist the construction of shed. 
  Provision of chicks, basic utensils, feed for few weeks (until changes occur in the feeding habit 
from formulated feed to scavenging), basic medicines and vitamins, etc.). 
  Assist to establish systematic hatching plan & flock management schedule. 
  Technical assistance packing and marketing of eggs. 
  Technical support and guidance for minimum 1-year period for smooth exit and sustainability 
Semi-intensive dairy:   
25The backyard poultry and goat/ sheep packages consist of a 70% grant with a household contribution of 
cash, feed, water and fencing/ housing 
36 
Inputs: The inputs include 4-cow cattle with automated drinking water facility, milking machines and 
grass  choppers.  Each  households  will  be  provided  with  rooted  pasture  cutting,  and  milking  utensils, 
hormones for the livestock, AI, vaccines and minerals.  
Selection criteria: 
  Should be an existing dairy farmer or new farmer with experiences. 
  Small scale dairy farmers reacting semi intensive management up to certain level. 
  Number of existing herds per farmer should not exceed 4 cross breed high yielding cows or local 
cows. 
  Availability of reliable water source. 
  Committed to establish 40 perches (¼ Ac) improved pasture/ fodder Unit. 
  Acceptability to conduct the artificial insemination & synchronization. 
  Availability of milk marketing facility. 
  Priority to youth/women. 
  Committed to construct some four-cow cattle sheds. 
  Committed to continue semi – intensive management practices. 
  Recommended by DAPH. 
Implementation process:  
  Awareness creation on small scale semi intensive dairy farming and benefits among the potential 
HHs. 
  Select beneficiaries according to defined selection criteria. 
  Collect baseline information required to measure the outcome of the intervention. 
  Prepare basic business plan for the successful sustainable semi intensive goat rearing. 
  Organize and conduct trainings and workshops. 
  Assist the construction of shed. 
  Provision of milking utensils, milking machines, grass chopping machines, minerals and vitamins, 
etc.). 
  Facilitate Department of Animal Production and Health (DAPH) to carry out the synchronization of 
cattle & artificial insemination in the newly established dairy farm Unit of the selected households. 
  Motivate & facilitate to establish fodder crops & azolla units (selected farmers). 
  Technical  support  and  guidance  guide  the  beneficiaries  to  follow  improved  dairy  management 
practices for minimum 1-year period. 
Semi-intensive goat production: 
Inputs:  Interventions  in  goat  production  will  target  all  households  but  with  a  particular  focus  on 
women,  women  headed  households  and  the  most  vulnerable. The  selected  households  will  receive 
assistance  to  construct  elevated  goat  sheds  and  will  receive  a  package  of  improved  (Jamunapari) 
cross  stud  goats.  They  will  also  be  offered  medicines  -  deworming  &  vaccination  (for  first  round 
practices) and a mineral block. 
Selection criteria: 
  Should be an existing goat farmer or new farmer with experiences. 
  Practicing semi intensive management in a small way. 
  Number of existing herd per farmer should not exceed 10 local goats. 
  Availability of reliable water source. 
  Committed to establish improved pasture/fodder Unit. 
  Priority to youths/women. 
  Committed to construct an elevated goat shed and live fence around. 
  Committed to continue semi – intensive management practices. 
  Recommended by DAPH. 
37 
Steps in implementation: 
•  Awareness creation on small scale semi intensive goat rearing and benefits among the potential 
HHs. 
•  Select beneficiaries according to defined selection criteria. 
•  Collect baseline information required to measure the outcome of the intervention. 
•  Prepare basic business plan for the sustainable semi intensive goat rearing. 
•  Organizing and conduct trainings and workshops. 
•  Assist construction of elevated goat shed for selected farmers with their labour contribution. 
•  Motivate & facilitate to establish fodder crops & azolla units (Selected Farmers). 
•  Provision cross bread stud goat (for selected well preforming, needy HH), basic medicines, 
minerals and vitamins, etc). 
•  Technical support and guidance for minimum 1-year period to follow improved goat management 
practices. 
Micro/small scale agro-enterprises - Mushroom cultivation 
Inputs: 
  Assistances to construct 60 “Fruiting rooms/shed” (12’ x 11’). 
  Basic equipment & utensils (sterilization barrel, saw dust stove, wheelbarrow, weighing 
  balance, thermometer, moisture meter, etc. 
  18,000 nylon rope (300m per HH). 
  Potting materials (200 gage poli propylene bags (7” x 14”, saw dust, rice bran, Calcium 
  Carbonate, soya flour, Magnesium Sulphate, etc.). 
  Mushroom seeds and cotton. 
  Label and polythene for packaging. 
  Growth media potting machines to the societies. 
Selection criteria: 
  Existing women farmers (doing in cottage level)/ women farmers with little knowledge about 
  mushroom cultivation. 
  Priority will be given to women headed/differently abled people/youths. 
  Working as formal/informal production groups/ready to work as a producer group. 
  Availability of adequate place to build the fruiting shed. 
  Monthly income should be less than district poverty line. 
  Availability of technical/supporting facility. 
  Availability of marketing facility. 
  Committed to follow the novel practices 
  Committed to continue cultivation. 
  Recommended by DoA. 
Steps of implementation: 
•  Awareness creation on mushroom cultivation and benefits among the potential HHs. 
•  Select beneficiaries according to defined selection criteria. 
•  Collect baseline information required to measure the outcome of the intervention. 
•  Prepare basic business plan for the mushroom cultivation. 
•  Organize and conduct trainings and workshops. 
•  Assist the construction of shed and other structures. 
38 
  Provision of basic equipment & utensils (sterilization barrel, saw dust stove, wheelbarrow, 
weighing balance, thermometer, moisture meter, etc.), nylon rope, 200 gage poli propylene bags 
(7” x 14”), etc. 
•  Assist to establish systematic production plan. 
•  Assistance / linkages with market. 
  Technical support and guidance for minimum 1-year period for productivity improvement, smooth 
exit and sustainability. 
D. Climate resilient farming practices   
118.  Climate  resilient  agricultural  production  will  be  introduced  as  part  of  the  cropping  system  to 
increase the cropping intensity of the farming system. In-kind grants for seed and tools will be 
given  to  smallholder  farmers  combined  with  fertiliser  through  the  government  subsidy 
programme  supplemented  by  agricultural  extension  support.  The 
intervention  will  be 
accompanied  by 
to  ensure  sustainability  of  activities 
the  capacity  building  efforts 
(Subcomponent 1.2). Approximately 30,000 farm households will be targeted for this activity. 
119.  Technical assistance 
120.  A  Rice  Specialist  will  be  recruited  on  a  short  term  basis  to  disseminate  climate  smart 
technologies through demonstrations and the training of technical staff and front line extension 
workers. The Rice Specialist will work under the guidance of the Agriculture Specialist. 
Sub-component 2.2 Investment for inclusive value chain development   
A. Feeder road rehabilitation and maintenance:  
121. Connectivity  to  local  markets  through  feeder  road  rehabilitation,  storage  facilities  and  other 
market infrastructure is an essential prerequisite for market access. Investments will be made to 
improve the condition of existing feeder roads in the vicinity of the catchment areas to access off-
farm  water  infrastructure  and  agricultural  markets  .Access  road  rehabilitation  will  upgrade 
existing access tracks and pathways in the vicinity of the water tanks and will not exceed 10 km 
in  length  for  any  single  track.  Road  infrastructure  investments  will  not  involve  farm  land 
expropriation  and  clearing.  The  activity  will  improve  the  condition  of  selected  feeder  roads 
through rehabilitation, connecting production areas to market outlets. It will also construct critical 
new roads, bridges and culverts as necessary. 
122. Community  managed  maintenance  groups  will  be  formed  and  local  road  maintenance  plans 
prepared.  Roads  will  include  the  construction  of  access  pathways  and  the  setup  of  road 
maintenance mechanisms employing the most vulnerable households in temporary employment. 
The  design  will  adopt  innovative  climate  smart  solutions  and  also  promote  good  environmental 
management.  
123. The road infrastructure development will be informed by climate hazards. The design will adopt 
climate smart solutions while promoting good environmental management. The interventions will 
comply with the Environmental Management Act (EMA), the Guidelines for Environmental Impact 
Assessment  and  the  IFAD’s  SECAP  requirements.  All  asset  constructions  will  be  in  line  with 
existing national building standards which will be integrated as needed to inform the design and 
construction. The interventions will be compliant with all national technical standards, particularly 
those  relating  to  concrete  adaptation  measures  for  market  structures  as  well  as  integrated 
watershed management.  
124. Rehabilitation  works.  The  project  will  target  access  roads  located  in  the  catchment  areas  for 
rehabilitation for sustained physical connection to markets. A total of 600 km of access roads will 
be constructed/ rehabilitated as per the following process. 
125. Identification,  selection  and  prioritisation.  Roads  to  be  developed  connecting  tanks  within 
39 
cascades and cascades to major road arteries with access to markets. The identified roads will 
be screened through selection criteria including; i) technical (number and types of crossings and 
drainage  structures  to  be  constructed,  complexity  of  works,  remoteness/quality  of  borrow  pits 
and other materials, availability of qualified contractors, etc.), ii) economic (estimated value chain 
targeted,  other  existing  potentials  to  value,  other  project’  activities  to  be  covered,  etc.);  iii) 
joint-financing 
financial  (estimated  cost  of  rehabilitation,  availability  of 
mechanism, etc.); iv) social (potential for mobilising local labour for rehabilitation and formation 
of community led road maintenance groups, existence and quality of labour, etc.); v) climate and 
environmental  aspects  (seriousness  of  damages  to  the  environment,  exiting  remediation 
measures  and  their  possible  implementation,  technological  options  to  address  climate  threats, 
etc.).  All  these  criteria  will  be  scored  for  each  road,  and  prioritisation  of  the  selected  ones  will 
guide sequential order during further steps of implementation process. Following an inventory of 
the  existing  network  of  rural  agricultural  roads  in  target  areas,  a  rural  agricultural  road 
improvement programme will be developed with the coordination of DAD and GA. A community-
based road maintenance strategy will be developed and related road maintenance associations 
strengthened/formed at community level.  
funds,  possible 
126. Survey  and Design  to be done  by competitively recruited private consultancy firms. Design  will 
include  Environmental  Social  Impact  Assessment  (ESIA)  and  technical  surveys  (hydrology, 
topography,  etc.)  resulting  in  the  production  of  good  quality  BoQs  (including  line  diagrams, 
drawings, etc.) in coordination with DAD. Quarries for good quality and quantity material will also 
be identified prior to start of works. Such firms (of various sizes) would need to be registered and 
certified. Customised technical specifications for District Gravelled Roads in Sri Lanka will serve 
as  reference  to  rehabilitate  targeted  roads.  These  include:  (i)  cross-sectional  width  of  5  m;  (ii) 
thickness of gravel pavement layer (150 mm); (iii) provision of side and mitre drains; (iv) camber 
of  5-10%;  (v)  no  shoulder.  Each  targeted  road  will  be  fully  rehabilitated  (including  drainage 
structures), along its entire stretch. Technical surveys will identify climate specific hazards which 
will be mitigated through specific design measures in order to ensure that climate resilient roads 
are  provided.  Existing  standard  designs/drawings  for  structures  will  be  customised  to 
requirements of local milieu for sustainability. Various technological options to be considered to 
reduce damages resulting from effects of water on roads (extreme climatic events due to climate 
change). 
127. Procurement. Selection of contractors will need to ensure good quality and timeliness of works. 
Criteria for their selection  would  include: (i)  past  experience on road  infrastructure construction 
(at least five years); (ii) number of similar rehabilitation works implemented (at least five); and (iii) 
ownership  of  construction  equipment  (grader,  wheel  loader,  tank  truck,  compactor,  etc.).  The 
project will plan the procurement process and contract award to allow execution of works during 
dry seasons. Each contractor to be assigned not more than six months to complete works, based 
on the scope of works. 
128. Rehabilitation works. Road works will be executed by competitively recruited private contractors 
or  PO  through  equipment-based  approach  with  consultation  with  DAD.  Few  labour-based 
operations  to  carry  out  include:  i)  excavation  (culverts,  side/mitre  drains,  bridges,  etc.);  ii) 
provision  of  materials  (transportation/loading  of  aggregates,  water,  sand,  cement);  iii)  gravel 
spreading  along  road,  etc.  Execution  of  these  to  follow  technical  specifications  of  BoQs  and 
allocation of lots. Before works start, sensitisation of communities along each road will be carried 
out (led by the Project) to ensure their effective participation. Local community participation will 
include  provision  of  local  material  and  unskilled  labour  to  be  paid  by  contractors.  Such 
involvement  will  contribute  to  build  their  capacity  for  further  maintenance  of  the  constructed/ 
rehabilitated  roads.  Works  will  consist  of  both  earthworks  (including  drains)  and  structures. 
Before works start, an updated timeline of activities will be developed as a monitoring tool. 
129. Supervision and follow up. The consultancy firm that will design the roads will be responsible for 
supervising on-going works and will be accountable to the Project Engineer in consultation with 
DAD technical staff. A supervision framework will need to be set up to ensure quality in the work 
conducted.  This  will  include  stationed  supervisors  on  each  (or  group  of)  roads,  depending  on 
their geographic locations. They will ensure that works are in line with technical specifications of 
BoQs  and  timeframes.  This  will  ease  timely  decision  making  process  of  any  possible 
improvement  during  works.  Both  Project  and  District  Engineers  will  undertake  regular  (weekly) 
field  visits and take part to site meetings useful to  assess work progress against timelines and 
40 
BoQs. Each follow  up mission  will be clearly  documented,  highlighting recommendations made 
to improve works.  
130. Defect  liability  periods  and  hand-over. A  defect  liability  period  of  one  year  will  be  observed  for 
each  rehabilitated  road,  during  which  all  works  will  be  guaranteed,  under  the  responsibility  of 
contractors.  After  that  period,  each  road  will  be  officially  handed  over  (written  document)  to 
respective District offices for further management. 
131. Mapping and Impact assessment. All roads will be mapped comprehensively, to include not only 
socio-economic information (population, social centres, etc.) but also technical characteristics of 
existing structures (location, dimensions, cost, etc.). This will be done at ASC and District levels. 
It is expected that investments in road rehabilitation will result in positive impacts in the lives and 
environment of beneficiaries. Analysing most aspects linked to the rehabilitation of roads will be 
useful.  Socio  economic  information  resulting  from  the  involvement  of  communities  (unskilled 
labour or aggregates sellers) will be collected for further impact analysis of these activities. 
132. Road  maintenance  works.  The  Project  will  maintain  all  rehabilitated  roads:  annually  routine 
maintenance will be planned and periodic maintenance (every three  years). For ownership and 
sustainability  purposes,  the  GOSL  will  share  responsibilities  in  financing  road  maintenance 
works, on a cost-shared basis: i) for routine maintenance, it will be incremental (totally supported 
by SARP in PY1, funds will be reduced by 25% each year to end up being entirely endorsed by 
the GOSL in PY6); ii) periodic maintenance works will be funded on a 70% - 30% basis (70% for 
SARP and 30% for the GOSL). Maintenance works to be carried out during a period of the year 
that  corresponds  (as  compromise  between)  to  the  end  of  the  rainy  season  and  the  start  of 
harvesting period. While routine maintenance activities will be aligned to the mechanism existing 
in  the  country,  periodic  ones  will  be  implemented  as  per  the  procurement  process  described 
above for rehabilitation works. BoQs for periodic maintenance works to be developed by Project 
Engineer.  Contractors  will  be  hired  on  a  competitive  basis  to  carry  out  works  according  to 
specifications of BoQs.  
133. On  each  constructed/  rehabilitated  road,  groups  will  be  formed  and  capacitated  through:  (i) 
training  in  administrative/technical  skills  and  (ii)  equipped  with  light  tools  (cutlasses,  diggers, 
shovels,  wheelbarrows,  spades,  mason  Head  Pans,  whippers,  steel  tampers,  etc.).  Based  on 
national  standards,  each  group  will  include  10  members  with  each  member  maintaining  one 
kilometre of road.  
B. Agrarian Service Centres and Agrarian Banks 
134. The Agrarian Service Centres have been set up to serve clusters of villages. SARP will support 
the priority of DAD to transform the ASCs into ‘one-stop-shops’ for the provision of advisory and 
support services. ASCs in each target area will be capacitated to deliver integrated planning and 
implementation  support  to  the  cascade  systems.  While  the  ASCs  were  designed  to  provide 
various services required by the farmers in a coordinated manner, the weaknesses in the ASCs 
include  a  lack  of  trained  advisors,  shortage  of  funding,  lack  of  modern  equipment  (computers 
and  GIS  software)  inhibit  the  effective  and  efficient  provision  of  support  services  to  farmers. 
SARP  will  develop  the  capacity  of  30  Agrarian  Service  Centres,  located  in  proximity  to  the 
selected  cascades,  to  serve  as  local  knowledge,  coordination,  and  communication  hubs  for 
planning,  design,  and  implementation  of  project  interventions.  Investments  will  be  made  in 
awareness  building,  knowledge  generation,  learning  and  exchange.  This  will  include  providing 
essential  IT  software  and  mobile  phone  applications  to  support  local  level  data  gathering  and 
dissemination.  In  conjunction  with  government  co-financing,  this  activity  will  also  develop 
capabilities (training and equipment) of ASCs to undertake scientific crop selection with farmers 
and  Department  of  Agriculture  through  soil  testing  and  input  management.  It  will  implement 
improved  soil  testing  facilities  to  support  farmers  to  rationally  select  crops,  inputs  and  climate-
smart practices according to soil conditions.  
135. SARP  will  also  work  to  strengthen  the  technical  and  financial  capacity  of  20  selected Agrarian 
Banks  at  the  level  of  village  clusters  in  the  six  project  districts.  It  is  expected  that  those  banks 
that  meet  a  minimum  performance  criteria,  will  receive  additional  liquidity  by  the  Agrarian 
Development  Division  of  the  MoA  to  strengthen  their  capital  basis  and  expand  their  lending 
portfolio. On the basis of an institutional assessment (technical, operational, financial), SARP will 
41 
render  support  to  strengthen  the  delivery  capacity  of  selected Agrarian  Banks.  Qualified  local 
partner institutions, such as Institute of Bankers of Sri Lanka and Centre for Banking Studies of 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka, will be contracted to provide capacity development services based on 
the rigorous needs assessment. Staff training and technical assistance will be centered around 
risk  management,  loan  portfolio  management  and  capacity  development  in  the  management 
information system.  
136. As  lack  of  upfront  capital  may  be  a  major  drawback  for  farmers  to  adopt  climate-resilient 
practices,  appropriate  financial  channels  and  products  to  reduce  the  risks  associated  with 
climate  smart  agricultural  innovations  will  be  explored. These  may  require  micro-finance,  small 
grant  and  index-based  weather  insurance  support.    IWMI  is  in  the  position  to  provide  those 
products to smallholder farmers.  
137. SARP  will  also  work  closely  with  SAPP  by  rendering  technical  support  to  PFIs  under  the 
Consolidated  Revolving  Fund  managed  by  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka  (CBSL)  to  explore 
innovative technology applications, such as a new debit card, commonly known as "farmer card", 
service delivery through agency banking and value chain finance solutions specifically for the dry 
zone beneficiaries. 
C. Market Infrastructure and Stakeholder Platforms 
Market infrastructure 
138.  Market infrastructure  will be established  at  district and  ASC  level  in the form of construction of 
local  markets,  farmer’s  markets,  and  platforms  for  value  chain  stakeholders  to  convene. 
Investments could include collection points, storage and package facilities and local market and 
farmer market structures. SARP will construct 6 local markets and 4 farmer market centres. For 
their construction, prototypes of drawing and BoQs of main buildings will be developed following 
a participatory approach (involving all relevant stakeholders at ASC level), under the leadership 
of the Civil Engineer. The output resulting from this process will take into consideration lessons 
learnt  from  other  farmer  market  centres  set  up  in  the  country  examining  the  facilities  and  their 
use. For each type of facility, all requirements for a sustainable and efficient use and functioning 
of the building will be considered and translated into final designs. 
139.  Prior  to  the  development  of  new  facilities,  an  assessment  (feasibility  study)  will  need  to  be 
carried out to determine their location, their sizes, their layout, required equipment to install, etc. 
Sites  will  be  selected  based  on  key  criteria  including:  level  of  production  of  the  area  covered, 
physical  access,  existing  potential  for  storage,  existing  practices  (storage,  trading,  processing, 
etc.),  presence  of  active  and  dynamic  POs,  capacity  for  each  PO  to  raise  its  contribution, 
opportunities for trading (access to market) and the level of collective marketing activities.   
Implementation arrangements: 
140. Proposals for infrastructure sub-projects of a pure public good nature, smallholder farmer training 
and capacity building will be 90 percent funded by grants facility.  Larger Micro-projects of up to 
$100,000  for  some  of  the  market  infrastructure  investments  under  sub-component  2.2,  will  be 
screened  for  technical,  financial,  social  and  environmental  feasibility  before  final  approval.  For 
assets  like  storage  facilities  which  are  jointly  owned  and  operated  by  farmers  and  the  private 
sector,  and  where  a  proper  arrangement  is  in  place  for  joint  management,  a  20  percent 
beneficiary and 20 percent private sector contribution will be required.  
Multi-stakeholder Platforms 
141.  A network of multi stakeholder platforms (20) will be set up in selected locations as a pilot activity 
around  bulking  centres,  field  shops  and  storage  facilities  and  as  a  venue  for  farmers,  service 
providers  (public/  private  sector)  and  other  private  sector  actors  to  meet,  learn  and  negotiate 
arrangements.  Direct  linkages  will  be  strengthened  between  the  POs  and  other  groups  with 
private  sector  value  chain  stakeholders  identified  through  the  value  chain  studies.  Multi-
stakeholder  meetings  will  be  held  regularly  (at  least  2  times  per  year)  initially  facilitated  by  the 
42 
project  team  but  later  jointly  by  the  producers  and  private  sector  stakeholders  themselves. 
Commercial and non-commercial suppliers (of technical or financial services or inputs) as well as 
government agencies and other supporters would also be active participants of these meetings. 
These  platforms  will  be  set  up  at ASC  and/  or  division  and  district  levels.  In  some  cases  local 
community level platforms might be preferred depending on the demand from local stakeholders. 
At  ASC  level  the  platform  could  include  the  construction  of  aggregation  or  market  facilities. 
Besides acting as a venue for farmers to communicate with input suppliers, buyers and service 
providers the platform would be used to identify where there are opportunities to improve market 
access  and  linkages.  The  ASC  platform  meetings  should  be  composed  of  representatives  of 
Producer  Organizations,  ASC  staff  and  the  private  sector  –  input  suppliers,  produce  buyers, 
service providers etc. The ASC one-stop-shop hubs, farmer’s markets and the multi-stakeholder 
platforms should be regarded as pilot programmes.  
142. Technical support 
143. The market infrastructure works will be led by a full time Civil Engineer who will be responsible 
for  holding  discussions  with  the  districts  on  priorities  and  location  of  feeder  roads  and  market 
infrastructure as well as contracting, supervising and monitoring the work of sub-contractors. 
Activity 
Assessment of the performance of ASCs and Agrarian 
Banks 
Selection  of  target  ASCs  and  banks  in  the  target 
districts 
Capacitation of ASCs and Agrarian Banks 
Community  dialogue  to  identify  market  infrastructure 
needs and priority cluster locations 
Contract  preparation  for  design  and  planning  of  civil 
works 
Detailed  studies  conducted  to  prioritise  locations  for 
market centres 
Preparation of feasibility studies and detailed design of 
market facilities and road infrastructure 
Rehabilitation  of roads and market infrastructure 
O&M plans to manage infrastructure works 
Organization of multi-stakeholder platforms in selected 
pilot locations 
Responsibility  
Agro-enterprise/  Rural  finance/  Value  chain  
specialists & contract with outside institution  
Agro-enterprise/ Rural finance specialists 
Agro-enterprise/  Rural  finance  specialists  + 
field team 
Agro-enterprise development team 
Civil Engineer 
Contracted  to  private  sector  +  value  chain 
specialist 
Contracted to private sector 
Contracted to private sector 
Contractor + agro-enterprise team 
Agro-enterprise team 
D. Youth and women’s enterprises 
144.  An  important  focus  of  SARP  –  as  noted  previously  –  is  women  and  youth  entrepreneurship. 
Support  in  training  and  capacity  building  will  be  provided  through  sub-component  1.1  and 
reinforced through small investments for business development, sub-component 2.1. Attention 
will  be  given  to  youth  who  have  participated  in  the  Incubation  process  and  women  who  have 
identified  profitable  business  opportunities  as  reflected  in  their  buisness  plans.  The  approach 
will  be  to  develop  their  technical  and  business  skills  whilst  providing  them  with  investment 
support to develop commercial profitable enterprises.  
145.  Combinations  of  matching  grants  and  loans  will  be  offered  to  them  and  other  able  bodied 
persons  including  entrepreneurial  small  farmers  to  provide  commercial  goods  and  services 
(input supplies, mechanization, spraying, transportation etc.) to farm households. The selection 
of  viable  business  ventures  will  be  guided  by  the  findings  of  the  value  chain  studies  and 
identified  opportunities  for  linking  small  farmers’  POs  to  economic  partners  locally  as  well  as 
larger  scale  input  dealers,  traders,  exporters,  retailers,  and  processors.  Vegetables,  fruits  and 
small livestock – as identified from the value chain appraisal – will provide small-scale farmers 
with  attractive  options  for  diversifying  their  sources  of  income  (and  diets)  while  enhancing  the 
43 
stability  and  sustainability  of  their  farming  systems.  Agricultural  machinery  and  equipment  for 
hire  service  providers  is  seen  to  be  an  attractive  and  feasible  source  of  income  for  young 
entrepreneurs  and  will  be  supported  by  youth  employed  in  repair  workshops.  Other  potential 
businesses for  youth  and  women flourishing  in the Dry Zone  are  protected  agriculture, quality 
seed production, semi commercial dairy and goat production. Approximately 1,216 businesses 
will be supported in total. Business proposals will be prioritized to enable small family farmers’ 
organised  into  groups/  organizations  to  increase  their  productivity,  reduce  post-harvest  losses 
and respond competitively to increasing market demands for high value products. 
146. 
Examples of eligible investments include: 
-  Machinery and traction equipment (ploughs, disc harrows, rippers, seeders, and cultivators) 
-  Seed multiplication, multiplication of vegetative planting material (beans, groundnut etc,), tree 
nurseries and orchards, etc. 
-  Aquaculture and apiculture 
-  Post harvest investments 
-  Equipment  for  protected  agricultural  production  (metal  poles,  small  shade  houses,  drip 
irrigation, small scale hydroponic systems)  
-  Vegetable and fruit preservation and drying equipment 
-  Low cost, appropriate technologies and small scale facilities for crop storage   
-  Small scale semi intensive dairying  
-  Semi-intensive goat production 
-  Semi-intensive backyard poultry 
-  Seed paddy production and processing 
Women  and  youth  would  be  eligible  for  these  investments  as  individuals  or  alternatively  as 
partnerships or small groups. Examples of successful small enterprises for women and youth that 
have been tried and tested in the Dry Zone by WFP and UNDP are given below 
Agri-processing and value adding business 
Inputs: Provision of basic machinery and equipment (grinding mills, splitters, polishers, oil expeller, 
flour mixer, drier, packing equipment, etc.). 
Selection criteria: 
  HH which have taken initiatives to set up value addition businesses. 
  Priority will be given to trained youths/women HHs who have already trained on value addition. 
  Having a feasible business plan/demand. 
  Availability of adequate & suitable place to set up business. 
  Family monthly income should be less than district poverty line. 
  Committed to continue the business. 
  Recommended by DS/Dept. Small industries. 
Steps of implementation: 
  Awareness creation on small scale agri- processing and value adding business management. 
  Select beneficiaries according to defined selection criteria. 
  Collect baseline information required to measure the outcome of the intervention. 
  Prepare basic business plan for agri- processing and value adding business. 
  Organize and conduct trainings and workshops. 
  Assist to setup the business. 
  Provision of basic machinery and equipment (grinding mills, splitters, polishers, oil expeller, flour 
mixer, drier, packing equipment, etc.). 
  Linkages with market. 
  Technical support and guidance for minimum 1-year period for productivity improvement, 
  Smooth exit and sustainability. 
Protected agriculture 
44 
Inputs: Assistances to construct rain shelter/protected net house (20’ x 40’). 
Provision of basic equipment & tools (thermometer, RH and soil moisture meter, etc). 
Selection criteria: 
  Existing-full time farmers, taken initiative to move protected agriculture in small way. 
  Farmer having basic knowledge on protected agriculture/cultivation. 
  Farmer practicing good agriculture practices/model farmer/farmer with enthusiasm to do new 
things. 
  Priority will be given to women/youths. 
  Working as formal / informal production groups/ready to work as a producer group. 
  Availability of adequate place to build the rain shelter/poly tunnel. 
  Monthly income should be less than district poverty line. 
  Availability of technical / supporting facility. 
  Availability of marketing facility. 
  Committed to continue protected cultivation. 
  Recommended by Department of Agriculture. 
Steps of implementation: 
  Awareness creation on protected agriculture and benefits among the potential HHs. 
  Select beneficiaries according to defined selection criteria. 
  Collect baseline information required to measure the outcome of the intervention. 
  Prepare basic business plan for the protected agriculture. 
  Organize and conduct trainings and workshops. 
  Assist the construction of rain shelter / poly tunnel and other structures. 
  Provision of basic equipment & tools (thermometer, RH and soil moisture meter, etc). 
  Assist to establish systematic production plan. 
  Assistance for/linkages with market. 
  Technical support and guidance for minimum 1-year period for productivity improvement, smooth 
exit and sustainability. 
Small scale poultry hatchery 
Inputs: 
Incubator/hatching unit (100 egg capacity). 
 
  Assistance to constitution sheds for mother stock. 
  1,000, one and half month old backyard poultry chicks (sexed) / month old quail /chicks 
  Provision 80 numbers of feeders & waterers. 
  Provision 40 bags (25Kg each) chick feed. 
  Provision of necessary vitamins & medicines (for initial stages). 
Selection criteria: 
  HHs which has interest on doing hatchery business and rearing poultry. 
  Priority will be given to trained youths/women HHs. 
  Having a feasible business plan/demand. 
  Availability of adequate & suitable place to set up business. 
  Family monthly income should be less than district poverty line. 
  Committed to continue the business. 
  Availability of veterinary supporting facility. 
  Availability of marketing facility. 
  Recommended by DAPH. 
Steps of implementation: 
  Awareness creation on small scale poultry hatchery management. 
  Select beneficiaries according to defined selection criteria. 
  Collect baseline information required to measure the outcome of the intervention. 
  Prepare basic business plan for small scale poultry hatchery business. 
  Organize and conduct trainings and workshops. 
45 
  Assist to setup the business. 
  Provision of hatching unit and mother stock. 
  Linkages with market. 
  Technical support and guidance for minimum 1-year period for productivity improvement, smooth 
exit and sustainability. 
Vocational training on agricultural machinery and equipment repair and maintenance 
Inputs:  
  Necessary tools and equipment required to improve the quality of the training (based on the 
capacity assessment). 
  Seed money for the tools (only for 90 the balance will get the support to set up business). 
Selection criteria: 
•  Youths who have interest on Agri. Machine repair. 
•  Family monthly income should be less than district poverty line. 
•  Committed to continue. 
•  Recommended by DS/VTC. 
Steps of implementation: 
•  Awareness creation. 
•  Select beneficiaries according to defined selection criteria. 
•  Select the VTC to conduct the skill training. 
•  Carryout the capacity assessment of the selected VTC. 
•  Collect baseline information required to measure the outcome of the intervention. 
•  Organize and conduct trainings and workshops. 
•  Assist to on the job training. 
•  Provide necessary tools and equipment required to improve the quality of the training. 
•  Provision of seed money to by basic tools. 
•  Linkages with agricultural machinery suppliers for employment 
Support to Producer Organization Business Models  
147.  In the target districts there are reported to be approximately 11,400 producer groups set up for 
a range of products – paddy rice, vegetables, legumes, fruits, dairy and goat. The crop based 
groups  operate  on  a  seasonal  basis  receiving  subsidised  inputs  through  the  government 
schemes.  The  groups,  however,  are  not  organised  as  business  entities  with  a  commercial 
mindset.  SARP  intends  to  support  capacity  building  of  producer/  farmer  organizations  (POs), 
with the rationale that strengthening of PO will empower the group to commercialise and enter 
product value chains. Amongst the better organised producer organizations it is expected that 
they would become an effective partner for the 4P schemes implemented under SAPP. Start-up 
funding will be provided through loans at group (PO) level and this  will be complemented with 
support  in  business  management  training,  mentoring  and  exchange  visits.  As  part  of  the 
commercialisation process three main business models are proposed: 
1) Incipient  Producer Groups, SHGs  and other  informal  groups within the target  ASCs. Under 
this  model,  specific  attention  will  be  given  towards  supporting  groups  to  link  to  markets. 
Financial support will be provided through combinations of grants for capitalisation and loans for 
working  capital  availed  through  the  Agrarian  Banks.  The  grants  will  be  matched  with  some 
counterpart  beneficiary  financing.  Financial  support  will  be  provided  on  a  gradual  basis  to 
ensure solid management and absorption capacity. The POs supported under this model will be 
at  a  start-up  stage  of  their  business  thus  requiring  a  strong  field  presence  to  support  their 
institutional strengthening. A target of 10 ‘social enterprise’ models will be developed. 
46 
2)  Mature  POs  or  farmer  organizations  already  managing  sizable  businesses.    Under  this 
second model, the relatively more mature POs already engaged in market linkages, processing 
and/or  value addition,  will  be  provided  with  loans  to  support them to  expand  their  business to 
the benefit of their members. Fresh and processed produce may be sold directly by the POs to 
local  wholesale  or  retail  markets.  Given  the  limited  number  of  effective  POs  in  the  target 
districts, the initial support will be for 10 POs and with an average membership of 80 members 
each, for a total outreach of 800 smallholder farmers over the programme.  
3) Private-sector led 4P partnership. Under this last  model SARP  will coordinate support from 
SAPP  to  encourage  private  sector  companies  to  present  business  proposals  for  outgrower 
schemes  that  foresee  partnerships  between  private  sector  companies  and  farmers  groups  in 
the dry zone. SARP will strengthen the capacity of PO/FOs and will facilitate linkages to private 
sector  buyers  with  the  support  of  SAPP.  The  SAPP  modalities  will  be  used  to  access  loan 
funding for the POs/ FOs through the commercial banking system. SAPP will facilitate links to 
financial  organizations.  As  an  incentive  for  the  private  sector  to  operate  in  the  dry  zone,  the 
project  will  provide  loans  and  other  stimuli  to  encourage  private  sector  companies  to  contract 
farmer  organizations  (and  other  groups)  to  supply  raw  materials  and  value-added  products. 
SARP proposes a modified business model that offers private sector companies an incentive in 
the form of concessionary loans conditional on investing in non-movable assets relate to value 
addition in the dry zone target districts. The output of this business model will be accredited to 
SAPP.  
Eligibility criteria for selecting POs under categories 2 and 3:  
  PO management and members that have completed some advanced business management 
training, and/or specific group level training around their common interest;  
  at least 50% of the PO or individual members sales are sold commercially for markets;  
  PO  members  follow  good  governance  practices,  follow  a  savings  first  principle  and  have 
 
dynamic leaders and members who expect the rules established by the PO; 
the  PO  is  willing  and  able  to  provide  financial  contributions  for  implementing  its  envisaged 
business plan; 
  PO’s existing for more than three years should present a positive organisational audit. 
Support for business plan preparation 
148.  Any PO, SHG or individual requesting support for agro-enterprise development will be expected 
to prepare a business plan that will go through an appraisal process to determine its economic 
feasibility  and  sustainability.  The  business  plan  will  define  a  clear  marketing  strategy,  the 
production, storage, handling and processing investments needed, costs and expected benefits, 
risks, responsibilities to be shared among the producer organization members, partnership with 
other actors among others. Support will be given by the Agro-enterprise Promoters for business 
plan  preparation,  appraisal,  implementation,  monitoring  and  evaluation.  ARPAs  will  be  trained 
by  project  staff  in  order  to  support  the  Agro-enterprise  Promoters  to  implement  the  following 
activities:  
  Organise a training of trainers on the participatory preparation and analysis of business plans;  
  Train selected field staff participating in BP preparation, appraisal and implementation support 
in  various  fields,  as  needed  (such  as  environment  &  climate  change  adaptation,  gender 
approach, nutrition-sensitive agriculture, etc.);  
  Assist POs in the participatory and iterative preparation of their business plan that could meet 
the eligibility criteria for investment support.  
  Assist  the  appraisal  and  environmental  screening  (when  necessary)  of  prepared  BPs  by 
technical  experts,  before  they  are  presented  to  the  grant  approval  unit,  the  Technical 
Implementation Unit at District level (TIU);  
  Support the implementation of approved BPs through project staff. service provider field staff, 
DAD and DOA staff and local consultants as envisaged in the approved BP;  
  Ex-post  evaluation  of  funded  BPs  after  two  years  of  implementation  by  the  service  provider 
staff and local consultants if necessary to generate lessons, and inform adequately the M&E 
system of the project.  
47 
149. 
150. 
151. 
It  is  important  that  the  component  supports  BPs  that  are  viable,  sustainable,  and  likely  to 
make  a  major  contribution  to  increased  productivity,  production,  and  marketing,  including 
value  addition.  The  Agro-enterprise  Promoters  and  ARPAs  will  receive  training  in  the 
participatory  preparation  and  analysis  of  BPs.  They  may  in  turn  provide  coaching  to  local 
service  providers  or  consultants  that  might  be  subcontracted  with  PMU  agreement-to  carry 
out  some  of  the  tasks  mentioned  above  such  as  assisting  BP  preparation  and  analysis, 
organizational audit of micro-projects, environment and social screening, etc.  
Proposals  will  be  identified,  appraised,  and  approved  based  on  a  full  set  of  eligibility  and 
design  criteria  and  evaluation  procedures.  Proposals  will  be  evaluated  and  selected  by  an 
independent  technical  committee  located  in  the  Technical  Implementation  Unit.  Defined 
criteria for evaluation will be drawn up. 
The agro-enterprise team will review the project proposals/ business plans. Service providers 
and business coaches will support applicants to develop sound business plans and  improve 
their  marketing,  business,  technical  and  managerial  skills,  to  be  packaged  in  the  micro-
projects. Detailed application procedures and eligibility criteria, including eligible interventions 
and expenditures for the matching grants will be developed by the project start-up. Evaluation 
of  proposals/business  plans  will  also  include  outreach  to  poor  households,  integration  of 
gender, youth, nutrition and climate change aspects. 
Activity 
Community  dialogue  to  present  the  menu  of  micro-
enterprise interventions on offer  
Training  of  Agro-enterprise  promoters  on  BP 
preparation  
Preparation  of  micro  project  proposals  –  technical 
feasibility, 
risk 
management, etc.  
Establishment of the enterprise + requisite training 
Mentoring  support  to  prepare  sub-project  proposals 
for funding 
Ex-post evaluation of funded BPs 
profitability, 
availability, 
cash 
Responsibility  
Agro-enterprise team 
Agro-enterprise specialist + FBS trainer 
Agro-enterprise 
beneficiaries 
team 
together 
with 
Agro-enterprise team + SCR methodology 
Agro-enterprise team 
Agro-enterprise team 
Implementation arrangements:  
152. Income  generating  and  micro  enterprise  activities  under  Sub-components  2.1  and  2.2  will  be 
implemented as grants and combinations of grants/ loans which will be put in place to address 
partially  the  financial  constraints  of  the  target  groups  to  enable  them  to  procure  the  necessary 
inputs and equipment. Activities under sub-component 2.1 relating to household resilience cater 
for low cost livelihood activities for the most vulnerable households. As such contributions from 
beneficiaries are considered to be low covering labour and some materials. Beneficiaries will be 
eligible to could request support either individually, as partnerships or as small groups. A ceiling 
of  $1,100  per  person  has  been  set  based  on  the  experience  of  other  livelihood  projects  with 
similar activities in the Dry Zone.  
153. Agro-enterprises  for  women  and  youth  under  subcomponent  2.2  will  be  more  substantive  with 
activities  budgeted  up  to  $5,600  per  beneficiary.  Some  of  these  investments  are  envisaged  as 
partnerships and/ or for small groups. As part of the policy on grants and incentives, individuals 
could aggregate these amounts as part of a partnership or group activity.  Matching grants at a 
ratio of 70 percent (IFAD loan) and 30 percent (beneficiaries) will be set. The applied matching 
grant ratios and funding ceilings will be periodically reviewed and recalibrated to take account of 
the changing circumstances and lessons learned during project implementation.  
154. Based on experience in Sri Lanka it is estimated that for group activities the average PO small 
investment project cost will be about US$50,000 and the average cost of smallholder group-level 
micro-projects  around  US$25,000.  A  ceiling  of  $25,000  has  subsequently  been  set  for  these 
48 
IGAs. Proposals for small grants of up to $25,000 will be required to include a simple business 
plan  which  will  be  prepared  in  a  participatory  manner  with  beneficiaries  demonstrating  the 
technical and financial feasibility of the proposal. 
155. Technical and facilitation assistance will be provided for: (i) training of ARPAs, service providers 
and  community  and  farm  leaders  as  required;  (ii)  facilitation  of  the  participatory  planning  and 
implementation  processes  for  community-level  and  group-based  micro-projects  and  verification 
of eligibility of communities, groups and their proposed investments; (iii) technical assistance for 
the  screening,  assessment  and  design  of  proposed  investments,  such  as  technical,  financial, 
economic, social and environmental feasibility, as well as (iv) preparation of business, operation 
and maintenance plans.  
156. The grant size capping is indicative and will be revised once more information is available on all 
active  matching  grant  schemes  for  agriculture  in  Sri  Lanka.  The  micro-project  will  be 
administered  and  managed  by  the  PMU  and  Area  Hub  teams  depending  on  the  size  of  the 
business  proposal  Grant  disbursement  for  value  chain  activities  will  be  performance  based, 
phased, and linked to achievement of key development and business milestones, agreed in the 
grant  contract.  Grantees  will  be  provided  with  training  to  build  their  capacity  to  accurately 
account for the funds received before disbursements. The agro-enterprise team in the PMU will 
engage with the grantees to ensure full accountability 
E. Market, weather and climate information services  
157. SARP will assess the need to support the generation and dissemination of market, weather and 
climate  information  and  will  explore  the  possibility  of  designing  and  testing  a  system  for  index-
based weather insurance.  
Market information services   
158. In Sri Lanka, the mobile phone-based market information services (MIS) is widely spread in rural 
areas for the intended benefit of a number of stakeholders, including farmers. However, a study 
noted insufficient evidence to suggest that existing mobile phone-based MIS which entails users 
subscribing  to  short  (text)  message  service  (SMS)  price  alerts,  influence  smallholder  farmers’ 
market participation decisions. Knowledge of prevailing prices is different from having the ability 
to take advantage of this information. The average Sri Lankan smallholder farmer often has no 
say  in  the  prices  they  receive  from  vendors  and  lacks  transportation  to  distant  markets  where 
prices may be better45. 
159. The  ultimate  aim  of  these  systems  is  to  create  a  level  playing  field  for  all  actors,  and  increase 
clarity  and  transparency  both  on  prices  and  volumes.  Currently,  a  public  sector  provider  of 
market information is the Agrarian Research and Training Institute (ARTI) under the Ministry of 
Agricultural  Development  and  the  Department  of  Agrarian  Development.  The  mobile  market 
information  services  can  function  both  to  push  information  to  the  farmers,  but  also  pull 
information from them for M&E and for bringing buyers and sellers together. However, providers 
indicate it is still a challenge to get farmers to pay for these services. Also, the price information 
is not always very accurate for rural areas. 
160. SARP  will  assess  the  need  for  further  support  and  investments  in  the  generation  of  market 
information  and  timely  dissemination  of  this  data.  The  actual  need  of  farmers,  combined  with 
their  bargaining  power  and  realistic  sales  opportunities,  will  be  leading  in  defining  the  required 
activities. Possibly this can be combined with an assessment of access to weather information. 
Important will be to build on and improve upon the existing market information systems, and not 
create  new  ones.  In  case  the  assessment  indicates  that  market  information  for  certain  value 
chains  is  missing,  this  could  be  an  opportunity  for  SARP  to  support  an  expansion  of  these 
systems.  Activities  to  be  supported  would  include  an  assessment  of  the  need  for  market 
information in existing VCs and in new VCs, and consequently support for adaptation of existing 
MI systems. 
161. SARP  will  assess  the  need  for  further  support  in  the  generation  of  market  information  and  its 
timely  dissemination.  The  aim  will  be  to  provide  market  information  which  will  go  beyond 
49 
commodity price information, but will focus to aid smallholder capacity to plan better and identify 
available  market  opportunities. The actual information needs will be determined and tailored to 
specific  VC  and  geographical  areas.  The  project  will  build  on,  improve  upon  and  expand  the 
existing  market  information  systems/channels  through  mobile  based  messaging  services  and 
others  to  ensure  adequate  supply  of  information  to  cater  for  varied  VC  needs.  Activities  to  be 
supported would include market information needs assessment in existing and in new VCs, and 
consequently  identification  of  support  required  to  enhance  the  delivery  capacity  of  existing 
systems. 
Climate and weather information services  
farmers  will:  (i) 
162. Without  knowledge  about  the  upcoming  season  weather  events,  it  is  difficult  to  establish  the 
types  and  quantities  of  input  needed,  the  right  type  of  practices,  the  suitable  market  to  target, 
and the subsequent investments needed to successfully harvest for both consumption and profit. 
Climate  services  are  intended  to  support  the  process  of  decision-making  by  providing  farmers 
with  information  on  the  upcoming  season  accompanied  by  advisories  for  their  livelihood 
decision-making.  Provision  of  weather/climate  services  to  inform  farm  management  decision-
making  among  smallholder 
the  collection  of  historical  agro-
meteorological  data  to  inform  the  climate  services;30  (ii)  produce  downscaled  seasonal  and  in-
season forecasts for each district; (iii) develop advisories to accompany the dissemination of the 
seasonal  forecasts;  (iv)  support  extension  officers  to  access,  interpret,  and  disseminate  the 
climate services; (v)  disseminate climate services through SMS and knowledge platforms. Farm 
management decision-making  by farmers is impacted by risk and uncertainty. Climate services 
integrate  weather  and  agricultural  information  to  help  inform  farmers’  actions.  Besides  working 
on the basis of seasonal forecasts, in-season updates are needed to further inform the farmers. 
To  optimize  the  use  of  the  climate  information  in  decision-making,  the  provision  of  climate 
services  will need to be  integrated  into the extension  support offered at district  and  ASC  level. 
SARP will build on the approaches developed by UNDP and WFP which treats the issue in an 
integrated manner with a combination of hardware and software investments.  
facilitate 
163. UNDP  has  taken  a  broad  brush  approach  that  includes  the  collection  and  dissemination  of 
weather/climate  information  and  access  to  advice  on  future  seasonal  conditions  for  agricultural 
planning  as  well  as  the  early  warning  of  storms  and  floods  essential  for  water  management  - 
planning  the  release  of  water  from  the  irrigation  tanks.  A  number  of  interventions  are  being 
implemented  to  share  data  and  information  between  the  different  institutions  responsible  for 
collecting,  managing  and  using  the  different  data  sources.  Attention  has  been  given  to 
monitoring the weather and hydrological conditions at local level to respond in a timely manner to 
weather vagaries and improve the forecasting of both weather conditions (high intensity rainfall 
causing 
long-term  water 
management).  Some  of  the  hardware  investments  made  by  UNDP  include:  a)  setting  up 
automatic  rainfall  stations  for  each  river  basin  to  increase  coverage  of  rainfall  data;  b) 
establishing automatic water level sensors at critical locations in river basins26; c) water level and 
rainfall  monitoring  of  the  village  irrigation  systems;  d)  manual  water  level  gauges  and  simple 
rainfall  gauges  to  be  managed  by  the  producer  organizations27.  SARP  will  follow  the  same 
guidelines by  investing in level gauges, rainfall measuring  gauges and evaporation  pans  in the 
selected cascades and tanks. 
flooding)  and  seasonal  conditions  (affecting  agriculture  and 
164. Dissemination  of  climate/  weather  information  is  being  undertaken  by  UNDP  and  involves 
capacitating  the  relevant  institutions  involved  in  forecasting  and  flood  water  management.  The 
improved climate and hydrological monitoring networks will provide basic data for improving long 
term  forecasts,  as  well  as  calibrating  satellite  data  and  hydrological  models  to  increase  the 
extent to  which information can be generated  i.e. to areas not directly covered  by  the network. 
UNDP are training government staff (DoM, DAD, DoA) to operate and maintain these systems. 
26 Two automatic water level sensors are required for each sub-watershed, monitoring the upper and lower parts of the 
sub-watershed catchment. 
27  Some  Producer  Organizations  already  have  water  level  gauges  in  their  reservoirs.  It  is  recommended  that  each  irrigation  reservoir 
selected for improvement be provided with a manually read water level gauge and a simple rainfall gauge, to be managed by the PO. This 
intervention  is  meant  to  enhance  the  capacity  of  the  FO  to  relate  flood  events  to  measured  rainfall  and  to  set  up  their  own  simple 
operational rules 
50 
165. As  SARP  will  extend  activities  outside  the  UNDP  catchment  areas  the  focus  will  be  on 
dissemination and the use of data at local community level and through the ASCs. The activity 
will build on the community baseline assessments by identifying differentiated community needs 
in terms of weather and climate information and services, understand what information are most 
needed  depending  on  their  livelihoods,  and  specify  the  most  appropriate  mechanism(s)  to 
ensure community members can access information when they need it. Particular attention will 
be given to ensure gender-specific needs are adequately reflected, together with specific needs 
linked  to  education  and  age.  This  will  be  followed  by  service  provider  training  for  extension 
workers, NGOs and government and project staff through the FFS and FBS methodologies. The 
University  of  Reading  PICSA  approach  will  be  adapted  for  use.  Through  PICSA,  farmers,  with 
support from the extension officers, will be able to develop farm plans that help inform the way 
they  undertake  their  agricultural  practices.  This  plan  will  be  informed  by  historical  climate 
information  and  agronomical  advice  and  be  further  supported  by  the  seasonal  and  in-season 
forecasts.  Complementing  the  training  programme,  advisories  and  agro-climatic  content  will  be 
disseminated  to  households  through  ICTs  (SMs,  knowledge  information  hubs  and  the 
development of a mobile platform using the DEWN system operated by Dialog telecom). The use 
of SMS platforms (used to disseminate market information) will be instrumental to also broadcast 
updated weather information and allow to reach farmers beyond the extension services. A lump 
sum allocation has been set aside to develop SMS/ mobile communication through engaging the 
private sector  in a cost sharing partnership.  In this  way  SARP  will complement  the  institutional 
capacity building work being implemented by UNDP.  
166. Service Providers and Technical Assistance.  
167. SARP  will  hire  local  service  providers  for  community  level  activities  –  social  mobilization, 
community planning and enterprise development - under multi-year results based contracts. The 
providers will establish teams located in the two hub cluster areas. Two service providers will be 
contracted  to  cover  project  implementation  (possibly  one  team  per  cluster).  The  local  NGO 
teams  will  be  supported  by  a  cadre  of  technical  specialists  recruited  through  the  project.  The 
local service providers should have demonstrated capacity to manage large contracts.  
168. The  implementation  modalities  for  providing  technical  support  to  SARP  include:  (a)  support  to 
Farmer Field Schools (b) support in social mobilisation and planning as well as the preparation of 
subproject (SPs)/ business plans (BPs) for competitive funding; (c) provide specialised technical 
assistance  to  DOD,  DOA  and  DOI  staff  and  extension  workers  as  well  as  smallholder 
beneficiaries in sustainable land management, gender, nutrition etc.; (d) provide implementation 
support to smallholder beneficiaries of sub-projects to ensure that the objectives of each SP/BP 
funded under the project are achieved; and (e) strengthen the capacity of local consultants and 
agricultural  input  providers  to  respond  to  the  smallholder  demands.  Service  providers  are 
expected  to  sub-contract  local  consultants  for  specialised  inputs.  SARP  technical  staff  will 
provide prior training for some of these activities.  
169. The local service  providers  will provide  training, coaching support  to  local farmer organizations 
and groups as well as individual one-on-one mentoring support to particular households and/ or 
individuals.  This  will  increase  the  local  level  capacity  and  sustainability  of  the  project 
interventions  over  time.  It  will  also  strengthen  the  capacity  of  local  NGOs/consultants  and 
agricultural  input  providers  to  be  able  to  respond  promptly  to  the  smallholder  needs.  Selected 
NGOs’  capacity  will  be  strengthened  to  help  disseminate  knowledge  and  identify  appropriate 
POs to prepare subproject proposals; private agricultural input suppliers will be strengthened in 
developing systems to supply critical agricultural inputs and services to smallholder farmers; and 
private  enterprises’  capacity  will  be  strengthened  in  agricultural  marketing,  post-harvest 
management, specific value chains, and processing as well as in strengthening market linkages. 
Organizational Framework  
a.  Project Management and Coordination 
Project structure and organization:  
170. The SARP implementation structure will have strong management foundations both at National 
and  District  levels.  The  project  will  be  executed  by  Presidential  Secretariat  and  the  various 
51 
departments  of  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture.  The  Secretary  of  the  Presidential  Secretariat  will 
establish  a  Programme  Management  Unit  (PMU)  to  manage  and  supervise  the  overall  project. 
The  Project  Management  Unit  (PMU)  will  be  led  by  a  National  Project  Manager,  and  will  have 
overall  responsibility  for  project  implementation.  The  PMU  will  be  supported  by  a  team  of 
technical specialists  and administrative  and financial  support staff. Two  area based  hubs  will be 
set  up  to  provide  overall  coordination  and  oversight  of  all  project  activities  within  the  6  districts 
and ensure adequate presence and support of the project management out in the districts level. 
The  main  project  implementation  activities  will  be  undertaken  at  district  levels.  The  PMU  and 
district  offices  will  be  staffed  by  dedicated  full  time  staff  and  supported  by  technical  and 
administrative staff to ensure timely project delivery.  
171. By being placed in the Presidential Secretariat it will work closely with SAPP its sister project28. 
The  Presidential  Secretariat  will  be  the  principal  coordinating  body  supported  by  technical  lead 
agencies under the Ministry of Agriculture that include the Department of Agrarian Development, 
the  Department  of Agriculture  and  the  Department  of  Irrigation.  The  Presidential  Secretariat  will 
work  very  closely  with  the  PMU  to  oversee  implementation.  In  order  to  capitalize  on  the 
experience  and  competences  of  SAPP  to  address  the  commercialization  challenges  of 
smallholder farmers, it was considered convenient to ensure that the two projects are coordinated 
by  an  experienced  Programme  Coordinator  to  provide  strategic  guidance  and  ensure  closer 
project collaboration. This management structure will be first step towards the establishment of a 
single management unit for IFAD’s future programme in Sri Lanka.  
172. At  central  level  the  PMU  will  comprise  a  Project  Manager,  a  Senior  Finance  Specialist,  an 
Assistant  Finance  Officer,  Finance/ Administrative  Officers  (3),  a  Senior  Procurement  Specialist, 
an Assistant Procurement Specialist, an M&E Specialist, Drivers, Office Assistants and Secretary. 
The  technical  team  at  central  level  will  include  a  Civil  Engineer  (chartered),  Natural  Resource 
Management Specialist, an Agricultural Specialist, and Institutions Specialist, a Value Chain and 
Marketing  Specialist,  a  Rural  Finance  Trainer,  a  Training  Specialist  (focusing  on  the  Farm 
Business  and  Farmer  Field  School),  a  Post-harvest  specialist  and  an  Enterprise  Development 
Specialist (also covering the youth incubation scheme).    
173. At  District  level,  SARP  will  set  up  two  District  Hub  offices  in  selected  districts  led  by  Area 
Coordinators – technically trained in natural resource management or watershed development  – 
who will be responsible for day to day implementation whilst doubling up as specialised technical 
support.  Each  District  Hub  will  be  staffed  by  an  Agriculturalist,  Institutions  Officer,  Water 
Resource/  Civil  Engineer,  M&E  assistant  and  Driver.    The  remaining  four  Districts  will  have  a 
contained  technical  staffing  complement  of  an  Agriculturalist  (extension  worker)  and  Agro-
enterprise  Promoter  (who  will  double  up  as  a  social  mobiliser).  Each  of  the  District  Offices  will 
have Office Assistants. The District Units will be housed under the District Offices in each district. 
The District Offices will be led by Area Coordinators and supported by the relevant support staff to 
provide  implementation  support  and  managing  all  project  activities  within  the  selected  sub-
watersheds and cascades.  
174.  The  PMU  will  be  supported  by  chartered  engineer  who  will  be  responsible  for  managing  the 
district  engineering  team  for  day  to  day  management  and  coordination.  The  team  will  be  for 
verifying  the  engineering  design  of  the  water,  road  and  market  infrastructure  works  and  will 
supervise the construction/ rehabilitation works in the project area.   
The Organogram for SARP is given below: 
Figure 1: Implementation Structure Chart 
28 A financial management assessment was conducted to determine whether the Presidential Secretariat 
has acceptable FM systems to provide IFAD reasonable assurance that funds will be used for the 
intended purpose to enable project development objectives to be met. The assessment found the 
arrangements to be acceptable and the procedures employed by SAP, will be followed by SARP. 
52 
175.  SARP will be fully integrated within the GOSL administration, and the project implementation is 
designed  to  capitalize  on  existing  government  agencies  at  all  levels.  The  participating 
departments  will  carry  out  the  project  activities  within  their  mandates,  but  coordinated  by 
provincial  DPD  offices,  with  district  units  established  at  the  Department  of  Agriculture 
(DoA)/Provincial  Irrigation  Department  (PID)/Assistant  Commissioner  Agrarian  Development 
(ACAD) offices and divisional units established at Agrarian Service Centers (ASCs).  
176.  While  there  will  be  no  dedicated  structure  established  at  Provincial  level,  the  provinces  will 
focus  on  coordination  and  monitoring  support  and  as  such  will  not  lead  any  activities  nor 
manage  activities  in  districts.  They  are  considered  necessary  to  provide  closer  support  and 
backstopping to the District Offices during implementation. 
level.  The  Technical 
Implementation  unit  will  have  executive  and 
177.  Technical  Implementation  Unit.  A  Technical  Implementation  Unit  (TIU)  will  be  established  at 
District 
technical 
responsibilities.  The  TIU  will  consist  of  (at  least)  the  Area  Coordinator,  the  District  Agrarian 
Development  representative,  the  District  Agriculture  representative  and  the  District  Planning 
representative  and  appropriate  project  technical  officers.    The  TIU  will  be  responsible  for  the 
approval  and  implementation  of  micro  project  proposals  relating  to  small  irrigation  systems, 
feeder  roads,  market  infrastructure  and small enterprise development. Larger cascade natural 
resource  plans  will  need  to  be  approved  at  PMU  level  where  senior  engineering  and  water 
resources  staff  are  based.    The  task  of  the  TIU  will  be  to:  (i)  speed-up  decisions  and 
procedures;  (ii)  approve  micro-projects  under  Sub-components  2.1  and  2.2;  (iii)  propose  the 
agenda  for  the  District  MSC  meetings  and  prepare  the  support  documents;  (iv)  propose  the 
Annual Work  Plan  and  Budget  (AWPB)  to  the  District  Cluster  Hub  and  PMU  for  analysis  and 
decision;  (v)  submit  Annual  Reports  on  sub-projects;  and  (vi)  coordinate  activities  between 
SARP,  UNDP,  WFP  and  share  technical  experience.  Periodically  representatives  of  the  two 
World  Bank  projects  in  the  Dry  Zone  will  be  invited  to  participate.    .  The  TIU  will,  in  addition, 
53 
include representatives of NGO or civil society and a representative of the private sector, when 
deciding on the approval of micro-projects. Meetings will take place monthly.  
178.  Project  coordination  and  grievance:  The  Secretary  to  the  Presidential  Secretariat  will  oversee 
the  SARP  National  Steering  Committee  (NSC)  which  will  provide  strategic  oversight  to  the 
project.  The  Steering  Committee  will  comprise  representatives  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance, 
Ministry of Planning and the respective departments of the Ministry of Agriculture as well as the 
Forest  and  Wildlife  Departments  of  the  Ministry  of  Mahawelli  Development  and  Environment. 
Coordination will be made with the Ministry of Mahawelli Development and Environment which 
has responsibility for forestry and wildlife.  
179.  At  District  Level  coordination  will  be  conducted  through  the  District  Multi-Stakeholder 
Committees, Chaired by the District Secretary. Members will include the Director Planning, Asst. 
Commissioner,  DAD  &  Land,  the  Provincial-District  Director  Agriculture,  Provincial-District 
Engineer,  the  Irrigation  Department,  Provincial-District  Director Animal  Production  and  Health, 
District  Forest  Officer,  District  Director Wildlife,  Environment  Officer,  a  representative  from  the 
Chamber of Commerce and Project staff – of SARP  and collaborating projects  (UNDP, WFP). 
Meetings are expected to be conduce once every two months.  
180.  At  local  level,  Coordination  Committees  will  be  set  up  at  the  level  of  the  Agrarian  Service 
Centre.  The  committees  will  be  chaired  by  the  Divisional  Officers  and  members  expected  to 
participate  will  include  project  staff,  counterpart  ARPAs/  AIs,  the  Livestock  Development 
Instructor,  representatives  of  FOs  and  the  private  sector.  Meetings  will  similarly  be  convened 
once a month.  
181.  Communities,  individuals  and  women  who  believe  that  they  are  adversely  affected  by  SARP 
may submit complaints to the Divisional Grievance Committee to be set up at Divisional Level to 
redress  grievances  originating  from  the Agrarian  Service  Centre  Committee.  In  the  event  that 
grievances cannot be addressed locally, they will be channelled to the District Multi-Stakeholder 
Committee  for  redress.    The  Grievance  Committees  will  ensure  that  complaints  received  are 
promptly  reviewed  to  address  project-related  concerns.  Project  affected  communities  and 
individuals  may  further  submit  complaints  that  are  not  resolved  locally  to  the  PMU  where  an 
independent  Inspection  Panel  will  be  set  up  to  determine  whether  harm  occurred,  or  could 
occur, because of IFAD non-compliance with its policies and procedures.  
182.  IFAD  has  a  Complaints  Procedure  to  receive  and  facilitate  resolution  of  concerns  and 
complaints with respect to alleged non-compliance of its environmental and social policies and 
the  mandatory  aspects  of  its  Social,  Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment  Procedures.  For 
more  information,  visit  the  IFAD  webpage:  https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/accountability-and-
complaints-procedure." 
54 
Figure 2: Coordination and Grievance Mechanisms 
b. Planning, M&E, Learning and Knowledge Management 
182. Planning – Programme planning will be an on-going process with annual reviews of activities at 
all  level  (community,  ASC,  district  and  central  level)  contributing  to  the  development  of  Annual 
Work Plans and Budgets (AWPBs). The AWPBs, together with the log frames’ quantified results-
based indicators and process indicators, will be the primary basis for programme monitoring, for 
identifying  and  integrating  management  priorities  for  implementation,  forecasting  procurement 
requirements  and  facilitating  the  mobilization  of  staff  and  resources  when  needed.  An  initial 
AWPB  has  been  prepared  for  the  initial  18  month  period  and  will  be  used  to  ensure  the  timely 
start-up and usage of start-up funds prior to Entry into Force of the loan. The activities are based 
on  the  design  document,  but  consultations  with  main  stakeholders  (including  collaborating 
partners, ASC, and district staff) will play an important role.  
183. AWPBs  will  cover  the  IFAD  loan,  co-financing  partners,  GoSL,  private  sector  and  beneficiary 
contributions. The programme structure is output based, with each activity developed to achieve a 
certain  output,  which  in  terms  guides  the  outcomes.  The  same  structure  should  be  followed  for 
future AWPBs, with a clear indication of responsibilities and division of budget lines amongst each 
of the PMU staff.  
55 
184. 
The annual plan should be treated as an indicative plan of project activities that sets targets, 
budgetary  estimates  and  success  indicators  over  the  implementation  duration.    The  annual 
plan  should  be  sub-divided  for  each  district.  As  the  instrument  for  implementing  the  project 
according to its design, the annual work planning and budgeting process shall: 
-  Assess  the  previous  year’s  achievements  in  comparison  with  the  previous  year’s  work  plan 
and budget and in view of District review reports. 
-  Plan  outputs  for  the  year  to  achieve  the  outcomes  specified  in  the  Strategic  Results 
Framework of SARP.  
- 
Identify/  review  key  indicators  for  monitoring  the  delivery  of  project  inputs  and  the 
achievement of project outputs.  
-  Agree on the requirements and scheduling of reports to be submitted to the PMU; and 
-  Review plans for staff/ beneficiary training  
185. 
186. 
187. 
Annual work plan and budgeting– Following the Inception Workshop, a decentralised process 
will be put in place that focuses on the district level. Technical Implementation Units (TIU) will 
be set up at district hub level to coordinate the implementation of district plans. The Technical 
Implementation  Unit  will  comprise  the  Area  Hub  Coordinator,  SARP  technical  staff, 
representatives  of  DoA,  DAD,  DoA,  DAP,  service  providers  and  implementing  partner 
projects.  The plans will be informed by the community  level participatory  plans  expected to 
be prepared as part of the social mobilization and cascade planning processes.  
The District Cluster Plans will be consolidated at the central – PMU - level into a Project-wide 
draft  AWPB.  The  district  plans  will  subsequently  be  shared  with  IFAD  for  review  and 
expression of “No Objection”. The draft should be sent to IFAD latest by 31st October of every 
year or 60 days before the start of the next Project Year. IFAD will have 30 days for reviewing 
and provision of “No Objection” and the PMU will have a full month to revise and finalise the 
AWPB.  This  process  is  critical  to  ensure  the  timely  submission  of  the  draft  to  each  level  of 
approval. The finalised  AWPB  will be distributed  to all SARP  implementing partners by 31st 
December of every year to ensure a smooth transition from year to year. The AWPBs will be 
the basis for implementation. 
In order to ensure flexibility in implementation, the plans can be adjusted on a quarterly basis 
in the light of information collected from the community  together with the experience of field 
staff. This should be made at ASC and District level with adjustments made following the TIU 
meetings  where  the  problems  of  particular  communities  would  be  discussed.  The  quarterly 
plans should include a list of interventions with budget and output estimates and a budgeted 
assessment  of  all  inputs  required  for  the  district.  Some  of  the  input  procurement,  however, 
may be made in bulk from the central level PMU. Within the quarterly work plan budget, funds 
can be reallocated between interventions if under spending occurs. The TIU has the authority 
to  make  these  modifications.  The  quarterly  plans  should  be  submitted  together  with  a 
procurement plan that lists items to be procured by the PMU. The quarterly plans should be 
submitted 2 weeks ahead of the start of the semester. Changes to the AWPB must be sent for 
non-objection by IFAD. 
188.   Responsibilities for planning and coordination. Overall coordination of project components lies 
with the Project Director. After initial targeting and roll-out planning has been undertaken, the 
main  responsibility  for  planning  and  coordination  will  lie  at  District  Hub  and  District  levels. 
AWPBs will be developed and consolidated at district level, with support of the M&E assistant, 
who  will also  be responsible for the final compilation.  Final approval of the  work plans rests 
with the Project Director. 
189. 
Start-up activities.  
  A number of preliminary studies should be conducted immediately after the Financial Agreement 
is  drawn  up.  These  include  a  Climate  Risk  Analysis  consultancy  and  preparation  of  the 
56 
Environmental and Social Mapping Framework. These activities will be implemented in parallel to 
the start-up of the project in the field. 
  A  public  launch  will  be  held  in  Colombo  in  March  –  April  2020  that  will  include  a  wide  range  of 
stakeholders. The launch could include a start-up workshop for project staff and ministry officials 
directly  involved  in  project  implementation.  The  workshop  would  focus  of  implementation 
arrangement, setting the stage and updating and the roll out plan for project implementation.  
  As  the  Inception  Workshop  will  be  to  create  a  general  awareness  of  the  project,  it  should  be 
followed  up  by  Divisional  level  workshops  (half  or  full  day)  to  introduce  the  project  locally  and 
address some of the technical issues. Alternatively, one workshop could be held comprising staff 
from all 6 districts. At this  workshop the roll-out  plan  will be  validated and agreed upon. All staff 
will participate in this, for everyone to understand their role in reaching the development objective 
of  the  project.  These  workshops  should  be  used  to  decide  on  the  cascades,  tanks, ASCs  and 
communities for focus of project activities. The project will conduct some preliminary work and will 
set criteria for site selection before these are discussed in the technical workshops. This is a vital 
prerequisite to preparing detailed Annual Work Plans. Sufficient time will have to be given for the 
implementers  to  familiarise  themselves  with  the  PIM  and  ultimately  take  ownership  over 
implementation.  The  workshops  should  be  followed  by  the  information  campaign  on  identifying 
location  for  the  target  communities,  as  described  in  the  detailed  programme  description.  This 
launch  will  also  sensitise  beneficiaries  to  the  upcoming  surveys  to  be  undertaken,  and  alert 
possible service providers of upcoming calls for proposals.  
  As the project design documents are comprehensive there should not be a need to conduct many 
studies  at  start-up,  other  than  collection  of  baseline  information.  The  baseline  study  should 
include a review of the project areas and sites as described in more detail in the PIM. 
  Actions should be taken to conduct an inventory of service providers/ implementing partners and 
assess  their  capacity  to  provide  technical  support  to  the  subcomponents  of  the  project.  Sub-
contractors could include international organizations, national NGOs, government offices and the 
private  sector.  The  range  of  services  to  be  provided  should  be  advertised  for  competitive 
assessment.    
The complete list of start-up activities are given below. 
Activity 
SECAP follow up activities 
Inception (start-up) workshop 
District start-up workshops 
Assignment of key national staff 
Prepare ToR for Steering Committee and convene meeting 
Recruitment of national consultants 
Identification and recruitment of MoA staff 
Selection and contracting of service providers 
Tender preparation for vehicles and motor bikes 
Procurement of vehicles and motorbikes 
National preparation of AWPB Workshop and PIM  
Preparation of policy on grants and loans 
VAM targeting and planning 
Design of M&E system + manual 
Design of M&E software 
ToR for baseline survey and preparatory studies 
Baseline survey, assessment of Agrarian Service Centres and 
Agrarian Banks 
Responsibility  
Country Director 
PMU 
PMU 
PMU 
Initiator + PMU 
PMU 
MOA 
PMU 
PMU 
PMU 
PMU 
PMU IFAD TA staff 
Contracted organization 
M&E expert 
M&E expert 
PMU 
Contracted organization 
57 
190.  Monitoring,  evaluation  and  learning  –  An  M&E  system  will  be  established  to  provide 
information  on  progress  and  performance  that  monitors  the  implementation  process  and 
contributes  to  effective  Project  management,  decision  making  and  reporting,  including  to 
government and IFAD. Monitoring will focus on collecting data on the status of planned activities 
in  the  AWPB,  and  on  creating  a  cumulative  overview  of  the  direct  results  (deliverables/outputs) 
from Project start-up until completion. 
191. System design: SARP  will  put in place a results-based monitoring and evaluation system. This 
system  will  generate  comprehensive  and  reliable  information  to  support  planning  and  decision-
making. An annual survey will be conducted from PY3 to report on Core Indicators. The system 
will  be  participatory,  decentralised,  and  compliant  with  IFAD  requirements,  and  relevant  data, 
analysis  and  reporting  will  be  disaggregated  by  gender  and  age.  The  data  will  inform  the 
preparation of above mentioned AWPBs and annual progress reports compatible with ORMS. 
192. The  project  logical  framework  matrix  reflects  the  theory  of  change  behind  the  intervention, 
namely the reasoning behind the selected activities and outputs, for reaching the outcomes and 
objectives.  The  theory  of  change  is  the  description  of  the  changes  we  wish  to  see  and  the 
linkages  between  them  that  we  believe  to  exist.  The  logical  framework  represents  a  simple 
framework for monitoring programme key  performance indicators and for presenting the  logic  in 
reports etc.The number of indicators included in the log-frame is limited in number, and will act as 
key  performance  indicators.  This  will  be  supplemented  by  a  series  of  more  detailed  progress 
indicators and data to be collected.  
193. 
The objectives of the M&E system will be to: 
- 
- 
- 
Monitor  and  guide  programme  implementation  in  terms  of  relevance,  efficiency  and 
success in impacting the lives of the target groups  
Share knowledge 
Evaluate programme impact.  
194. The  approved  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  provides  the  basis  for  input  monitoring,  output 
monitoring,  process  monitoring,  annual  project  reporting,  and  results-oriented  annual  reporting. 
To meet the monitoring and evaluation requirements, the Project Director in consultation with the 
Technical  Assistance  team  will  be  responsible  for  including  the  following  requirements  into  the 
draft work plan and budget: 
  Expected outcomes, output targets, for each district  
  Detailed schedules for activities to be undertaken and inputs to be delivered 
  Monitoring indicators for delivery of inputs and production of outputs 
  Baseline data on location and status of project target groups 
  Schedule of formats for regular reporting 
195. 
In line with the implementation approach, the M&E system will be decentralised. Training and 
backstopping  will  be  provided  to  those  involved  in  data  collection  and  collation  at  the  different 
levels. Since many of the activities will be subcontracted to service providers, the different service 
provider  agreements  would  specify  responsibilities  for  monitoring  and  include  templates  for 
consistent reporting. 
196. 
The  M&E  system  will  assess  progress  and  achievements  of  the  interventions.  Provision  will 
be  made  for  close  monitoring  and  supervision  of  SARP  activities;  especially  during  the  first  two 
years  to  ensure  that  implementation  of  development  activities  proceeds  smoothly,  and  that  any 
problems  are  dealt  with  in  a  timely  manner.  The  M&E  system  will  also  monitor  and  assess 
development objectives and priorities regularly. This will support prompt identification of problems 
(such as objectives that are not being met or are off-track) so that remedial actions can be taken.  
197. Staffing  and  responsiblities:  The  M&E  Specialist  will  be  responsible  for  planning,  monitoring, 
reporting, evaluation and assessment, learning, knowledge management and communication, as 
well as ensuring appropriateness and efficiency of implementation related to targeting. Two M&E 
58 
Assistants  will  be  recruited  and  placed  at  the  District  Hubs,  under  the  supervision  of  the  M&E 
Specialist.  The  M&E  Assistants  at  district  level  with  the  support  of  the  M&E  expert  will  lead  the 
district  level  planning  and  monitoring  activities  which  will  align  with  the  procedures  of 
DoA/DAD/DoI.  The  M&E  Specialist  will  oversee  the  M&E  function.  The  relevant  units  of 
government at district level together with the main service providers, the implementation partners 
and the beneficiaries will play an important role in M&E functions. 
198. Baseline  data  and  surveys:  Baseline  data  and  studies  are  meant  to  provide  the  basis  for 
measurement  of  results  and  comparisons  over  time  and  space  for  the  mid-term  review, 
completion  and  ex-post  evaluations.  Beneficiary  surveys  will  be  undertaken  to  quantify  the 
coverage  and  usage  of  interventions  differentiated  by  gender  and  age.  It  will  further  assess  the 
extent  to  which  SARP  interventions  meet  the  expectations  of  beneficiaries  and  determine  the 
nature  and  magnitude  of  the  outcomes  of  the  interventions  on  households  and  communities.  A 
baseline survey will be undertaken during the first six months after entry into force. The baseline 
survey data collection will be complemented by the community level planning process. Efforts will 
be made to identify gender issues and gaps so that these can be addressed.  
199.  Local  level  monitoring:  The  Community  led  Watershed  Development  Plans  will  provide  the 
basis  for  input  monitoring,  output  monitoring,  process  monitoring  and  outcome  monitoring  at 
community  level.  To  meet  the  monitoring  and  evaluation  requirements,  the  Social  Inclusion  and 
Gender Facilitators together with the Community Facilitators will be responsible for including the 
following requirements into the respective development plans: output targets for the community, 
schedule  of  delivery  of  inputs,  projection  of  beneficiaries,  and  responsibilities  and  timing  for 
reporting 
200.  Mid-term  Review:  A  Mid-Term  Review  (MTR)  will  be  conducted  halfway 
through 
implementation  (beginning  of  PY4)  to  assess  the  performance  of  the  project,  results  attained 
against  the  established  objectives,  and  the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  SARP  management. 
The MTR will evaluate whether the Project is on course to achieve the objectives and will identify 
any constraints and recommend remedial measures to achieve them. The recommendations will 
consider  the  likelihood  of  achieving  the  Project's  targets  during  the  remaining  time  and  may 
modify those targets. Before completion, an impact assessment will be undertaken to inform the 
Project  Completion  Report  (PCR)  which  will  provide  an  assessment  of  the  accomplishments  of 
SARP and analysis of its performance. 
201.  Reporting:  
  Progress reports will be produced on a quarterly basis, for internal programme management 
use.  District,  quarterly  or  six-monthly  Implementation  Plans  will  provide  the  basis  for  input 
monitoring,  output  monitoring,  process  monitoring,  annual  project  reporting,  and  results-
oriented annual reporting at municipal level. Six month reports (with the annual report being 
larger)  will  be  submitted  to  IFAD  and  GoSL.  Reports  will  similarly  be  shared  with  service 
providers  and  beneficiaries.  The  PMU  will  produce  monthly,  quarterly  and  annual  reports. 
Formats  and  content  will  be  further  developed  at  the  start  of  implementation,  including  for 
various  service  providers  and  implementers.  Key  elements  will  include:  progress  reporting 
against  physical  and  financial  targets,  evidence  of  outcomes  for  each  component,  etc. 
Standard sections on targeting, gender, partnerships and knowledge management.  
  Monthly  field  reports.  Community  facilitators  will  be  expected  to  convene  community  level 
meetings through the Community Development Fora on a regular basis and will document the 
minutes.  Information  should  include  the  progress  of  the  activity,  discussing  problems, 
solutions and actions. They will also be expected to submit short monthly reports on planned 
activities  that  have  not  taken  place,  and  identify  the  constraints  and  any  type  of  support 
required.  The  Area  Coordinators  will  review  these  with  the  purpose  of  initiating  immediate 
actions  to  ensure  that  quarterly  performance  is  on  track.  Standard  reporting  formats  will  be 
developed.  
  GoSL reporting. As per Ministry of Agriculture – DoA/ DAD requirements, the project will feed 
into annual sector reviews and reporting formats provided. Coordination with relevant ministry 
departments as well as participation in policy development meetings will be the responsibility 
of the PIU. 
59 
  RIMS. As part of its corporate reporting system, IFAD has developed the Results and Impact 
Management  System  (RIMS),  which  aims  to  create  a  common  set  of  indicators  that  can  be 
compared across projects and countries. All IFAD-financed projects supervised by IFAD are 
required to report on the indicators annually,  as  well  as undertake RIMS compliant baseline 
and  impact  assessment  studies  for  reporting  on  anchor  indicators  of  child  malnutrition,  food 
security  and  household  assets.  Considerable  effort  has  been  made  during  the  design  to 
ensure that this reporting requirement is consistent with the reporting requirements internally 
in the programme. Each year, by 31 March, the programme will report on the selected RIMS 
indicators  and  on  programme  outreach,  for  the  previous  calendar  year,  in  an  Excel  format 
provided by IFAD.  
202. Learning and Knowledge Management – Knowledge Management (KM) will ensure that Project 
implementation is a continuous learning process in which quantitative and qualitative data will be 
compiled,  analysed  and  disseminated  as  lessons  learned,  together  with  thematic  studies  and 
stories from the field that explain challenges encountered and results achieved. 
203. The project  will  include some innovative features that include:  a) the  targeting  and community-
level  planning  methodology  to  be  applied;  b)  new  sustainable  land  management  measures;  c) 
linking nutritionally rich food items to institutional markets (e.g. school feeding); d) roll-out of the 
FBS approach; e) youth incubation pilot testing; f) small-scale mechanization hire services; and 
g) pilot-testing  of climate data  information and market information systems. The FBS approach 
and  community  planning  processes  have  already  been  tried  and  tested  in  Sri  Lanka  and  are 
available for scaling-up. 
204. Capturing  and  documenting  lessons  and  innovations  through  on-going  data  collection, 
monthly/semi-annual  reports,  and  thematic  studies  will  be  an  integral  part  of  SARP.  The 
knowledge  management  function  of  the  M&E  will  document  and  share  knowledge  through 
internal  (e.g.,  learning  events,  stakeholder  workshop  meetings,  etc.)  and  external  mechanisms 
(e.g.,  website,  blogs,  radio,  podcasts  featuring  programme  stakeholders,  etc.).  Knowledge 
activities will proactively pursue gender and youth issues, and present success stories related to 
commercialisation  of  agriculture  and  increasing  resilience.  SAP  will  also  have  bi-annual  and 
annual  review  meetings  /  workshops.  Workshops  will  report  on  programme  progress,  lessons 
learned,  challenges  and  solutions  to  implementation  constraints.  In  complement,  an  SMS 
communication  and  broadcasting  system  will  be  developed  to  reduce  the  communication  gap 
between field-level farmers and the project. 
205. For innovation and learning, coordination amongst donor programmes will be required as well as 
amongst  the  various  extension  services  at  the  different  administrative  levels.  Platforms  for 
improved  coordination  and  the  effective  dissemination  and  scaling  of  technologies  will  be 
established through platforms set up at district and community level. 
206. The  information  to  be  generated  by  the  M&E  system  will  enable  DoA,  DAD,  DAP  and  other 
related  departments, the Divisional Offices and other  relevant stakeholders to carefully monitor 
SARP and provide reliable information on the different interventions and the resultant impacts (or 
lack thereof). Information sharing with other dry zone projects in Sri Lanka will receive particular 
attention. Knowledge gained in other countries of the region will be made available to SARP. In 
turn,  the  SARP  experience  will  inform  regional  learning  on  integrated  watershed  development 
interventions. 
60 
c. Financial Management, Audit and Governance 
207.  The overall inherent risk of the country is deemed MEDIUM. Sri Lanka is ranked 89th out of 180 
countries with the score of 38 in the Corruption Perception Index (CPI) in the survey conducted 
by Transparency International. The 2018 RSP rating is 3.7  – medium risk bracket. Overall, the 
financial management risk is rated as Medium.  Taking into consideration recent experience of 
IFAD-financed  projects,  Financial  Management  Assessment  was  undertaken  for  the  NADEP 
and SAP at this design, guided by the 'financial management questionnaire (FMAQ)'. In view of 
the  mitigation  measures  and  previous  experience  of  the  NADeP  and  SAP,  the  overall  project 
fiduciary risk is assessed to be Medium at the design stage. 
208.  The Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) has as one of its four main functions, management of the 
country’s  public  debt,  on  behalf  of  the  government.  All  advance  accounts  related  to  foreign 
funds are opened and maintained at the CBSL. Government is in the process of implementing a 
series  of  focused  legislative,  administrative,  institutional  and  capacity  improvement  measures. 
These initiatives mainly cover reforms in the areas of taxation, expenditure management, public 
enterprises, procurement and policy improvements.  
209.  The  Presidential  Secretariat  as  the  Lead  Project  Agency  (LPA),  will  have  the  overall 
accountability for the project, including fiduciary aspects. The project will (i) establish a control 
framework  integrating  periodic  internal  audits,  independent  external  audits,  and  social 
safeguards  to  be  adopted  based  on  IFAD  policies;  (ii)  adopt  a  good  governance  and  mutual 
accountability framework to strengthen accountability and transparency in line with international 
best  practices.(iii)  outline 
financial  management  procedures  and 
disbursement  requirements  in  the  PIM;  and    (iv)  establish  a  Management  Information  System 
(MIS) to support the core project management functions 
the  project  specific 
210.  Organisation  and  staffing. The  dedicated  PMU  for  the  SARP  will  be  set  up  and  established 
under the Presidential Secretariat, though strengthened to include additional positions relevant 
to  achieving  the  SARP  project  objectives.  This  PMU  will  be  responsible  for  implementing  all 
operational-level  fiduciary  functions.  The  Finance  department  of  the  PMU  will  consist  of  a 
Finance  Manager,  released  on  a  full-time  basis,  to  be  assisted  by  an  Accountant  and  two 
Accounts Assistants. In addition, an Internal Auditor and a Procurement Officer with experience 
of  National  Procurement  Procedures  will  be  recruited  to  the  PMU  (and  will  also  hold 
responsibility  for  contract  management).  Overall,  the  Finance  department,  reporting  to  the 
Project Coordinator for SAP and SARP, will take on the key functions of project administration.     
211.  Budgeting.  Sri  Lanka  has  a  three-tier  administrative  structure:  central,  provincial,  and  local 
government. All  activities  of  the  government  are  predetermined  and  are  set  out  in  plans  and 
programs.  The  annual  estimates  of  expenditure  detail  the  financial  commitment  of  the 
government  for  the  next  year’s  program  of  activities. There  are  three  budget  areas—national, 
provincial,  and  local—  corresponding  to  the  three  levels  of  government.  The  Constitution 
requires  the  central  government  to  allocate  adequate  funds  from  the  annual  budget  to  the 
provincial councils to meet their needs. The Finance  Commission is the intermediary  between 
the central government and the provincial councils in finance matters.  
212.  The PMU, after consultations with project stakeholders, shall prepare its annual budget, linking 
all  the  planned  activities  to  the  cost  categories  outlined  in  Schedule  II  of  the  Financing 
Agreement; this exercise will take place in advance of the preparation of the national budget, to 
ensure  that  the  required  Government  funds  will  be  allocated  and  available  on  time  from  the 
General  Treasury.  All  financing  contributions  should  be  clearly  stated  in  the  budget  to  be 
submitted to the NSC and IFAD for its approval. 
213.  The  LPA  should  make  adequate  annual  budgetary  provisions  for  IFAD  funds  and  Counterpart 
funds in the National Budget, based on the AWPB of the Project. 
214.  Disbursement arrangements and flow of funds. The Presidential Secretariat, the LPA, would 
be  responsible  for  managing  the  funds  flow  from  the  loan  proceeds  and,  opening  and 
61 
maintaining the Designated Account in US Dollars at the Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) to 
receive loan resources in advance as soon as possible after entry into force of the Agreement. 
Replenishments  of  the  DA  would  be  effected  through  submission  of  Withdrawal  Applications 
(WAs) and accompanying Statements of Expenditures (SOEs) and/or supporting document, in 
accordance  with  IFAD  procedure  as  set  out  in  the  Letter  to  the  Borrower  and  Loan 
Disbursement Handbook, to IFAD.  
215.  In  accordance  with  Section  3.1  of  the  LDH,  the  Designated  Account  will  be  administered 
following  Imprest  Account  arrangements.  Advances  from  this  Financing  must  be  segregated 
from other funds for the Project 
216.  IFAD  funds  would  be  channelled  through  the  Designated  Account  maintained  at  the  CBSL. 
Under Imprest arrangements, the maximum authorized allocation to the Designated Account will 
be  USD  4  million.  One  or  more  advances  may  be  withdrawn  within  this  authorized  allocation. 
Before disbursement can begin, IFAD must receive, from the designated representative a letter 
designating  the  names  of  officials  authorized  to  sign  withdrawal  applications  which  includes 
their  authenticated  specimen  signature(s).    The  project  is  eligible  and  authorised  to  use  the 
IFAD Client Portal (ICP), the applicable form is included in LTB.  
217.  Documentation  evidencing  the  opening  of  the  Designated Account,  with  details  of  the  names 
and  titles  of  the  persons  authorized  to  operate  this/these  account(s),  must  reach  IFAD  before 
withdrawal from the loan account can begin. The Project will maintain Project Accounts in local 
currency at a state owned commercial bank, to receive funds from the Designated Account for 
eligible  expenditure  for  the  project  implementation.  The  government  will  maintain  the  Project 
Accounts in a state owned local currency at the commercial bank to provide counterpart funds 
for Project implementation. 
218.  The following are the SOE thresholds29 that apply for withdrawal application under procedure (i) 
"Advance  Withdrawal"  and  under  procedure  (iii)  "Reimbursement":  USD  50,000  for  all 
expenditures categories. 
219.  Internal  controls  and  internal  audit. As  part  of  internal  control  procedures,  the  PMU  would 
give effect to a formal delegation of authority and clear segregation of duties among the project 
staff. In addition, the project’s financial performance will be periodically reviewed by the National 
Steering  Committee chaired by  the  Presidential Secretariat. The overall  control  measures and 
systems and procedures that are in place (applying Government rules) are relatively adequate 
to  address  needs  of  the  proposed  project.  Furthermore,  following  Government  circular,  all 
donor-financed projects must employ an internal auditor, which will also be the case for SARP.    
220.  Management  Information  System  (including Accounting  software).  The  Project  will  establish  a 
Management  Information  System  (MIS)  to  support  the  core  project  management  functions  at 
the central and district levels, such as business plan  development, financial management and 
project monitoring and evaluation. 
221.  The  PMU  will  adopt  an  accounting  software,  customised  to  record  and  generate  financial 
reports  and  preserve  financial  data  per  the  requirements  of  IFAD.  The  customisation  should 
comply to the chart of accounts, disbursement rules and share of financiers and should be able 
to generate Financial Statements and automate the preparation of Was.  
222.  External Financial Audit. The Auditor General (AG) who is constitutionally mandated to audit 
all  government  accounts  and  report  to  Parliament  annually,  will  perform  the  external  financial 
audit of the project. A copy of the Financing Agreement (FA) and other relevant  information of 
the Project should be submitted to the AG’s office in advance, enabling AG to issue necessary 
instructions  and  guidance  to  staff  and  ensure  timely  submission  of  audit  report  and 
management letters. Specific additional auditing requirements of IFAD will be communicated to 
the AG, and the AG would submit audited financial statement and a detailed audit report along 
with a Management Letter not later than six months after the end of the financial year. 
62 
223.  IFAD will publicly disclose project financial statements and audit reports of projects financed by 
IFAD.  In  line  with  the  standards  of  the  International  Aid  Transparency  Initiative,  the 
government is  encouraged  to  publish  relevant  financial  information on their own websites, for 
increased  accountability.  The 
the  
borrower/recipient  and    of    IFAD    to    publish    the    audit    report,    with    no  limitation-of-use 
clause. 
  audit  TORs  explicitly  mention 
right  of 
the 
224.  Lending Terms and Financing Conditions  
225.  The Loan is granted on ordinary terms and shall be subject to interest on the principal amount 
outstanding of the Loan rate equal to the IFAD Reference Interest Rate, payable semi-annually 
in  the  Loan  Service  Payment  Currency,  and  have  a  maturity  period  with  a  MAXIMUM  35 
YEARS, including a grace period   with MAXIMUM 10 YEARS starting from the date as of which 
the Fund has determined that all general conditions precedent to withdrawal have been fulfilled. 
The grace period and maturity period shall be confirmed at the financing agreement negotiation. 
A summary of FM risks and mitigating actions at SAP design stage is presented below. 
Summary of Project Fiduciary Risk Assessment at Design 
Initial Risk 
Assessment 
Proposed  Mitigation 
Final Risk 
Assessment 
M 
Index: 38 in 2018 
(ranking 89 out of 
180) 
The overall inherent risk of the country is deemed MEDIUM. Sri 
Lanka is ranked 89th out of 180 countries with the score of 38 in 
the Corruption Perception Index (CPI) in the survey conducted by 
Transparency International. The 2018 RSP rating is 3.7 – medium 
risk bracket- 
Inherent Risk 
1. TI Index 
Control Risks 
1. Organization 
and Staffing 
2. Budgeting 
3. Funds flow and 
Disbursement 
Arrangements 
4. Internal Controls 
5. Accounting 
Systems, Policies 
& Procedures 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
H 
M 
M 
M 
H 
 A dedicated PMU for SARP to be set up 
 
  Additional finance and procurement staff to be recruited 
  Comprehensive, user-friendly PIM to be finalized 
All financing contributions should be clearly stated in the budget 
to be submitted to the NSC and IFAD for its approval. 
79. 
The  LPA  should  make  adequate  annual  budgetary 
provisions  for  IFAD  funds  and  Counterpart  funds  in  the  National 
Budget, based on the AWPB of the Project. 
Early consultative process for preparation of AWPB and PP with 
timely submission to NSC and IFAD 
  Clear definition of funds flow  
The PMU would give effect to a formal delegation of authority and 
clear segregation of duties among the project staff. In addition, the 
project’s financial performance will be periodically reviewed by the 
National Steering Committee chaired by the Presidential 
Secretariat. The overall control measures and systems and 
procedures that are in place (applying Government rules) are 
relatively adequate to address needs of the proposed project  
80.  Management 
Information  System  (including  Accounting 
software).  The  Project  will  establish  a  Management 
Information  System  (MIS)  to  support  the  core  project 
management  functions  at  the  central  and  district    levels, 
such as business plan development, financial management 
and project monitoring and evaluation. 
6. Reporting and 
M 
  PIM to detail reporting and monitoring requirements and rules 
M 
63 
Summary of Project Fiduciary Risk Assessment at Design 
Initial Risk 
Assessment 
Proposed  Mitigation 
Final Risk 
Assessment 
monitoring 
  Financial reporting to be automatically generated through 
7. Internal Audit 
M 
81. 
accounting software 
,  following  Government  circular,  all  donor-financed  projects 
must employ an internal auditor, which will also be the case 
for  
82. 
Project  management  to  act  on  internal  audit  findings  and 
recommendations 
  Agree on TORs and maintain continuous dialogue with AG of 
Sri Lanka and IFAD to ensure submission of acceptable 
reports, timely submission of annual audits and informative 
management letters 
8. External Audit 
M 
Project Fiduciary 
Risk Design 
M 
d. Procurement  
L 
M 
M 
226.  The  main  purpose  of  this  section  is  to  provide  implementation  support  to  SARP  to  fulfil  its 
procurement  responsibilities.    Accordingly,  SARP  is  required  to  perform  all  procurement 
responsibilities in accordance with the Loan Agreement signed between the Government of Sri 
Lanka  (GoSL)  and  International  Fund  for  Agriculture  Development  (IFAD),  Procurement 
Guidelines and Letter to the Borrower (LTB).  The prime objective of procurement process is to 
achieve  value  for  money,  in  an  efficient,  fair,  equitable,  transparent,  competitive  and  cost-
effective environment.    
Regulatory framework of Public Procurement 
227. Government Procurement Guidelines that are implemented across all government organizations 
and foreign funded projects without any exception, would be adopted by SARP to the extent that 
they  are  consistent  with  IFAD  Procurement  guidelines;  any  inconsistency,  IFAD  Procurement 
Guidelines  supersede  the  Government  Guidelines.    The  Government  Procurement  Guidelines 
issued in 2006 are still in force until the revised version of the Guidelines (2017 revision) that are 
being  tabled  at  the  Parliament  are  approved.  The  new  Guidelines  are  supplemented  with  two 
Manuals  covering  procurement  of  Goods, Works,  Information  Systems,  Services  and  selection 
and employment of consultants.  
Procurement prior-review Threshold 
228. The  below-listed  thresholds  are  set  in  consideration  of  country-specific  risk-indicators, 
as well as experience from other completed and ongoing IFAD projects in Sri Lanka 
Procurement & Prior-review Thresholds 
Currency: US$ 
International 
Competitive Bidding 
National Competitive 
Bidding 
National Shopping  Prior-review 
Goods 
Works 
≥ 150.000 
≥ 400.000 
50.000 to 150.000 
≤ 50.000 
100.000 to  400.000 
≤ 100.000 
≥ 100.000 
≥ 100.000 
Request for proposal 
(internationally) 
Request for proposal 
(nationally) 
Request for 
quotation 
(National 
Shopping) 
64 
Non- 
Consulting 
Services 
Consulting 
Services 
≥ 80.000 
 50.000 to  80.000 
≤ 50.000 
≥ 50.000 
≥ 80.000 
(QCBS) 
50.000 to 80.000 
(LCS) 
≤ 50.000 
(CQS/ICS) 
≥ 50.000 
(The Letter to the Borrower (LTB) includes further details. ) 
229.  Ethics in Procurement 
Fraud  and  corruptions:  The  project  procurement  process  should  strictly  adhere  to  the  Anti-
Corruption  Policy  of  IFAD  (zero  tolerance  to  corrupt,  fraudulent,  collusive,  coercive  and  obstructive 
practices,) as required by Financing Agreement and IFAD Procurement Guidelines.  
Confidentiality: All parties associated with procurement activities should maintain strict confidentiality 
throughout the process. 
Conflict  of  interest:  The  officials,  firms  and  any  other  individuals  involved  in  procurement  process 
should  not  have  a  conflict  of  interest.  All  members  of  Procurement  Committees  and  Technical 
Committees  are  required  to  make  a  declaration  that  they  do  not  have  any  conflict  of  interest  in  the 
procurement concerned, before participating in the process, 
Use  of  project  funds:  Funds  allocated  under  the  project  should  be  used  only  for  the  purposes 
provided and according to the accepted professional ethics and contractual obligations. 
230.  Procurement Management Unit 
A  dedicated  Procurement  Unit  (PU)  would  be  established  in  the  PMU,  headed  by  a  Senior 
Procurement  Officer  assisted  by  a  Procurement  Officer  with  adequate  supporting  staff.  The  Senior 
Procurement  officer  will  be  reporting  direct  to  the  Project  Manager  (PM).  The  Procurement  staff 
should  have  minimum  five  years’  experience  in  donor  funded  projects  and  be  selected  by  open 
advertisement  followed  by  a  formal  interview.  Their  appointments  are  subject  to  IFAD  NO-objection 
and their availability until the project completion is emphasized. 
231.  Procurement Roles and Responsibilities 
User Depts:  
(a)  It  is  the  responsibility  of  the  user  /  beneficiary  department,  in  this  case  Dept.  of  Agriculture, 
Agrarian  Development  and  Irrigation,  to  submit  the  list  of  annual  requirement  of  items    (goods, 
services and works) based on their planned activities as reflected in the AWPB to the PMU; the 
list will serve as input into the Procurement plan of the project; 
(b)  Submission of TOR for services, Bill of Quantities for works and Specification of goods; 
(c)  Participate/represent in Technical Committee (TEC) meetings when finalizing 
TOR/BOQ/Specifications; 
(d)  Participate  in  Procurement  Committee  meetings  and  involve  in  contract  monitoring  process 
actively, depending on the nature of the contract. 
Finance Unit of the SARP 
(a)  Provide confirmation on availability of funds for the procurement; 
(b)  Effect payment when the contract has been satisfactorily performed. 
Procurement Unit of the SARP 
While  overall  responsibility  of  project  procurements  rests  with  the  PM,  Procurement  Unit  (PU) 
headed  by  Senior  Procurement  Officer  performs  all  project  procurements.  Accordingly,  Senior 
Procurement Officer is directly responsible to the PM and  the role played by him is as follows. 
(a)  Active participation in preparation of annual work planning process.  
(b)  Preparation  of  annual  procurement  plan  in  line  with  the  AWPB  and  obtaining  NOL  of  IFAD 
and subsequent revisions. 
65 
(c)  Initiating  action  to  get  Procurement  and  Technical  Evaluation  Committees  (PCs  and  TECs) 
appointed  by  the  relevant  authorities  according  to  the  Government  Procurement  Guidelines 
and arrange meetings. 
(d)  Preparation of draft bid  documents and recommend appropriate procurement method to  the 
PC /TEC. 
(e)  Recommending evaluation criteria and assist TEC and PCs. 
(f)  Ensuring prior review requirements are fulfilled.  
(g)  Advertising and invitation of bids. 
(h)  Making arrangements to receive bids and assist Bid opening committees in opening bids. 
(i)  Obtaining  approval  of  the  appropriate  authorities  for  the  recommendation  made  by  the  PCs 
and  convey  decision  of  awards  to  the  successful  bidder  and  provide  publicity  of  award 
through relevant websites and Newspapers. 
(j)  Obtaining prior approval of IFAD for award when necessary. 
(k)  Contract monitoring and suggesting remedial action to the PMU as necessary. 
(l)  Maintaining the Contract Register and submission the same to the CPM monthly. 
Procurement committee. 
(a)  Approval of bidding documents and Procurement Time Schedule. 
(b)  Review  recommendation  of  the  TEC  and  recommend  award  of  Contract  to  the  appropriate 
authority.   
Note: TEC is composed of set of officers who are experts in the relevant field to assist PCs. 
232.  Procurement Methods 
Procurement  of  goods,  Works  and  Services  and  selection  of  consultants  that  does  not  involve 
international  bidding  will  be  carried-out  according  to  the  Government  Procurement  Guidelines. 
Competitive bidding is the basis for economical and efficient public procurement. However, depending 
on  the  nature  of  the  procurement  with  emphasis  to  the  market  situation  the  project  should  select 
appropriate procurement method according to the Guidelines.  The procedure that should be followed 
for  every  category  of  procurement  financed  by  IFAD,  is  defined  in  the  LTB.    The  details  of  the 
procurements  that  are  to  be  completed  during  the  year  will  be  reflected  in  the  annual  Procurement 
Plan. Direct contracting and single sourcing may be used in exceptional circumstances when it can be 
justified that competitive method would not yield better value for money and with specific approval of 
IFAD.  Procurement  of  small  quantities  of  office  supplies  and  equipment  and  consumable  materials 
which  are  available  locally  at  economical  prices  would  be  procured  through  shopping  procedure 
based on quotations received from minimum three reliable suppliers.  
233.  Procurement Planning 
The  PMU  would  be  responsible  for  preparing  and  forwarding  procurement  plan  to  IFAD  for  “No 
objection” on an annual basis, 60 days prior to the commencement of the relevant financial year and 
subsequent revisions. Procurements would be made according to the approved procurement plan and 
AWPB  of  the  project.    As  provided  in  all  Financing  Agreements  and  Procurement  Guidelines,  IFAD 
review of and no objection to the Borrower’s procurement plans is compulsory.  Annual procurement 
plan  and  subsequent  revised  plans  would  be  submitted  to  IFAD  for  No-objection  in  the  format  with 
planned and actual rows across three different categories (first 18 month procurement plan is given in 
Annex    7).    PMU  is  required  to  update  Procurement  plan  to  reflect  changes  of  the  project  and 
timescale.  It should minimum includes: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
A brief description of each procurement activity to be undertaken during the period and 
name of the implementing agency responsible for the procurement; 
The estimated value of each procurement activity; 
The method of procurement to be adopted for each procurement activity and;  
The  method  of  review  IFAD  will  undertake  for  each  procurement  activity  indicating 
either post review or prior review.  
66 
234. Misprocurement 
Instances  where  procurements are not carried out in  accordance  with the Guidelines and Financing 
Agreement,  IFAD  will  declare  that  the  procurements  concerned  are  ineligible  for  funding  by  IFAD.  
Even  if  the  contract  was  awarded  following  IFAD  No-objection,  still  IFAD  has  right  to  declare 
Misprocurement  if  it  concludes  that  the  NOL  was  issued  on  inaccurate  information  provided  by  the 
Project.  
235. Procurement process 
Procurement  process  mainly  comprised  of  preparation  of  bidding  documents,  bidding  process,  Bid 
evaluation  and  award  of  contract.  All  these  steps  are  comprehensively  explained  in  Government 
Procurement  Guidelines  and  the  project  is  expected  to  follow  them.  In  case  any  provision  in  the 
Government  Guidelines  is  in  inconsistent  with  IFAD  Procurement  Guidelines,  as  stated  at  the 
beginning of this Manual, IFAD Guidelines would be applied. The PMU should ensure that  
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
Procurement  will  be  carried  out  in  accordance  with  Financing  Agreement  and  any  duly 
agreed amendments thereto and procedure and limits specified in Letter to the Borrower; 
Procurement  will  be  carried-out  within  the  Project  implementation  period,  except  as 
provided under IFAD General Conditions; 
Procurement  is  to  be  consistent  with  the  duly  approved  annual  work  plan  and  budget 
(AWPB) and procurement plan (for the first time, the procurement plan will cover the first 18 
months of the project implementation period); 
Procurement is to result in the best value for money and fit for the purpose 
It  is  appropriate  to  explain  the  provisions  applicable  for  Direct  contracting  or  sole-sourcing  at  this 
juncture,  as  special  attention  of  project  authorities  deserve  this  area  and  it  is  allowed  only  in  very 
exceptional  circumstances  with  express  approval  of  IFAD;  and  subject  to  possible  misuse.  
Accordingly, the direct contracting and single sourcing is permitted under following circumstances: 
(a)  An existing contract awarded in compliance with procurement procedure acceptable to IFAD 
may be extended to procure additional goods or works of similar nature to a maximum value 
of  25%  of  the  original  contract,  provided  that  no  advantage  could  be  obtained  by  further 
competition and that the prices are reasonable.  
(b)  Standardisation  of  vehicles,  equipment  or  spare  parts  to  ensure  compatibility  with  existing 
vehicles, equipment or machinery may justify additional purchase from the original supplier. 
(c)  The required equipment is proprietary and obtainable from one source. 
(d)  Process design requires purchase of a critical item form a particular supplier as a condition for 
a performance guarantee. 
(e)  Purchase from original supplier may be justified in exceptional cases and emergencies such 
as in response to natural disaster, situations such as emergencies. conflicts and post conflicts 
in the country. (For further details refer to Section E of the IFAD Procurement Guidelines.) 
239. The post ordering phase and Contract Management 
Post ordering phase:  A contract or Purchase Order duly signed by the authorized personnel will be 
issued  to  the  successful  bidder  with  copies  to  the  parties  concerned.  An  order  /  contract 
acknowledgement should be examined to ensure that the order has been accepted on the terms and 
conditions  agreed  and  filed.    It  may  be  necessary  to  monitor  the  progress  of  order  to  ensure  that 
delivery  dates  are  met  or  to  expedite  delivery  of  overdue  orders.  On  receipt  of  the  GRN  (Goods 
Received Note) from the stores that goods are in the expected quality and quantity, Finance division 
would make the payment; and the procurement documents are transferred to completed orders file. 
Contract Management:   Contract Management procedure is designed to ensure that  
I. 
The  supplier  performs  the  contract  in  accordance  with  the  terms  and  conditions  in  the 
contract; 
II. 
The procuring entity fulfills its obligations and duties under the contract; and 
III.  Swift remedial or preventive action is taken when problems crop-up or are foreseen. 
67 
Overall  contract  management  will  be  the  responsibility  of  the  Senior  Procurement  Officer  who  may 
draw  on  other  sources  such  as  technical  expertise,  payment  services,  legal  services  and  supply 
management systems as required.  All contracts will be listed in the Register of Contract in the format 
introduced by IFAD.  Updated Contract Register would be submitted to the CPM monthly as required in 
the  Loan  covenant.    In  order  to  improve  system  of  Contract  management,  PMU  would  take-up  any 
issue  that  can  not  be  solved  at  project  level  to  the  notice  of  the  Steering  Committee  for  appropriate 
action.   
231 Filing system and Record Management As the procurement processes are subject to review by 
IFAD,  External  and  Internal  auditors  of  the  country  and  Supervision  missions  to  verify  that  the 
procurement  procedure  stipulated  in  the  Loan  Agreement,  and  Guidelines  have  been  applied.    In 
order  to  ensure  the  transparency  and  correctness  of  the  procurement  procedure,  all  original 
documents relating to their processing should be kept under safe custody of the Senior Procurement 
Officer until the project is completed and thereafter transferred to the LPA.  As a best practice, each 
procurement  activity  will  have  its  own  separate  file  or  folder  or  dossier  containing  properly  coded 
records in chronological order which facilitates reviewing at any time the entire historical record of a 
certain procurement.  Records relating to any procurement should be maintained for a period of five 
years from the completion of the project.  
Preferred format of documents: 
Preferred Format 
Hard copy 
Hard or soft copy 
Hard copy 
Hard copy 
Hard copy 
Hard copy 
Hard or soft copy 
Hard copy 
Hard copy 
Document 
A copy of the published advertisement or list of suppliers in Limited tenders  Hard copy 
A copy of the published pre-qualification and invitation documents and any 
Hard copy 
amendments, extensions or clarifications that were requested and issued 
Minutes of the bid opening and attendance sheet signed by all present 
Bid received and evaluated, plus clarifications requested and responses 
received 
Technical evaluation report 
Signed minutes of all meetings relating to the procurement, including pre-bid 
and negotiation meetings where these were held 
A contract award notice 
Letter of Bid /offer acceptance to the supplier, contractor or consultant 
The signed contract document or letter of contract acceptance 
Any contract amendments 
All contractual correspondence between the procuring entity and a supplier, 
contractor or consultant Hard or soft copy 
Post-contract documents relating to the fulfilment of contract obligations, in 
particular photocopies of performance guarantee or advance payment 
payment guarantees. 
Signed minutes of any meetings related to contract management, including 
contract progress or review meetings 
Signed delivery documents evidencing delivery of supplies or signed 
completion certificates in relation to a contract for services or works under 
the 
contract including any contract delivery records 
Copies of all invoices for works, services or supplies including work-papers 
verifying  the  accuracy  of  payments  claimed  and  details  of  the  actual 
payment authorized 
A copy of cumulative payment worksheets/records evidencing management 
of all payments made 
All  submissions  to  and  all  decisions  of  the  appropriate  approval  authority 
related 
including  the  approval  of  the  invitation 
documents, approval of the evaluation report(s), contract award, approval of 
contract documents and contract amendments and any decision to suspend 
or cancel procurement proceedings 
Any  claims  made  by  the  procuring  entity  in  respect  of  any  warranty,  short 
supply,  damage  and  other  claims  upon  the  provider  or  upon  the  procuring 
entity. 
In the case of IFAD prior review, all submissions and correspondence in 
relation to the seeking of IFAD’s ‘No Objection’ 
the  procurement 
Hard copy 
Hard copy 
Hard copy 
Hard copy 
Hard copy 
to 
Hard or soft copy 
Hard or soft copy 
Hard and Soft copy 
68 
Any other communications relating to the procurement in questions including 
internal entity correspondence 
Hard or soft copy 
Frequency of procurement supervision 
IFAD will monitor the procurement performance on a sample basis when semi-annual implementation 
support missions are carried out.   
69 
Environmental and social safeguards 
Objectives.  The  objective  of  the  Review  Note  of  the  Social  Environment  and  Climate  Assessment 
Procedures (SECAP) is for the project to take into account social, environmental and climate change 
issues. The Review Note summarizes the development context, looks how the project might impact it 
with  regards  to  IFAD’s  mainstreaming  themes  (gender,  youth,  nutrition,  indigenous  peoples,  climate 
and environment) and makes specific recommendations how the project can mitigate risks and better 
include social and environmental concerns. The SECAP aims at mainstreaming social, environmental 
and  climate  adaptation  sustainability  issues  into  all  the  components  of  the  project,  as  well  as  at 
ensuring  effective  stakeholder  engagement,  including  a  procedure  to  respond  to  alleged  complaints 
from project-affected individuals /communities. 
Values and principles.  The environmental and social values and principles include the following:  
  Addressing the vulnerability and adaptation priorities of rural people, by ensuring the efficient use 
of natural resources and promoting approaches to (re)build social cohesion and good governance 
of natural resources.  
  Promoting  the  sustainable  use  of  natural  resources  and  protection  of  key  ecosystems  in  an 
 
integrated manner. 
Implementing participatory approaches, with special emphasis on the participation of and benefits 
to women and youth. 
  Promoting the development of Indigenous Peoples and other marginalized groups. 
  Promoting sound agricultural and manufacturing processes.  
  Ensuring  stakeholder  consultation, 
transparency  and  accountability 
in  programme/project 
operations.  
Environmental and social safeguards Implementation.  The environmental and social safeguards 
being  mainstreamed  in  all  SARP  activities,  all  members  of  the  PMU  are  concerned  by  their 
implementation,  while  the  Project  Director,  the  Natural  Resource  Management  and  Environmental 
Safeguards  Specialist,  the  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  Specialist  and  the    Social  Inclusion  and 
Institutions  Specialist  have  specific  responsibilities  for  their 
implementation,  monitoring  and 
evaluation,  as  defined  in  their  respective  Terms  of  Reference.  An  Environment  and  Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) will be developed to inform the adaptation measures that SARP is 
expected  to  bring,  and  to  formalize  them  into  the  ESMF  and  its  Environmental  and  Social 
Management  Plan  (ESMP).  The  ESMP  indicators  will  be  monitored  regularly,  as  appropriate.  In 
addition, specific environmental and social indicators will be developed and integrated into the logical 
framework and will be regularly evaluated, as appropriate.  
Sensitization  on  environmental  and  social  safeguards.  In  view  of  raising  awareness  on  the 
environmental  and  social  safeguards  the  project  will  organize  meeting,  workshops,  and  seminars  to 
the relevant target groups, under the responsibility of the Project Director, and with the support of the 
Natural  Resource  Management  and  Environmental  Safeguards  Specialist,  the  Monitoring  and 
Evaluation Specialist and the Social Inclusion and Institutions Specialist. 
70 
APPENDICES 
Appendix 1: Targeting and Mainstreaming Priorities 
The  social  inclusion  strategy  for  SARP  provides  measures  to  ensure  meaningful  participation  of 
youth,  people  with  disabilities,  indigenous  people  in  the  project  activities  and  provides  a  nutrition 
sensitive  approach  to  ensure  food  security  for  the  beneficiaries.  The  strategy  provides  guidance  on 
operationalization of mainstreaming priorities of IFAD.  
Youth between the ages of 15-29, represent approximately 24 percent of the population of the country 
with  over  75  percent  of  whom  live  in  rural  areas.  Youth  continue  to  face  challenges  related  to 
education,  civic  engagement,  political  participation  and  employment  in  particular.  Unemployment  for 
people aged between 20-24 and 25-29 is around 44 percent and 34 percent, respectively (2014). Sri 
Lanka’s  vulnerability  to  climate  change  has  a  strong  impact  on  youth  population,  limiting  their  job 
opportunities  and  income-generating  ability  in  agriculture.  The  challenges  of  young  women’s 
participation in the labour force are even more pronounced. Whilst young male participation is around 
74.8  percent,  only  35.8  percent  of  young  females  participate  in  the  labour  force.    Other  factors  for 
youth  unemployment  include  mismatched  skills,  limited  employment  creation  in  the  formal  private 
sector and lack of entrepreneurship. Self-employment is also constrained by a lack of business skills 
and  financial  literacy  and  the  inability  of  youth  to  access  finance.  In  rural  areas  youth  who  are  self-
employed often have little to show in terms of income and market access. The trend of departure of 
youth from agriculture and rural outmigration is seen across Sri Lanka.  
SARP  has  mainstreamed  the  participation  of  youth  and  incentivize  their  engagement  in  the  project 
activities.  The  project  has  tailor  made  activities  to  match  the  aspirations  of  youth  through  youth 
incubation scheme, agri-business development along the value chains, mechanisation of agriculture, 
introducing new technology and innovation models and building capacities as change agents, training 
and skill development in agriculture. Out of the total beneficiaries 40,000 rural smallholder households 
(180,000) in the project area, youth include 20% (36,000).  
SARP  adopts  a  youth  sensitive  approach  for  youth’s  engagements  and  ensuring  they  benefit  from 
project activities:   
a)  The  project  through  the  component  will  train  and  build  capacities  of  youth,  to  generate 
employment  opportunities  along  the  value  chain  and  facilitate  their  access  to  rural  finance, 
rural organizations, knowledge, skills and markets. There is a strong focus on youth as agents 
of change and leaders in the innovative aspects of the project such as the  youth incubation 
scheme,  mentoring  component  and  the  promotion  of  mechanization  within  value  chain 
activities.  
b)  Special  emphasis  will  be  given  to  youth  from  marginalized  sections,  ethnic,  minorities, 
indigenous communities, youth affected by civil war, youth with disabilities and young women.  
c)  The community mobilization will focus on presenting agriculture as a business that can enable 
rural youth to have an income comparable to the one they might get in the city. 
d)  Through  engagement  and  capacity  building  of  Agri-service  centres,  relevant  market 
information,  rural  finance  and  market  linkage  will  be  strengthened  for  young  people.  Young 
people  will  be  supported  to  develop  entrepreneurial  skills  with  innovative  approaches  and 
identify  opportunities  for  pioneering  activities  within  existing  value  chains  to  start  new 
businesses.  
e)  SARP  community  mobilization  and  inclusion  approach  will  involve  selecting  a  community 
mobilisers for each target  community (50  percent  women and 20 percent  youth) from within 
the  local  communities  to  undertake  social  and  economic  mapping  of  the  communities  to 
identify  project  beneficiaries  for  different  activities  and  ensure  their  inclusion  in  project 
activities.  
f)  Combinations  of  matching  grants  and  loans  will  be  offered  to  youth  and  women  to  provide 
commercial goods and services (input supplies, mechanization, spraying, transportation etc.) 
to farm households. Incentive mechanisms in the form of matching grants will be applied for 
introducing  and  promoting  innovative  technologies,  particularly  with  respect  to  resilience  by 
individuals and agri-entrepreneurs. Agri-machinery and equipment for hire service providers is 
71 
seen  to  be  an  attractive  and  feasible  source  of  income for  young  entrepreneurs  and  will  be 
supported by  youth employed in repair workshops. Other potential businesses for youth and 
women  flourishing  in  the  Dry  Zone  are  protected  agriculture,  quality  seed  production,  semi 
commercial  dairy  and  goat  production.  Small  post-harvest  management  (PHM)  investment 
grants will also be offered to households to fund investments in post-harvest and value adding 
technologies.  
g)  Data  for  SARP  outreach/outputs  indicators  will  be  disaggregated  by  age,  sex  and 
ethnic/indigenous people  
h)  Youth incubation schemes will focus on life-skills, personal development, vocational and skill 
development and will link the youth to existing ventures/business for employment as well as 
provide  technical  assistance  for  the  formulation  and  implementation  of  agri-business  plans. 
SARP will develop an incubation system to address the paucity of youth skills in farming and 
related value chain activities. Both technical and entrepreneurial skills of young people will be 
developed culminating in the preparation of business plans for implementation which may be 
financed by combination of loans and grants following specific eligibility criteria and approval 
procedures. 
It  will  also  create  awareness  for  women  and  men  about  the  effects  of  ownership  and 
inheritance  rights,  including  land.  In  areas  where  female  groups  and  youth  groups  do  not 
exist,  the  project  will  conduct  gender  awareness  training  at  community  level  and  set  up 
women’s  and  youth  based  self-help  groups  for  knowledge-sharing  on  GAP  and  SLM 
practices. Youth entrepreneurship will also be promoted through the FBS.  
i) 
Indigenous People:  The principles of IFAD’s policy on “Engagement with Indigenous people” will be 
fully  adhered to  by  SARP.   The project’s  approach  to engaging  with  indigenous  people includes the 
free  and  informed  consent  of  all  its  beneficiaries  and  that  there  is  a  focus  on  the  principle  of 
community-driven  development,  valuing  local  knowledge,  access  to  markets,  gender  equality  and 
promoting climate-resilient agriculture. SARP is guided by social inclusion strategy, whereby specific 
emphasis  to  these  groups  during  the  community  mobilization.  The  project  would  ensure  that  these 
communities engage in village level activities and that they are not left behind from the benefits of the 
project. The project at the outset will seek to identify and determine the extent and needs of IP's in the 
project  sites  and  based  on  this  will  ensure  their  active  engagement  in  SARP.  It  should  however  be 
noted  that  the  extent  of  IP  populations  in  the  project  sites  has  not  been  determined  at  the  design 
stage. Sri Lanka has small number of indigenous communities. 
The forest-dwelling Wanniyala-Aetto (also referred to as Vedda) comprise a very small community of 
indigenous people. Their deep-rooted connections to their ancestral lands enabled them to maintain 
their cultural and spiritual traditions. They are distinguished by their hunting and gathering way of life, 
by their unwritten language, which is closely related to but distinct from Sinhalese, by their beliefs  in 
traditional gods and ancestor spirits, and by the importance of ancestral lands to all aspects of their 
life. They lived mostly as nomadic forest-dwellers in the remote eastern parts of the country. Currently, 
the  entire  community  is  in  danger  of  extinction  and  has  been  facing  the  brunt  of  marginalisation, 
landgrabbing, relocation and exclusion. Labelled as poachers and alienated from their ancestral land, 
they  have  taken  up  to  Sinhala  and  have  had  marriages  for  their  self-preservation  and  involuntary 
assimilation.  Sinhala-speaking  Veddas  are  found  primarily  in  the  southeastern  part  of  the  country, 
especially in the vicinity of Bintenne in Uva District. There are also Sinhala-speaking Veddas who live 
in Anuradhapura  District  (project  area)  in  the  North  Central  Province.  The  Project  through  its  social 
inclusion strategy would include them as beneficiaries if they are present in the areas of intervention 
of SARP.  
People with disabilities: The social inclusion strategy of SARP recognizes the vulnerabilities faced 
by people with disabilities. The exclusion and vulnerabilities are more pronounced for elderly, single 
women, widows, ex-combatants and youth with disabilities. SARP will pay specific emphasis to these 
groups  during  the  community  mobilization  for  their  inclusion  in  project  activities.  The  project 
implementation  team  will  be  trained  to  ensure  access  and  benefits  of  the  project  to  people  with 
disabilities  by  ensuring  their  inclusion  among  the  beneficiary  groups,  understanding  needs  of  these 
groups and taking specific measures for their participation in project components.  
Gender Strategy for SARP  is guided by  poverty and livelihood  analysis of the region and provides 
pathways for ensuring gender equality and women's empowerment through SARP's key strategies.  
72 
Poverty and livelihood analysis Sri Lanka is ranked 75 out of 149 countries according to the Gender 
Inequality Index. Over the last decade, Sri Lanka has made significant improvements with respect to 
women’s  right.  According  to  the  RSPA,  Sri  Lanka’s  application  of  gender  equality  ranks  2.8,  with 
women  still  largely  under-represented  and  unheard  in  decision  and  policy  making  bodies.  Although 
the  gender  gap  in  agricultural  employment  has  reduced  by  5  percent  over  the  period  2000-2017, 
women  still  represent  29  percent  in  2017  (versus  24  percent  for  men)  with  a  wage  gap  of  over  43 
percent  compared  to  men.  Despite  the  notably  high  achievement  in  terms  of  education  a  relatively 
small percentage of women (30.2 percent) participate in the labour market30.  
Women  play  an  important  role  in  agriculture  (in  addition  to  their  domestic  and  reproductive  role) 
comprising  53  percent  of  the  agricultural  labour  force  (often  as  unpaid  family  labour)  and  women 
headed  households  comprise  23  percent  of  rural  households.  The  traditional  norms,  however,  are 
biased  in  favour  of  men,  resulting  in  obstacles  to  women’s  equitable  access  to  resources  (land, 
capital– including credit) and markets, and the control of assets. Due attention will need to be given to 
women’s  empowerment  and  voice  including  skills  and  capacities  (at  producer  organizational  level, 
and  within  communities  as  farmer  leaders)  and  the  promotion  of  economic  activities  best-suited  to 
them. Particular consideration will also be given to nutrition determinants for the potential to engage 
with women and adolescent girls in project activities. 
Only 16 percent of all privately owned land belongs to women in Sri Lanka. This inhibits their access 
to  market,  subsidies,  credit,  irrigation  water  and  agricultural  assets.  Among  the  paid  agriculture 
labourers,  women  get  lesser  wages  than  their  male  counterparts.  The  lack  of  substantial  source  of 
income and absence of assets such as land for collateral has made it difficult for women to avail high 
value loans that could enable them to move up the agricultural value chain. Most of the unemployed 
and  working  poor  include  landless  labourers,  small-scale-holder  farmers,  plantation  labourers,  small 
and  cottage  industry  workers,  casual  workers,  construction  workers,  small  traders,  and  domestic 
worker.  This  is  the  group  that  finds  it  difficult  to  move  out  of  the  poverty.  Women  are  engaged  in 
majority of these occupations and constitute among the poorest with little/no ownership and access to 
land, housing, savings and social infrastructure31. 
Historically, Sri Lanka had segregated male and female farmer organizations. It has also resulted in 
limited the scope for women to share a common platform with men and participate in equal decision-
making  and  dialogue.  The  lack  of  social  capital  in  the  agriculture  sector,  commercial  spaces  and 
markets,  has  created  barriers  for  women’s  involvement  in  trade  and  commerce.  They  are  less 
involved  in  commercial  agriculture  and  medium-scale  industries  that  could  raise  their  incomes  and 
profits32. 
Sri  Lanka  is  emerging  from  a  history  of  conflict  and  ethnic  tensions  have  not  completely  subsided. 
Poverty is exacerbated in conflict affected areas and these areas have shortages in food and lack of 
nutrition.  The  vulnerabilities  of  internally  displaced  people  and  war  affected  communities  run  deep 
including  loss  of  identity  and  reduced  access  to  education  and  coverage  of  health  services.  The 
restoration of livelihoods is dependent largely on the prospects of resettlement33.  
Family farming for subsistence is a strong feature in Sri Lanka. Many women-headed households also 
have farming as their high option. Women face greater resource constraints to credit, land, etc. than 
men, despite making up a greater percentage of the overall agricultural labor force. The women are 
overburdened with farming and household activities. Limited mobility is another serious constraint to 
access  to  necessary  inputs,  resources,  training  and  markets. There  has  been  a  marked  increase  in 
Women  Headed  Households  (WHHs)  in  post-war  Sri  Lanka.  The  2012-13-  Household  and  Income 
Expenditure Survey showed that in Sri Lanka, 1.2 million households or 23 percent of the households 
30  About  eighty  percent  of  adult  women  in  Sri  Lanka  have  reached  at  least  a  secondary  level  of  education  with  no 
significant difference with men. The former can be compared to 35 percent in India and 26.5 percent in Pakistan. (2015 
data). 
31 United Nations Development Programme. Human Development Report 
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/hdr14- report-en-1.pdf 
32 2018. FAO. Country Gender Assessment of the Agriculture and Rural Sector in Sri Lanka 
http://www.fao.org/3/CA1516EN/ca1516en.pdf 
33 Asian Development Bank, 2009. Poverty and Human Development in Sri Lanka 
http://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/27993/poverty-human-dev-sri-lanka.pdf 
73 
are  WHHs34.    Taking  cognizance  of  the  economic  and  social  vulnerabilities  of  Women  Headed 
Households  (WHHs),  the  Ministry  of  Women  and  Child  Affairs  supported  technically  by  UNFPA  is 
implementing  a  national  action  plan  on  WHHs.  The  targeting  of  WHHs  will  be  aligned  with  IFAD’s 
approach  of  supporting  government  programmes  and  policies.  50%  percent  of  SARP  beneficiaries 
are women. 
The impact of climate vulnerability and its subsequent coping mechanisms differ for women and men. 
A  Gender-sensitive  climate  vulnerability  and  capacity  analysis  (GCVCA)  of  the  Dry  Zone  provinces 
indicates that  rural women are more vulnerable due to the adverse impact of drought, flooding and 
climate  change  as  it  has  direct  bearing  on  household  water  availability  and  consumption,  domestic 
assets  such  as  livestock  and  backyard  poultry  and  health  of  family  members.  Women  traditionally 
manage  household  water,  family  gardens  and  livestock  and  bear  the  brunt  of  managing  impacts  of 
reduced water availability and disaster impacts. This has a direct impact on their own intra-household 
food  security,  which  can  be  exacerbated  during  extreme  climate  events  and  in  the  aftermath  of  a 
disaster35.  Women  are  also  shouldering  majority  of  the  care  work  including  taking  care  of  children, 
elderly and family members with disability. In the Dry Zone districts of Sri Lanka the impact of war and 
disease  has  left  a  number  of  women  widowed  resulting  in  a  significant  number  of  female-headed 
households. Female-headed households are socially marginalized, are less empowered and have to 
worker  harder  to  access  shared  resources.  The  aftermath  of  the  conflict,  has  further  increased 
women’s  care    giver  responsibilities  to  those  living  with  a  disability.  It  has  also  resulted  in  pushing 
other women into precarious work, in Sri Lanka and overseas, as domestic migrant labour36.  
The Gender strategy is an outcome of in-depth gender-sensitive poverty and livelihoods analysis and 
Gender-sensitive  climate  vulnerability  and  capacity  analysis  (GCVCA).  The  Strategy  focuses  on 
analysing gender and social norms and power dynamics along with differential vulnerability to climate 
risks that affect increased adaptation and productivity for youth, women and vulnerable groups in Dry 
Zone.  Some key elements of the gender strategy are highlighted below.  
a)  Farmer  Business  School  (FBS)  has  a  strong  participatory,  youth  and  women-focused  extension 
approach that will enable them to build the relevant skills to increase production; access markets and 
sell at competitive prices; enhance nutrition; collaborate with each other; and engage in beneficial and 
efficient decision-making.  
b)  Building  Programme  Staff  Capacity  to  deliver  on  gender  responsive  and  socially  inclusive 
programme implementation is budgeted in the project. Targeting and gender mainstreaming would be 
included  in  the  TORs  of  all  PMU  staff  with  overall  responsibility  for  ensuring  that  these  aspects  are 
given sufficient attention and resources during project implementation. There will be dedicated social 
inclusion and gender experts at decentralized levels to ensure the gendered outcomes of the project.  
c) Selection of gender responsive agribusiness and climate resilient agribusiness value chains will be 
prioritized.  Such  a  selection  will  address  power  and  information  asymmetries  found  in  traditional 
agribusiness value chains (smallholder farmers, middle-men, processors and exporters) in Sri Lanka. 
Please  refer  to  IFAD's  document  on  Women  in  Value  Chains  and  Gender-Sensitive  Value  Chain 
Mapping.  
34  Government  of  Sri  Lanka,  MoW&CA,  National  Action  Plan  on  Women  Headed  Households  2017-  2019.  The  National  Framework  for 
Women Headed Households (2017- 2019) has been introduced specially to improve the socio economic situation of women affected by the 
conflict. The government as well as the Banks have provided credit facilities for enhancing livelihood development activities for galvanizing 
the national policy for eradication of poverty. A recent initiative of the Ministry of Women and Child Affairs is the directive obtained from 
the Treasury to allocate a minimum of 25% investment for economic development of rural women. Programs are in place to encourage girls 
to enter into technological fields, which provide opportunities in accessing the labour market. 
35 Country Gender Assessment Sri Lanka, An Update http://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-
document/172710/sri- lanka-country-gender-assessment-update.pdf 
36 Aheeyar M.M.M Climate change adaptation in water management for food security: Recent developments in Sri Lanka-A 
review of Existing Knowledge and Information. Sri Lanka Water Partnership 2012 and Country Gender Assessment Sri Lanka, 
An Update http://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-document/172710/sri- lanka-country-gender-assessment-
update.pdf 
74 
d)  Gender  sensitive  selection  of  interventions  to  maximise  returns  to  women’s  labour,  reduce 
drudgery  and  unpaid  work  and  support  their  social  and  economic  empowerment  such  as  direct 
targeting of homestead gardening interventions and farm production to local markets through capacity 
building  of  women,  youth  and  marginalized  groups;  collectivised  women’s  groups  in  marketing, 
advanced value chains and rural enterprises; women as change agents and gatekeepers of NRM  & 
rejuvenated water systems. The selection criteria gives preference to women's for micro/small scale 
agro-enterprises - mushroom cultivation, dairy and goat production and value chain development.  
To  promote  women  enterprises,  combinations  of matching  grants  and  loans  will  be  offered  to  youth 
and  women  to  provide  commercial  goods  and  services  (input  supplies,  mechanization,  spraying, 
transportation etc.) to farm households. Incentive mechanisms in the form of matching grants will be 
applied  for  introducing  and  promoting  innovative  technologies,  particularly  with  respect  to  resilience 
by  individuals  and  agri-entrepreneurs.  Agri-machinery  and  equipment  for  hire  service  providers  is 
seen to be an attractive and feasible source of income for young entrepreneurs and will be supported 
by youth employed in repair workshops. Other potential businesses for youth and women flourishing 
in  the  Dry  Zone  are  protected  agriculture,  quality  seed  production,  semi  commercial  dairy  and  goat 
production.  Small  post-harvest  management  (PHM)  investment  grants  will  also  be  offered  to 
households to fund investments in post-harvest and value adding technologies. 
e) Gender has been mainstreamed into the community mobilisation process (under targeting section) 
.  
f)  SARP's  M&E  framework  going  beyond  mere  monitoring  participation  of  youth,  women  and 
vulnerable  groups  in  programme  activities  to  measuring  the  impact  of  programme  interventions  on 
smallholder  farmers.  The  use  of  sex  and  age  disaggregated  data  and  indicators  in  logframe  will 
specifically  measure  changes  in  gender  norms,  empowerment  of  target  groups,  adaptive  capacity, 
secure access to resources, markets and services, incomes, nutrition, workload and resilience.  
Nutrition  sensitive  approach:  Under-nutrition  remains  a  concern  in  Sri  Lanka,  with  around  20 
percent  of  children  under  five  years  of  age  regarded  as  stunted.  Additionally  13  percent  suffer from 
wasting  and  33  percent  are  underweight.  More  than  50  percent  of  children  and  women  suffer  from 
anaemia,  with  more  than  9  percent  of  the  female  population  affected  by  severe  chronic  energy 
deficiency. The high rate of low birth weight (18 percent) is also a major predictor of under nutrition. 
Although,  the  level  of  stunting  is  lower  than  other  countries  in  the  region  (ranked  at  44  out  of  132 
countries) there are significant inter-provincial  variation.  More  than 33 percent  of women and  nearly 
37 percent of men suffer from food deficiency. According to the RSPA, Sri Lanka’s nutrition policies 
are  prioritizing  nutrition  as  a  key  national  development  strategy  with  a  rank  of  4.8,  achieving 
satisfactory  outcomes. The  infant  mortality  rate  has  decreased  from  10  to  7.5  deaths  per  1,000  live 
births over the period 2010-2017, and life expectancy increased up to 75 years37.  
The nutritional situation analysis for the six districts based on government data and  work of WFP in 
the country is presented below.  
Districts  
Nutrition 
interpretation) 
situation 
(key 
indicators 
and 
Key interpretation  
Anuradhapura 
-  Stunting  =  19%  (above  national  average  of 
17%) 
-  Wasting  =  19.7%  (extremely  high  –  above 
15%) 
-  Underweight in women (low BMI <18.5 kg/m2) 
= 7.4% (10%) 
-  Overweight in women =  44.7% (45%) 
- 
Infant  and  Young  Child  Feeding  amongst 
children 6-23 months 
  Children  consuming  4  +  food  group  = 
58.6% 
  Consuming  minimum  meal  frequency  = 
95.3 
Across districts - Stunting 
prevalence either above 
or below national average 
of 17% is acceptable 
according to WHO 
benchmark (< 20%). 
However, where higher 
than national average 
should be monitored with 
caution.  
However, wasting is 
37 FAO Statistics & Global Nutrition Report, 2016 
75 
  With 3 IYCF practices = 65.9% 
-  Micronutrient intake among children  
  Consumption of vitamin A rich food  
+ (6-23 months = 96.5% 
+ 24 -59 months = 96.4% 
  Consumption of iron rich food  
+ (6-23 months = 67.2% 
+ 24 -59 months = 70.4% 
-  Diet  diversity  amongst  mothers  of  children  < 3 
years of age  
  Milk = 15%  
Food from grains = 98.1% 
 
Food from roots/tubers  = 72% 
 
 
Food from legumes = 71.9% 
  Meat/fish/poultry/eggs = 75.45%  
  Cheese/yogurt = 24.4% 
  Vitamin A rich  = 97.3% 
  Other fruits and vegs = 53.0% 
 
Fats/oil = 18.2%  
  Sugary foods = 27.8% 
Vavuniya 
-  Stunting  =  18.7%  (above  national  average  of 
17%) 
-  Wasting = 16% (extremely high – above 15%) 
-  Underweight in women (low BMI <18.5 kg/m2) 
= 7.9% 
-  Overweight in women =45.5% 
- 
Infant  and  Young  Child  Feeding  amongst 
children 6-23 months 
  Children consuming 4 + food group = 45% 
  Consuming  minimum  meal  frequency  = 
38.6% 
  With 3 IYCF practices = 12.4% 
-  Micronutrient intake among children  
  Consumption of vitamin A rich food  
+ (6-23 months = 79.5% 
+ 24 -59 months = 93.4% 
  Consumption of iron rich food  
+ (6-23 months = 58.2% 
+ 24 -59 months = 68.8%  
-  Diet  diversity  amongst  mothers  of  children  < 3 
years of age  
  Milk = 57.7%  
Food from grains = 90.3% 
 
Food from roots/tubers  = 46.5% 
 
Food from legumes = 19.7% 
 
  Meat/fish/poultry/eggs = 60.8%  
  Cheese/yogurt = 6.7% 
  Vitamin A rich  = 75% 
  Other fruits and vegs = 36.7% 
Fats/oil = 13.2%  
 
  Sugary foods = 28.5% 
Mannar 
-  Stunting  =  20.8%  (above  national  average  of 
17%) 
-  Wasting  =  13.6%  (extremely  high  –  above 
15%) 
-  Underweight in women (low BMI <18.5 kg/m2) 
= 7.6% 
-  Overweight in women = 54.6% 
76 
extremely high above 
15% in most of the 
districts (WHO benchmark 
and also national 
average). Even where it is 
below 15% is it still 
considered high according 
to WHO benchmark – 
calling for preventing 
actions. 
% of children consuming 
4 + food groups is low – 
indicating low diet 
diversity – particularly low 
consumption of iron rich 
food  
Overweight/obesity 
among women of 
reproductive age is a 
problem, and although 
consumption of 
grains/roots food source 
is high – consumption of 
protein source and other 
vegetables are relative 
low.  
From fill the nutrient gap 
(please see map which 
shows low diet diversity in 
dry zones as well).  
The diversity of 
complementary feeding 
for young children is a 
priority area for improving 
infant and young child 
feeding (IYCF) practices, 
and one where there has 
been little progress over 
recent years. Only 62 
percent of all children 
aged 6–23 months 
received a minimum 
acceptable diet (MAD) 
that reaches the target on 
all three IYCF practices.  
The low proportion is 
mainly driven by low 
proportion achieving 
minimum dietary diversity 
(MDD)of four or more 
food groups among 
- 
Infant  and  Young  Child  Feeding  amongst 
children 6-23 months 
  Children  consuming  4  +  food  group  = 
68.5% 
  Consuming  minimum  meal  frequency  = 
83.5% 
  With 3 IYCF practices = 54.8% 
-  Micronutrient intake among children  
  Consumption of vitamin A rich food  
+ (6-23 months = 98.6% 
+ 24 -59 months = 92.4% 
  Consumption of iron rich food  
+ (6-23 months = 94% 
+ 24 -59 months = 79.6%  
-  Diet  diversity  amongst  mothers  of  children  < 3 
years of age  
  Milk = 49%  
 
Food from grains = 94% 
 
Food from roots/tubers  = 47% 
Food from legumes = 36.5% 
 
  Meat/fish/poultry/eggs = 87.9%  
  Cheese/yogurt = 20.8% 
  Vitamin A rich  = 69% 
  Other fruits and vegs = 30.1% 
 
Fats/oil = 56.2%  
  Sugary foods = 25.1% 
breastfed children and 
insufficient milk given to 
non-breastfed children.38 
MAD in breastfed children 
decreased slightly from 
2006 to 2016 (from 83 
percent to 79 percent) 
(Department of Census 
and Statistics & Ministry 
of Health Nutrition and 
Indigenous Medicine, 
2017).39 Over the same 
period, the proportion of 
non-breastfed children 
receiving milk or milk 
products dropped from 96 
percent to 90 percent, and 
proportion of non-
breastfed children with 
three IYCF practices as 
recommended decreased 
from 58 percent to 53 
percent 
Puttalam 
-  Stunting  =  11.7%  (above  national  average  of 
17%) 
-  Wasting  =  17.2%  (extremely  high  –  above 
15%) 
-  Underweight in women (low BMI <18.5 kg/m2) 
= 7.6% 
-  Overweight in women = 51.1% 
- 
Infant  and  Young  Child  Feeding  amongst 
children 6-23 months 
  Children  consuming  4  +  food  group  = 
73.1% 
  Consuming  minimum  meal  frequency  = 
90.3% 
  With 3 IYCF practices = 62.2% 
-  Micronutrient intake among children  
  Consumption of vitamin A rich food  
+ (6-23 months = 93.3% 
+ 24 -59 months = 94% 
  Consumption of iron rich food  
+ (6-23 months = 62.% 
+ 24 -59 months = 64.8%  
-  Diet  diversity  amongst  mothers  of  children  < 3 
years of age  
  Milk = 15%  
Food from grains = 98% 
 
Food from roots/tubers  = 69% 
 
 
Food from legumes = 65% 
  Meat/fish/poultry/eggs = 63.%  
  Cheese/yogurt = 13% 
  Vitamin A rich  = 97.7% 
  Other fruits and vegs = 37% 
 
Fats/oil = 30%  
  Sugary foods = 26% 
38 MAD is a composite indicator of minimum meal frequency, minimum dietary diversity (4 or more food groups) and 
breastmilk. For non-breastfed children, the third IYCF practice is consumption of milk or milk products. 
39 According to the DHS 2016 calculations consistent with the previous DHS from 2006-07. 
77 
Kurunegala 
-  Stunting  =  17.7%  (above  national  average  of 
17%) 
-  Wasting  =  13.5%  (extremely  high  –  above 
15%) 
-  Underweight in women (low BMI <18.5 kg/m2) 
= 9.5% 
-  Overweight in women = 42.2% 
- 
Infant  and  Young  Child  Feeding  amongst 
children 6-23 months 
  Children  consuming  4  +  food  group  = 
65.7% 
  Consuming  minimum  meal  frequency  = 
90.7% 
  With 3 IYCF practices = 59.1% 
-  Micronutrient intake among children  
  Consumption of vitamin A rich food  
+ (6-23 months = 96.5% 
+ 24 -59 months = 96.4% 
  Consumption of iron rich food  
+ (6-23 months = 67.2% 
+ 24 -59 months = 70.4%  
Matale 
-  Stunting  =  14%  (above  national  average  of 
17%) 
-  Wasting = 9.9% (extremely high – above 15%) 
-  Underweight in women (low BMI <18.5 kg/m2) 
= 8.3% 
-  Overweight in women =46.9%  
- 
Infant  and  Young  Child  Feeding  amongst 
children 6-23 months 
  Children  consuming  4  +  food  group  = 
74.8% (national = 72.6) 
  Consuming  minimum  meal  frequency  = 
97.6% (86.1%) 
  With 3 IYCF practices = 72.7% (62%) 
-  Micronutrient intake among children  
  Consumption of vitamin A rich food  
+ (6-23 months = 93.4 (national – 92.3%) 
+ 24 -59 months = 89.1% (national 89.4%) 
  Consumption of iron rich food  
+ (6-23 months = 47.6% (59.2%) 
+ 24 -59 months = 49.4% (60.7%) 
-  Diet  diversity  amongst  mothers  of  children  < 3 
years of age  
  Milk = 11%  
Food from grains = 98.% 
 
Food from roots/tubers  = 43% 
 
 
Food from legumes = 75% 
  Meat/fish/poultry/eggs = 58%  
  Cheese/yogurt =25 % 
  Vitamin A rich  = 95.5% 
  Other fruits and vegs = 46.9% 
 
Fats/oil = 84%  
  Sugary foods = 36% 
SARP  places  greater  emphasis  on  nutrition  and  considering  the  multidimensional  causes  of 
malnutrition,  SARP  will  have  a  basket  of  nutrition  sensitive  activities.  The  nutrition  sensitive  project 
components are designed to address the key challenges posed by nutrition situation analysis of the 6 
project districts. SARP  will  closely  work with WFP to address malnourishment challenges in the Dry 
Zones focusing on increased production, availability and consumption of diverse, safe and nutritious 
78 
food.  The  social  inclusion  strategy  in  Appendix  8,  outlines  a  nutrition-sensitive  approach  with  a 
situational analysis on nutrition of the targeted beneficiaries in Dry Zone and activities to address it. 
Nutrition has been mainstreamed in SARP through a multi-pronged approach and nutrition-sensitive 
implementation of the project. Some key activities are referred below.  
a) Nutrition will be mainstreamed through the selection of nutrition sensitive value chains (as outlined 
on  the  section  of  value  chain  development).  Awareness  raising  and  behavioural  change  regarding 
nutrition will be an integral part of the approach that will include social marketing and home gardening 
activities  at  community  level.  As  many  households  are  loosely  organized  into  groups  and  this 
mechanism is widely used for the receipt of government subsidised inputs, SARP will engage directly 
with  rural  producer  organizations  to  strengthen  their  capacity,  governance  and  inclusivity  whilst 
developing  social  and  economic  enterprises  amongst  those  groups  with  potential.    Please  refer  to 
IFAD note on Nutrition sensitive value chains for selection and implementation of Nutrition Sensitive 
value chains.  
b)  Nutrition  sensitive  approaches  including  increasing  availability  and  dietary  diversity  through 
nutritious foods (rice, vegetables, fruits, legumes, homestead garden, poultry, fishery. SARP will also 
ensure  increased  productivity  and  diversified  income  through  these  commodities  and  linking  the 
farmers to local markets and enterprises.  
c)  Technical  awareness  and  enhancing  nutritional  knowledge  through  social  behaviour  change 
communication  (SBCC  -good  nutrition  awareness,  knowledge,  attitudes  and  practices)  on  nutrition 
practices, cooking healthy food platter, balanced diet and food diversity for all members of household.  
d) Nutrition-sensitive FBS and training activities where nutrition-related knowledge will be integrated in 
curricula  and  learning  modules  of  FBS  with  a  special  attention  on:    (i)  the  production  of  nutrients 
enrich products (ii) food safety (both in storing and processing; (iii) pesticide management; as well as 
(iv) tracking and management of food waste and food loss.  
e) Post-harvest losses remain problematic in Sri Lanka, adversely affecting food security and nutrition 
through  both  restricted  food  availability  and  access,  participating  farmers  organizations  will  receive 
financial  and  technical  support  for  the  implementation  of  a  nutrient-preserving,  value  addition 
technology  (i.e.  drying  facility).  This  initiative  will  be  particularly  beneficial  in  its  ability  to  increase 
income not only through a reduction in loses but also the value addition will mean they are able to sell 
their products at a higher profit margin than selling the raw materials. 
f)  Household  who  receive  commercial  gardening  support  will  simultaneously  receive  technical  and 
physical  asset  support  to  implement  a  new,  or  strengthen  an  existing,  home  garden  facilitating  and 
promoting the production of nutritional-dense products for home consumption.  
g)  The  community  mobilization  strategy  will  focus  on  activities  on  nutrition,  where  social  norms  and 
behavioural  issues  are  central  to  improving  nutrition.  Ensuring  that  farmers  will  get  an  improved 
nutrition  sensitive  agricultural  production  knowledge  and  skills  and  an  understanding  of  how  to  fill 
seasonal nutrition gaps and improve dietary diversity and household food security.  
h)  Household  who  receive  commercial  gardening  support  will  simultaneously  receive  technical  and 
physical  asset  support  to  implement  a  new,  or  strengthen  an  existing,  home  garden  facilitating  and 
promoting  the  production  of  nutritional-dense  products  for  home  consumption.  Again,  this  has  the 
potential to improve diet quality on two fronts, directly by increasing home consumption of these high-
nutritional value products and indirectly through increased income from commercial-related activities, 
thus enhancing their purchasing power for a higher quality diet or to improve other underlying causes 
of  malnutrition  (i.e.  increased  investment  in  improved  water  and  sanitation  facilities).  For  integrated 
homestead gardening for nutrition, the recent IFAD How To Do Note on the subject provides a useful 
reference.  
79 
Appendix 2:    Value Chain Analyses 
Table 1: Preferred commodities – status, entry points and opportunities 
Commodity 
Rice 
3. 
Maize  4. 
Vegetables 
. 
Status / entry point / opportunities for impact 
1. 
Rice is the staple diet in Sri Lanka and is the single most important crop occupying 
34  percent  (0.77  /million  ha) of  the  total cultivated area.  On  average  560,000  ha  are cultivated 
during the main season and 310,000 ha during the second season making the average  area of 
land sown around  870,000 ha. About 1.8 million farm families are engaged in paddy cultivation 
island-wide.  Sri  Lanka  currently  produces  2.5  million  MT  of  rough  rice  annually  and  is  virtually 
self-sufficient.  The  per  capita  consumption  of  rice  fluctuates  around  114  kg  per  year  (including 
rice and rice based products) depending on the price of rice, bread and wheat flour. 
2. 
It  is  projected  that  the  demand  for  rice  will  increase  at  1.1%  per  year  and  to  meet  this  rice 
production  needs  to  grow  at  the  rate  of  2.9%  per  year.  Increasing  the  cropping  intensity  and 
national average yield are the options available to achieve these production targets. Since rice is 
the staple diet and its cultivation is the main occupation of millions of small scale producers the 
prices of both paddy and rice significantly affect the welfare of the people in the country.  Prices, 
however,  are  fixed  by  government  their  effectiveness  is  limited.  It  is  contended  that  both  the 
producers and consumers are exploited by the  other players in the value chain, particularly rice 
millers  and  wholesalers,  who  obtain  an  oligopolistic  position  in  the  market.  These  people  are 
blamed  for  manipulating  both paddy  and  rice prices particularly  by  private rice  millers and  who 
are allegedly cornering the markets of both paddy and rice. 
Maize  is  an  important  input  to  the  animal  feed  value  chain.  Local  maize  production  was 
estimated at around 400,000Mt (2017-18) and 215,395 MT for the local animal feed industry. The 
total requirements of maize seeds  are excessive and some 1,399 MT are imported. The gap of 
local  demand  is  covered  through  imports  with  costs  as  US$  24  million.  The  local  market  for 
maize produced by small farmers is enormous and many companies such as Prima , CIC, Plenty 
food, Nelna Ltd etc. are potential partners in this sector for small farmers  
Vegetables  produced  by  small  holders  are  attractive  for  both  the  domestic  market  as  well  as 
increasingly for the export market - ethnic and niche markets. More than 1 million US$ worth of 
vegetable  products are exported  annually to  EU,  UK,  Middle  East and  to  Maldives.  Vegetables 
are  grown  widely  in  all  of  the  project  districts  although  the  actual  combination  of  vegetables 
varies. The most commonly grown vegetables with economic potential are big onion, tomatoes, 
eggplant,  and  spine  gourd.  The  total  production  of  vegetables  is  sufficient  for  domestic  market 
demand.  The  year  round  supplies  of  vegetables  have  become  highly  vulnerable  to  climate 
change resulting in gluts and scarcities at different times of the year.  
A  rapid assessment  of  the  vegetables sub-sector shows  that  the industry has some  favourable 
prospects  for  growth  in  both  the  domestic  and  export  markets  given  the  diverse  agro-climatic 
zones  of  the  country  which  allow  year-round  production  and  emerging  business  partnerships 
between smallholders and a number of market players who are targeting niche commodities and 
seasonal  windows  for  production  of  various  commodity  lines.  Smallholder  vegetable  farmers 
have greatest opportunities in domestic and regional markets by targeting off-season production 
and product lines which are highly labour intensive.   There is considerable potential to increase 
productivity, reduce post-harvest losses and better management during glut and lean periods is a 
clear  way  to  go.  Some  varieties  of  protected  agriculture  crops  cultivated  such  as  bell  pepper, 
cherry  tomatoes  and  cucumber  are  supplied  to  local  up-market  outlets  such  as  Sri  Lankan  Air 
Lines, hotels and restaurants, and super market chains.  
The  major  market-side  constraint  is  the  lack  of  commercial  horticulture  packhouses  capable  of 
serving  domestic  or  export  customers.  On  the  production  side,  key  areas  requiring  attention 
include  stronger  farmer  organization  for  attaining  minimum  volume,  quality  and  supply 
consistency  thresholds  required  for  sustainable  engagement  with  profitable  market;  irrigation 
infrastructure  development;  adoption  of  productivity  enhancing  technologies,  innovations  and 
management practice and access to financial services. 
Entry points: 
80 
Commodity 
Vegetable 
seed 
Status / entry point / opportunities for impact 
 
The added value for SARP to target the vegetables sector is to support the development of a 
more sustainable,  private  sector-driven market  access for smallholder  farmers  –  especially 
through  attracting  greater  investment  into  private  agribusiness  and  pack  houses  linked  to 
organized  smallholder  producer  groups  –  with  corresponding  investments  by  both  the 
enterprises and farmers. 
There  are  already  emerging  business  partnerships  between  farmers  and  private  sector 
market players (supermarkets, exporters, etc.) which can be a good starting point within the 
SARP development approach.     
Farmers  will  need  ready  access  to  relevant  and  affordable  technical  horticulture  services, 
including advice and support on production systems for specific products, disease and pest 
management  as  well  as  access  to  appropriate  small-scale  commercial  production 
technologies (e.g. poly-tunnels, drip irrigation, trellis netting) 
 
 
5. 
Of  considerable  potential  is  the  production  of  vegetable  seeds  (and  in  particular  onions)  in  the 
Dry Zone. The availability of high quality vegetable seeds is important for both food security and 
agricultural commercialization. Vegetable seed production comprise 3 types of seed categories – 
breeder seeds, basic or registered seeds, certified /standard /commercial seeds. The value chain 
involves  the  production  of  basic/  hybrid  seeds  and/or  traditional  seeds  through  a  number  of 
options: a) contract farming b) direct cultivation by private dealers c) production by public sector 
farms d) production by smallholder farmers. Commercial or certified seeds are produced by the 
government Department as well as private companies directly or alternatively through public and 
private  sector  collaboration.  At  present,  Sri  Lanka  depends  on  imports  of  a  large  variety  of 
vegetable hybrid seeds and prospects for local production of seeds is yet to be fully harnessed. 
The production of seed is way below the requirements of the country (less than 75% of demand 
is produced locally). 
At present, Sri Lanka produces a little over 20% of the country’s vegetable seeds requirements 
through formal and informal systems.Vegetable seeds are essentially for the local market though 
there  are  small  quantities  exported  informally  by  individuals.  The  Sri  Lanka  production  and 
imports  of  vegetables  seeds  are  around  2,000  to  2,500  MT–  to  the  exclusion  of  the  domestic 
production  of  uncertified  seeds  by  farmers  for  their  own  use.  In  addition  there  are  imports  and 
local  production  of  seed  potatoes  in  excess  of  2,500MT  annually.  Some  of  the  certified 
vegetables seeds- hot pepper, beans, egg plants cucumber, okra, big onions, long beans, bitter 
gourd  –  are  produced  locally  and  account  for  more  than  50%  of  country’s  requirements. 
Upcountry  vegetable  seeds  such  as  carrots,  cabbage,  cauliflower  Knol  Khol,  leeks,  lettuce  are 
currently  imported  to  meet  the  country’s  needs.  From  discussions  with  the  private  sector  and 
farmers it is recognised that there is a high potential market available in Sri Lanka for vegetable 
seeds which is growing and as such there are opportunities for seed production.  
The  trend  in  the  vegetable  seed  market  is  to  demand  hybrid  seeds  as  against  OP  (Open 
Pollinated varieties).The access to high quality basic seeds for normal crops and for seeds crops 
at  affordable  prices  and  at  appropriate  time  appears  to  be  a  key  issue  raised  by  small  holder 
farmers. To address this situation, the Ministry of Agriculture through its departments encourages 
the local production of a variety of vegetable seeds by the private sector and directly by farmers 
themselves.  
There are more than 20 local companies involved in seed production and some of them such as 
Hayleys,  CIC,  Cargills  and  Land  Mark  Pvt  Ltd  have  been  in  contact  with  SAPP  for  assistance. 
Increased  local  production  of  seeds  in  Sri  Lanka  would  save  an  extensive  amount  of  foreign 
exchange  and  could  also  be  a  great  contributor  to  support  many  agriculture  value  chains.  The 
Department of Agriculture has plans to meet at least 50% of the demand for quality seeds in the 
vegetable  sector  through  involvement  of  private  and  public  sector  with  farmers  in  the  next  few 
years. 
The demand for vegetable seeds including onions and potatoes is in excess of local production. 
The market is attractive and an incentive for the production of a wide range of seed varieties and 
combined  with  the  necessary  technical  assistance,  market  linkages  and  a  favourable  policy 
environment, considerable potential exists. Incentives, however may be needed to attract  seed 
marketing companies to link up to small farmers, particularly in the Dry Zone 
Chili 
Chilli (Capsicum annuum L.) is one of the important cash and condiment crop widely grown in Sri 
Lanka for dry chilli production and also a part of the chilli crop is harvested as green pods. Chili is 
a high potential product as more than 70% of the national requirements are imported from India. 
81 
Commodity 
Status / entry point / opportunities for impact 
Green  chili  also  has  the  potential  to  generate  annual  net  revenues  in  the  region  of  $7,190  – 
19,642 per hectare depending on the irrigation system used (surface and sprinkler, respectively)  
Per-capita consumption  of chilli  in  the  form  of dry  chilli  is  estimated  2.8 kg  per annum  and  the 
national  annual  requirement  of  dry  chilli  &  green  chilli  are  around  60,000  Mt  &  63,000  Mt 
respectively. Chilli contributes an average $28 million to GDP in the country. 
Fruits 
Chilli is mostly grown in  the Dry Zone,  especially in  the North Central Province. The main chilli 
growing districts are “Anuradhapura, Monaragala, Ampara, Puttulum, Vavuniya, Kurinagala, and 
Hambanthota, The average area of land under green chilli was around 13,500 ha (2018) with an 
annual production  of 50,289 Mt and 28,714 Mt in  the “Maha” and “Yala” seasons, respectively. 
The annual production of dry chilli is around 7,500 Mt.  
The current national yield is  around 5.8 Mt/ha which  is significantly less than the potential yield 
using  well  adapted  varieties  and  good  agronomic  practices.  The  Field  Crop  Development 
Institute  introduced  in  2015  their  first  local  chilli  hybrid,  MICH  HY  1,  with  a  yield  potential  of 
32t/ha as green chilli.  
Key Entry Points: 
  Home garden cultivation  of  green chilli  in  parts  of  the  dry  zone as  part  of  the  ongoing 
programmes with District Offices.  
  Previously IFAD funded projects including NADeP & SAPP worked on developing 
Producer-Public-Private Partnerships (4Ps) and one such partnership with Landmark 
Agro Seeds Pvt. Ltd. specifically worked on chilli seed production under poly tunnels 
with beneficiaries in Anuradhapura District. There’s potential for scaling up the 
partnership under SARP through geographical expansion of the model. 
There are already emerging farmer clusters in Anuradhapura District, cultivating chili, 
which could be further strengthened through formal clusters and market linkages 
incorporating private sector investment. 
 
  Off-season cultivation during the Yala Season could be promoted by introducing new 
water saving technologies such as micro irrigation and protected agriculture combined 
with Integrated Pest Management (IPM) and drought tolerant varieties of seeds. 
There is potential for fruit production in the Dry Zone and especially  mango, pineapple, passion 
fruit  and  papaya  as  fresh  and  processed  products.  These  fruits  are  pro-poor,  nutritionally 
sensitive with high potential for both the local market and export. In 2016/17 production of these 
crops nationally exceeded 236,000 MT from which a notable proportion was exported at a value 
of  more  than  US$6  million.  Mango  is  grown  in  almost  all  dry  zone  districts  -  Anuradhapura, 
Polonnaruwa Vavuniya, Matale, Mannar Ampara and Hambanthota and has the widest coverage 
of  smallholders.  Pineapple  is  more  limited  in  coverage  but  represents  the  largest  exportable 
commodity  in  the  fruit  sector.  However,  pineapple  is  restricted  in  coverage  in  the  dry  zone  to 
areas  with  adequate  water.  Passion  fruit  can  be  found  in  large  volumes  in  Vavuniya,  Mannar, 
Ampara, and Kurenagala. All of these fruits are in high demand in local markets.  
The  dominant  fruit  value  chains  are  sold  as  fresh  fruits  in  the  local  market  and  for  juices  and 
other processed  products such  as  jams,  chutneys  and  pickles.  Limited  quantities  of  fresh  fruits 
are  exported  with  the  EU,  Singapore,  Middle  east  and  Maldives  the  main  destinations.  The 
export values of mango, pineapple, passion fruit and papaya is $ 379,520, $ 5 million, $391,160 
and  $4,189,300,  respectively  (2015).  More  than  20  established  companies  are  engaged  in 
marketing  fruits  including  local  super  market  chains.  A  list  of  these  companies  identified  is 
included in annex 3 of this report. Generally, a larger portion of these fruits produced in Sri Lanka 
finds itself a large market locally. 
Most  of  the  fruits  produced  are  often  seen  as  a  house  hold  garden  crop  without  much 
maintenance  and  organization  needed.  Based  on  2015-2016  planned  production  data  by  the 
Ministry  of  Agriculture,  production  of  mangoes  reached  28,800  MT  in  an  area  of  33,016  ha. 
Pineapple production reached  39,481 MT in 5,845 Ha, passion fruit production 3,591MT planted 
in 1,351Ha and papaya production is around 64,205 MT grown in some 7,299 Ha. Productivity in 
all these crops appears to be an issue compared with those of well managed plantations in the 
higher rainfall areas of the country. Yields of mango, pineapple, passion fruit and papaya are 3 to 
4 MT, 6 to 7 MT, 2 to3 MT, and 8 to 9 MT per Ha. respectively, 
6. 
Mango,  papaya  and  passion  fruit  have  the  greatest  potential  for  productivity  increases 
82 
Commodity 
Status / entry point / opportunities for impact 
and  pineapple  is  a  very  attractive  export  earner.  The  potential  for  pineapple  lies  in  broadening 
the range of export markets combined with improvements in the quality of the produce in order to 
make it a preferred product in the international market. This could be done by focusing more on 
the  varieties,  package  of  practices  and  knowledge  transfer.  Banana    is  also  an  attractive 
perennial fruit crop as it gives economic gains throughout the year and can be found in five of the 
target districts - Anuradhapura, Polonnaruwa, Matale, Ampara, Kurenagala. Around 40,000 ha of 
banana  are  grown  in  the  dry  and  intermediate  zones.  Annual  banana  production  nationally  is 
around  780,000mt  and  an  average  yield  is  13mt/ha.  Out  of  the  total  production  only  around  5 
percent is exported.  
Hayleys,  HJS  Condiments,  Cargills,  and  CBL  Natural  foods  Alloy  expo  Ltd,  and  Nelna  Co.  are 
among more than 2 dozens of private companies involved in promoting  the production and sale 
of  fresh  fruit  in  the  local  and  export  markets.  These  fruits  are  also  used  in  the  local  fruit 
processing  industry.  Cargills,  Hayleys,  Lanka  Canneries,  HJS  Condiments  and  several  other 
companies are partnering with local producers to supply fresh fruits and processed fruit products 
to local market. The fresh fruit market is expanding and regular price fluctuations depending on 
seasons  are  recorded.  The  different  production  models  practiced  for  fruits  sector  are  generally 
sub-contracting of harvesting, and out grower contract farming system with private companies for 
passion  fruit,  papaya  and  pineapple.  Some  of  the  companies  such  as  Hayleys,  Cargills  are 
working with SAPP.  
7. 
onstraints: Several constraints to promote local production of fruits were identified. In the mango 
sector lack of proper maintenance , inadequate control on fruit flies and phytosanitary regulations 
for exports , large post-harvest losses, inadequate local value addition, access to export markets 
,  poor  harvesting  and  post harvesting  practices  , inadequate  flow  of  information and training  to 
producers on new technologies and value addition are prominent constraints in the mango sector 
.  In  case  of  passion  fruits  and  pineapples  absence  of  planting  materials  and  familiarization  of 
best  agriculture  practices  are  stated.  In  case  of  papaya:  its  vulnerability  to  different  diseases, 
difficult adaptability to climatic changes, and marketing issues are noted during the discussions. 
In  terms  of  exports,  all  these  fruits  as  fresh  are  subject  to  serious  phytosanitary  controls  , 
standards and certification, and traceability issues. 
8. 
9. 
pportunities: Prospects for small holders in the fruit sector to generate increasing incomes lie in 
several areas. There is a minimum value addition to fruits at farm gate level depriving farmers a 
better return to investment while the consumer is deprived of a quality fruit.  In addition to fresh 
exports and value addition to fresh products through processing, products such as mangoes and 
pineapples have large export markets as dried products. Fruit varieties are available throughout 
the country. There is considerable potential to develop the downstream of the value chain in fruit 
sector (collection in bulk, processing, packing, and marketing  –export and local) to channel the 
full benefits of the markets to producers. In addition to fresh exports and value addition to fresh 
products  through  processing,  products  such  as  mangoes  and  pineapples  have  large  exports 
markets as dried products. 
10. 
11. 
ruits and vegetables distribution in Sri Lanka plays a vital role in the final output of post-harvest 
cultivation. It has been found that nearly 25%  - 30% of fruits and vegetables are wasted due to 
post harvest losses. 
12. 
13. 
The  fruits  varieties  are  available  throughout  the  country  and  the  market  is  extensive. 
Therefore , if facilities are made available and including access to training , information and other 
BDS  services  including  financial  access  ,  the  fruit  sector  offers  an  attractive  opportunity  for 
private  sector  to  engage  in  a  much  sustainable  manner  for  which  there  are  number  of 
established companies interested. 
C
O
F
Grains  and 
pulses 
Grains and pulses such as black and green grams, finger millets have stable markets locally. The 
local  demand  for  these  products  is  not  yet  satisfied  by  the  local  production.  Therefore  some 
significant  amounts  of  these  are  imported  to  the  country.  There  are  private  partner  companies 
available to support local farmers in this sector. 
Black  Gram  is  one  of  the  important  grain  legumes  in  the  rain-fed  farming  system  in  dry  and 
intermediate  zones  of  Sri  Lanka.  It  can  be  grown  under  low  moisture  and  fertility  conditions.  It 
has  high  nutritive  value  and  consist  high  content  of  proteins,  vitamins  and  minerals.  Presently, 
83 
Commodity 
Status / entry point / opportunities for impact 
blackgram  is  successfully  cultivated  in  the  districts  of  Anuradhapura,  Polonnaruwa,  Vavuniya, 
Kurunegala, Puttlam, Killinochchi, Mulathiv, Batticaloa and Jaffna. About 80% of blackgram crop 
cultivated  during  “Maha”  season  as  rain-fed  SARP  crop  and  rest  is  grown  in  “Yala”  in  paddy 
fields with supplementary irrigation. Cultivated extent and production of blackgram vary from year 
to  year  with  a  decreasing  trend.  Consequently,  the  production  is  not  sufficient  for  the  demand 
where the national average yield of blackgram has been stagnating around 0.7-0.8 t/ha over the 
years,  and  it  is  far  behind  the  research  yield,  which  is  about  1.5-2.0  t/ha.  Until  early  nineties, 
large  quantities  of  blackgram  were  exported  to  various  countries  and  no  importation  were 
recorded.  However,  recent  figures  illustrate  that  the  large  quantities  of  blackgram  are  imported 
annually  highlighting  the  importance  of  increasing  the  cultivation  extent  with  the  objective  of 
imports substitution. (DOA,SL) 
Opportunities for impact & Key Entry Points: 
 
The crop is resistant to drought conditions hence ideal for project locations especially 
the dry zone. It is well adopted for different cropping systems including monoculture in 
SARP/lowlands in both “Yala” & “Maha” seasons and either intercropping with Maize.  
  Soil fertility improvement through fixing Nitrogen and crop residue produced more 
organic matter soil texture development. 
  Plant protein supplementary for malnutrition.        
 
Further it could be grown as a relay crop before the onset of “Yala” season. In addition, 
like most of the legumes, it could be grown in “Yala” season under major/minor 
irrigations successfully. 
  Black gram also could be grown with relatively less inputs (Less cost of production) 
hence it’s suitable for rural smallholder farmers. However, it’s important to secure the 
market through proper commercialization of the value chain itself. 
  Project could seek the possibility of working with Mahailluppallama (MI) research station 
to develop new varieties of Blackgram as no such upgraded varieties released to the 
market after late 1990s. 
Finger millet is an important food crop in Sri Lanka and can be cultivated under the adverse soil 
and  climatic  conditions  of  the  Dry  Zone.  It  is  grown  as  a  rainfed  crop  under  a  short  growing 
season  and  with  resistance  to  pests  and  diseases.  “Kurakkan”  grains  are  highly  nutritious  and 
have  an  excellent  seed  storage  quality.  The  area  of  land  under  finger  millet  has  decreased 
nationally,  from  21000  ha  in  late  1980s  to  7,000  ha  2016  due  to  forest  clearance  regulations. 
Traditional finger millet cultivation is being replaced by other comparable and competitive crops 
such  as  maize,  pulses  and  vegetables  (DOA,  SL).  Nevertheless  the  productivity  of  finger millet 
has increased from 0.6 mt/ha in late 1995 to 1.17 mt/ha in 2015 due to newly improved varieties 
and adoption of improved cultivation practices. Finger millet is presently grown in number of Dry 
Zone districts including all project target districts. Seeds for the varieties Rawana and Oshadha 
are produced and distributed by the Department of Agriculture (DOA) as high yielding varieties. 
Opportunities for impact & Key Entry Points: 
 
 
 
 
The crop is resistant to drought conditions hence ideal for project locations especially in 
the dry zone. It could be cultivated during “Maha” season with the onset of monsoon or 
during “Yasa” in paddy fields effectively. 
Finger millet could be grown with relatively less inputs (Less cost of production) hence 
it’s suitable for rural smallholder farmers. However, it’s important to secure the market 
through proper commercialization of the value chain itself. 
Transplanting could be practiced instead of broadcasting of seeds to reduce seed cost 
and for higher productivity on the land. Further, weed control could be done through 
mechanical methods in an effective manner comparing to transplanting where weed 
control is difficult to manage which leads to lower productivity. 
Finger millet is considered a highly nutritious food with low glycemic index, fortified with 
iron and calcium hence would be an ideal source for enhancing the diet at beneficiary 
households highlighting the possibility of promoting nutrition sensitive value chain 
development in project locations. 
Low Glycemic Index (Low Glucose, Good for avoid Diabetic)     
 
  Value addition is an option for “Kurakkan” based products which could be promoted 
through FBOs under the guidance of the project. 
Groundnut 
The production of groundnut in Sri Lanka was 28,000 MT in 2015 and has seen a sharp growth 
in  the  last  five  years.  This  is  mainly  due  to  the  opening  up  of  additional  growing  areas  in  the 
84 
b. High cost of labour and low technical inputs: Labour is the most significant constraint faced by farmers. The introduction of machinery and equipment is necessary for groundnut to become commercially viable. Introduction of new value chain players to meet these gaps and commercializing 
c. Developing economies of scale: Scale is often impacted by availability of seed and labour. Groundnut is profitable and farmers will expand the area under cultivation on tenancy to meet potential market. Market players are active and driving up  the scale of production. If issues inhibiting 
d. Mitigation of environmental risks: Environmental risks are now a regular part of cultivation in the dry zone. Technical training and improvements in agro management practices, and micro irrigation are key interventions to overcome the challenges. 
Commodity 
Dairy 
Goat 
Status / entry point / opportunities for impact 
North  and  East  of  Sri  Lanka  –  dry  zone  areas.  Market  demand  is  high  from  confectionery 
manufacturers  – biscuits, roasted, fried and mixed snacks and sweets. There is no commercial 
production of groundnut oil or butter. Peanut butter is a relatively new commodity imported to Sri 
Lanka but in small quantities for high-end supermarkets. 
14.  Yala  production  of  groundnut  has  increased  drastically  in  recent  years  contributing  an 
average of 40% of total production. Groundnuts are produced and sold currently in the dry zone 
as raw commodities. There is a strong interest from buyers which is driving production. The main 
constraints facing the value chain are: 
15. 
a. Low availability of seeds and quality of seeds: The transition of seed supply from DoA to the 
private sector has not yet taken place in the region. Private seed production farms are very small 
and unable to cope with demand and are not certified. The seed certification program has not yet 
taken off at a scale that can sufficiently supply the market demand for seed during the planting 
season. Some private sector actors such as CBL Plenty Foods Ltd has shown a keen interest to 
pilot seed supply and lead the development of the chain. An alternative for small scale farmers is 
to  develop  low  cost  on-farm  seed  storage  that  can  be  replicated  easily  by  farmers.  Groundnut 
seed  supply  is  not  so  much  the  constraint  as  the  difference  between  the  type  of  product 
demanded  by  the  market  and  the  one  cultivated  locally.  The  local  seed  variety  has  a  lower 
cooking yield and is therefore commands only a very small local market and is mainly considered 
a subsistence crop. 
solutions, such as a machinery and equipment hire services could have a significant impact on 
the value chain. 
scale can be addressed farmers are more likely to produce at a level of around 2.5 ha. that can 
be managed with family labour and equipment. This could bring down cost of production.  
Potential action areas: 
 
Improved  seed  supply  value  chain  linkages  as  a  longer  term  solution  involving  the 
development  of  adequate  supplies  of  certified  seed  and  market  mechanisms  to  purchase, 
store  and  re-sell  the  seed  to  farmers  during  the  season.  Agribusiness  linkages  with 
processors provide an opportunity through contract farming modalities.  
  Strengthen technical  know-how  and  improve  the  use of machinery  and  equipment  that  will 
lower the costs of production. Strengthen producer organizations and value chain players to 
provide  equipment  for  land  preparation,  tillage  and  harvesting  to  bring  down  the  costs  of 
production. Key activities could include technical training, provision of equipment, setting up 
agro-equipment  hiring  businesses  which  may  be  done  as  a  producer  organization 
strengthening activity. 
Milk  is  a  large,  small  holder  production  sector  responding  to  an  expanding  local  market 
throughout  the  country.  In  the  Dry  Zone  dairy  production  is  concentrated  in  the  districts  of 
Polonnaruwa Vavuniya Matale Moneragala Hambanthota, Kurenagala. Several established large 
companies are engaged in collecting milk for processing in to other products. About 350,000MT 
are produced annually which meets only a fraction of the local market. Due to this inadequacy, 
Sri  Lanka  imports more  than 71,000  MT  of  milk  products  at  a cost  of  US$400 million annually. 
Large companies such as CIC, MILCO, Cargills, Nestle, and FONTERA are some of the private 
sector partners already operating in this sector with small holder producers. 
In  Mannar  the  dairy  value  chain  assessment  showed  low  access  to  improved  breeds,  poor 
access  to  and  use  of  veterinary  and  artificial  insemination  (AI)  services,  low  level  of  technical 
know-how and application, impact of limitations on grazing land during the peak milk production 
period,  quality  of  milk  production  and handling, and  scattered  production  and difficult  access  in 
areas such as Madhu as key limitations that need to be addressed to upgrade the value chain 
Goat  contributes  to  the  livelihood  development  of  smallholder  farmers  of  the  country.  Goat 
farming  is  one  of  the  most  affordable  and  sustainable  ways  of  enhancing  rural  household 
income, especially  in  the  areas  where  crop  and  dairy  farming  are  not  economical.  Total recent 
goat counts of Sri Lanka are 314,800 (Department of Census and Statistics, 2018). The majority 
is  concentrated  in  the  dry  and  dry  intermediate  zones  of  Sri  Lanka.  A  large  share  of  the  goat 
counts is concentrated in the northern dry zone - Mannar, Vavuniya, Anuradhapura and Amparai 
in the dry zone and Kurunegala and Puttalam in the intermediate zone (Department of Census 
and Statistics, 2016).  The  annual  per  capita  consumption  of   goat  meat  in  Sri  Lanka  in  
2017  was  about  0.1  kg (Department of Animal Production and Health, 2017). The total annual 
domestic production  of  mutton  was  1350  MT  (2015)  the  balance  requirement  (350.33  MT)  was 
85 
Commodity 
Status / entry point / opportunities for impact 
imported (Department of Animal Production and Health, 2015. Even though a considerably lower 
attention is paid for mutton production, many people demand mutton during festival seasons in 
the country. Therefore, development in mutton production should be taken into consideration in 
order to reduce the imports and to be self-sustained in future.  
Goat  production  is  mainly  comprises  of  intensive  and  semi  intensive  management  systems.  In 
both systems, animals are reared primarily for mutton though some does are also milked and the 
milk is sold. Goat milk is becoming popular due to its merit in contributing to health benefits and 
therefore rearing dairy goats under intensive management is becoming popular since recent past 
with rapid developments in Northern and Eastern provinces. The  majority  of  goats  reared  are  
indigenous  goats  and  crosses  with  improved  breeds such  as Jamunapari, Beetal,  and  Boer 
and usually, Indigenous  goats  produce less milk and  are  mainly reared for meat. However, the 
wealth of the indigenous goat could be improved by giving little attention comparing to upgraded 
breeds.  Goats  are  relatively  cheaper  than  cows  which  reflects  in  small  initial  investment  and 
correspondingly  small  risk  of  loss  by  individual  deaths.  This  makes  goats  an  attractive 
proposition  for  household  use  and  subsistence  farming,  especially  for  poor  households.  Goats 
can conveniently  be cared  for  by  women  and  children,  occupy  little  housing  space,  and supply 
both meat and milk in quantities suitable for immediate family consumption, which is important in 
view of the difficulties of storage in rural areas including the Dry Zone. 
The benefits can be summarised as: 
 
 
Income - Important means of earning supplementary income. 
Food - Provide animal proteins (milk and meat) that are important for the nutritional well-
being of peasants/Smallholders. 
  Security - Sources of investment, security and stability. 
  Employment - Creation of employment including effective utilization of unpaid family 
labour. 
Fertilizer - Contribution to farm fertility by the return of dung and urine. 
 
  By-product utilization - Enable economic utilization of non- marketable crop residues. 
Leather SARP and handicraft - Skins are used extensively to produce various leather 
 
goods and handicraft. 
86 
Private sector contract farming programmes nationally  
Programmes started / 
mobilized 
No. 
Partner 
company 
Beneficiary farmers 
Actual 
(direct) 
Indirect 
Fruits and Mixed Vegetable 
– 
Cargills 
Backyard Beekeeping- 
CBL 
Seaweed Cultivation- 
Hayleys Aqua Agri 
Dairy Development – 
Cargills Dairy 
Dairy Development – 
CIC Dairy 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6  Gherkin Cultivation 
Sunfrost Pvt. Ltd 
7 
Beekeeping 
HJS Condiments 
Seed onion – 
Hayleys Agro 
Farms 
Jalapeno pepper - 
Sunfrost Pvt. Ltd 
8 
9 
10  Passion Fruit - 
HJS Condiments 
11  Hybrid seeds – 
Landmark Agro 
12  maize production – 
Nelna farms 
13  Dairy development – 
Fonterra Brands Ltd 
14  Dairy development- 
cello Dairies Ltd 
15  Maize cultivation 
CIC 
16  Poultry development 
SL Poultry Ltd 
17  Kitul products 
Lanka eco prod. Ltd 
37 
15 
1564 
262 
158 
254 
10 
10 
10 
8 
15 
15 
50 
20 
241 
600 
879 
2,400 
1,118 
1,600 
255 
150 
152 
94 
400 
2000 
200 
100 
4080  
100  
100  
Tot
al 
14,469 
2,426 
87 
Product 
Sector/  
Value 
Chain 
Fruits 
S. 
No. 
1 
Private Companies – 
Marketing Partners 
Type of Partner Private Companies 
Super 
Retail/ 
Market 
Grower 
Processor 
Exporter 
.Co 
Small 
.Co 
Medium 
.Co 
Large 
T JC Mango 
H J S CONDIMENTS LTD 
GLOBAL TRADING & 
MARKETING PVT 
NELNA 
LANKA CANNERIES LTD 
AGRI BIO TECH PVT LTD 
SMAK 
FOODCITYSUPER 
MARKET, CARGILLS  
ARPICO SUPER MARKET 
LAUGF SUPER MARKET 
DOLE LANKA PVT LTD 
C R EXPORTS PVT LTD 
MUBARAK TRADING CO 
EXPOLANKA PVT LTD 
C B L NATURAL FOODS 
PVT 
EASTERN & ALLIED 
AGENCIES LTD 
NIDRO SUPPLY PVT LTD 
PULSES SPLITTING & 
PROCE INDUST P L 
TARGET AGRICULTURE 
PVT LTD 
VEGILAND EXPORTERS 
PVT LTD 
ISHANA EXPORTS PVT LTD 
CONSOLIDATED BUSINESS 
SYSTEMS PT 
ALOY EXPO PVT LTD 
C R EXPORTS PVT LTD 
EXPOLANKA PVT LTD 
EASTERN & ALLIED 
AGENCIES LTD 
INTERNATIONAL 
FOODSTUFF COMPANY 
AGRI BIO TECH PVT LTD 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 Mangoes 
Pineapple 
Passion 
fruits Papaya 
2  Vegetables 
Green Chilli   
Bitter Gourd 
Snake Gourd 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
3  Protected Agriculture Vegetables (Potential for Small Farmers with Higher Income Groups) 
X 
H J S CONDIMENTS LTD 
PRIMA CEYLON LTD 
CEYLON GRAIN 
ELEVATORS 
GOLD COIN FEEDS 
PUSESELLA FARM PVT 
LTD 
CIC FEEDS 
NELNA FARM PVT LTD 
PLENTY FOODS PVT LTD 
PRIMA CEYLON LTD 
CEYLON GRAIN 
ELEVATORS 
GOLD COIN FEEDS 
PUSESELLA FARM PVT 
LTD 
Bell Pepper 
4  Oil Seeds 
Sesame  
Seeds 
(2015/16 
Estimates) 
Perennial 
Spices 
5 
Pepper          EXPOLANKA PVT LTD 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Super 
Retail/ 
Market 
Grower 
88 
Processor 
X 
Exporter 
X 
.Co 
Small 
.Co 
Medium 
.Co 
Large 
X 
Clove       
Cinnamon 
Nutmeg 
6  Treacle 
Kitul/Palmyra 
BIO EXTRACTS 
C B L NATURAL FOODS 
PVT LTD 
BIO FOODS 
ADAMEXPO 
RENUKA AGRO EXPORTS 
LTD 
EOS ORGANIC 
HDDES Pvt 
EXPOLANKA PVT LTD 
INTERNATIONAL 
FOODSTUFF COMPANY 
AGRI BIO TECH PVT LTD 
LAUGF SUPER MARKET 
ARPICO SUPER MARKET/ 
FOODCITY/ 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
89 
Appendix 3:  Terms of Reference 
Scope of work 
Project Director 
The  Project  Director  will  lead  the  overall  delivery  of  all  aspects  of  the  project  and  ensure  close 
coordination  between  the  technical  assistance  staff  and  national  project  staff  and  activities  within 
scope, budget and timeline under the guidance of the National Project Steering Committee (NPSC) to 
achieve high quality and timely results and project deliverables. More specifically, responsibilities will 
include: 
  Provide  leadership,  coordination  and  guidance  on  all  matters  pertaining  to  the  smooth 
implementation  of  the  Project,  in  accordance  with  procedures  and  obligations  specified  in  the 
IFAD Loan Agreement and implementation arrangements detailed  in the Project Implementation 
Manual (PIM); 
  Responsible  for  elaboration  and  the  implementation  of  procedures  set  forth  in  the  PIM,    the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and other relevant documents; 
  Ensure  regular  communication  and  coordination  with  the  Presidential  Secretariat,  NPSC  and  all 
other partners and interested stakeholders, with regard to all project activity;  
  Ensure  the  establishment  of  the  Project  Implementation  structures  both  at  national  and  district 
levels  (i.e.  the  project  Implementation  Units  and  their  link  with  the  District  Authorities  and  ASC 
staff; 
  Supervise  daily  activities  of  the  PMU,  evaluating  performance  and  operating  effectiveness 
(including  on-going  staff  performance  evaluations  and  feedback),  making  recommendations  for 
change, as necessary; 
  Preparation of Annual Work Plans, including monthly  targets and deliverables as well as annual 
spending targets in accordance with the Project Document. Tracking of work outputs throughout 
the year in light of these Annual Work Plans; 
  Assumes direct responsibility for managing the project budget by ensuring that: 
-  project funds are disbursed properly;  
-  expenditure is in accordance with the project document and project work plans;  
-  accounting records and supporting documents are properly kept and financial reports 
- 
are prepared;  
financial operations are transparent and financial procedures/regulations are properly 
applied;  
  Ensure regular monitoring of the status of project activities (through the preparation and updating 
of  implementation  plans  and  schedules,  operations  manuals,  disbursement  projections,  etc.), 
including preparation and transmission of comprehensive progress reports as required under the 
conditions  of  the  Loan  Agreement,  and  any  other  reporting  requirements  under  the  project  (for 
example annual audits); 
  Ensure  that  appropriate  procedures  are  established  and  implemented  for  the  inspection  and 
monitoring of the work of consultants and contractors, so as to be able to certify that works and 
services  are  satisfactorily  accomplished  in  compliance  with  Terms  of  Reference  and  evaluate 
performance considering the different levels of responsibilities of the Project and synchronize key 
components to ensure the right results; 
  Arrange  for  short-term  staff  training,  as  needed,  for  PMU  staff  in  areas  such  as  procurement 
under  IFAD  Guidelines  and  IFAD  loan  disbursement  procedures,  and  other  areas  as  may  be 
considered appropriate; 
  Closely  cooperate  with  all  relevant  stakeholders,  and  project  beneficiaries  in  designing  and 
implementing  project  activities  according  to  project  documents  in  the  best  way  to  accomplish 
maximum benefit and positive impact for the project beneficiaries;  
  Carry  out  monitoring  visits  to  Project  sites  on  a  regular  basis;  survey  (informally)  the  intended 
beneficiaries and other stakeholders; 
90 
  Prepare  project  progress  reports  and  the  project  final  report  and  organize  National  Steering 
Committee Meetings, review meetings and evaluation missions; 
  Organize  meeting,  workshops,  and  seminars  to  raise  awareness  about  the  project  and  to 
disseminate lessons learnt from the project to a wider audience, as appropriate. This will include 
all technical aspects of the project and those relating to environmental and social safeguards. 
Qualifications and experience 
•  The  Project  Director  should  have  demonstrated  experience  and  knowledge  of  procedures 
applicable  to  multi-  or  bi-lateral  financing.  Experience  in  IFAD’s  rules  and  procedures  will  be  a 
plus.  
•  Academic  degree  in  Agronomy  and  rural  Development,  Business  and  Administration 
Management,  Monitoring  &  Evaluation,  Social  Sciences  or  related  studies  and  documented 
previous experience in similar assignments. A Master degree will be a preference; 
•  Proven  experience  of  at  least  five  (5)  years  in  implementing  IFAD  or  other  international 
Agencies and NGOs funded projects; 
•  Extensive  working  experience  in  preparing  and  dealing  with  various  reports  and  information 
analysis, a distinct advantage; 
•  Experience  in  monitoring,  control  and  evaluation  of  IFAD  or  other  International  agencies  and 
NGO’s funded projects activities or any other project 
•  Good  communication  (verbal  and  written)  and  strong  interpersonal  skills  (human  resources 
management) and ability to work in a team (leadership); 
•  Excellent analytical and writing skills; 
•  Experience  and  knowledge  of  the  rules  and  procedures  in  force  at  the  IFAD  and  the 
Government of Sri Lanka will be an advantage; 
•  A good knowledge of English; 
•  Good computer skills especially in MS Word, Excel, PowerPoint; 
Duty Station and Duration of services 
The Project Director will be based in Colombo with field visits as may be required. Duration of 
services – 72 person months. Initially, the contract will be assigned for a period of twelve (12) months 
and its extension will be based upon performance evaluation. 
91 
Senior Finance Management Specialist  
Scope of Work 
The  Finance  Management  Specialist  will  assist  and  report  to  the  Project  Director  on  all  financial 
matters  relating  to  implementation  of  the  project.  S/He  will  be  mainly  responsible  for  preparing 
Trimester  Financial  Progress,  Project  Account,  Accounting  Manual,  SOE  manual  and  other  related 
financial reports as may be required by IFAD and the Government of Sri Lanka. 
The incumbent will work closely with and under the supervision of the Project Director at the Project 
Management  Unit  (PMU)  for  the  achievement  of  project's  goals.  The  main  responsibility  is  to  assist 
the Project through the performance of the following duties and responsibilities: 
•  Develop and implement appropriate financial and accounting systems for the project to meet the 
requirements of IFAD and Government both at PMU and District levels; 
•  Lead the team of financial assistants; 
•  Develop annual budget in close collaboration with the Project Director and technical team both at 
PMU and District Hub levels; 
•  Develop  Funds  Flow  Projections  in  collaboration  with  the  Project  Director  and  the  Procurement 
Specialist at PMU levels 
•  Assist  in  the  planning  and  budgeting  for  project  implementation,  taking  the  lead  role  in  the 
financial  plan  and  budgets  and  ensuring  that  the  assumptions,  parameters,  guidelines  and 
policies in planning are complied with; 
•  Ensure that all accounting records and bank accounts are up to date; 
•  Prepare  a  monthly  bank  reconciliation  of  all  Bank  Accounts  having  into  consideration  all  "Cost 
Centers"; 
•  Establish and improve the internal control systems (goods, services, assets and works) and verify 
that the accounting controls is put in place at all levels; 
•  Monitor  financial  disbursements  and  all  administrative  procedures  in  line  with  the  IFAD  and 
Government requirements; 
•  Provide assistance in compiling and consolidating accounts and preparing Unaudited and Audited 
Project Account in stipulated date for each Fiscal Year as agreed in loan/credit agreement; 
•  Maintain up to date the Financial Management Manual as per need of the project and train project 
staffs in adopting sub-project accounting and financial monitoring system; 
•  Ensure the timeliness of required financial reports to IFAD on a regular basis; 
•  Prepare the reports and the Annual Financial Statements for all project funds disbursed by PMU 
• 
(IFAD and Government’s); 
Integrate  financial  procedures  and  systems  with  the  Management  Information  System  (MIS)  to 
track project progress and management performance; 
•  Provide orientation and on-the-job-training to upgrade performance skills of the project staff both 
at PMU and District Hub levels on all project related financial system such as disbursement and 
procurement process as per the IFAD procedures and guideline; 
•  Attend and participate in project meetings and give input to financial related matters; 
•  Monitor project progress through field visits, offer feedback and keep regular communication with 
related field and coordination level staff, if required; 
•  Ensure  that  entities  that  receive  project  funds  for  the  implementation  of  micro-projects  are 
complying with the Rules and Procedures in force; 
•  Ensure  compliance  with 
to 
procurement, disbursements, Special Accounts, Expense Statements (Statement of Expenditure - 
SOE),  the  Financial  Monitoring  Reports  (Financial  Monitoring  Report  -  FMR),  the  Special 
Commitments, etc.  
IFAD  and  Government  standards  and  procedures,  related 
•  Review  and monitor project performance and make recommendation to  improve performance in 
relation to Financial Management; 
•  Cooperating with IFAD, Government and other partners to improve project financial management, 
particularly in terms of following up the action points agreed in the project legal documents, during 
the IFAD supervision missions and the recommendations of external auditors; 
•  Providing  the  Auditor  with  access  to  copies  of  all  necessary  documentation,  information  and 
supporting materials; 
92 
• 
Implement and monitor any tasks required by the Project Director 
Qualifications and experience 
  Academic  degree  in  Finance,  Economy,  Accounting  or  Business  and  Administration 
Management and documented previous experience in similar assignments A Master degree will 
be a preference; 
  Proven experience of at least five (7) years as Accountant, finance controller for IFAD or other 
international Agencies; 
  Good  knowledge  of  International  Accounting  Standards  (IAS),  International  Standards  on 
Accounting  (ISA)  and  experience  in  IFAD  projects  or  other  international  organizations  are 
preferential conditions; 
  Experience  and  knowledge  of  the  rules  and  procedures  in  force  at  the  IFAD  and  the 
Government of Sri Lanka; 
  Have  good  computer  skills  especially  in  MS  Word,  Excel,  PowerPoint  and  Accounting 
programs; 
  Good knowledge of English 
Duty Station and Duration of services 
The Finance Management Specialist will be based in Colombo with field visits as may be required. 
Duration of services – 72 person months. Initially, the contract will be assigned for a period of twelve 
(12) months and its extension will be based upon performance evaluation. 
93 
Scope of Work 
Financial Assistant 
The Financial Assistant will be under the direct guidance of the Financial Management Specialist in 
Colombo. More specifically; 
  The Financial Assistant will assist the Financial Management Specialist and report to the Project 
Director  on  all  financial  matters  relating  to  implementation  of  the  project.  She/he  will  be  mainly 
responsible  for  preparing  regular  reports  and  Annual  Financial  Statements  for  all  project  funds 
disbursed by PIU and required by IFAD and Government of Sri Lanka.   
Installation of appropriate accounting/reporting systems to ensure that the PIU and especially the 
Programme Coordinator are regularly informed of on-going financial status and transactions.  
  Develop and implement appropriate financial and accounting systems for the  project to meet the 
 
requirements of the IFAD and Government both at PMU and district hub levels; 
  Develop annual budget in close collaboration with the Project Technical Team both at PMU and 
District levels; 
  Ensure  that  all  programme  funds  are  used  in  accordance  with  the  conditions  of  the  financing 
agreements, with due attention to economy and efficiency, and only for the purposes for which the 
funds were provided; 
  Provide  assistance  to  the  Financial  Management  Specialist  in  compiling  and  consolidating 
accounts and preparing Unaudited and Audited Project Account in stipulated date for each Fiscal 
Year as agreed in loan/credit agreement; 
  Ensure that all necessary supporting documents, records and accounts are kept in respect of all 
programme  activities,  with  clear  linkages  between  the  books  of  account  and  the  financial 
statements presented to the financiers; 
  Develop  Funds  Flow  Projections  in  collaboration  with  the  Project  Coordinator  and  the 
Procurement Specialist at PMU levels 
  Assist in the planning and budgeting for the project program, taking the lead role in the financial 
plan  and  budgets  and  ensuring  that  the  assumptions,  parameters,  guidelines  and  policies  in 
planning are complied with; 
  Ensure  compliance  with  the  IFAD  and  Government  standards  and  procedures,  related  to 
procurement, disbursements, Special Accounts, Expense Statements (Statement of Expenditure - 
SOE),  the  Financial  Monitoring  Reports  (Financial  Monitoring  Report  -  FMR),  the  Special 
Commitments, etc.  
  Monitor  financial  disbursements  and  all  administrative  procedures  in  line  with  the  IFAD  and 
Government requirements; 
  Establish and improve the internal control systems (goods, services, assets and works) and verify 
that the accounting controls is put in place at all levels; 
  Liaise  with  external  auditors  to  audit  the  Programme  accounts  to  meet  the  required  submission 
dates by both GoSL and IFAD. 
Qualifications and experience 
  Academic  degree  in  Finance,  Economy,  Accounting  or  Business  and  Administration 
Management and documented previous experience in similar assignments A Master degree will 
be a preference; 
  Proven experience of at least five (5) years as Accountant, finance controller for IFAD or other 
international Agencies; 
  Good  knowledge  of  International  Accounting  Standards  (IAS),  International  S tandards  on 
Accounting  (ISA)  and  experience  in  IFAD  projects  or  other  international  organizations  are 
preferential conditions; 
  Experience  and  knowledge  of  the  rules  and  procedures  in  force  at  the  IFAD  and  the 
Government of Sri Lanka; 
  Have  good  computer  skills  especially  in  MS  Word,  Excel,  PowerPoint  and  Accounting 
programs; 
94 
  Good knowledge of English 
Duty Station and Duration of Services 
The Financial Assistant will be based in Colombo with field visits as may be required. Duration of 
services – 72 person months. Initially, the contract will be assigned for a period of twelve (12) months 
and its extension will be based upon performance evaluation. 
95 
Senior Procurement Specialist 
Scope of Work 
The  Procurement  Specialist  will  take  full  responsibility  for  procurement  under  the  program.  This  will 
include two primary areas of responsibility: 
(i)  direct  responsibility  for  designing  and  establishing  the  procurement  function,  including  the 
staffing  structure,  functional  allocations,  linkages  with  other  departments,  training  and 
mentoring, and design of procedures and development of manuals for procurement; 
(ii)  carrying  out  procurement  activities  including,  among  other  things,  the  preparation  and 
consolidation of the procurement plans with assistance from the Finance Administration Unit, 
preparation  of  bidding  documents  and  RFP’s,  facilitation  of  obtaining  required  necessary 
clearances, preparation of advertisements, responding to bidders' clarifications on advertised 
contracts  and  playing  a  central  role  in  the  evaluation  of  bids  and  proposals,  and  contract 
management. 
More specifically: 
  Strengthen  discipline  of  staff  using  IFAD’s  Standard  Bidding  Documents;  prepare  project’s 
customized  Bidding  Documents  and  Request  for  Proposals  (RFP).  This  should  include 
standardized Forms to be used for International, National and Local Shopping Methods; 
  Establish a simplified Procurement Tracking System for monitoring of the Project procurement 
activities  and  train  staff  to  track  procurement,  to  analyse  recurrent  weakness  and  strengths 
and to develop and implement mitigation measures; 
  Prepare  and  train  staff  to  prepare  and  update  the  Project’s  Annual  Procurement  Plan 
(including procurement method, types/kinds, quantity, value, delivery requirements, sources, 
etc.); 
  Preparation  of  work  plans,  planning  of  budget  and  composing  of  budget  applications  jointly 
with a financial management specialist; 
  Train  staff  to  prepare  the  General  Procurement  Notice  (GPN),  and  Specific  Procurement 
Notices  (SPN),  and  Expression  of  Interests  (EOI)  and  ensuring  their  publication  in  the  «UN 
Development Business» as well as local and international newspapers in accordance with the 
guidelines of IFAD; 
  Support  on  the  establishment  of  a  register  of  qualified  suppliers  and  consultants  and 
periodical updates per project advertisements and consultant request; 
  Review  and  coordinate  the  preparation  of  Technical  Specifications  and  Terms  of  Reference 
concerning  procurement  activities,  as  well  as  review  and  finalization  of  Terms  of  Reference  
prepared by Groups of Experts with specific emphasis on ensuring they are comprehensive, 
generic and minimizing risks of misinterpretation at the evaluation stage; 
Initiate the procurement process, and participate in the preparation of the short lists and pre-
qualification of suppliers where necessary; 
 
  Coordinate  the  response  to  the  inquires,  and  communicate  the  results  of  the  evaluation 
process to the applicants; 
  Coordinate the preparation of Bidding Documents and RFPs and issue the documents to the 
respective bidders and consultants; 
  Supervise the procurement process for International and Local procurement; 
  Manage complaints with comments related to procurement process/issues to the relevant 
 
authority and manage issue during the procurement processes as they arise. 
In  cases  of  procurement  actions  requiring  IFAD  “No  Objection”,  coordinate  the  dispatch  of 
procurement  documents  to  DAD  and  DOA  monitor  IFAD  response  time  on  issuing  “No 
Objections” at different levels of the procurement process and follow-up accordingly; 
  Prepare Procurement Performance report (e.g. time taken at each step of the procurement 
process, improvement of procurement cycle, best practices etc.); 
96 
  Monitor and ensure timely responses to procurement questions raised by IFAD; 
  Publication of contract award information as required by IFAD guidelines; 
  Follow-up  with  the  short-listed  consultants  within  10  days  of  RFP  dispatch  to  ensure  their 
participation in the procurement exercise; 
  Participate in constitution of the Evaluation Committees; 
  Prepare  and/or  review  the  minutes  of  the  Evaluation  Committee  meetings,  and  request  for 
“No Objection” letters; 
  Advise on arrangements for negotiation process, where necessary; 
  Prepare and/or support in the preparation of draft contracts (agreements) and review the final 
contracts  and  supervise  timely  distribution  of  all  relevant  procurement  and  contract 
documents; 
  Ensure timely receipt of the Goods documentation and consultant’s monthly status reports; 
  Verification  of  payment  documents  under  contracts  for  the  supply  of  goods  and  services 
jointly with the financial management specialist; 
  Ensure  to  maintain  an  accurate  project  filing  system  covering  all  project  procurement 
activities. 
Qualifications and experience 
  Minimum Masters level degree in one of the following disciplines: Economics; Master of Business 
Administration, Public Procurement, Engineering or Statistics or similar. 
  Proven  experience  of  at  least  five  (7)  years  as  a  Procurement  Specialist  for  IFAD  or  other 
international Agencies; 
  Good  knowledge  of  International  Procurement  procedures,  International  Standards  on 
Procurement  and  experience  in  IFAD  projects  or  other  international  organizations  are 
preferential conditions; 
  Experience  and  knowledge  of  the  rules  and  procedures  in  force  at  the  IFAD  and  the 
Government of Sri Lanka; 
  Have  good  computer  skills  especially  in  MS  Word,  Excel,  PowerPoint  and  Accounting 
programs; 
  Good knowledge of English 
Duty Station and Duration of Services 
The Procurement Specialist will be based in Colombo with field visits as may be required. Duration of 
services – 72 person months. Initially, the contract will be assigned for a period of twelve (12) months 
and its extension will be based upon performance evaluation. 
97 
Scope of work 
Procurement Assistant 
The Procurement Assistant (PA) work under the guidance of the Senior Procurement Specialist and 
will  coordinate  procurement  activities  of  SARP.  The  position  will  be  filled  through  a  competitive 
recruitment  process.  The  PA  will  coordinate  the  procurement  function  based  on  GoSL  and  IFAD 
guidelines and procedures. The position will be based at the project implementation unit in Colombo 
with frequent travel to the six districts.  
Specific duties include: 
 
 
In  collaboration  with  other  members  of  the  PMU,  DOA  and  DAD  government  officials  at  District 
level  and  implementing  partners,  prepare  a  procurement  plan  for  works,  goods  and  services 
required by the project and submit same for approval by the GoSL NPSC and IFAD along with the 
AWPB. 
Identify the sources of supply, evaluate the eligibility and qualifications in order to prepare the list 
of suppliers/contractors and keep PC abreast on this; 
  Prepare and collate tender and contract documents for specific procurements according to GOSL 
and IFAD guidelines 
  Establish  a  register  of  qualified  suppliers  and  consultants  and  periodical  updates  per  project 
advertisements and consultant request; 
  Maintain the contract register and regularly update the same with monitoring data on progress of 
all contracts 
  Prepare  procurement  documents  and  facilitate  procurement  for  the  SARP  following  guidelines 
specified in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). These will include procurement procedures 
for  Goods,  Works  and  Services,  community-based  procurement  procedures,  internal  control, 
reconciliation  and  dispute  resolution,  risk management, post-procurement, audit  and monitoring, 
etc. 
  Review  the  final  contracts  and  supervise  timely  distribution  of  all  relevant  procurement  and 
contract documents; 
  Assist  establishing  a  performance  monitoring  database  for  all  suppliers  and  consultants,  and 
ensure timely updates of the system; 
  Assist  establishing  a  performance  a  procurement  filing  system,  and  supervise  the  efficiency, 
security and effectiveness of its use;  
  Assist  in  handling  Project  procurement  related  complaints,  including  logging  and  recording, 
notifying  the  IFAD,  and  preparing  response  to  the  complaints,  including  in  the  preparation  of 
qualitative justifications for settlement of disputes with consultants and suppliers; 
  Contribute  to  the  preparation  of  work  plans,  planning  of  budget  and  composing  of  budget 
applications jointly with the accountant; 
  Review  and  coordinate  the  preparation  of  Technical  Specifications  and  Terms  of  Reference 
concerning procurement activities, as well as review and finalize Terms of Reference prepared by 
lead technical experts; 
  Verify  the  payment  documents  under  contracts  for  the  supply  of  goods  and  services  jointly  with 
the financial management specialist; 
  Report  in  writing  to  the  Project  Director  on  potential  or  actual  violation  of  contractual  terms  by 
contractors and service providers for appropriate sanctions  
  Undertake any other duties assigned by the programme coordinator. 
Qualifications and experience  
  Minimum  Bachelors  level  degree  in  one  of  the  following  disciplines:  Economics;  Master  of 
Business Administration, Public Procurement, Engineering or Statistics or similar. 
  A comprehensive knowledge of Public Procurement Regulations including the PPDA regulations, 
as well as procurement guidelines for IFAD.  
  Experience in preparing tender and contract documents for national and international competitive 
bidding  
98 
  At  least  5  years  working  experience  in  public  organization/  Semi-Public  organization  for 
procurement  of  goods,  works  and  services  in  projects  financed  by  the  government  and  or 
international financial organizations; 
Duty Station and Duration of Services 
The Procurement Assistant will be based in Colombo with field visits as may be required. Duration of 
services – 72 person months. Initially, the contract will be assigned for a period of twelve (12) months 
and its extension will be based upon performance evaluation. 
99 
Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist 
Scope of work  
  Establish  the  M&E  system  and  strategy,  including  design,  data-collection  formats,  data 
collection, data-analysis, and reporting format and systems;  
  Develop  a  database  for  the  project  performance  indicators,  collect  appropriate  data  from  the 
sources, and maintain the database and prepare reports to meet the reporting requirements of 
SARP;  
  Track and analyze progress towards agreed outputs of each of the Project components in line 
with the monitoring framework; 
  Flag potential risks or challenges emerging from monitoring information;  
  Develop the ToRs for the baseline and other monitoring surveys envisaged by the Project and  
select standards for the consultant organization selected to conduct the surveys 
  Support  the  development  of  the  Annual  Plan  and  Budget,  ensuring  that  all  aspects  of  the 
Monitoring  and  Evaluation  function  are  integrated.  including  environmental  and  social 
safeguards 
  Ensure that the information is collected, consolidated and filed with continuity and Collaborate in 
the  preparation  of  quarterly  reports,  identifying  the  differences  and  similarities  between  the 
areas of intervention. 
  Support  the  development  and  implementation  of  capacity  building  training  programs  related  to 
monitoring and evaluation; 
  Participate  in  annual  review  meetings  that  monitor  the  progress  of  the  Project  and  define,  in 
coordination  with  PMU,  plans  for  monitoring  micro-projects  and  establish  an  analytical  and 
comparative framework for each micro-project clarifying objectives and expected results. 
  Develop a social and environmental development framework for SARP, including a plan for data 
collection and analysis and develop a methodology in accordance with the project documents.  
  Based  on  the  logframe  indicators  assist  the  PMU  to  ensure  that  the  selected  indicators  for 
measuring  social  and  environmental  development  outcomes  are  included  in  the  M&E  project 
design. 
  Develop standardized methodologies for analysis of data pertaining to social and environmental 
development. 
  Undertake follow up monitoring  to ensure that proposed mitigation measures are implemented 
according to environmental and social mitigation implementation plan. 
  Maintain and improve safeguard management processes, systems and tools. 
  Compile monthly, quarterly and annual reports on safeguards related issues as part of the M&E 
reports. 
  Compile and analysis the data pertaining to social impacts against envisaged project outcomes 
in respect of social development.  
Qualifications and experience  
  Degree in Agricultural Economics or a related subject; 
  Extensive  experience  in  the  design  and  administration  of  monitoring  and  evaluation  systems 
and instruments, especially in utilizing participatory techniques and information systems; 
  Experience in providing management-level technical assistance and consensus-building among 
project staff in implementing the agreed actions of the project; 
  Familiar with the agricultural sector and preferably with experience in M&E; 
  Professional experience of at least seven  years, of which at least five in the area of monitoring 
and evaluation; 
  Experience in building capacity and knowledge of organizations; 
  Excellent interpersonal relationships, group ease and interview skills. 
Duty station and duration 
100 
The Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist will be based in Colombo with field visits as required. 
Duration of services – 72 person months. Initially, the contract will be assigned for a period of twelve 
(12) months and its extension will be based upon performance evaluation. 
101 
Monitoring and Evaluation Assistant (s) 
Scope of work 
The M&E Assistant, will work under the supervision of the Project Director and M&E Specialist. The 
M&E  Specialist  will  oversee  all  M&E  functions.  The  M&E  Assistant  will  assist  the  M&E  Specialist  to 
design the project M&E system. Specific responsibilities include but are not limited to the following: 
  Provide technical advice to the Project Director to establish and operate a viable monitoring and 
evaluation  system.  Such  a  system  must  be  capable  of  measuring  progress  in  relation  to  work 
plans  for management  purposes  as  well  as  being  capable  of  measuring  outputs  and  impacts  in 
relation to selected project indicators.  
  Organise  and  manage  the  data  collection  framework  for  the  project  and  design  a  data  base 
system.  
  Develop  data  collection  formats  for  service  providers,  and  compile  inputs  received  on  regular 
basis, including taking responsibility for quality, accuracy and timeliness of data. 
  Assist in annual data verification exercises in the field. 
  Create  and  regularly  update  an  e-library  repository  collecting  knowledge  and  stories,  and 
ensuring ease of access. 
  Systematically compile lessons learned from programme implementation into formats suitable for 
dissemination. 
  Provide technical support to the project team in data collection and analysis as necessary. 
  Help organize stakeholder workshops for feedback to and input from all stakeholders. 
  Through  regular  visits  to  the  field  sites  ensure  the  efficient  and  timely  operation  of  the  M&E 
system.  
  Contribute to work plans and reports as required. 
  Support the M&E expert in monitoring social and environmental safeguards   
Qualifications and experience.  
The candidate should have at least a first degree (Master’s degree is an added advantage) in rural 
development, agricultural economics, rural sociology with experience in the use of computer 
databases. Familiarity with participatory monitoring and evaluation methodologies and analytic tools 
will be an advantage.  
Other qualifications include: 
  At  least  five  years  of  experience  in  designing  and  implementing  monitoring  and  evaluation 
systems at project level.  
  An understanding of community, agriculture and/rural development processes. 
  Excellent quantitative and analytical skills. 
  Good oral and written communication skills in English.  
  Computer-literate and  well-versed  in the use  of MS  Word, MS Excel  and the Internet, and have 
demonstrated capability in MS Access. 
Duty station and duration 
The Monitoring and Evaluation Assistant will be based in the District Hubs with field visits as may be 
required to all districts and ASCs. Initially, the contract will be assigned for a period of twelve (12) 
months and its extension will be based upon performance evaluation. 
102 
Senior Project Engineer 
Scope of work  
The  Senior  Project  Engineer  will  be  responsible  for  the  planning  and  execution  of  the  overall 
infrastructure  related  aspects  of  the  project.  He/she  will  review  the  designs  and  costing  of  various 
tank irrigation infrastructure, and help plan the construction activities, provide overall supervision of 
the  construction  of  various  infrastructure  components  planned  under  SARP  in  the  respective 
districts.  
  Support  SARP  in  planning  all  infrastructure  related  works,  including  overseeing  of  the 
engineering  surveys,  review  of  the  design  and  costing  of  various  infrastructure  proposed 
under the project in the respective districts 
  He/she will check the design of various components of the engineering infrastructure planned 
under SARP for safety and cost effectiveness  
  He/she  will  help  in  selection  of  contractors  for  execution  of  infrastructure  related  works, 
wherever necessary based on the set selection criteria  
  He/ she will help in the planning and management of construction activities 
  He/she will perform quality control and quality assurance of the infrastructure works based on 
the design of various components through random inspection.  
  Recommend effective methods of completing work as per the schedules. 
  Coordinate with PMU team on finance and procurement  
  Prepare and analyse the progress report vis a vis infrastructure works and submitting to the 
PMU. 
  Other duties as assigned by the SARP Project Director. 
Qualifications and experience 
  Bachelor’s Degree in Civil Engineering.  
  At  least  7  years  of  relevant  professional  experience  working  on  infrastructure  projects, 
particularly in the area of water resources.  
  Knowledge of engineering surveys, and design and construction of hydraulic infrastructure.  
  Specialized training or certificate in construction or civil/ structure IFAD funded projects will be 
an advantage. 
Duty station and location 
Colombo with frequent travel to the project sites. Duration of services – 72 person months. Initially, 
the contract will be assigned for a period of twelve (12) months and its extension will be based upon 
performance evaluation. 
103 
Natural Resource Management and Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Under the overall guidance of the Project Director the Natural Resource Management Expert will be 
responsible for co-ordinating and managing the technical aspects of project implementation including 
watershed planning, soil and water conservation and community forestry. In particular the specialist will:  
  Review  the  sources  as  background  materials  referred  to  in  the  Project  Implementation  Manual  to 
plan  and  design  natural  resource  measures  suited  to  the  arid  and  semi-arid  conditions  of  the  dry 
zone of Sri Lanka: 
Identify  counterpart  staff  with  requisite  natural  resource  management  background  and  train  and 
mentor them throughout the duration of the assignment. 
 
  Prepare  Terms  of  Reference  and  select  contracting  institutions  and  monitor  the  preliminary 
surveys and modelling exercises of the cascade tank systems in the hot spot areas.  
  Develop  the  community  level  watershed  planning  methodology  to  include  technical  guidelines  for 
watershed development and the management of soil and water conservation measures in upstream 
areas 
  Survey the project sites and identify potential areas for water resource development drawing on 
the technical assessment conducted during the project design process.  
  Design  measures,  co-ordinate  and  manage  technical  aspects  of  water  resources  development, 
water harvesting and other related topics. He/she, and the Project Engineer, will jointly review the 
designs  of  various  interventions  planned  for  water  infrastructure  development  and  irrigation 
management.    
  He/  She  will  conceptualize  studies  for  assessing  the  effectiveness  of  agricultural  water 
management  interventions  aimed  at  water  saving  and  crop  productivity  improvement  and  will 
undertake data collection required for the purpose. 
  He/She, together with the Project Engineer, will support the district hubs and district technical staff 
to design the studies required for planning water related interventions in the project area. 
 
.Prepare  site  specific  Environmental  &  Social  Management  Plans  (ESMPs),  for  SARP  and 
ensure that such plans are approved by relevant authorities before implementation. 
  Guide the Natural Resource Management team to select and design suitable technical measures, 
set  work  norms  for  the  cash  for  assets  activities  and  prepare  Terms  of  Partnership  with  the 
communities for agreed upon interventions  
  Provide  technical  guidance  and  organise  trainings  for  project  staff  –  natural  resource 
management  officers,  counterpart  staff  and  community  facilitators  in  all  aspects  of  natural 
resource management planning, soil and water conservation and community forestry activities. 
Incorporate  environmental  concerns  in  the  design,  construction  and  operation  of  watershed 
management activities so as to minimize the negative impacts on environment. 
 
  Guide  the  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  team  to  ensure  that  social  and  environmental  safeguards 
are met 
  Conduct  awareness  and  training  programmes  with  project  and  government  counterpart  staff  on 
social and environmental safeguards. 
  Together  with  the  Social  Inclusion  Expert  Submit  reports  that  address  the  Environmental  Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) issues to the Project Director. 
  He/she will report to the SARP Project Director. 
. 
Qualifications and experience: 
A  successfully  completed  Master’s  Degree  Water  Resource  Engineering,  Agricultural  Engineering, 
Natural Resource Management or equivalent. 
At  least  7  years  post  qualifying  experience  working  on  water  resource  and  natural  resource 
management projects 
Proficiency in English is essential   
Duty station and location 
104 
Colombo with frequent travel to the project sites. Duration of services – 72 person months. Initially, 
the contract will be assigned for a period of twelve (12) months and its extension will be based upon 
performance evaluation. 
105 
Watershed Development and Irrigation Officers (2) 
Scope of work: 
Under the overall guidance of the Project Director, the Watershed Development and Irrigation Officers 
will take overall responsibility for the planning and implementation of the cascade/ sub-watershed 
infrastructure. In particular the expert (s) will:  
  He/ She will support the PMU in planning agricultural water management and irrigation activities 
in the designated command areas  
  He/She,  together  with  the  Project  Engineer,  will  check  the  designs  of  various  interventions  for 
agricultural water management, including irrigation management 
  Organize and conduct  training to  project counterparts  and IA/  ARPA staff and the communities in 
the preparation of natural resource management plans.  
  Participate  in  the  Community  Planning  Process  and  prepare  Terms  of  Partnership  with  the 
communities  for  agreed  upon  measures  and  provide  guidance  on  issues  related  to  water 
resources development. 
  Select sites, and design measures based on their technical feasibility and assess the inputs and 
materials needed for construction and rehabilitation. 
  Liaise with WFP and apply their work norms for the construction of small scale irrigation schemes 
using cash for work payment to beneficiaries.  
  Appraise the feasibility  of the  water management schemes (technically, financially, and socially) 
and provide guidelines on the preparation of contracts. 
  Provide  technical  guidance  and  organise  trainings  for  AIs,  service  providers  and  farmers  in  all 
aspects of irrigation and water harvesting activities.  
  Appraise the feasibility of irrigation and water management schemes (technically, financially, and 
 
socially) and provide guidelines on the preparation of contracts. 
Identify  and  recommend  the  equipment  necessary  for  the  construction  of  irrigation  and  water 
harvesting schemes.  
  Monitor the technical quality of implementation ensuring that technical specifications are correct to 
enable cash for work disbursements to be made consistent with the technical guidelines provided 
by the project. 
  Train the communities on the O&M of the developed infrastructure. 
  Prepare  reports  on  the  physical  impacts  of  various  interventions  on  agricultural  water 
management, including irrigation management  
  Prepare  and  analyse  the  progress  report  vis  a  vis  agricultural  water  management  and  submit 
reports to the PMU. 
  He/she will report to the Natural Resource Management Specialist. 
Qualifications and experience: 
A successfully completed Bachelor’s Degree Civil Engineering or equivalent. A Postgraduate Degree 
in Water Resource Management or other the relevant field. At least 5 years post qualifying experience 
working on water resources management projects 
  Conversant  with  the  design  and  execution  of  hydraulic  structures  such  as  embankments, 
spillways, sluices and channels and micro irrigation systems 
  Conversant with irrigation management and command area development 
  Excellent  working  knowledge  of  English,  both  verbal  and  written;  Fluency  both  written  and 
verbal in Sinhalese/Tamil 
  Knowledge of IFAD rules will be an asset. 
  Technical skills and experience in irrigation and water management.  
  Proven  background  in  training  and  skills  transfer  preferably  within  a  rural  development 
context.  
Duty station and duration 
106 
District Hubs with frequent travel to the project sites.  
Duration of services – 72 person months. Initially, the contract will be assigned for a period of twelve 
(12) months and its extension will be based upon performance evaluation. 
107 
Natural Resource Management Officers  
Scope of work: 
Under the overall guidance of the Project Director the Natural Resource Management Expert will be 
responsible for co-ordinating and managing the technical aspects of project implementation including 
watershed planning, soil and water conservation and community forestry. In particular the officers will:  
  Review  the  sources  as  background  materials  referred  to  in  the  Project  Implementation  Manual  to 
plan  and  design  natural  resource  measures  suited  to  the  arid  and  semi-arid  conditions  of  the 
southern provinces of Sri Lanka: 
  Organize and conduct  training to  project counterparts  and IA/  ARPA staff and the communities in 
the preparation of natural resource management plans.  
  Take  a  lead  in  the  community-based  natural  resource  management  planning  in  the  selected 
catchment areas and provide guidance on planning issues related to the management of natural 
resources. 
  Select suitable technical measures, set work norms for the cash for assets activities and prepare 
Terms of Partnership with the communities for agreed upon interventions  
  Provide  technical  guidance  and  organise  trainings  for  community  facilitators  and  farmers  in  all 
aspects of soil and water conservation and community forestry activities. 
  Ensure that environmental safeguards are met. 
Qualifications and experience: 
B.Sc.  in  Agriculture  or  a  related  subject  area  with  at  least  5  years  field  experience  in  soil  and  water 
conservation and conservation agriculture practices. Proven background in training and skills transfer 
preferably within a rural development context.  
Proficiency in English is essential   
Duty station and duration 
District Offices with frequent travel to the project sites.  
Duration of services – 72 person months. Initially, the contract will be assigned for a period of twelve 
(12) months and its extension will be based upon performance evaluation. 
108 
Area Based Coordinators (2) – Natural Resource Management Officers 
Scope of work 
As area coordinator 
  Coordinate with the Project Director and all Technical Specialists in the PMU 
  Guide and supervise the implementation of SARP’s activities at district hub level  
  Supervise,  monitor  and  coordinate  the  implementation  of  project  activities  at  district  and  ASC 
level  to  ensure  the  project  is  implemented  as  planned,  and  provide  recommendations  for 
improvement and follow up;  
  Ensure that the planning and implementation processes are inclusive of women, youth and other 
vulnerable groups 
  Prepare  consolidated  monitoring  progress  reports  on  the  implementation  of  project  activities  at 
district, ASC, and community/ group level and submit to the PMU.  
  Provide technical and supervisory support to the District Technical Teams 
  Provide recommendations for more effective implementation of project activities. 
  Assist  in  the  conduct  of  training,  preparing  technical  guidelines  and  advocacy  to  all  local 
stakeholders  
  Facilitate the documentation of best practices of the project  
As Natural Resource Management Officer 
  Review  the  sources  as  background  materials  referred  to  in  the  Project  Implementation  Manual  to 
plan  and  design  natural  resource  measures  suited  to  the  arid  and  semi-arid  conditions  of  the 
southern provinces of Sri Lanka: 
Identify  counterpart  staff  with  requisite  natural  resource  management  background  and  train  and 
mentor them throughout the duration of the assignment. 
Identify contact farmers in project communities to work as technical facilitators in the farmer field 
school 
 
 
  Organize and conduct  training to  project counterparts  and IA/  ARPA staff and the communities in 
the preparation of natural resource management plans.  
  Develop  the  community  level  planning  methodology  to  include  technical  guidelines  for  natural 
resource management - rangelands, management and soil and water conservation 
  Take  a  lead  in  the  community-based  natural  resource  management  planning  in  the  selected 
catchment areas and provide guidance on planning issues related to the management of natural 
resources 
  Select suitable technical measures, set work norms for the cash for assets activities and prepare 
 
Terms of Partnership with the communities for agreed upon interventions  
.Provide  technical  guidance  to  the  National  Technical  team  in  land  use  planning,  soil  and  water 
conservation, community forestry. 
  Provide  technical  guidance  and  organise  trainings  for    community  facilitators  and  farmers  in  all 
aspects of soil and water conservation and community forestry activities 
  Ensure that environmental safeguards are met. 
Qualifications and experience 
o  A  Master’s  degree  in  Natural  Resource  Management,  Agricultural  Engineering  or  a 
related technical subject   
o  Experience of at least seven years in natural resource management  
o  Experience in managing small team of extension workers/ technical staff 
o  Experience in managing and delivering training  
o  Good communication (written and oral) in Sinhala and English  
Duty station and duration 
District Hubs with frequent travel to the project sites.  
109 
Duration of services – 72 person months. Initially, the contract will be assigned for a period of twelve 
(12) months and its extension will be based upon performance evaluation. 
110 
Agriculture and Livestock Specialist  
Scope of work 
The Agriculture/ Livestock Specialist will report directly to the Project Director and work collaboratively 
with  District  Government  and  other  PMU  personnel.  She/he  will  have  the  following  main 
responsibilities: 
  Prepare guidelines for the implementation of agriculture related activities for implementation.   
  Provide technical guidance to the technical team of agricultural officers and AI counterparts in 
climate  smart  technologies,  livestock  development;  facilitating  the  setting  up  of  demonstration 
sites; and disseminating improved/ tested technologies. 
  Provide support to project technical and extension staff in the preparation of extension materials 
(IEC) in selected subject areas 
  Assess  immediate  and  future  training  and  extension  needs  of  the  farming  community  for 
agriculture and livestock related activities.  
  Conduct training courses for implementing aspects of agricultural and livestock development. .  
  Provide technical guidance and organise trainings for AIs and ARPAs and farmers in all aspects 
of agriculture and livestock related activities.  
  Liaise  closely  with  all  relevant  Government  departments  and  research  institutions,  testing 
 
research findings and adapting them to the conditions of the project area.  
Identify,  procure  and  distribute  input  supplies  and  locally  available  equipment  for  agricultural 
related activities.  
  Co-ordinate organizational and technical aspects for the organization of Farmer Field Schools 
providing backstopping support to the agriculture officers and AI extension workers.  
  Monitor  the  procurement/  distribution  of  inputs,  materials  and  equipment  required  for  the 
establishment of natural resource management based activities. 
Qualifications and Experience 
  A Master’s degree in agriculture, livestock management or a related subject ; 
  Extensive  knowledge  of  contemporary  issues  in  production  systems  within  the  agricultural 
sector;   
  A minimum of seven years at a senior level in a relevant public sector, private sector or NGO, 
with  proven  skills  in  the  management  and  coordination  of  agriculture  initiatives  and 
programmes within the agricultural sector; 
  Experience in implementing the Farmer Field School methodology. 
  Computer  literacy  is  a  prerequisite,  as  is  a  very  good  command  of  spoken  and  written 
English. 
  Fully aware of and alert to the crosscutting issues of gender, youth, and poverty targeting 
Duty station and location 
Colombo with frequent travel to the project sites. Duration of services – 72 person months. Initially, 
the contract will be assigned for a period of twelve (12) months and its extension will be based upon 
performance evaluation. 
111 
Agriculture and Livestock Officers (6) 
Scope of work: 
The  agriculture  officer  will  be  required  to  support  activities  and  assist  the  Agriculture  and  Livestock 
Specialist  of  the  project.  S/he  will  provide  assistance  with  the  implementation  of  project  activities, 
including, but not limited to: 
  Participate in community planning processes using participatory appraisal techniques.  
  Preparing guidelines for the implementation of agriculture related activities for implementation.   
  Provide technical guidance to the farmer in agriculture sector activities including soil and water 
conservation,  design  and  implementation  of  on-farm  trials;  facilitating  the  setting  up  of 
demonstration sites on farmer's land; and disseminating improved/ tested technologies. 
  Conduct demonstrations and design technical packages for implementation. 
  Prepare and disseminate extension materials (IEC) in selected subject areas 
  Assess  immediate  and  future  training  and  extension  needs  of  the  farming  community  for 
 
agricultural based activities.  
Identify  contact  farmers  in  project  villages  to  work  as  technical  facilitators  in  the  Farmer  Field 
Schools 
  Guide the development and implementation of agricultural training and technical activities for 
Farmers and Farmer Groups/Associations through provision of agronomic advice to support 
extension programs for farmers, including women and youth; 
  Conduct farmer level training and transfer of technologies to project beneficiaries.  
  Conduct training courses for implementing aspects of agriculture and livestock development.  
  Provide technical guidance and organise trainings for AIs ARPAs and farmers in all aspects of 
 
 
agriculture and livestock development.  
In consultation with District technical staff, IAs and ARPAs to prepare extension materials (IEC) 
in selected subject areas. 
In collaboration with Extension Workers, oversee the development of Demonstration 
Plots,  researching,  developing,  and  promoting  farming  practices  or  products  that 
enhance farm productivity; 
  Visit farms to collect seed, plant, and soil samples and testing samples for nutritional 
 
deficiencies, diseases, or other changes; 
Identify,  procure  and  distribute  input  supplies  and  locally  available  equipment  for 
agricultural related activities. 
  Monitor  the  procurement/  distribution  of  inputs,  materials  and  equipment  required  for 
the establishment of natural resource management based activities. 
  Assist beneficiaries, groups and communities in the identification and preparation of 
micro-projects proposals and draw contracts based upon agreements concerning the 
target  beneficiaries,  type  of  activities,  mode  of  operation  (schedule,  inputs, 
incentives, payment calendar, etc.) and quality standards. 
  Prepare workplans, periodic progress reports as and when required. 
Qualifications and experience: 
The minimum of a tertiary degree in agriculture or a closely related field with at least five years field 
experience.  He/  she  should  have  appropriate  technical  skills  and  experience  in  the  field  of  natural 
resource management.  He/  she  should  have  should  also  have  a  proven  background  in  training  and 
skills transfer preferably within a rural development context. He/ she must be keen to work in a multi 
sectoral  team  and  be  committed  to  the  project’s  poverty  alleviation  GOAls  and  its  demand  driven 
approaches. Experience in implementing Farmer Field School methodologies. 
Duty station and duration: 
Duty station – District Offices.  
112 
Duration of services – 72 person months. Initially, the contract will be assigned for a period of twelve (12) 
months and its extension will be based upon performance evaluation. 
113 
Agro-enterprise Development Specialist/ Youth Expert  
Scope of work 
Under the overall guidance of the Project Director the Agro-enterprise Development Specialist will: 
  Prepare guidelines for the implementation of micro-projects related to farm enterprise diversification.  
  Participate  in  planning  exercises,  contributing  to  the  planning  process  on  issues  related  to 
socio-economic aspects with special focus on livelihoods/ market appraisals. 
Identify suitable income generating opportunities for groups and individuals. 
 
  Prepare  feasibility  and  market  studies  and  surveys  where  and  when  required  for  the 
development of income generating activities. 
  Assist newly formed groups to find suitable outlets for produce and facilitate in arranging for the 
 
sale of their produce. 
Identify  and  strengthen  backward  and  forward  linkages  with  individual  producers,  entrepreneurs 
and private sector outlets for improved marketing, procurement of inputs, sub-contracting, training 
and extension.  
  Provide  leadership  in  carrying  out  needs  assessments  of  the  capacity  of  extension  workers  in 
 
enterprise development and marketing. 
Identify training needs and design training programmes for project beneficiaries and field staff in 
aspects of farm business management. 
  Develop training materials  in agro-enterprise development and marketing for front line extension 
staff  in  collaboration  (together  with  the  Core  Team  of  Trainers)  and  monitor  the  training  and 
extension programme for extension workers and lead farmers. 
  Organize  and  deliver  a  training  programme  for  agro-enterprise  promoters  on  data  collection, 
compilation and analysis. 
  Prepare training and extension material on subjects relating to farm business management and 
marketing. 
  Train target beneficiaries management aspects of group organization and group marketing 
  Train farmers in farm business management and marketing. 
  Make periodic on-site visits to the districts and sites where the project is operating to provide back 
up  support,  coach  and  mentor  staff  and  gain  first-hand  appreciation  of  the  achievements  and 
challenges.  
  Design and implement simple systems of record keeping and data collection for farm enterprise 
diagnosis.  
  Prepare  monthly  and  quarterly  monitoring  of  achievements,  beneficiary  profiles,  and  project 
status reports and activity impact assessments on an ad hoc basis when required. 
  Arrange and organise inter-group visits both within and outside the project area. 
Qualifications 
Graduate  degree  in  agricultural  economics  with  specialization  in  business  management  and/  or 
marketing with at least seven years of practical experience in designing and delivering agro-enterprise 
development training programmes. Additionally, the consultant should possess: 
 
 
 
A degree from a well-recognised and reputable university or institute of technology. 
At least seven years practical experience in enterprise development. 
Fluency in the English language. 
Duty Station and Duration:  
Colombo with field visits as may be required. Duration of services – Project Duration   
114 
Scope of work 
Agro-enterprise Promoters (AEP) 
Under the direct supervision the  Agro-enterprise Specialist, the AEPs  will be directly responsible for 
the  planning  and  implementation  of  income  generating  opportunities  that  add  value  to  the  priority 
value chains.  Specifically, the AEP will be expected to perform the following tasks: 
  Facilitate  and  support  producers,  producer  organisations  and  value  chain  enterprises  to  develop 
micro-project proposals and investment/business plans for accessing grants and loans; 
  Facilitate  and  support  community  facilitators  for  timely  collection  and  assessment  of  business 
proposals / plans from technical, business, management, financial  and inclusion perspective; 
  Facilitate  and  support  producer  organisations,  farmers  groups,  small  agro-enterprises  and  agri-
business  to  meet  market  requirements  and  strengthen  technical,  financial  and  business  service 
support;  
  Assist  the  communities/  groups/  producer  organizations  in  designing  a  marketing  strategy  for 
beneficiaries, and assist them in undertaking its implementation. 
  Facilitate  the  organization  of  periodic  multi-stakeholder  platform  meetings  at  ASC  level  with 
amongst  others,  traders,  transporters,  marketing  intermediaries,  wholesale  and  commission 
agents and develop a programme to overcome systemic problems.  
  Broker  “win-win”  and  trust  based  business  or  service  relationships  among  value  chain 
stakeholders and contribute to improving the business enabling environment; 
  Contribute  to  the  knowledge  development  in  the  relevant  commodities  by  undertaking  case 
studies  and  document  and  promote  learning  in  activities/investment  following  the  knowledge 
agenda; 
  Coordinate  with  other  members  of  the  team  and  mentor  community  facilitators  and  service 
providers in agro-enterprise promotion. 
  Provide strategic support to community facilitators for inclusion of poorer individuals and 
households in developing respective investment proposals.  
  Contribute to regular updating of results chain and implications for inclusion by different household 
 
and demographic profiles.  
Identify bottlenecks specific to poorer individuals and households and youth and explore technical 
resolution options.  
  Explore  options  for  providing  embedded  services  and  extending  linkages  between  service 
providers and households.  
  Undertake any other duties as requested by the Project Director and Agro-enterprise Development 
Specialist.  
Qualifications and experience: 
  Bachelor’s degree in Business Administration, Agribusiness Development, or relevant subjects. 
  At least 3 years’ relevant experience in inclusive value chain development in particular agriculture 
markets, preferably working experience with private sector 
  Sound experience in private sector led business development, service provision and supply chain 
development;  
  Knowledge  and  experience  in  building  capacity  of  stakeholders  and  facilitation  of  multi-
stakeholder consultation workshops and training.  
  Experiences that demonstrate creativeness, innovativeness and entrepreneurial skills;  
  Excellent spoken and written English.  
  Good interpersonal skills and capacity to work effectively as part of a team.  
Preference given to: 
  Experience in agro-enterprise development, agricultural value chains and market development. 
115 
Duty station and duration  
Assigned district offices with extensive field travel to project sites. 72 months (12 months initially with 
possibility for extension based on performance)  
116 
Farm Business School Capacity Development Expert 
Scope of Work 
Under  the  general  supervision  of  the  Project  Director  and  in  close  collaboration  with  the  Agro-
enterprise Development Specialist,  the Farm Business Capacity Development Expert  will  select and 
train  a  Core  Team  of  Trainers  and  front  line  extension  workers  in  farm  business  management  and 
marketing,  assist  in  developing  training  materials  and  train  other  government  staff  at  district  level. 
Specifically, the expert will be expected to perform the following tasks: 
  Prepare  an  FBS  capacity  building  program  for  AI  and  ARPA  staff  and  submit  this  to  the  Agro-
enterprise Specialist and Project Director for approval to implement. 
  Adapt  the  FAO  FBS  materials  adding  additional  modules  to  respond  to  the  dry  zone  conditions 
and needs    
  Select and train a team of Core Trainers from amongst project and government field staff. 
  Organise and deliver a 10-day training programme for the Core Team of Trainers  
  Together  with  the  Core  Team  of  Trainers  translate  and  adapt  the  training  content  to  field 
conditions 
  Provide operational guidance to FBS facilitators on setting up the FBS programme in their local 
area  
  Provide guidance and backstopping support to the Core Team of Trainers in conducting the FBS 
training for front line FBS extension facilitators 
  Monitor the FBS training and extension programme for extension workers and lead farmers. 
  Together with the Agro-enterprise Specialist deliver a training programme for agribusiness subject 
matter specialists at provincial and district level in farm business management and marketing. 
  Make periodic on-site visits to the districts and ASC sites where the project is operating to provide 
coaching  and  mentoring  support  to  FBS  facilitators  and  gain  a  first-hand  appreciation  of  the 
achievements and challenges.  
Qualifications 
Graduate degree in agricultural economics with specialization in farm business management and/ or 
marketing with at least seven years of practical experience in designing and delivering farm business 
management  related  training  programmes.  The  candidate  should  have  experience  and  skills  in 
preparing training materials and organising and delivering training programmes.  
Duty Station and Duration: Colombo with frequent visits to the project area.  
Duration of services – 39 person months.  
117 
Value Chain and Marketing Specialist 
Scope of work 
The  Value  Chain  and  Marketing  Specialist  will  report  directly  to  the  Project  Director  and  work 
collaboratively  with  other  PMU  technical  staff  and  district  personnel.  She/he  will  have  the  following 
main responsibilities: 
  Set criteria for the selection of priority value chains and conduct in-depth value chain analyses 
covering the following: 
  Appraise the current and potential local and national demand for agricultural produce 
and market structures.   
  Assess  the  organizational  and  managerial  capacity  of  community  members  to  plan 
and implement identified opportunities.  
  Assess  the  concentration  of  farm  households  for  the  potential  cropsand  livestock 
products and delineate their spatial boundaries.  
  Differentiate the rural community  based on socio-economic factors and estimate the 
potential  household  beneficiaries  stratified  according  to  the  main  commercial 
products.   
Identify  target  communities/  villages/  groups  and  areas  for  concentration  of  project 
resources during implementation.  
 
  Assess  the  constraints  and  opportunities  impacting  on  the  value  chain  and  propose 
ways of overcoming them. 
  Assess the scope and capacity of service providers within the project area to provide 
marketing, credit, input supply and extension services to generate income.  
  Propose  practical  upgrading  strategies  and  actions  with  estimates  of  impact  at farm 
household level.  
  Assess  government  policies,  ongoing  and  proposed  programs 
for  development  of 
agribusiness, especially for identification  of opportunities for private sector investments, and 
design of agribusiness support services 
  From  the  value  chain  bottlenecks  and  constraints  identified,  provide  technical  guidance  and 
capacity building services to make corrections for improvement; 
  Undertake  market  analysis  for  priority  value  chains  and  proper  costing  of  value  chain 
infrastructure 
  Prepare detailed market development plans for selected crops in the hot spot areas; 
  Facilitate,  oversee  and  guide  the  implementation  of  Value  Chain  activities  from  farm  to  end 
markets; 
  Promote  Producers  Organizations  (POs)  for  agricultural  value  chain  interventions,  market 
 
development and related downstream activities;   
In  collaboration  with  farmer  organisations,  maintain  regular  contact  with  end  buyers  and 
monitor market development and opportunities; 
  Provide  guidance/training  on  value chain activities to assist  extension and technical support 
programs for farmers, women and youth; 
  Conduct  feasibility  studies  for  value  chain  interventions  for  selected  crops  and  livestock 
products 
  Assist farmer groups and associations in the preparation of sub and micro-project proposals 
incorporating value chain development and oversee their resultant activities and performance; 
  Other tasks that may be assigned by the PMU or Area Coordinators. 
Qualifications and Experience 
  A  Master’s  degree 
in  agricultural  economics,  agribusiness,  marketing,  business 
administration, or related discipline;  
  Good  understanding  of  agribusiness  value  chains  and  knowledge  of  agricultural  market 
behavior 
  Extensive  knowledge  of  contemporary  issues  in  production  and  value  chain  systems  in  the 
agricultural sector in Sri Lanka; 
118 
  A  minimum  of  2  years  of  experience  working  with  agri-business  enterprises  or  Producers’ 
Companies. 
  A minimum of seven years at a senior level in a relevant public sector, private sector or NGO, 
with  proven  skills  in  the  management  and  coordination  of  value  chain  initiatives  and 
programmes within the agricultural sector; 
  Computer  literacy  is  a  prerequisite,  as  is  a  very  good  command  of  spoken  and  written 
English; 
  Fully aware of and alert to the crosscutting issues of gender, youth, and poverty targeting. 
  Fluency in English and a good command over Sinhalese and Tamil. 
Duty Station and Duration: Colombo with frequent visits to the project area. 24 months duration.  
119 
Social Inclusion and Institutions Specialist 
Scope of work: 
Community  development  and  empowerment  in  SARP  will  be  led  by  the  Social  Inclusion  and 
Institutions  Specialist,  who  will  provide  technical  and  mentoring  support  to  the  Social  Inclusion  and 
Gender  Facilitators  and  local  community  development  service  providers.  The  Social  Inclusion  and 
Institutions  Specialist  will  work  under  the  general  guidance  of  the  Project  Manager  and  in  close 
collaboration with the Department of Agrarian Development - ARPAs.   
Specific duties of the Social Inclusion and Institutions Specialist include but are not limited to the 
following: 
 
Identify,  recruit,  train  and  mentor  the  Social  Inclusion  and  Gender  Facilitators  responsible  for 
inclusive social mobilization and community development. 
  Review  the  proposed  social  mobilization  process  set  out  in  the  Project  Implementation  Manual 
and make modifications if needed in line with the local conditions in the field.   
  Set  criteria  and  guidelines  for  the  identification  and  recruitment  of  the  cadre  of  Community 
Facilitators (CFs) – volunteer household mentors 
  Prepare  guidelines  and  training  materials,  to  be  applied  by  the  national  officers,  in  social 
inclusion, community mobilization  and  household  targeting and mentoring. The  materials should 
cover  processes  for  sensitization,  community  entry,  situation  analysis,  social  and  institutional 
mapping and vulnerability assessment. . 
  Take  responsibility  for  overseeing  the  identification,  selection  and  contracting  of  NGO  service 
providers  to  support  the  community  development  and  household  livelihoods  development 
activities.   
  Provide  guidance  and  technical  support  to  DAD  and  DOA  extension  staff  and  implementing 
partners to ensure that correct targeting is done.  
  Oversee  the  identification,  selection  and  training  of  CFs  and  provide  support  to  the  ARPA  field 
staff and community leaders.  
  Provide  guidance  in  the  processes  of  community  organization,  including  establishment  of 
Community  Development  Fora,  establishment  of  Farmer/  Producer  Organizations  and  self-help 
groups at community level. 
  Guide the Monitoring and Evaluation team to ensure that social safeguards are met 
  Conduct  awareness  and  training  programmes  with  project  and  government  counterpart  staff  on 
social safeguards 
  Together  with  the  Natural  Resource  Management  and  Environmental  Safeguards  Specialist 
submit reports that address the Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF) issues to 
the Project Director. 
Qualifications and experience: 
The Social Inclusion and Institutions Specialist should have a higher-level university degree in social 
science /  or a field related  to rural community development. A minimum of 7  years of experience in 
community  development  and  applied  gender  mainstreaming  at  project  /  or  institutional  level. 
Experience with poverty, gender and youth targeting in agriculture-based rural development projects. 
Mastery of participatory tools and approaches.   
Other qualifications and experience should include: 
 
 
 
 
Rural development project management and implementation 
Computer literate  
Strong inter-personal skills 
Strong analytical skills 
120 
 
Fluency in English and Sinhala and preferably Tamil 
Duty station and duration 
Colombo with frequent travel to the project sites.  
Duration of services – 72 person months. Initially, the contract will be assigned for a period of twelve 
(12) months and its extension will be based upon performance evaluation. 
121 
Social Inclusion and Gender Facilitators  
Scope of work 
Under the overall guidance of the Project Coordinators and supervision and support of the Community 
Development Specialist the Social Inclusion and Gender Facilitators will: 
  Take the lead in the social mobilization and community development processes in their respective 
local areas. 
  Draw up guidelines and criteria for the selection of the cadres of community facilitators (CFs) to 
be employed by the project. 
  Provide  on  the  job  training  and  mentoring  support  to  community  facilitators  and  community  and 
group  representatives  nominated  by  the  community/  group  in  community  mobilisation  and 
organization.  
  Review the availability and potential of national service providers to be sub-contracted to provide 
support in community mobilization and livelihoods development.  
  Assist  the  Social  Inclusion  and  Institutions  Expert  to  develop  terms  of  reference  for  national 
service providers in areas related to social mobilisation and gender related issues.   
  Contribute in participatory planning covering socio-economic aspects. 
 
Identify training needs and design training programmes for project beneficiaries and field staff in 
aspects social development. 
  Facilitate  the  formation,  organization  and  training  of  community  members  to  form  Community 
Development Fora, Farmer Field Schools and user groups for community and group activities. 
  Regularly monitor and provide technical support to community facilitators in group formation and 
development.  
  Monitor  the  implementation  of  the  services  and  the  outcomes  achieved  by  the  local  service 
providers  with  regard  to  farmer  group  composition,  social  inclusiveness,  internal  cohesion  and 
reciprocal trust 
  Assist in providing data to meet the projects monitoring and evaluation requirements as and when 
needed. 
  Provide  technical  advice  to  the  Project  Director  and  Area  Coordinators  regarding  social 
mobilisation and gender policies and activities with a view to ensuring their appropriateness and 
viability. 
  Facilitate  linkages  between  communities  and  implementation  partners  both  within  or  external  to 
the project.   
Qualifications and experience: 
A tertiary qualification in a discipline in a discipline relevant to social or rural development. Proven 
experience in participatory rural poverty alleviation activities would be an advantage. Training or 
experience in rural development or community development with emphasis on social and group 
management aspects.  At least 5 years of experience in the implementation of rural and agricultural 
development projects and in particular the organization and development of community and user 
groups and community based organization, 
Duty station and duration 
In the District sub-offices with frequent travel to the project sites. 72 months (12 person months for the 
first year with extension depending on performance). 
122 
Rural Finance Specialist  
Scope of work 
Under the direct supervision and responsibility of the SARP Project Director and in close collaboration 
with the Departments of Agriculture and Agrarian Development, the consultant will develop a training 
programme  in  rural  finance  to  strengthen  the  capacity  of  the  Agrarian  Banks.  In  particular,  the 
consultant will:  
  Set  criteria  to  assess  the  performance  of  the  Agrarian  Banks  and  coordinate  the  performance 
assessment through contracting  a consultant service  provider  in  order to assess  the capacity of 
the bank and their staff; 
  Select  Agrarian  Banks  for  capacity  building  activities  and  conduct  a  needs  assessment  and 
prepare training materials to develop local capacity; 
  Discuss design and layout of all training materials with project technical staff; 
 
together  with  other  project  staff,  organize  and  hold  two  five-day  training  courses  on  aspects  of 
rural  financial  management  using  the  draft  materials  and  amend  the  materials  in  light  of 
comments received; 
Qualifications:  
Advanced  degree  in  Banking,  Rural  Finance  with  experience  working  with  rural  banks.  Fluency  in 
written English. Extensive  experience of agricultural  finance  in Sri Lanka, the  preparation of training 
materials and conducting training courses. 
Duty station:  Colombo and selected districts. 
Duration: 
16 months  
123 
Post-harvest Management and Value Addition Specialist  
Scope of work 
Under  the  overall  supervision  of  the  budget  holder  and  the  technical  supervision  of  the  TSS 
(Technical  Support  Services)  Senior  Agribusiness  and  Enterprise  Development  Officer  (LTO), 
Regional  Office  for  Asia  and  the  Pacific  (RAP),  and  in  collaboration  with  the  National  Team  Leader 
and National Project Coordinator the consultant will carry out the following duties: 
  Analyse  the  harvest  and  post-harvest  handling  system  of  the  chili  supply  chains  including  costs 
and benefits of applying selected technologies; 
  Recommend the introduction of improved post-harvest and value adding technologies;  
  Asses  the  adequacy  of  on-farm  and  village  level  storage  structures  and  recommend  criteria  for 
 
the design of improved structures both at farm and village level; 
Identify  suitable  packaging  materials  for  introduction  through  practical  training  programmes  for 
service providers and farmers groups. 
  Advise on technologies required to improve efficiency, reduce costs and losses in the chili value 
 
chain  
In  collaboration  with  the  National  Training  Consultant  and  other  project  staff,  identify  target 
groups, and other relevant stakeholders involved in agricultural commodity value chains for chili in 
order to assess the need for support on post-harvest handling, storage and quality control; 
  Prepare training materials in post-harvest handling, packaging, storage and primary processing of 
fresh and dry chili for service providers, SMEs, traders and farmers.  
  Organise  and  deliver  a  programme  of  trainings  on  post-harvest  handling  procedures  and  value 
addition of chili for service providers, farmer group leaders, traders and SMEs; 
  Provide on-site technical support for SARP beneficiary groups on; 
  basic food microbiology and quality assessments based on physical parameters 
  understanding and compliance with relevant food standards  
  various  methods  of  processing  and  preservation  of  grains,  fruits  and  vegetables,  as 
applicable 
  packaging and storage techniques 
  quality assessments of raw materials, packaging materials and finished products 
  operation and maintenance of processing machineries and equipment 
  understanding and implementation of GAP 
  Assess  the  need  for  and  feasibility  of  introducing  equipment  to  ensure  consistent  quality 
upgrading of chilli, specifying the technical specifications and recommending procurement; 
  Supervise the construction and installation of appropriate storage structures at the agreed site(s) 
and provide training on their proper use, maintenance, management, etc.; 
  Conduct periodic farm visits and monitor the use of on-farm and village level storage structures.  
  Present  a  summary  of  findings  on  project  accomplishment  in  the  area  of  post-harvest 
management, packaging and value addition 
  Other tasks that may be assigned by the PMU specialists and Area Coordinators 
Qualifications and Experience 
  The Food Processing Specialist will have a Master's degree in food science or a related field; 
  At least seven years of working experience, on post-harvest technology and management of 
horticultural crops.  
  Her/his  background  must  include  thorough  training  in  food  processing  and  engineering 
specifically  related  to  fruits  and/or  vegetables  and/or  grains,  food  chemistry  and  plant 
sciences and experience working in the commercial food processing industry; 
  Experience  with  chilli  processing  including  threshing,  washing,  decortication,  cleaning, 
grading,  heat  treatment,  quality  testing  and  Hazard  Analysis  and  Critical  Control  Point 
(HACCP) controls, etc.; 
  Experience with development of value-added chilli products;  
  Extensive  knowledge  of  contemporary  issues  in  food  processing  systems  within  the 
agricultural sector; 
124 
  Computer literacy is a prerequisite, as is a very good command of spoken and written English 
and Sinhala; 
  Fully aware of and alert to the crosscutting issues of gender, youth, and poverty targeting.  
Duty Station and Duration:  
Colombo with frequent travel to the project sites.  
Duration of services – 21 person months.  
125 
Scope of work 
Nutrition Specialist 
  Select  a  team  of  Core  Trainers  to  assist  in  preparing  localised  training  materials  on  the 
relevance of improved nutrition to climate resilient productivity and livelihoods diversification. 
  Prepare  and  deliver  a  Training  of  Trainers  programme  for  the  Core  Team  of  Trainers  on 
nutrition and Behaviour Change Communication as relevant to the dry zone conditions of the 
country. 
  Provide  back-up  support  to  the  Core  Team  of  Trainers,  extension  workers  and  service 
providers and community facilitators as the field level training programme is rolled out.  
  Prepare a specialised training programme on nutrition for application within the Farmer Field 
School.  
  Design  Nutrition  Intervention  Packages  for  the  project  area  in  close  collaboration  with  the 
Value Chain Specialist and Extension staff with feedback from District offices 
  Deliver a short training on nutrition for the cadre of community facilitators to familiarize them 
with content and strategies for implementing the nutrition packages in their districts 
  Provide technical assistance and guidance to field level staff in the implementation of nutrition 
sensitive  value  chains  to  identify  interventions  at  different  stages  of  the  Value  Chain  and 
nutritional challenges in each project district. 
  Support and monitor the mainstreaming of nutrition in the project through field visits, providing 
course correction.  
  Document lessons learnt and achievements in mainstreaming nutrition in the project. 
 Qualification and experience 
  Postgraduate degree (or equivalent) in food security management, nutrition, public health or 
related discipline.   
  Understanding of economic, cultural and gender dynamics that affect nutrition  
  At least 6-7 years relevant professional experience 
  Good writing skills in English 
Duty Station and Duration: Colombo and target districts - 3 months (when actually employed) 
126 
APPENDIX 4 
Table of Contents 
Financial Management Arrangements to the PIM 
(Draft Version 1.0) 
1.0 
Introduction .......................................................................................................................... 130 
1.1 The Project ............................................................................................................................ 130 
1.2 The Project Implementation Unit ........................................................................................... 131 
1.3 Anticorruption policy .............................................................................................................. 134 
2.0 Budgeting and Planning ............................................................................................................ 134 
2.1 Development of the AWPB ................................................................................................... 135 
2.2 Review of the AWPB ............................................................................................................. 136 
3.0 Accounting system .................................................................................................................... 136 
3.1 Designing the project accounting system. ............................................................................ 137 
3.2 The Selection of an Accounting Software ............................................................................. 138 
3.3 Accounting Manual ................................................................................................................ 139 
Recording  and processing of transactions ................................................................................. 139 
4.0 
Records Management ......................................................................................................... 141 
4.1Filing of the financial records ................................................................................................. 141 
4.2 Storage of financial records .................................................................................................. 141 
4.3 Archiving of financial records ................................................................................................ 141 
4.4 Back- up procedures ............................................................................................................. 141 
5.0 
Internal controls ................................................................................................................... 141 
5.1 Segregation of duties ............................................................................................................ 142 
5.2. Authorization ........................................................................................................................ 142 
5.3 Reconciliations and Checks .................................................................................................. 142 
5.4 Restricted Access ................................................................................................................. 142 
5.5 Monitoring and Review .......................................................................................................... 143 
6.0 Flow of funds, cash and bank account management ............................................................... 143 
6.1 Flow of Funds, opening of special accounts and  project accounts ..................................... 143 
6.2 Petty cash account ................................................................................................................ 144 
6.3 Bank reconciliation ................................................................................................................ 145 
7.0 IFAD Disbursement Procedures ............................................................................................... 146 
7.1 Evidence of Authority to Sign Withdrawal Applications ........................................................ 146 
7.2 The Designated Account ....................................................................................................... 146 
7.3  Withdrawal of Financing Proceeds and Supporting Documentation ................................... 147 
7.4 Use of Statements of Expenditures (SOE) and SEO Thresholds ......................................... 148 
7.5 Withdrawal of Funds under component 3 –Micro Finance Institutions .... Error! Bookmark not 
defined. 
127 
8.0 Processing of payments ............................................................................................................ 148 
8.1 General instructions .............................................................................................................. 149 
8.2 Processing of payments  for Civil Works and Goods ............................................................ 149 
8.3 Processing of payments  for Consultants' Services .............................................................. 150 
8.4  Processing of Payments for  Office Supplies and Other Operating Costs .......................... 152 
8.6 Travel Arrangements & Processing of Travel Related Expenditures.................................... 152 
9.0 Financial Reporting ................................................................................................................... 153 
9.1 Monthly Reports .................................................................................................................... 154 
9.2 Periodic Progress Reports .................................................................................................... 154 
9.3 Cash Flow Forecast .............................................................................................................. 155 
9.4 Annual Financial Statements and Audit Reports .................................................................. 156 
10.0 Fixed Asset Management ....................................................................................................... 156 
10.1 Purchase of Equipment ....................................................................................................... 156 
10.2 Asset Register ..................................................................................................................... 156 
10.3 Asset Verification Review.................................................................................................... 157 
10.4 Vehicle Maintenance and Fuel ............................................................................................ 157 
11.0 Audit Arrangements ................................................................................................................ 157 
11.1 The Audit Cycle and Appointing the Auditor ....................................................................... 157 
11.2. TORs of the Auditors and the Engagement letter .............................................................. 158 
11.3 The Audit Report ................................................................................................................. 159 
12.0 IFAD Supervision .................................................................................................................... 159 
12.1 Supervision missions by the Fund ...................................................................................... 160 
13.0 Loan completion and Closing .................................................................................................. 161 
13.1 Recovery plan ..................................................................................................................... 161 
13.2 Loan Completion ................................................................................................................. 161 
13.3 Loan Closure ....................................................................................................................... 161 
Annexes: 
Annex I: Sample Job descriptions related to Financial Management and  Administration 
Annex II: Sample Annual Work Plan and Budget  
Annex III: Sample chart of account  
Annex IV: Sample TORs for an accounting software 
Annex V: Sample Monthly Budget Execution Report  
Annex VI: Sample Periodic Financial Progress Report  
Table 1: Sample Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments by Category   
Table 2: Financial performance per expenditure category and  financier 
Table 3: Financial performance per component and per financier 
Table 4: Project Cash Flow Forecast 
Table 5: SOE-Withdrawal Application Statement. 
Table 6: Signed Contract Listing 
128 
Table 7: Physical Progress Report 
Annex VII: Fixed asset register 
Annex VIII A: Petty Cash Request Form 
Annex VIII B: Petty Cash Reconciliation Form 
Annex IX A: Vehicle Log 
Annex IX B: Vehicle History Record 
Annex X : Sample Terms of Reference for the Audit of Project 
Annex XI: Required Aide Memoire tables for IFAD Supervision missions  
Table 1:  Cumulative expenditures by component and Financier - 
Table 2: Budgeted Expenditures and Performance against previous year’s  AWPB  
Table 3A: Financial performance by financier  
Table 3 B. Financial performance by financier by component  
Table 3 C: Expenditures by category -  
Annex XII: Sample recovery plan  
Annex XIII: Designated account reconciliation statement (Imprest account ) 
Annex XIV Checklist for Withdrawal Application 
Annex XV : Sample of financial statements  
Acronyms 
AWPB= Annual Work Plan and Budget 
CB = Central Bank  
FA= Financing Agreement 
FC = FM 
IFAD = International Fund for Agricultural development 
LPA = Lead project Agency 
SDR = Special  
MFI = Microfinance Institutions 
MOA = Ministry of Agriculture 
MOF = Ministry of Finance 
PD= PD 
PIM=Project Implementation Manual 
PMU = Project Implementation Unit 
WA = Withdrawal Application 
129 
1.0 
Introduction 
The  following  manual  outlines  the  financial  procedures  to  be  followed  by  the  Project  Management  
Unit () during the following stages of the project cycle: i) preparation and planning, ii) implementation 
and  iii)  completion  of  the  project.  The  manual  aims  to  describe  in  detail  the  necessary  steps  to  be 
undertaken by the relevant project staff and the Finance Manager (FM) (interchangeably identified as 
the  Finance  Controller  -  FC)  in  particular,    when  undertaking  actions  related  to  a)  planning  and 
budgeting, b) accounting, c) records management, d) internal controls, e) flow of funds, f) withdrawal 
of financing proceeds, g) processing of payments,  h) financial reporting, i) fixed asset management, j) 
audit arrangements, k) supervision by IFAD and l) project completion and loan closure.  
This manual is to be considered a living document and it is to be reviewed and updated at least once 
a  year.  It  is  to  be  read  together  with  the  Project  Implementation  Manual,  the  Procurement  Manual, 
and the HR-manual. It is also important to note this manual makes references to the following IFAD 
key  documents:  Financing  Agreement,  IFAD  General  Conditions,  Letter  to  the  Borrower,  IFAD 
Guidelines  on  Project  Audits,  as  well  as  the  Disbursement  Handbook.  Therefore,  it  is  fundamental 
that  the  project  staff,  especially  the  PD  and  the  FM  master  these  documents  before  the 
implementation  of  the  project  begins.  The  generic  IFAD  documents  listed  above  are  available  at 
http://www.ifad.org/pub/basic/index.htm. 
1.1 The Project 
The International Fund for Agricultural development (IFAD) has agreed to provide the Borrower on the 
terms  and  conditions  set  forth  in  the  Financing  Agreement,  the  amount  of  approximately  USD  42.7 
million   to contribute to  Sri Lanka’s smallholder poverty reduction and food security  in  the Dry Zone 
region. Districts and divisions will be targeted on the basis of criteria that will include water scarcity, 
vulnerability  of  the  people,  and  rainfall  distribution.  These  provinces  and  districts  will  also  include 
areas  where  possible  partnerships  with  WFP,  UNDP,  ADB  and  AFD  can  occur.  The  selection  of 
districts will be further examined during the detailed design stage. 
The development objective is to build resilience and market participation of 40,000 rural smallholder 
households  in  the  project  area.  The  Project  will  consists  of  the  following  components/Sub-
components as outlined in schedule 1 of the financing agreement: 
Component 1: Capacity Building for Climate Resilience and Inclusive Value Chains (USD 10.5 
million) 
Sub-component 1.1 Strengthening adaptive capacity of service providers and farmers to climate 
change 
Sub-component 1.2 Strengthening capacity for inclusive value chain development 
Component 2: Investments for Climate Resilience and Inclusive Value Chains  (USD 58.3 
million)  
Sub-component 2.1 Investments for climate resilient production and infrastructure 
Sub-component 2.2 Investment for inclusive value chain development 
Component 3: Project Management and Coordination (US$4.4 million) 
The  Recipient/Borrower  and  IFAD  have  agreed  within  the  Financing  agreement  (FA)  to  allocate  the 
financing  to  categories  of  eligible  expenditures  shown  in  the  Schedule  2  of  the  FA.  The  schedule  2 
also  specifies  the  percentages  of  such  eligible  expenditures  to  be  financed  by  the  Financing:  100% 
net of tax. 
130 
Category 
IFAD loan  
(USD 000) 
IFAD Grant 
(USD 000) 
Total  
(USD 000) 
Eligible 
expenditures 
(%) net of Tax 
I. Civil Works 
Equipment, 
and 
II. 
Goods 
vehicles 
Consulting 
III. 
services 
lV Grants 
V.  Training  and 
Workshops 
Vl. Salaries  
VlI. Operating 
costs 
Total 
13,300 
2,800 
7000 
14,000 
2,800 
100% 
100% 
10,400 
3000 
13,400 
100% 
7,900 
4,700 
1,600 
1,000 
41,700 
1,000 
7900 
4,700 
0 
1,000 
42,700 
100% 
100% 
100% 
(Table 1: Schedule 2 of the financing agreement - eligible expenditures by expenditure category) 
In addition to IFAD financing the Project will also receive counterpart financing from the Government, 
equivalent to approximately  USD  12.6 million.  The counterpart financing  will  include xxxxx million in 
the form  taxes and duties and USD xxxxx million in cash from the Government’s budget. The project 
beneficiaries will also contribute approximately USD 13.2 million to the project.   
1.2 The Project Management Unit  
The  Project  Management  Unit  (PMU)  is  responsible  for  implementing  the  project  and  its  different 
components. That will be operating under the Presidential Secretariat of Sri Lanka (hereafter referred 
to  as  the  Lead  Project  Agency  –  LPA).  The  PMU  will  be  located  in  the  facilities  of  the  LPA  in  the 
capital with the exception of a small field office, located in the project area.  
131 
National Project  
Steering 
Committee
Project 
Management Unit 
(PMU)
District Units 
(06Nos)
Contractors, 
Suppliers and 
Consultants
Designated Field 
Level Officers
Beneficiaries
(Chart 1: organogram of the project implementation arrangements) 
To implement the project and it components,  the   will receive funds from the financiers  (IFAD, the 
government and beneficiaries), which will be channelled through a designated and project accounts to 
cover  project  expenditures,  in  accordance  to  the  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  (AWPB)  and  the 
expenditure categories as per the schedule 2 of the FA.  
(Chart 2:The Financial operations environment of the PMU) 
The Project and the  will be managed by the PD (PD) who is responsible for setting up the PMU and the proper 
staffing of it. The project funds will be managed by the FM (FM) with support of Deputy FM (DFM) assisted by 
two Programme Officers (Finance) and a Documentation Officer under the direct supervision of the PD(PD).  
132 
Project Director 
(PS01)
Finance Manager -
01     (PS3)
Procurement 
Manager– 01 (PS3)
)
Deputy Finance 
Manager   -01 (PS4)
Programme Officer 
-02    (PS6)
Management 
Assistant -01
(Chart 3: Organogram of the  staff involved in financial operations) 
In order to ensure that the financing proceeds are used for the intended purpose and as efficiently as 
possible,  it  is  essential  that  the  FM  sets  up  and  maintains  adequate  financial  management 
arrangements  in  each  stage  of  the  project  cycle:  i)  preparation  and  planning,  ii)  implementation  as 
well as iii) completion and closing, as illustrated in the chart below.  
(Chart 4: Financial management arrangements in the different stages of the project cycle) 
 Given the importance and complexity of managing the project, it is essential that SARP is staffed with 
qualified  and  motivated  staff.  The  staff  will  be  managed  in  accordance  with  the  HR  manual  of  the 
project. Equally it is important that the skills of staff are developed to meet the changing environment 
of the project. It is the FMs and the HR focal points responsibility to make sure the training needs are 
identified and that a staff development plan is included in the Annual Work Plan and Budget.  
  Sample  Job  descriptions  for  the  PD,  Financial  Manager,  Deputy  FM,  Programme  Assistant 
(Finance),  Documentation  Officer  are  provided  in  annex  2.  A  sample  staff  development  plan  is 
provided in annex II: Table 6 of the AWPB. 
133 
1.3 Anticorruption policy 
The  management  of  the  project  funds  shall  be  sufficiently  rigorous  to  safeguard  against  Fraud  and 
Corruption. Fraud and corruption include, but are not limited to: 
 
 
 
 
corrupt practice - offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting, directly or indirectly, anything of value 
to influence improperly the actions of another party 
fraudulent  practice  -  any  act  or  omission,  including  a  misrepresentation,  that  knowingly  or 
recklessly misleads, or attempts to mislead, a party to obtain a financial or other benefit or to 
avoid an obligation 
collusive  practice  -  an  arrangement  between  two  or  more  parties  designed  to  achieve  an 
improper purpose, including influencing improperly the actions of another party 
coercive practice - impairing or harming, or threatening to impair or harm, directly or indirectly, 
any party or the property of the party to influence improperly the actions of a party 
IFAD  applies  a  zero-tolerance  policy  towards  fraudulent,  corrupt,  collusive  or  coercive  actions  in 
projects  financed  through  its  loans  and  grants.  ‘Zero  tolerance’  means  that  IFAD  will  pursue  all 
allegations falling under the scope of this policy and that appropriate sanctions will be applied where 
the  allegations  are  substantiated.  IFAD  takes  all  possible  actions  to  protect  individuals  who  submit 
allegations  of  fraudulent  or  corrupt  practices  in  its  activities  from  reprisal.  The  IFAD  anticorruption 
policy  is  available  on  IFAD  website  at  www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/index.htm). The  IFAD 
website also provides instructions on how to report any alleged wrongdoing to the Office of Audit and 
Oversight (http://www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/how.htm). 
  It is the PD’s and the Financial Manager’s responsibility to make sure that all    staff including 
the financial department are aware of IFADs and the lead project agency’s anticorruption policy and 
whistle blowing procedures. 
2.0 Budgeting and Planning 
The  PMU  is  responsible  for  developing  an  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  (AWPB).  The  AWPB  is 
expected to contain several key elements such as: 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
vi) 
Introduction and brief background; 
Strategic focus and outputs; 
Major risks and mitigation actions; 
Budget and Financing plan; 
Procurement plan; 
Training and technical assistance schedule and,  
vii) 
PMU staff development plan 
The budget and financing plan can be described  as a detailed statement of the expected resources 
available to the project and the planned use of those resources for the upcoming project  year.  The 
AWPB  and  especially  the  budget  and  financing  plan  is  an  important  tool  for  managing  the  financial 
performance of the project and to ensure sufficient cash flow.   
134 
The budgeting and planning process comprises of the following parts: 
  Preparation  of  annual,  semi-annual,  quarterly  and  even  monthly  financial  plans  including 
procurement, receipts, expenditures and cash flows. 
  Review  of  past  performance  against  budgets  and  the  procurement  plan,  to  promote  an 
understanding of the project cost base; 
 
Identification of potential efficiency savings; and 
  Review  of  the  main  expenditure  headings  in  light  of  the  project  implementation  plan, 
procurement  plan,  and  expected  variations  in  cost  e.g.  pay  increases,  inflation  and  other 
anticipated changes.  
(Chart 5:  The project budget cycle ) 
2.1 Development of the AWPB  
Before the beginning of each fiscal year for the project, the Financial Manager should in consultancy 
with other project staff and stakeholders, prepare the AWPB for the next year reflecting any updates 
to  the  project  cost  tables  detailed  in  the  project  design.  The  budget  and  financing  plan  should  be 
prepared and presented on a quarterly basis. The data on the number of activities to be implemented 
in the coming year and the estimates of the total funds needed to finance them should be presented 
by  component  and  sub-component,  by  expenditure  category  as  well  as  by  financier.  The  estimates 
should  be  based  on  the  project’s  (up  to  date)  cost  tables.  In  addition  to  the  financial  information 
described  above,  the  budget  should  also  take  into  account  the  physical  outreach  of  the  project 
(number of farmer’s to be trained etc.). 
When preparing the AWPB the following aspects should be taken into consideration: 
  Consistency  with  other  financial  reports:  It  is  practical  to  prepare  the  budget  and  financing 
plan in the same format as the periodic (financial) progress reports and the project financial 
statements of the project. 
  Contingency  provisions  (physical  and  price)  and  allocation  of  funds  from  the  unallocated 
expenditure category. 
  Post implementation activities e.g. arrangements for after life   of project, disposal of project 
assets (computers, vehicles etc.), future repair and maintenance.  
  Availability for funds and arrangements for all audits.  
After preparing the draft AWPB, the FM will send it to the PD and Steering Committee/LPA for review 
and clearance/approval before sending it to IFAD for no objection. In accordance with the FA, a draft 
135 
AWPB has to be submitted to IFAD no later than 60 days before the beginning of the relevant fiscal 
year of the project. If required the /LPA could propose adjustments in the AWPB during the relevant 
project year, which would become effective after IFAD’ approval. 
The AWPB must be accompanied by a procurement plan prepared by the Procurement Officer. The 
first Procurement plan should cover the first 18 months of the project lifecycle while the subsequent 
procurement plans should cover 12 months of the project lifecycle.  
 A sample of a budget and financing plan, procurement plan as well as a staff development plan 
is provided in Annex II. 
2.2 Review of the AWPB 
Every quarter, the FM should review the costs incurred during this time period. In case of differences 
between the planned and actual costs presented in the Annual Budget, the FM and the Programme 
Mangers heading  each component should collectively  identify the reasons for those differences and 
detail them in the periodic Financial Reports presented to IFAD. In case of internal problems identified 
during  the  costs  review,  the  FM  and  Programme  Managers  should  take  the  necessary  steps  to 
eliminate  them.  Otherwise,  the  budget  for  the  next  quarters  should  be  readjusted  to  reflect  the 
difference between actual and planned figures. 
3.0 Accounting system 
The  majority  of  project  activities  result  in  the  receipt,  commitment  or  expenditure  of  funds.  The 
accounting  system  records,  processes  and  organises  this  data  in  order  to  produce  useful  financial 
information  in  form  of  AWPB,  Financial  Reports, Withdrawal  Applications,  Financial  Statements  etc. 
needed  by  the  Project  Financiers  (IFAD,  Government,  Beneficiaries)  as  well  as  the    management. 
The  accounting  system  should  reflect  the  project’s  needs  and  be  designed  to  provide  the  financial 
information  required  by  all  interested  parties  (PMU,  LPA  and  IFAD).  It  should  also  fulfil  all  the  legal 
and regulatory requirements of the borrower. The accounting system is a critical part of the project’s 
financial management system and its design. 
The FM is responsible for the following key areas related to the accounting system of the project: 
(Chart 6: The operating environment of the project accounting system) 
  Designing the accounting system of the project  
  Selection and maintenance of an accounting software. 
  Development of an accounting manual 
136 
3.1 Designing the project accounting system. 
When designing the accounting system of the project the FM must undertake the following steps: 
Step  one:  Identify  the  different  kind  of  reports  the  system  is  expected  to  generate,  based  on  the 
different stakeholders requirements. - What information and in what format needs to be produced by 
the  PMU?  As  a  minimum  requirement  the  Accounting  system  will  need  to  produce  the  following 
reports:  
  Statement of cash receipts and payments (by category and by financier),  
  Statement of cash receipts and payments (by component),  
  Statement of comparative budget and actual amount by component,  
  Statement of Special Account movements,  
  Statement of Special Account Reconciliations,  
  SOE-Withdrawal Application Statement. 
Step  two:  List  the  transactions  and  activities,  which  the  system  must  account  for.  As  a  minimum 
requirement the accounting system must include: 
a)  Purchase orders, receipts, check books and other similar documents evidencing 
receipt, commitment or expenditure of funds. 
b)  A journal for primary entry  of all transactions, including adjustments, destined to 
be posted to the ledger. 
c)  A  petty  cash  book  (PCB)  for  small  cash  expenditures  below  a  certain  low 
threshold.  The  credit  side  of  the  PCB  should  be  analyzed  into  columns,  one  for 
each project component, The totals to be posted to ledger accounts monthly. 
d)  A bank cash book (one for each source of financing). The credit side should also 
be  analyzed  into  columns,  one  for  each  project  component  (like  PCB).  Total  of 
these columns should be posted to their respective ledger accounts monthly. 
e)  A  ledger  containing  separate  ledger  accounts  for  each  project  component.  The 
debit  side  of  each  ledger  account  should  be  analyzed  into  the  expenditure 
categories  defied  in  the  IFAD  Financing  Agreement  (Civil  Works,  Equipment, 
Goods and vehicles, Technical Assistance and Studies, Training and Workshops, 
Credit Line, PMU Management cost). The ledger accounts should be closed and 
trial balance prepared at the end of each month. 
f)  Fixed  asset  register  to  record  location,  price  and  date  of  acquisition  (or 
completion)  of  all  buildings,  vehicles,  computers,  printers,  major  equipment  and 
furniture.  There  register  should  have  a  separate  section  for  each  type  of  fixed 
asset. 
Step  Three:  Design  the  specific  accounting  books,  including  a  chart  of  accounts  and  records  to  be 
maintained,  the  transactions  to  be  recorded  therein  and  the  precise  accounting  entries  on  the 
occasion of each transaction.  
Step  Four:  Incorporate  the  systemic  accounting  issues  as  agreed  with  IFAD  and  the  government 
including  the  used  accounting  standards  and  valuation  criteria.  -    In  accordance  with  the  project 
design document, all project accounts will be kept on a double entry system and the used accounting 
standards will be IPSAS Cash.  
Step  Five:  Resolve  accounting  issues  (if  any)  rising  from  the  fact  that  the  project  is  being 
implemented and expenditures are being incurred in different locations (HQ vs. field office). - The field 
office is to provide monthly reports and to HQ by electronically by using the internet connection or by 
hand carrying a USB-stick. 
137 
Step Six:  Determine a tentative  list of users and user rights for each staff member in  line  with their 
terms of reference in order to maintain a proper level of security.  
Step Seven: In the light of steps 1-5 decide, select and procure the accounting software that is able 
to  satisfy  the  needs  of  the  project.  The  FM  needs  to  have  an  answer  to  steps  from  1  to  5  before 
approaching a software company.  
Step  Eight:  Incorporate  all  decisions  of  the  previous  seven  steps  in  an  accounting  manual.  This 
manual will need to be reviewed and updated once a year.  
3.2 The Selection of an Accounting Software 
The  accounting  software  of  the  Project  is  an  important  tool  for  collecting,  analysing,  storing,  and 
disseminating information that is vital for decision making. In addition,  it enhances transparency and 
accountability  of  the  project  activities,  provides  timely  reports,  helps  detecting  errors  and  shortfalls 
during  project  implementation  and  indicates  necessary  corrections.  With  the  experience  in  NaDEP 
and SAPP Projects,  SARP would continue with the same software 
When choosing  an accounting software  the FM should ensure that the software is  able to meet the 
following criteria:  
  Reflect project needs and be designed to provide the minimum financial information required 
by  all  interested  parties  (PMU,  LPA,  IFAD)    including  the  provision  of  accurate,  timely, 
complete,  reliable  and  consistent  information  and  reports  as  well  as  fulfil  the  legal  and 
regulatory requirements of MOF/MOA; 
  The  accounting  software  should  be  configured  as  a  modular  solution  and  the  different 
modules should be suitably integrated. The software should contain the following modules: i) 
general  ledger  module,  ii)  accounting  module  incl.  petty  cash,  iii)  budget  module,  iv)  fixed 
asset  module,  v)  contract  management  and  procurement  management  module.  -  The 
integration of budgeting module accounting module/system is important to enable comparison 
of  the  actual  performance  with  budgets/targets  (quarterly,  annual,  and  cumulative  for  the 
Project).  
  Ability to account under different bases of accounting (cash,modified accural, accural) 
  Use the double-entry system of transactions; 
  Have multi-currency and multi-lingual capabilities and reporting; 
  Allow for multi-period and multi-user processing and reports; 
  Able  to  output  financial  reports  in  a  variety  of  formats  including  hard  copy  printouts,  as  an 
excel spread sheet and as an HTML file; 
  Provide adequate documentation and complete audit trail to facilitate audit. 
  Have security settings and different access levels for different users 
  Be user friendly. Technical support, training and installation & configuration should be offered 
by the supplier and be easily accessible during project implementation.    
  For procurement needs, the accounting software should capture and report on the following: 
Prior  review  thresholds;  Procurement  methods  thresholds;  Procurement  reference;  Activity 
description;  Component  (as  per  the  description  schedule  of  the  Loan);  Category  (as  per 
disbursement  schedule);  Estimated  amount;  Procurement  method  used;  Prior/Post  review; 
Date  of issuance of advertisement; Bank no objection on bidding documents (Goods/works) 
or  RFP  (consultants);  Date  of  bid  (Goods/works)  or  RFP  (consultants)  submission;  Bid 
opening  date  (goods/works)  or  Financial  Proposal  opening  date(consultants);  Bank  No 
objection to evaluation report; Bank no objection to contract draft; Date of submission to the 
Fund  of  the  Copy  of  signed  contract;  Contract  related  data  (date  of  signature,  date  of 
completion, contract amount, contract amendments and payments terms). 
138 
In the installation phase of the accounting system, FM will need to determine the following: 
  access  level  and  different  user  rights  e.g.    (i)  active  use  for  inputting/editing  of  data  for 
different modules; (ii) read-only use; or (iii) no-access.  
 
Information storage and back-up 
  Design of the chart of accounts and the detailed list ledger accounts required to account for 
transactions under the project. 
  Design the detailed formats of various accounting books, records, and statements (e.g., cash 
and bank books, journals, various ledgers, trial balance, voucher formats, etc.). 
 A sample of a TORs for an accounting software is provided in annex IV 
3.3 Accounting Manual 
The Accounting Manual is an integral part of the financial management manual of the project. It is to 
be  prepared  by  the  FM  and  the  DFM  and  will  become  effective  after  it  has  been  approved  by  the 
Steering  Committee  of  the  project.  The  accounting  manual  is  to  be  reviewed  and  updated  once  a 
year.  
When developing the accounting manual, it is essential that the FM and the DFM are familiar with the 
following: 
  National legislation and IFAD Financing agreement including the reporting requirements 
 
International  Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPAS)- cash basis    
  The features and user manual of the procured accounting software. 
The accounting manual should as a minimum address the following subtopics: 
Used accounting standards: 
International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPAS)- cash basis    
Chart of Accounts  
The Chart of Accounts is used to: (i) capture the financial data under the appropriate headings and (ii) 
classify  and  group  financial  data  for  the  various  financial  reports.  The  structure  of  the  Chart  of 
Accounts  caters  data  to  be  captured  by:  (i)  the  Project  components,  sub-components,  activities  (ii) 
expenditure items under each component and sub-component, (iii) The IFAD expenditures categories 
for  the  Project,  and  (iv)  sources  of  funding.  Expenditure  categories  may  also  be  recorded  by  using 
“cost centre” functionality which is commonly available in accounting software’s.    
The structure of the Chart of Accounts should conform closely to the project cost tables (as presented 
in the project design report) to enable comparison of actual project costs during implementation with 
those estimated during the project preparation.  
 A sample of a chart of account is provided in annex III 
Budgeting and budgetary control 
The  project  budget  will  be  recorded  in  the  budget  module  of  the  accounting  software.  Budgeting  is 
discussed more in detail in section 2 of this manual. 
Recording  and processing of transactions 
Whenever a transaction takes place under the Project, it should be recorded and processed using the  
accounting  software  that  meets  the  project’s  specific  accounting  requirements.  Processing  of 
payments is discussed in detail in section 8 of this manual. 
The recording of transactions under the Project follows the Cash basis of accounting with allows for 
the  recognition  of  cash  inflows  in  the  period  they  are  received  and  the  reporting  of  expenses  in  the 
period those expenditures are paid.  
Individual  records  of  transactions  are  treated  as  source  documents.  For  the  project  accounting 
139 
purposes, the following source documents are considered:  
  Purchase orders/ Contracts 
  Purchase invoices 
  Service invoices 
  Consultants/engineers’ reports 
All transactions occurred should be registered in the accounting software in accordance with the date 
of  occurrence  and  under  the  form  of  journals.  The  journal  should  contain  sufficient  and  detailed 
information about the date of the transaction, its type, amount and reference to the source document. 
All the transactions should be entered on the accounting software using the principle of double entry, 
which means that each transaction should be recorded twice, once on the debit side of the transaction 
and  once  on  the  credit  side  of  the  transaction.  The  accounting  software  will  automatically  process 
those transactions and post them to the ledger accounts, which are accounts where all transactions of 
similar  type  are  recorded.  This  processing  of  transactions  also  allows  for  the  production  of  timely 
reports.  
The  DFM  should  reconcile  the  project  accounts  on  a  monthly  basis.  In  case  certain  adjustments  of 
entries in the accounting process have to be made, the DFM should produce a memorandum in which 
the reasons and the way in which the adjustment has been made is explained. The memorandum will 
be authorized by the PD after being cleared by the FM. 
Petty cash management. 
The  DFM  will  manage  and  periodically  reconcile  the  petty  cash  account.  The  petty  cash  account  is 
discussed more in detail in the section 6.2 of this manual. 
Bank account reconciliations 
The DFM will need to perform monthly bank account reconciliations between the different accounts. 
The reconciliation is discussed more in detail in section 6.3 of this manual. 
Withdrawal of funds 
The  DFM  will  be  responsible  for  preparing  withdrawal  applications  to  be  submitted  to  IFAD.  The 
necessary  procedures  are  explained  in  section  7  of  this  manual  and  in  the  IFAD  disbursement 
Handbook.  
Financial reporting: 
The  DFM  is  not  only  in  charge  for  recording  the  financial  transactions  on  a  daily  basis  but  also  for 
summing up the expenditures made under each component and sub-component and for each activity 
under  those  and  posting  the  data  on  accounting/financial  reports  on  a  periodic  basis  during  the 
reporting  periods  specified  in  the  Letter  to  the  Borrower  and  in  the  Financing  Agreement.  The  DFM 
will  also  need  to  keep  track  and  report  on  the  availability  of  project  funds  in  the  different  accounts 
(Designated  accounts,  project  accounts  and  petty  cash)  as  well  as  the  commitments  made  by  the 
PMU. The produced reports will be approved by the PD after being cleared by the FM. The different 
financial reports are discussed more in detail in  section 9 of this manual. 
Fixed asset register 
The DFM needs to maintain a fixed asset register recording all fixed assets in the fixed asset module 
of the accounting software. Fixed asset management is discussed more in detail in section 8 of this 
manual. 
Period for which records are to be kept   
The DFM needs to file the original records in an organised way to be maintained by the  PMU/LPA for 
a minimum 10 years after the project completion. Record management is discussed more in detail in 
section 4 of this manual. 
Access Levels  
The access to the accounting system should be governed by the privileged metrics defining the levels 
of  access  by  different  users:  (i)  active  use  for  inputting/editing  of  data;  (ii)  read-only  use;  or  (iii)  no-
access.  This  would  allow  a  separated  and  controlled  access  to  the  Accounting  module  (i.e.  Journal 
recording,  posting  to  the  General  Ledger).  Each  accounting  transaction  records  the  user’s  ID, 
preventing unauthorized access to the system and an adequate level of protection against the input of 
false data or the destruction of the records.  At the same time, the data-sharing nature of the system 
involves a strict coordination and active data exchange among its various users (primarily the PMU). 
In this respect the system should ensure the reliability in information storage and fast data processing. 
Revision of accounting manual 
The accounting manual is to be reviewed and updated once a year.  
140 
4.0 
 Records Management 
Financial records must be created and preserved for every financial transaction performed under the 
project.  Financial  records  are  defined  as  any  financial  information  including  written,  computer  data, 
internal  forms,  e-mails,  or  any  other  form  of  storage  information  originated  from  the  PMU  such  as 
internal  forms,  journal  vouchers  financial  reports  (Monthly  &  quarterly)  copies  of  checks  and 
withdrawal  applications  etc.  or  received  by  the  PMU  such  as  supplier  invoices  and  receipts,  bank 
statements, IFAD documents etc. within the framework of the project's official activities. The objective 
of this procedure  is to preserve the financial records and files for further official  use by the LPA, for 
financial  audit  and  for  review  by  the  Fund  during  the  supervision  missions.  The  projects  financial 
records are the property of the LPA/MoF and cannot be removed or destroyed.  
It is important to note that in accordance with  the IFAD general conditions, the recipient/borrower 
has to maintain the original records for a minimum 10 years after the project completion. 
4.1Filing of the financial records 
The DFM is responsible for filing the financial records created or received by the project. To fulfil this 
responsibility, the DFM must maintain chronological files in which the financial documents have to be 
filed for future reference. Filing should be performed daily to prevent the accumulation of papers and 
to ensure that the financial records are maintained in an up-to-date manner at all times. Each financial 
record should be filed under its code in a chronological order, with a sequential number assigned to 
every document. Any kind of additions or amendments to the financial document should be filed in a 
chronological order immediately following the principal document. 
4.2 Storage of financial records 
The financial records of the project should be stored in the PMU office, at the LPA for a minimum 10 
years after the project completion. The data should be stored within the accounting software, as paper 
copies,  as  scanned  copies  and  as  computer  disc  copies.  The  Financial  Officer  should  allocate  an 
appropriate  storage  area  for  the  financial  records  in  paper  format  and  maintain  them  in  locked 
cabinets,  safe  from  water  and  fire,  to  which  access  is  controlled  and  limited.  The  Financial  Officer 
should  also  classify 
important 
correspondences should be filed. 
4.3 Archiving of financial records 
records  as  "Confidential",  or  "General".  All 
financial 
the 
In order to prevent an unnecessary pile-up of files in a limited office space, the FM should make sure 
that  the financial records are archived on a regularly basis. Once a year, the FM should make sure 
that the completed  or inactive files are archived  in a  manner that  will allow for easy retrieval  of the 
files in case they are required at some future date.  
4.4 Back- up procedures 
To avoid the loss or damage of financial data, the information should be kept in two copies: i) at the 
computer server  of the PMU/LPA and  ii)  in the  locked cabinets of the  PMU office. Only the  PD, the 
FM  and  the  DFM  are  allowed  to  access  the  financial  records  without  authorization.  The  access  of 
external persons is prohibited except for the auditors & IFAD staff.  
5.0 
 Internal controls 
Designing,  Installing,  and  maintaining  a  system  of  internal  financial  control  is  an  integral  part  of  the 
Financial  management  function.  Internal  financial  controls  aim  to  ensure)  efficiency,  ii)  reliability,  of 
financial reports and iii) compliance with applicable laws and regulations including the conditions set 
forth  in  the  financing  agreement.  The  key  features  of  the  internal  control  system  are  summarised 
below: 
  Segregation of duties; 
  Authorization; 
  Reconciliations and checks; 
141 
  Restricted access; and 
  Monitoring and review. 
5.1 Segregation of duties 
An  important  element  in  any  control  system  is  the  separation  of  those  duties  which  would,  if 
combined,  enable  one  individual  to  record  and  process  a  complete  transaction.  It  is  the  FM’s 
responsibility  to  ensure  that  the  following  duties  are  segregated  under  the  project:  preparation, 
authorisation, execution, custody, recording and the and operation of systems. 
Person A (e.g. 
Accountant) 
prepares the 
document: 
payment order, 
WA, financial 
report, etc.
Person B (e.g. 
Financial 
Controller) 
reviews and 
clears the 
document: 
payment order, 
WA, financial 
report, etc
Person C (e.g. 
the Project 
Director) 
approves the 
document: 
payment order, 
WA, financial 
report, etc
(Chart 7: Example of Segregation of duties) 
5.2. Authorization 
Authorization  controls  require  the  certification  that  a  transaction  or  event  is  acceptable  for  further 
processing. Several types of authorization are in effect at the project, mainly in the procurement cycle, 
payment cycle, bank and cash management cycle including reconciliation. The FM should ensure that 
the  authorizations  of  PMU  staff  ensure  efficient  implementation  while  keeping  the  risk  as  low  as 
possible. The authorization of project staff should be in line with their respective job descriptions. 
5.3 Reconciliations and Checks 
Reconciliations between independent, corresponding sources of data are a key control for identifying 
errors  and  discrepancies  in  balances.  The  FM  should  perform  the  following  reconciliations  each 
month: 
  Bank reconciliation  
  Reconciliation between system and special account receipts and payments statement  
  Any reconciling or balancing amounts should be promptly cleared. Unusual or long outstanding 
reconciling items must be brought to the attention of the financial officer.  The financial officer 
will review and sign all reconciliations as evidence of his review.  
In addition physical checks should be performed on assets held and on petty cash. 
5.4 Restricted Access 
All  data,  records  and  assets  should  be  kept  in  a  physically  secure  environment.  This  should  cover 
safe keeping  of  finance  records  such  as  official  order  forms  and  bank  details.  In  addition,  any  petty 
cash should be kept securely. Financial data and other records should also be protected in the form of 
back up procedures. All work should be regularly backed up and copy records stored securely off site  
142 
5.5 Monitoring and Review 
As detailed in financial reporting section 9, periodic financial reports must be prepared and submitted 
to  the  fund.  For  the  purposes  of  internal  control  the  same  information  should  be  prepared  and 
monitored by the PD on a monthly/quarterly basis. The reports should be prepared on a timely basis 
and  should  normally  be  available  for  distribution  two  weeks  after  the  end  of  the  reporting  period  to 
which  they  relate.  The  periodic  reports  should  be  reviewed  by  the  finance  officer  and  the  PD  as  a 
minimum. Where necessary, corrective action should  be taken to ensure the authorized  budget and 
procurement plan is not exceeded.  
6.0 Flow of funds, cash and bank account management 
The IFAD Loan will be disbursed over six years. The Loan Closing Date is the sixth anniversary of the 
date  when the project  was declared effective. IFAD disbursement procedures  and the accompanied 
forms  are  outlined  in  detail  in  the  Letter  to  the  Borrower  and  the  Disbursement  handbook  which 
should be read in parallel with this manual. Please refer to section 7 of this manual for more detailed 
information on the IFAD Disbursement procedures.   
6.1 Flow of Funds, opening of special accounts and  project accounts 
As  soon  as  entry  into  force,  IFAD  will  open  a  loan  and  a  grant  account  which  will  be  credited  with 
USD  41,700,000  and  USD  1,000,000  respectively.  These  funds  will  be  transferred  to  the  project  in 
accordance with the financing agreement and the IFAD’s disbursement procedures.  
The  project  will  open  two  designated  accounts  in  USD,  one  for  the  IFAD  loan  and  another  for  the 
IFAD grant in the Central Bank of the country and two project accounts in local currency; one for the 
IFAD loan and another for the IFAD grant in a commercial bank acceptable to IFAD. The Project will 
also  open two project  accounts designated to receive counterpart funding from the government and 
from the beneficiaries. The funds under component 3 rural finance (expenditure  category 5)   will be 
transferred  to  the  selected  microfinance  institutions  through  direct  payments  in  accordance  with 
section 7.5 of this manual.  
143 
(Chart 8: Flow of funds of the project) 
6.2 Petty cash account 
In  addition  to  the  bank  accounts  outlined  in  the  section  above,  the  PMU  will  operate  a  petty  cash 
account in local currency up to the equivalent of LKR 25,000. The Petty cash  will be  operated by the 
DFM. The purpose of the petty cash is to allow the PMU  to make payments for low value items (e.g. 
minor  repairs,  small  supplies,  newspapers,  taxi  fares,  and  other  sundry  expenses)  in  a  quick  and 
efficient manner. Payments through petty cash will only be allowed for amounts up to the equivalent 
of  LKR 5,000 for a single transaction. The cash is placed in a locked box which is kept in the PMU 
safe.  
The Petty cash disbursements may be in the form of an advance or a reimbursement (when the staff 
member has personally advanced the funds). In both cases, the requesting staff fills out a petty cash 
request form (Annex XXX). The payee name, the description of the goods or services, the estimated 
(or actual) cost and the transaction coding are indicated on the form, which is forwarded to the FM  for 
approval and to the Account for processing.  
For advances, the DFM delivers petty cash advances on the basis of the approved request. After the 
purchase is made, the requestor must return the invoice/receipt along with the change, if any, to the 
Account for recording into the Accounting system. 
144 
For  reimbursements  (i.e.  when  the  goods  or  services  have  already  been  delivered),  the  invoice  or 
receipt  is  given  to  the  Account  who  reimburses  the  requesting  staff  member  or  directly  pays  the 
supplier. The form is signed by the individual who receives the money. 
The  petty  cash  transactions  will  be  recorded  in  the  accounting  software  petty  cash  journal  as  they 
happen as described in the accounting manual. At the end of each week, the DFM will reconcile the 
petty  cash  journal  with  the  physical  cash  count  (materialized  on  the  form  shown  in  Annex  6.h.).  In 
addition,  a  surprise  cash  count  will  be  conducted  by  the  DFM  or  FC  twice  a  month.  It  will  also  be 
followed by a reconciliation of the petty cash balance per the cash journal with the actual cash held in 
the petty cash box.  
(Chart 9: Operation of the Petty Cash Account) 
The petty cash will be replenished on a monthly basis (or more often if necessary) on the basis of the 
last reconciliation done by  the DFM. The amount of the replenishment will be equivalent to the total 
disbursements made since the previous replenishment, so that the petty cash balance is maintained 
at the original level of the equivalent of USD 500. No funds can be deposited into the petty cash, other 
than the replenishments. 
 A sample of a petty cash reconciliation form and a petty cash request form is provided in annex 
VIII A&B.  
6.3 Bank reconciliation 
The  FM  must  perform  monthly  reconciliations  between  the  designated  account(s)  balance  recorded  on 
bank  statements  and  local  cash  book  balance,  recorded  on  the  system.  Performance  of  the  monthly 
reconciliation should follow the following steps: 
i)  Designate  Account  balance  recorded  on  bank  statement  on  reconciliation  date  is  taken  as  starting 
figure; 
ii)  Add  reimbursements/replenishments/other  deposits  that  have  been  processed  and  are  due  to 
designated account, but not yet recorded on bank statements;  
iii) Subtract undelivered cheques. Any long-outstanding cheques should be identified and investigated  
iv) Following these adjustments, the bank statement and local finance system cash totals should agree. 
Any remaining difference should be reported and investigated; 
v) The completed bank reconciliation statement should be signed by the FM; and 
vi) The reconciliation should be reviewed and countersigned by  independent finance team member who 
understands the reconciliation process. 
Periodic designated account reconciliations will be submitted IFAD as part of periodic progress report as 
outlined in section 9.  
145 
  Please  refer  to  annex  XII  (also  form  104  of  the  Disbursement  handbook)  for  a  standard 
Designated Account Reconciliation Statement  
7.0 IFAD Disbursement Procedures 
The  IFAD  disbursement  procedures  are  governed  by  the  Letter  to  the  Borrower  (LTB)  and  the 
Disbursement  Handbook,  which  will  be  sent  the  PMU/LPA  upon  the  project  effectiveness.  The 
handbook is also available on the IFAD site http://www.ifad.org/pub/basic/index.htm.  
As  stated  in  the  LTB  and  the  LDH,  four  standard  disbursement  procedures  may  be  used  for 
withdrawal of financing: 
Procedure I 
Advance  withdrawal  (using  imprest  accounts  or  revolving  funds  with  replenishment  to  a  bank 
account(s) designated to receive financing resources in advance). This modality is used to  advance 
and/or replenish funds to a bank account as designated by the borrower. The Fund may place a limit 
on the amount to be advanced and/or replenished. Relevant details on the modality – which is project 
specific – are agreed between the borrower and the Fund, and detailed in the LTB. 
Procedure II 
Direct  payment.  This  modality  is  used  for  eligible  project  expenditures  to  be  paid  directly  by  IFAD, 
generally  for  large  contracts,  to  suppliers,  contractors,  consultants  or  third  parties,  as  authorized  by 
the borrower. 
Procedure Ill 
 Reimbursement.  This  is  applicable  when  eligible  project  expenditures,  reimbursable  under  the 
financing, have been pre-financed by the borrower. Such reimbursements are expected to be claimed 
no later than 90 calendar days from the date of payment by the borrower. 
7.1 Evidence of Authority to Sign Withdrawal Applications 
The  Fund  requires  the  borrower’s  (or  recipient’s)  representative,  as  designated  in  the  financing 
agreement, to furnish satisfactory evidence of the authority and authenticated specimen signatures of 
the  individuals  who  will  sign  WAs  on  behalf  of  the  borrower.  This  evidence  must  reach  the  Fund 
before the first WA is presented by the borrower and should be the original (photocopies, facsimiles or 
other  means  of  transmission  are  not  acceptable).  A  sample  template  is  provided  in  annex  1  of  the 
disbursement  handbook.  Each  WA  should  be  signed  by  such  duly  authorized  individuals,  and  the 
Fund  must  be  notified  of  any  change  in  the  signatories  authorized  to  withdraw  funds  from  the 
loan/grant account.  
The  Fund  must  also  be  notified  of  the  designated  signatories  for  operating  any  designated  and/or 
programme or other accounts, including changes thereto, whether or not these authorized signatories 
are included in the financing agreement. Such changes, as effected during the life of the project, must 
be  communicated  promptly  to  the  Fund.  The  borrower,  guided  by  the  sample  in  annex  1  of  the 
disbursement handbook, should provide the names and specimen signatures of the newly appointed 
signatories  and  include  the  date  when  such  change  is  to  take  effect.  The  original  of  such  changed 
documentary evidence is to be provided to the Fund.  
7.2 The Designated Account 
The  flow  of  funds  for  the  Project  starts  with  the  opening  of  the  project  Designated  Account  (DA), 
denominated in US Dollars, in the national central bank, in accordance with the Funds requirements 
identified  in  the  Financing  Agreement  and  the  Letter  to  the  Borrower.  The  FM  is  responsible  for 
opening  and  managing  the  Designated  Account  including  receiving  on  a  monthly  basis  the  DA 
Statement of Account from the bank and reconciling it against PMU records. Disbursements from the 
DA should be recorded in  the PMU account records  as of the date they are made, that is when the 
checks are issued. 
146 
7.3. Withdrawal of Financing Proceeds and Supporting Documentation 
Based  on  the  Letter  to  the  Borrower  and  the  Disbursement  Handbook,  the  withdrawal  of  all  Project 
financing  proceeds  (direct  payments  to  contractors  from  IFAD,  and  to  reimbursements  and 
replenishments to the designated account) is done through the use of Withdrawal Applications (WA) -
form 100 in the disbursement handbook.  
It  is  the  FMs  and  the  DFM’s  responsibility  to  make  sure  that  the  WAs  are  correctly  prepared,  the 
documentation  is  complete  and  submitted  to  IFAD  in  a  timely  manner.    The  necessary  forms  and 
supporting  documentation  to  be  attached  to  the  WA  (form  100)  are  outlined  in  detail  for  each 
disbursement method in section 3 of the Disbursement Handbook 
Upon  Project  entry  into  force  and  after  sending  to  IFAD,  the  letter  designating  the  two  officials 
authorized to sign Withdrawal Applications (WA) with their names and specimen signatures, the FM 
will  prepare  the  first  Withdrawal  application  together  with  the  necessary  supporting  documentation 
requesting  the  IFAD  to  transfer  an  initial  advance  to  the  designated  account  up  to  a  ceiling  of  USD 
xxxxxxxxxxxxx. Disbursement from the DA may then start for eligible expenditures under the Project.  
(Chart 10: Withdrawal of IFAD Funds) 
For  the  subsequent WAs, prepared  by  the  DFM,  the  financial  must  ensure  that  the  right  supporting 
documentation  is  attached  to  the  WAs  before  providing  clearance.  When  submitted  supporting 
documentation to IFAD  should be copies the while the original documentation is to be retained by the 
PMU/LPA  and  securely  located  to  enable  inspection  by  IFAD  representatives  and  auditors  for  a 
period of at least 10 after the project completion date in accordance with the IFAD General conditions. 
As  specified  in  chapter  3  of  the  IFAD  disbursement  handbook,  for    all  payments  (  Works,  goods, 
consultants’ and other  services) the following supporting documentation is required:  
a)  The signed contract  or confirmed purchase  order (Showing the specified  amount that  is 
due paid. If this has been sent earlier to the fund a reference to the accompanying letter 
or document should be given in a footnote to the relevant Application summary Sheet  –
form 100) 
b)  The bank guarantee for advance payment, as specified in the contract documents 
c)  The bank guarantee for performance, as specified in the contract documents 
147 
d)  Copies  of  communications  sent  by  the  IFAD  country  programme  manager  to  the  lead 
project  agency  (LPA)  providing  the  IFAD’s  no  objection  (post  or  Prior)  to  the  contract 
award, and  
e)  Evidence of payment. 
For payments of goods, in addition to a-e: 
f)  Supplier’s  invoice  duly  certified  for  payment  by  the  PD  –  specifying  the  goods,  their 
quantities and prices 
g)  Bills of lading or similar documents; and  
h)  As appropriate, the certificate of delivery (to include condition of goods to delivery) 
For Payments of Consultants’ and other services, in addition to a-e: 
i)  The  supplier’s  or  consultant’s  claim,  duly  certified  for  payment  by  the  PD  and  showing 
sufficient  detail.  If  such  Services  relate  to  the  importation  of  goods  (for  example,  freight 
and  insurance payments),  adequate reference should be given  to enable  IFAD  to relate 
each  of  these  items  to  specific  goods  whose  cost  has  been  or  is  to  be  financed  by  the 
financing closing date; and  
j)  As a appropriate, a certificate of delivery of satisfactory services 
For progress and retention payments of civil works in addition a-e: 
k) 
the  claim  if  the  contractor,  including  a  financial  progress  report,  stating  the  work 
performed and the amount due; 
l)  A certificate-signed by the project consultants or owner’s representative, if any, or by the 
borrower’s  chief  engineering  officer  or  resident  supervising  engineer  assigned  to  the 
project, to the effect that the  work performed is satisfactory and the payment claimed is 
due in accordance with the terms of the contract, and  
m)  A copy of the contract payment monitoring form signed in original by the certifying officer. 
Together with each WA received for replenishment to the designated account, the project must submit 
the designated account reconciliation Statement, prepared by the DFM for the same reporting period 
in  which  the  eligible  expenditures  are  being  claimed.  This  form  needs  to  be  accompanied  by  bank 
statements  of  the  designated  account  and  that  of  any  other  operating,  district,  project  accounts 
ensuring that the closing bank balances for all these accounts correspond to the balances at the end 
of the same reporting period as indicated in the WA period. 
In order to minimize transaction costs, the FM must make sure that withdrawals from the loan and/or 
grant account shall be made in amounts of no less than US$ xxxxxxx or its equivalent, or such other 
amount as IFAD may designate in an advice to the borrower from time to time. 
7.4 Use of Statements of Expenditures (SOE) and SEO Thresholds 
The statement of expenditure (SOE) procedure is normally used for those expenditure types where it 
is  impracticable  or  unduly  burdensome  to  require  submission  of  full  documentation.  However,  the 
supporting documentations for the Statements Of Expenditures must  be maintained by the PMU/LPA 
and  made  available  for  review  by  IFAD  supervision  missions  upon  request  and  to  external  auditors 
during their annual review of project accounts to enable issuing of an independent audit opinion.  
Details  regarding  the  use  of  the  Statement  of  Expenditure  (SOE)  are  provided  in  section  4  of  the 
disbursement handbook. In accordance with the Letter to the Borrower the SOE threshold applies for 
all project expenditures up to a threshold of USD 50 000.  
The SOE thresholds above may be amended by the Fund during the course of project implementation.  
8.0 Processing of payments 
The  Project  will  mainly  finance,  small  works  (rural  roads,  irrigation  infrastructure  etc.),  consultants' 
services (design, supervision and studies),  goods (office supplies, computers, cars), microfinance in 
the form of grants and credit as well as PMU operating costs (salaries, travel expenditures etc.). Last 
section outlined how the PMU will receive funds from IFAD to cover the incurred expenditures related. 
This  section  will  outline  the  different  steps  involved  in  the  outflow  of  funds  from  the  PMU  to  the 
Contractors, Suppliers, and Consultants etc. The procurement process of these items, including the 
hiring process for consultants is detailed in the project procurement manual. 
148 
8.1 General instructions 
For all payments, the FM should ensure that the following steps are performed: 
i) 
ii) 
Preparation of Payment request voucher.  A payment request voucher should be prepared for 
each payment.  
Validation  of  invoice.  The  following  validation  checks  should  be  performed  by  the  FM  on 
invoice: 
 
Invoice arithmetically correct; and 
  Quantity and price recorded on invoice should be checked back to contract, order, certification 
of completion/delivery 
If  there  is  any  discrepancy  identified,  it  should  be  raised  with  the  vendor  prior  to  proceeding  with 
invoice processing, 
iii) 
Supporting  documentation:    the  following  documents  should  be  attached  to  the  payment 
voucher to support validation: 
  Copy of invoice;  
  Copy of letter of approval from technical committee or the specialist, minister; 
  Copy of purchase order, goods received note and contract if applicable; and 
  Copy of required guarantees  
All vouchers are authorized by the Minister after signatures of the FM, PD the and Director General of 
the LPA 
8.2 Processing of payments for Civil Works and Goods 
Project  will  incur  expenditures  related  to  works  under  Component  2  -  Investments  for  Climate 
Resilience  and  Inclusive  Value  Chains  in  the  form  of  rural  roads,  market  infrastructure,  irrigation 
infrastructure etc. and goods under Component 3 Project Management, in the form of fixed assets. 
The Expenditure Cycle for works and goods is detailed in the following chart: 
(Chart 12: Processing of payments for Works and Goods) 
149 
Before  releasing  the  payment  to  the  contractor  or  supplier,  the  FM  will  make  sure  the  following 
processes are followed:  
A.  The quantity of goods is checked back to the purchase order  and to contract and bid award 
letter  (if  applicable).  The  committee  members,  assigned  by  steering  committee/LPA  after 
being  assured  that  quality  of  goods  is  compliant  with  the  contract  conditions  deliver  an 
accepted delivery sheet or a compliant report to the Procurement Officer. The FM will ensure 
that the Procurement Officer provides all the necessary documents including the invoice and 
the acceptance/compliant report before proceeding with the payment.  
B.  The condition of the goods are reviewed for any damage or impairments. Damaged goods are 
to be identified and returned to the supplier/replaced. If any goods are rejected or returned to 
the supplier because they are not as ordered or are of sub-standard quality, the FM should be 
notified.  FM  must  keep  a  central  record  of  all  goods  returned  to  suppliers  and  maintain  a 
separate record of all goods and equipment delivered by suppliers by contracts funded by the 
IFAD financing. 
C.  All the works, are to be monitored by an architect or engineer. It is good practise to assign the 
architect/engineer  responsible  for  the  design  to  monitor  and  assess  the  works  of  the 
contractor.  The architect or engineer is responsible for sending compliant reports/certificate 
of  completion  to  the  Procurement  Officer  in  the  PMU  which  includes  the  percentage  of 
completion of the construction and if the construction materials are compliant with the contract 
conditions and specifications.  A request for payment is prepared by the Procurement Officer 
to be send to the FM. The FM will ensure that the payment request includes all the necessary 
documents  including  the  invoice  and  the  compliant  reports/certificate  of  completion  before 
proceeding with the payment to the contractor for the completed phase.  
8.3 Processing of payments for Consultants' Services 
Under the Project there are two types of consultants' services; a) Consultants with a lump sum contract, and b) 
Consultants with a time based contract. For type (a) consultants, payments will be made against the delivery of 
outputs as detailed in their contracts. For type (b) consultants, payments will be made against the submission of 
a  time  sheet  and  a  summary  of  activities  performed.  PMU  members  will  be  paid  against  the  submission  of  a 
monthly time sheet. The Expenditure Cycle for type (a) consultants is detailed in the following chart: 
150 
(Chart 13: Processing of Payments for consultants - type A)   
The Expenditure Cycle for type (b) consultants is detailed in the following chart: 
(Chart 14: Processing of Payments for consultants - type B)   
Before releasing the payment to the consultant (firms), the FM will undertake the following steps: 
A)  The  consulting  services  reports  are  monitored  by  technical  committees,  assigned  by  the 
steering  committee/LPA  for  the  purpose  of  evaluating  the  deliverables  submitted  by  the 
consultant (firms). Therefore the FM will ensure that no payment to the consultant is prepared  
unless  an  approved  committee  report  or  letter  of  approval  received  from  the  committee 
assures  that  the  deliverable  submitted  by  the  consultant  is  compliant  with  the  contract 
conditions, these documents should be passed first through the Procurement Officer. 
151 
B)  The  consulting  services  reports  are  monitored  by  the  specialist  responsible  for  the  activity  for  the 
purpose of evaluating the deliverables submitted by the consultant (Individual Consultant). Therefore 
the FM will ensure that no payment to the consultant is prepared  unless an approved report received 
from the specialist assures that this report is compliant with the contract terms and conditions, these 
documents should be passed first through the procurement officer. 
All  Supporting  Documents  and  Internal  Forms  must  be  retained  at  the  PMU  Office  in  the  LPA  and  must  be 
maintained and archived in accordance with the maintenance of records section of this manual.  
8.4  Processing of Payments for  Office Supplies and Other Operating Costs 
The payment for office supplies and operating cost will be against the preparation by the procurement officer of 
a  serially  numbered  checklist  evidencing  the  receipt  of  office  supplies,  and  the  presentation  of  the  Purchase 
order  and  supplier  invoice.  The  FM  will  compare  the  information  on  the  checklist  to  the  purchase  order  and 
supplier  invoice,  then  sign  the  checklist.  The  payment  for  services  is  against  the  presentation  by  the  supplier 
performing the service of a service invoice. 
At the end of each month, the FM will prepare a serially numbered "List of Payments" that detail all the incurred 
costs  for  office  supplies  and  operating  costs  during  the  month  and  present  it  to  the  PD  for  review  and 
authorization.  After  the  PD's  authorization  of  the  payments,  the  FM  will  prepare  the  checks  and  send  them  to 
the  PD  who  will  prepare  an  "Internal  Memorandum"  detailing  the  check  numbers,  amounts,  suppliers  and 
explanation  of  payments.  The  "Internal  Memorandum"  and  the  checks  will  be  presented  to  the  Minister  of 
Finance and his Advisor to approve the payments and sign the checks. 
The following chart summarizes the process detailed above: 
(Chart 15: Processing of Payments for Office supplies and operating costs)   
8.5 Travel Arrangements & Processing of Travel Related Expenditures 
Under the Project there is a budget allocated for workshops and study tours as well as staff training courses. 
The following chart summarizes the transaction cycle that should be followed to get approval for the travel 
and the expenditures related to it: 
152 
(Chart 16: Processing of Payments for Travel and Training)   
9.0 Financial Reporting 
Periodic  financial  progress  reports  are  a  formal  requirement  of  the  IFAD  Financing  Agreement. 
Sufficient information must be made available about what money is spent on, how much is spent and 
what  the  results  are.  The  major  financial  reports  include  the  following:  AWPB,  monthly  financial 
reports, periodic financial progress reports, supervision reports, annual financial statements and audit 
reports.  
(Chart 17: Project  Financial reporting cycle) 
In  addition  to  the  AWPB,  supervision  reports  and  audit  reports  (discussed  in  detail  in  section  2,  11 
and 12 of this manual), the FM will ensure that the following financial reports are prepared in a timely 
manner and submitted to IFAD in due time (applicable to reports 2-4 only): 
1.  Monthly  financial  reports  for  PMU  internal  use  only.  These  reports  will  be  verified  during  IFAD 
supervision missions.  
2.  Periodic  (semi-annual)  progress  reports,  to  be  provided  to  IFAD  within  45  days  after  the  reporting 
period 
153 
3.  Annual financial statements, to be provided to IFAD within 4 months after the end of the project fiscal 
year. 
4.  Annual  financial  statements  audited  by  an  independent  auditor  acceptable  to  the  Fund  and  in 
accordance with internationally accepted auditing standards and terms of reference cleared by IFAD, to 
be provided to IFAD within 6 months after the project fiscal year (explained in detail in section 11).  
9.1 Monthly Reports 
In  accordance  with  best  practises,  the  FM  will  prepare  monthly  financial  reports  based  on  the 
accounting system to aid management decision and control. The monthly management accounts will 
include the following. 
  Monthly  Budget  Execution  Report,  summarising  the  budget-actual  comparison  of  the  expenditures 
incurred, component-wise and category-wise. The report will also include a list of commitments entered 
into and still to be paid, by component and by category.  
  Bank Reconciliation Statement (please refer to annex XIII or form 104 of the Disbursement handbook) 
  Petty Cash reconciliation form  
Please see a sample of the above mentioned report in annex V  
9.2 Periodic Progress Reports 
Semi-annual  progress  reports  should  be  submitted  to  IFAD  no  later  than  45  days  after  the  end  of 
reporting period during the programme implementation period. 
The importance of the periodic progress reports lies in the fact that they provide IFAD with sufficient 
information to determine whether the funds disbursed to the project are being used as intended, the 
project  implementation  is  on  track  and  the  budgeted  costs  will  not  be  exceeded.  The  financial 
information  should  be  linked  to  the  information  on  physical  progress  and  procurement  to  give 
assurance that the financial and physical progress are consistent. 
The Periodic Progress Reports include the following: 
• 
 Project  Statement  of  Cash  Receipts  and  Payments  by  Category:  This  report  summarizes  the 
sources  of  project  financing,  with  the  uses  of  funds  in  accordance  with  the  disbursement  categories 
foreseen in the Financing agreement with the Fund. This report also states the cumulative expenditures 
from the start of the project until the date of the report as well as the cash flow forecast for the following 
semi-annual period. The automated accounting system has been talor made to generate the report with 
all required details.  
The standard format for the presentation of this report is provided in Annex VI: Table 1. 
  Uses of Funds by Project category: This report details the project expenditures by each expenditure 
category or sub category and by financier. 
A sample of a  Uses of Funds by Project category is provided in Annex VI: Table 2 
•  Uses of Funds by Project Activity: This report details the project expenditures by each component or 
sub-component  consistent  with  those  foreseen  in  the  Financing  Agreement.  The  total  planned,  actual 
and cumulative expenditures in this report should correspond to those mentioned in the uses of funds 
section of the “Sources and Uses of Funds” report presented above.  
 A sample format for this report is provided in Annex VI: Table 3 
154 
•  Cash flow forecast: This report summarizes the cash inflow and outflow for the following semi-annual 
period and is explained in detail in section 9.3.  
A sample of a Cash Flow Forecast is provided in Annex VI: Table 4 
•  Designated Account Reconciliation Statement  
Please  refer  to  annex  XIII  (also  form  104  of  the  Disbursement  handbook)  for  a  standard 
Designated Account Reconciliation Statement. 
•  SOE-Withdrawal Application Statement: This report summarizes the claimed and received WA from 
IFAD during the reporting period. 
• 
A sample of a SOE-WA statement is provided in Annex VI: Table 5 
•  Contract  Expenditures:  This  report  details  all  the  contracts  signed  and  amounts  paid  during  the 
quarter by category.  
 A sample format for this report is provided in Annex VI: Table 6 
•  Physical  progress  report:  This  report  summarizes  the  quantitative  physical  progress  made  in 
achieving overall objectives and links them to project expenditures by component and by category. This 
report should also contain a narrative part on the strategic direction for the next planning cycle as well 
as the main financial problems encountered. 
 A sample format for this report is provided in Annex VI: Table 7 
9.3 Cash Flow Forecast 
Preparing periodic cash flow forecasts is essential to ensure the project has sufficient funds to meet 
its  commitments  (expenditures  to  contractors,  service  providers,  suppliers  of  goods,  salaries  of  the 
PMU staff, operating and maintenance cost of the PMU such as rent, electricity, internet etc.) as they 
fall  due.  It  is  the  FMs  responsibility  to  prepare  periodic  cash  flow  forecasts  by  undertaking  the 
following steps: 
1.  Determining the opening balance of the time period 
2.  Determine  (as  accurately  as  possible)  all  the  cash  inflow  already  secured  from  different 
sources during the time period on a monthly basis. 
3.  Determine  (as  accurately  as  possible)  all  the  payments  due  during  the  time  period  on  a 
monthly basis.  
4.  Based  on  the  calculation  (steps  1-3)  determine  the  estimated  cash  need  for  time  period  in 
question. 
When  preparing  the  cash-flow  analysis,  key  sources  for  information  include  the  AWPB  (up-to-
date),  the  procurement  plan  (up-to-date),  disbursement  timetable  of  all  signed  contracts  and 
historic expense reports for PMU management costs as these can be assumed to stay relatively 
constant over the implementation period. 
Based  on  the  estimated  cash  flow  needs,  the  FM  in  consultation  with  the  PD  will  prepare  an 
submit  for  approval  the  required  withdrawal  applications  in  a  timely  manner  in  order  to  ensure 
sufficient liquidity and avoid any delays to the project implementation.      
155 
Sample of a cash flow forecast is provided in annex VI, Table 4. 
9.4 Annual Financial Statements and Audit Reports 
IFAD  requires  that  the  financial  statements  are  prepared  in  accordance  with  IFRS/IPSAS  or  IPSAS  cash. 
(National Standards are also acceptable as long as they meet the minimum requirements) and that the annual 
statements  are  provided  to  IFAD  within  four  months  after  the  end  of  the  fiscal  year.    In  accordance  with  the 
Project Design Report, the project will prepare it financial statements in accordance with IPSAS cash. 
The project financial statements should include the following information: 
  Project Information and performance,  
  Statement of project management responsibilities,  
  Statement of cash receipts and payments (by category and by financier),  
  Statement of cash receipts and payments (by component),  
  Statement of comparative budget and actual amount,  
  Statement of Special Account movements,  
  Statement of Special Account Reconciliations,  
  SOE-Withdrawal Application Statement and Notes to the Financial Statements. 
 A sample of financial statements are provided in annex XV .  
 It  is  important  to  note  that  IFAD  financing  proceeds  should  be  disclosed  separately  form  the  other  financiers 
(donors, government, beneficiaries etc.). It is also important to note that where the project consists of more than 
one entity the lead-PMU must provide consolidated financial statements. 
10.0 Fixed Asset Management 
Fixed asset management is an important process that seeks to track fixed assets for the purposes of financial 
accounting  and  to  ensure  preventive  maintenance,  and  theft  deterrence.  Adequate  Fixed  asset  maintenance 
also increases the sustainability of the project. 
There are three elements in fixed asset management that require the attention of the FM  
  Purchase of equipment 
  Setting up and maintaining an asset register including verification 
  Setting up a plan for disposal and/or handover of the asset once the project is completed  
10.1 Purchase of Equipment 
All procurement and payments for project equipment will be processed in line with the guidance provided in the 
procurement section of the PIM. The DFM financial officer should assign a unique, sequential asset number to 
all  furniture  and  equipment  items  purchased  (excluding  minor  items  such  as  stationary).This  must  be  clearly 
labelled on each item. Each item of equipment must be recorded in the fixed asset register 
10.2 Asset Register 
The  DFM  must  maintain  a  register  of  all  (material)  project  equipment.  This  will  be  recorded  on  the  asset 
management module of the accounting software. The asset register should record the following information for 
each  individual  piece  of  equipment:  1)  Asset  description,  2)  Asset  number,  3)  Serial  number  of  the  item,  4) 
Officer responsible for asset, 5) Funding of asset (IFAD, government etc..), 6) Location; Date of purchase; and 
7) Estimated life. The   
 A sample of a fixed asset register is provided in annex VII. 
156 
10.3 Asset Verification Review 
The FM must ensure that  a verification count of all equipment recorded in the fixed asset register  is performed 
at least once a year. This should include the following checks: 
  Verify that all equipment is still held in the location recorded on the register; and 
  Check that equipment is still in a reasonable state of repair. 
  Discrepancies between the verification exercise and the fixed asset register should be investigated. 
Where assets are missing or seriously damaged, they should be removed from the asset register. 
The removal should be formally documented and approved by the financial officer and by the LPA. 
The  verification  review  must  be  performed  by  different  staff  from  those  who  use  the  equipment,  to  ensure 
adequate segregation of duty. 
10.4 Vehicle Maintenance and Fuel 
The  drivers  are  required  to  record  all  trips  and  fuel  refills  in  a  logbook  and  collect  all  the  supporting 
documentation  (invoices  etc.).  The  vehicle  logbook  provides  control  over  the  use  of  the  cars  as  well  as  fuel 
consumption.  Fuel  distribution  is  handled  by  the  DFM.  Fuel  is  purchased  on  an  as-needed  basis  by  giving 
coupons to the drivers who must use the selected fuel station. The PMU is billed by the station twice a month. 
Unused  coupons  are  kept  in  the  office  safe  in  the  custody  of  the  DFM.  For  official  missions,  a  special  cash 
provision is given to mission leaders to allow them to purchase fuel (at reputable gas stations) during the trip.  
The  safety  of  cars  is  the  responsibility  of  the  recipient  staff  members  and  drivers  assigned  to  the  vehicles. 
Consequently, they must ensure that the cars are parked in a secure area when not in use or outside working 
hours. The drivers are required to monitor the maintenance of their assigned vehicles under the supervision of 
the PMU. The drivers must notify the PMU of maintenance needs so that the cars can be serviced on a timely 
basis. The cars must always be taken to the selected PMU garage for repairs and maintenance 
The DFM should on a monthly basis review the mileage and fuel usage as well as any undertaken service as 
reported in the log book of each car and compare these with the official invoices and travel authorizations etc. to 
make sure the numbers are accurate.  
An insurance policy must be taken by the PMU to  ensure all cars  and passengers against all risks,  including 
damage, theft, fire,  as well as  injury and  property damage to  third parties.  The insurance must  also cover  the 
same risks when the cars are used by the recipient staff members outside of normal working hours. 
 A sample of a vehicle log and vehicle history record log is provided in annex IX A & B. 
11.0 Audit Arrangements 
The  project  audit  is  an  ex-post  review  of  financial  statements,  records  of  transactions  &  financial 
systems;  It  examines  the  adequacy  of  accounting  systems  &  procedures,  capacity  to  maintain 
appropriate accounts & documentation of the project/grant expenditures. The objective of the project 
audit is to provide credibility and assurance of accountability. 
 In accordance with the IFAD general conditions and the IFAD guidelines for project audits, the 
PMU  must  have  its  financial  statements  audited  by  an  external  auditor  acceptable  to  IFAD. 
Accordingly, the Supreme Audit Institution i.e Audit Office of Sri Lanka will act as the external auditor 
to the Project. The Audited financial statements need to be sent to IFAD no later than 6 months after 
the  end  of  the  fiscal  year.  The  detailed  instruction  regarding  project  audit  are  outlined  in  the  IFAD 
guidelines for project audits available at http://www.ifad.org/pub/basic/index.htm 
11.1 The Audit Cycle and Appointing the Auditor 
The  complete  audit  cycle  can  be  divided  into  the  three  main  roles  carried  out  by  the  FM/PMU,  the 
Auditor and IFAD. 
The PMU and the financial officer will: 
  Timely prepare TORs of the Audit and submit these to the Fund for no objection,  
  manage the selection process of the auditor (if relevant)  
  and appoints the auditor. 
  Prepare the financial statements for reporting period  
  Make available all the financial information necessary to the auditors.  
157 
 should respond to the audit findings and recommendations. 
 
  Submit the audit report to the fund no later than 6 months after the end of the project 
fiscal year. 
The Auditor will: 
  perform the audit work including the three audit opinions  
 
  Provide a management letter 
Indicate any ineligible expenditures 
The Fund will: 
  Provide a non objection to the auditors TORs 
  Monitor timely submission and review of audit reports 
  Follow  up  on  remedial  action\apply  sanction  and  /or  remedies  if  relevant  including 
suspension of disbursement and or cancellation of loan balance (Legal Notice is sent to 
the  LPA    after  3  months  of  delay.  Suspension  of  disbursement  to  the  project  after  6 
months delay.) 
(Chart 18:  Project Audit cycle) 
When  appointing  the  auditor  the  financial  officer  will  need  to  ensure  that  the  following  steps  are 
followed:  
a)  Financial  Officer/PMU  prepares  TORs  for  the  auditor  and  sends  it  to  IFAD  for  review 
and no-objection.  
IFAD communicates “no objection” to borrower. 
b) 
c)  Financial Officer/PMU r initiates the procurement process using the agreed TORs. 
d)  Financial  Officer/PMU  informs  IFAD  of  the  name  of  proposed  auditor  and  the 
e) 
procurement process followed for the selection. 
IFAD  communicates  “no  objection”  to  borrower  on  the  selection  of  proposed  auditor 
upon performance of the necessary due diligence. 
f)  Financial Officer/PMU  appoints the auditor. 
g)  The auditor appointed normally issues a formal engagement letter  
11.2. TORs of the Auditors and the Engagement letter 
When preparing auditors TORs the financial officer should address the point outlined below:  
a)  Description of the employing project authority or entity; 
b)  Term of the auditor’s engagement, namely whether it is for a fiscal year or some 
c)  other period; 
d)  Description and the timing of the financial statements and other material to be provided 
by project management for the audit; 
e)  Terms for delivery of the audit report; 
158 
f)  Specification  that  the  audit  be  carried  out  in  accordance  with  internationally  accepted 
auditing standards; 
g)  Provision of a management letter; 
h)  Statement  of  access  to  project  records,  documents  and  personnel  available  to  the 
auditor;   
i)  Details regarding submission of a proposal and work plan by the auditor. 
Furthermore, the contents of the TORS should include: 
a)  A description in the TORs of the entity engaging the auditor and whether it is acting on 
behalf of or is a constituent part of a larger entity 
b)  Legal and general descriptions of the project and the LPA, in sufficient detail to enable 
the auditor to understand their nature, objectives and activities. 
The following additional information should also be considered: 
c)  Organizational charts; 
d)  Names and titles of senior managers; 
e)  Names and qualifications of officers responsible for financial management, accounting 
and internal audit; 
f)  name and address of any existing external auditor, if a change is made; 
g)  Description of information technology facilities and computer systems in use; 
h)  and 
i)  Copies  of  the  latest  financial  statements,  financing  agreement,  minutes  of  financing 
negotiations, project design document, and annual work programme and budget, if it is 
available. 
The  auditors  are  required  to  provide  a  formal  engagement  letter  confirming  their  acceptance  of  the 
appointment  and  outlining  the  methodology,  scope  and  responsibilities  under  the  audit.  The 
borrower’s representative will sign and return a copy of the letter to the auditor. 
    A  sample  of  an  engagement  letter  is  provided  in  annex  V  of  the  IFAF  guidelines  for  project 
audits. 
11.3 The Audit Report 
The Audit Report must include the following elements which should also be reflected in the auditor’s 
TORs: 
  An opinion on the Project’s financial statements 
  A separate opinion on the eligibility of expenditures included in the WA /Statement of 
Expenditure procedure 
  A separate opinion if the use of the Special Account/Designated Account is in compliance 
with the financing agreement 
 
In addition to the audit report, the independent auditor will prepare a management letter. This 
will include comment and recommendations on the adequacy of the financial management 
system, and on the system of internal control. The management letter should also include a 
follow up section on the status of implementation of previous years recommendations 
12.0 IFAD Supervision 
The project will be subject to extensive supervision from IFAD during the whole implementation period 
to  ensure  that  the  PMU  fiduciary  requirements  are  completed  on  time  and  to  minimise  the  project’s 
fiduciary risk.  
159 
If  financial  arrangements  of  the  PMU  are  deemed  acceptable,  IFAD  will  rely  on  them  to  provide 
assurance  that  the  financing  proceeds  are  being  used  for  the  intended  purposes.  In  the  case  that  
IFAD  identifies  weaknesses  in  the  financial  arrangements,  it  will  require  the  PMU/LPA  to  take  the 
appropriate  measures  to  mitigate  those  risks  e.g.  changing  the  design  and  operation  of  internal 
control processes or modifying the disbursement arrangements for an operation.  
The IFAD supervision of the project includes the following measures: 
  Monitor of timely submission of  audit reports and review of these reports 
  Verify compliance to audit recommendations and recommendations made by past supervision 
missions. 
  Monitor the submission of timely periodic financial reports and review of these reports 
  Monitor disbursements rate and the quality of the received Withdrawal Applications 
  Annual or semi-annual financial management supervision missions. 
12.1 Supervision missions by the Fund 
Throughout  project  implementation,  IFAD  will  conduct  annual  financial  supervisory  missions    to 
develop financial management ratings and ensure compliance  with the IFAD’s requirements. During 
the  supervisory  missions,  IFAD  will  assess  and  monitor  the  adequacy  of  the  PMU/LPA  financial 
management arrangements such as accounting,  budgeting,  internal controls, flow  of funds, financial 
reporting  and  the  auditing  practices.  The  key  findings  and  recommendations  of  the  mission  will  be 
captured in the Aid Memoire. 
When  preparing  for  and  during  an  IFAD  supervisions  mission,  the  necessary  supporting  actions  by 
the FM will include the following: 
 
 Update  and  make  available  for  the  mission,  the  project  financial  information  and  especially  the 
incurred expenditures by component, by category and by financier as of the last day of the preceding 
month.  
 Please refer to annex XI for the financial tables required for the aid memoire  
  Update  and  make  available  reports  on  the  status  of  counterpart  funding  (has  the 
Borrower/Lead Project Agency made available financing proceeds to the Project as planned?   
  Provide  a  walkthrough  of  the  existing  accounting  system  including  its  main  modules, 
budgeting, accounting, financial reports, fixed asset register as well as the  security settings in 
use. 
  Facilitate checking of the internal controls, by system “walk through” to ensure that approved 
procedures are consistently being followed.  
  Make  available  Withdrawal  Applications,  Statement  of  Expenditures  and  all  supporting 
documentation  regarding  expenditures  claimed  under  the  SOE  thresholds  to  facilitate    the 
verifying of adequacy, completeness and validity of claims.  
  Make  available  evidence  of  qualifications  and  educational  background  of  the  financial  staff 
including, organogram of the PMU, CVs, TORs of each position and PMU training plan.  
  Update and make available a complete a fixed asset register and facilitate sample test check 
of physical existence of the asset. 
160 
  Make  available  written  procedures  regarding  financial  operations  such  as  processing  of 
transactions,  financial  administration  manual,  accounting  manual,  fixed  asset  maintenance 
and  records  management  as  well  as  the  lead  project  agency’s  anticorruption  policy  and 
whistle blowing procedures. 
  Prepare  and  make  available  the  updated  bank  account  reconciliation  statement  and  bank 
account statements for all designated and project accounts. 
  Arrange meeting with the auditors and any other selected party requested by the mission. 
  Make available all necessary documentation and contracts regarding procurement not subject 
to prior review. 
  Provide  an  update  on  the  actions  taken  regarding    past  audit  recommendations  as  well  as 
action points  outlined in the past aide memoires. 
  Make available the most recent AWPBs, annual and semi-annual reports  
  Participate in report writing if necessary. 
13.0 Loan completion and Closing 
The closing of the loan/grant is due six months after the project completion date. Both the completion 
and  the  closing  date  of  the  loan  have  financial  implications  on  the  project  management  such  as: 
development and submission of a recovery plan, ensuring eligibility of expenditures and submission of 
the  necessary  documents  outlined  below.  Please  also  refer  to  section  1.3  of  the  Disbursement 
Handbook.   
13.1 Recovery plan 
To ensure that the designated account is completely and timely justified, the financial officer/PMU has 
to develop and submit to the Fund a so called recovery plan outlining the percentages per withdrawal 
application  that  will  recovered  and  paid  respectively.  The  recovery  plan  should  be  submitted  to  the 
fund  around  6  months  before  the  completion  date  or  when  the  outstanding  balance  (amount  still 
undisbursed by IFAD is less than the double of the authorized allocation.  
Please refer to annex XII for  a sample recovery plan. 
13.2 Loan Completion 
As defined in the Financing agreement the completion date of the loan its 6th anniversary; that is six 
years  after  it  entered  into  force.  By  the  completion  date  all  the  project  activities  must  have  been 
finalised.  The  payments  can  be  done  also  after  the  completion  date,  as  long  as  the  commitments/ 
contracts are signed prior to the completion date. Activities that have continued after the completion 
date  are  not  considered  as  ineligible  expenditures  and  can  therefore  not  be  financed  by  the  IFAD 
funds.  
After the completion date but no later than the closing date (six months after the completion date) the 
PMU can still incur expenditures related to so called winding up expenditures e.g. Final Audit, Project 
completion report, Project staff salaries involved in the winding up activities, PMU maintenance cost, 
project completion workshop. 
13.3 Loan Closure 
161 
The Fund requires the following to be provided by the PMU in order to close the loan: 
  Confirmation of last withdrawal application 
  Submission of final audit report 
  Submission of project completion report 
The Final Audit Report has to cover, the final project year up to the final expenditures and it can  
be paid from the loan available balance by using for example direct payment or Reimbursement of pre 
financed expenditures.  
Annexes: 
Annex I: Sample Job descriptions related to Financial Management and  Administration 
Annex II: Sample Annual Work Plan and Budget  
Annex III: Sample chart of account  
Annex IV: Sample TORs for an accounting software 
Annex V: Sample Monthly Budget Execution Report  
Annex VI: Sample Periodic Financial Progress Report  
Table 1: Sample Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments by Category   
Table 2: Financial performance per expenditure category and  financier 
Table 3: Financial performance per component and per financier 
Table 4: Project Cash Flow Forecast 
Table 5: SOE-Withdrawal Application Statement. 
Table 6: Signed Contract Listing 
Table 7: Physical Progress Report 
Annex VII: Fixed asset register 
Annex VIII A: Petty Cash Request Form 
Annex VIII B: Petty Cash Reconciliation Form 
Annex IX A: Vehicle Log 
Annex IX B: Vehicle History Record 
Annex X : Sample Terms of Reference for the Audit of Project 
Annex XI: Required Aide Memoire tables for IFAD Supervision missions  
Table 1:  Cumulative expenditures by component and Financier - 
Table 2: Budgeted Expenditures and Performance against previous year’s  AWPB  
Table 3A: Financial performance by financier  
Table 3 B. Financial performance by financier by component  
Table 3 C: Expenditures by category -  
Annex XII: Sample recovery plan  
Annex XIII: Designated account reconciliation statement (Imprest account ) 
Annex XIV: Checklist for Withdrawal Application 
Annex XV: Sample of financial statements  
162 
Annex I: Sample Job descriptions related to Financial Management and  Administration 
A.  PD 
Responsible for all aspects of IFAD projects implementation under direct supervision of the Steering 
Committee and the Lead Project Agency. Specific duties: 
  Plan,  organize  and  coordinate  project  implementation  in  line  with  rules  and  regulations  and 
provisions of the loan/grant agreements. 
  Elaborate  and  review  project  documents  as  well  as 
IFAD  standard  procurement  and 
disbursement documents. 
  Organize, coordinate, monitor, and control the work plan, budget and procurement plan to ensure 
delivery of project outputs. 
  Ensure the efficient management of project resources in a transparent manner. 
  Supervise  project  disbursement,  accounting  and  financial  management  and  ensure  eligibility  of 
funds use in accordance with the loan/grant agreements. 
  Ensure that procurement of goods, services and works is carried out according to project design 
and IFAD procedures. 
  Manage the PMU staff to ensure efficiency, including appraising their performance annually. 
  Communicate the projects’ objectives and components, to target groups including stakeholders to 
ensure sustainability and ownership of the project. 
  Assess  qualifications  and  pre-qualifications  of 
implementing  partners,  consultants,  and 
contractors that may be selected for project implementation. 
  Negotiate contractual arrangements with various implementing partners and contractors. 
  Evaluate  performance  of  implementation  by  governmental  and  non-governmental  implementing 
partners, consultants and contractors. 
  Prepare agreements with beneficiaries, stipulating the conditions of their participation. 
  Ensure  a  close  cooperation  and  coordination  with  other  national  and  international  development 
partners at national and district level. 
  Update the Project Implementation Manual if and when necessary, 
  Prepare quarterly and annual reports to IFAD, the steering committee and LPA as well as other 
stakeholders (if any). 
  Develop and maintain a M&E and MIS to monitor project progress and performance. 
  Ensure full compliance with directives issued by the Project Steering Committee and the LPA . 
B.  FM 
Under the direct supervision of the PD , and within the framework of projects appraisal reports and 
loan/grant agreements, responsible for the financial and administrative management of the PMU , 
including Accounting, Budgeting , financial reporting, internal controls, auditing arrangement, flow of 
funds and the efficient management of projects resources. Specific duties: 
  Prepare together with the PD the Annual work plan and budget and the budget and financing plan 
in particular. 
  Master  IFAD  key  documents  such  as,  the  disbursement  handbook,  procurement  guidelines  and 
handbook, IFAD guidelines for project audits, the Financing Agreement (FA) and the Letter to the 
Borrower (LTB).  
  Develop and maintain an efficient accounting system and reliable internal control procedures and 
guidelines for financial reporting and recordkeeping. 
  Responsible  for  the  preparation,  review  and  monitoring  of  projects  budgets  including  financing 
plan,  procurement  plan  (together  with  the  Procurement  Officer),  and  staff  development  plan 
(together with the training focal point)  
  Prepare/verify  all  withdrawal  applications  for  submission  to  IFAD,  and  ensure  the  availability  of 
funds  for  all  planned  activities.  Manage  the  projects  bank  accounts,  approve  and  co-signs  all 
payments. 
  Responsible for all project procurement, either directly or by delegation. 
  Prepare and provide financial reports including the sources and uses of funds statement, incurred 
financier,  designated  account 
expenditures  by  component,  expenditure  category  and 
163 
reconciliation statement, fixed asset list and cash flow forecast etc. for submission to the Project 
steering committee, LPA and IFAD on a semi and annual basis, and maintain all records in a form 
appropriate for audit. 
  Lead  the  process  of  contracting  an  external  audit  firm  to  conduct  an  independent  audit  of  the 
annual  project  accounts,  ensuring  that  annual  audits  are  carried  out  within  the  specified 
timeframe. 
  Develop and maintain a system of financial control over all expenditure incurred by implementing 
partners. 
  Responsible for developing and managing an effective and performance based human resources 
management system. 
  Supervise and coordinate the work of staff placed under his/her direct authority. 
  Review and regularly update the Financial and Administrative Manual of the PMU. 
  Develop together with the Financial DFM the Accounting manual of the PMU. 
  Responsible  for  the  organization  and  supervision  of  the  PMU  office,  assets,  logistics,  and  all 
administrative matters. 
  Undertake any other activities assigned by the PD. 
C.  DFM 
Under the direct supervision of the FM; specific duties include: 
  Assist the FM in the implementation of a sound financial management system. 
  Prepare  financial  reports,  including  monthly  funds  reconciliation,  and  monthly,  quarterly,  semi-
annual and annual expenditure statements;  
  Prepare transaction vouchers, and input all transactions into the PMU accounting system before 
submission to the FM for approval; 
  Process all payments, ensuring that PMU procedures are strictly adhered to; 
  Process monthly payroll, payment of salaries to staff and project contributions; 
  Manage and report on the use of Petty Cash in accordance with the approved procedures;  
  Assist the FM in the preparation of withdrawal applications; 
  Prepare cash flow forecasts as required; 
  Monitor financial returns from Implementing Partners, including periodic visits to their offices; 
  Assist in the preparation and monitoring of annual operational budgets 
  Functional supervision and training of Accounts & Administrative Assistants in PMU. 
  Maintenance of a well organized and up-to-date filing system for accounting and financial records 
as well as an fixed asset tagging system; 
  Perform physical inventory of project assets each year; 
  Assist the FM in the preparation of the accounting manual of the PMU 
  Provide assistance to the external auditors as required; 
  Undertake any other activities assigned by PMU management. 
D.  Administrative Assistant  
Under the direct supervision of the FM. Specific duties include: 
  Assist the Financial DFM in the implementation of a sound financial management system. 
  Assist the Financial DFM in preparing financial reports, including monthly funds reconciliation, and 
monthly expenditure statements;  
  Assist the FA in prepare transaction vouchers, and input all transactions into the PMU accounting 
system before submission to the FM for approval; 
  Assist the FA in process all payments, ensuring that PMU procedures are strictly adhered to; 
  Assist the FA in process monthly payroll, payment of salaries to staff and Project contributions; 
  Assist the Financial DFM and FM in the preparation of withdrawal applications; 
  Assist the FA and FC in prepare cash flow forecasts as required; 
  Assist  in  reviewing  and  monitor  financial  returns  from  Implementing  Partners,  including  periodic 
visits to their offices; 
  Assist in the preparation and monitoring of annual operational budgets 
  Collate data received from colleagues into the system. 
  Manage a well organized and up-to-date filing system for accounting and financial records; 
  Assist in providing assistance to the external auditors as required; 
  Undertake any other activities assigned by PMU management. 
  Supervise the driver(s) and office attendant. 
164 
  Perform secretarial duties, including maintenance of a well organized filing system. 
  Collect and review financial reports from implementing partners at district level. 
Annex II: Sample Annual Work Plan and Budget  
Table 1-4:Sample Budget and Financing Plan 
Summary table 1: Planned Project Expenditures by Component and Financier 
Total  
Financing Source 
Local  USD 
IFAD 
Loan 
IFAD 
Grant 
Government 
(Budget) 
Government 
(Tax) 
Beneficiaries 
Component 
1. Rural Market 
Development 
1 a. Rural Market innovation 
strategy 
 1b. Rural Market 
infrastructure 
1c. Women Capacity 
Building 
2. Irrigation Infrastructure 
3. Rural Finance   
4. Programme Management 
Total 
Summary table 2: Planned Project Expenditures by Expenditure Category and Financier 
Total  
Financing Source 
Local  USD 
IFAD 
Loan 
IFAD 
Grant 
Government 
(Budget) 
Government 
(Tax) 
Beneficiaries 
Category 
I. Civil Works 
II. Equipment, Goods and 
vehicles 
III. Technical assistance and 
Studies 
IV. Training and Workshops 
V. Credit line 
VI. Incremental Operating 
Costs 
Total 
Summary table 3: Planned Project Expenditures by Component and Expenditure Category 
165 
1. Rural 
Market 
Development 
1 a. Rural 
Market 
innovation 
strategy 
 1b. Rural 
Market 
infrastructure 
1c. 
Women 
Capacity 
Building 
2. Irrigation 
Infrastructure 
3. Rural 
Finance   
4. 
Programme 
Management  Total 
Component 
Category 
I. Civil 
Works 
II. 
Equipment, 
Goods and 
vehicles 
III. 
Technical 
assistance 
and Studies 
IV. Training 
and 
Workshops 
V. Credit 
line 
VI. 
Incremental 
Operating 
Costs 
Total 
166 
167 
Table 4: Detailed Tables per Component, Expenditure  Category  and Financier 
Description of 
activity by 
Component/subco
mponent  
Categ
ory 
Uni
t 
cos
t 
Unit 
Quan
-tity 
Total  
Physi
cal 
Outre
ach 
Quar
ter 1 
Quar
ter 2 
Quar
ter 3 
Quar
ter 4 
Tot
al 
IFA
D 
Loa
n 
IFAD 
Gran
t 
Gov. 
(Budg
et) 
Gov. 
(Tax) 
Benef. 
Items 
Timeline 
Financing Source 
0 
1. Rural Market 
Development 
1 a. Rural Market 
innovation 
strategy 
value chain expert 
Awareness building 
Workshop 
Baseline study 
Local Market 
survey 
Seminar 
Publications and 
booklets 
 1b. Rural Market 
infrastructure 
Feasibility study 
III. 
Techni
cal 
assista
nce 
and 
Studie
s 
III. 
Techni
cal 
assista
nce 
and 
Studie
s 
Awareness building 
seminar 
Publications 
I. Civil 
Works 
Rural roads 
KM 
consult
ant 
worksh
op 
Study 
report 
Semin
ar 
30 
000 
4 
000 
500
0 
120 
000 
21 
000 
1 
12 
3 
1 
3 
15 
5000 
3000
0 
48 
000 
1500
0 
1200
0 
6300
0 
7500
0 
10 
000 
20 
000 
20 
1 
4 
200 
4000 
####
### 
0 
Table 5: Sample Procurement Plan 
1 
Table 6: Sample Staff Development Plan  
2 
ComponentSubcomponent/ ActivityItemUnitQuantintyUnit cost estimate (USD)Total cost estimate (USD)Financing SourceProcurement MethodBid DocumentIFAD no objectionPublication (date)EOIResponse TimeClosing DateOpening SessionBid/quate evaluation (date)IFAD Prior review required Final reportNo ObjNotification of AwardSignatureEnd DateWORKSitem1item2GOODSitem3SERVICESitem4ContractTable 5: Procurement planPreparation of Tendering ProcessBidding ProcessEvaluation Process 
3 
CategoryComponentName and description  of person(s)Description of training activity Proposed trainer/training institutionLoaction of the training activityEstimated cost of the training activity (USD)Additional costs (e.g. travel, accomondation. DSA)Financing sourceIV. Training and Workshops4. Programme ManagementFinancial controller of the PIUFinancial Management CourseITC/ILO Turin Italy4 0003 500IFAD LoanIV. Training and Workshops4. Programme ManagementAdministrative assistant of the PIUadvanced course in EnglishProfessional Language InstituteLocal2000naIFAD LoanTable 6: Staff Development Plan 
Annex III: Sample chart of account (This will be adjusted once the cost tabs are finalised) 
Chart of Accounts 
Account code                             Account name                                                        
1-00-0-0           Establishment of a Macro-Fiscal Analysis Unit   
1-01-0-0           International Advisory Services 
1-01-0-1          Macroeconomic Analysis & Modeling Advisor 
1-02-0-0           Local Advisory Services 
1-02-0-1          Full-Time Macroeconomic Analysis & Modeling Advisor 
1-02-0-2          Fiscal Team Support Advisor 
1-02-0-3          Public Enterprise Coverage Advisor 
2-00-0-0           Public Expenditure Management 
     2-10-0-0           Cross-Cutting Issues 
2-11-0-0           International Advisory Services 
2-11-0-1           Legal Consistency Advisor 
2-11-0-1           Senior Advisor PIP/ Loi-Programme 
2-20-0-0           Expenditure Planning & Budget Formulation 
2-21-0-0           International Advisory Services 
2-21-0-1          Resident Budget Planning Advisor 
2-21-0-2          Visiting Budget/ Sectoral MTEF Advisor 
2-21-0-3          High-Level Review of BC / CoA Advisor 
2-22-0-0          Local Advisory Services 
2-22-0-1         Budget Preparation Advisor 
2-22-0-2         Sectoral Economist A 
2-22-0-3         Sectoral Economist B 
2-22-0-4         Review of BC / CoA Advisor 
2-30-0-0           Budget Execution, Monitoring & Audit 
2-31-0-0         International Advisory Services 
2-31-0-1        Senior Public Audit Expert 
2-31-0-2        Treasury Management Strengthening Advisor 
2-31-0-3        Budget Execution System Diagnostic & Solutions Advisor  
2-32-0-0        Local Advisory Services 
2-32-0-1       Treasury Management Strengthening Advisor 
2-32-0-2       Development of a Cash Forecasting Tool (Software Development) 
2-32-0-3       Budget Execution System Diagnostic Advisor 
3-00-0-0           Debt Management 
            3-01-0-0       International Advisory Services 
            3-01-0-1      Debt Strategy Formulation Advisor 
3-01-0-2      Cost Risk Analysis Advisor 
3-01-0-3      Debt Strategy Implementation Advisor 
3-01-0-4      Data & Debt Recording Advisor 
3-02-0-0      Local Advisory Services 
3-02-0-1     Debt Management Advisor 
3-02-0-2     Legal Advisor 
4-00-0-0           Aid Coordination & Management 
4-01-0-0      International Advisory Services 
4-01-0-1     Resident Aid Coordination & Management Advisor 
4-02-0-0     Local Advisory Services 
4-02-0-1    Aid Coordination & Management Advisor 
4-03-0-0    Miscellaneous Expenses 
4-03-0-1    Representation at Donor Meetings 
5-00-0-0           Training & Capacity Building 
5-01-0-0      International Advisory Services 
5-01-0-1     Training Design & Implementation Advisor 
5-02-0-0      Local Advisory Services 
5-02-0-1     Training Coordinator 
5-03-0-0       Miscellaneous Expenses 
5-03-0-1       Workshops 
5-03-0-2       Study Tours    
6-00-0-0           Project Management 
6-01-0-0       Local Advisory Services 
0 
6-01-0-1      Project Manager 
6-01-0-2      Financial Management Specialist 
6-01-0-3      Procurement Specialist 
6-02-0-0       Miscellaneous Expenses 
6-02-1-0       Operating Costs 
6-02-1-1    Accounting Software 
6-02-1-2    Office Equipment 
6-02-1-3    Office Equipment Maintenance Expense 
6-02-1-4    Stationary & Office Supplies 
6-02-1-5    Advertising Expense 
6-02-1-6    Post Expense 
6-02-1-7    Translation Expense 
6-02-1-8    Printing Expense 
6-02-1-9    Bank Charges 
6-02-2-0       Project Audit 
7-00-0-0 
8-00-0-0 
A/C Payables 
Bank & Related Accounts 
8-01-0-0     BDL Designated Account 
8-02-0-0     IFAD Account 
        8-03-0-0     Foreign Exchange Difference 
1 
Annex IV: Sample TORs for an accounting software 
A.  Background 
IFAD Project XXXX 
Accounting Information System 
The  LPA  is  currently  in  the  process  of  implementing  an  IFAD  Project  XXXX.  The  project  is 
implemented  through  a  project  implementation  unit  (PMU)  within  the  LPA.  In  order  to  comply  with 
IFAD’s reporting requirements the LPA will need to procure an Accounting Software to be used by the 
PMU for the Project for the following purposes: 
1) 
2) 
3) 
4) 
to collect, analyze, store, and distribute information that is useful for decision making 
l to provide transparency and accountability of the project activities, 
to    provide  timely  reports,  help  detect  errors  and  deficits  during  project  implementation  and 
indicate necessary corrections, and  
to prepare and present progress reports to the PMU, LPA and IFAD. 
The  project  will  be  managed  from  the  PMU/LPA  located  in  the  Capital  and  four  regional  offices  
situated in the districts of CC,BB, and BB where the project will be implemented. The main functions 
will be run from the PMU in the capital but accounting entries will also be executed form the regional 
offices in the three districts.    
B.  Specifications of the Software 
General features 
1.  The  Accounting  software  should  be  configured  as  a  modular  solution  and  the  different 
modules should be suitably integrated, the following are the basic modules: 
a.  Chart of Account 
b.  Accounting 
c.  Financial Reporting 
d.  Budget 
e.  Assets 
f.  Withdrawal Application 
g.  Contract Management, and integrating other modules if needed. 
2.  classifying the levels of the Chart of account into four levels; 
a.  Type (Assets – Liabilities – Expenses) 
b.  General Ledger Account 
c.  Subsidiary Accounts 
d.  Subsidiary -1 Accounts, to end up with auxiliary accounts. 
3.  Handling all the financial transactions of the Project according to the chart of account, that is 
used to: 
a.  Capture the financial data under the appropriate headings 
b.  Classify and group financial data for the various financial reports. The structure of the 
Chart of Accounts caters data to be captured by: 
the Project components and sub-components 
i. 
ii.  expenditure items under each component and sub-component 
iii.  The IFAD disbursement category for the Project 
iv.  Sources of funding 
4.  All vouchers used in the system are based on double entries. 
5.  Ability to account under different bases of accounting (cash,modified accural, Accural) 
6.  using adjusting entry when needed 
7.  Handling the definition of various currencies used by the system 
8.  Holding multi – donor’s information, with notification that no contract will have more than two 
9. 
donors. 
recording  the  daily  currency  rates  for  all  the  predefined  currencies,  if  reports  can  be 
demanded by Lebanese Government currency 
10.  Recording the loan number and source of fund. 
11.  Capacity to customize reports by e.g. exporting  data to excel. 
2 
Financial reporting 
12.  Produce the periodic Financial Reports as requested by IFAD: 
a.  Statement  of  Cash  Receipts  and  Payments  per  Project  components  showing 
quarterly, yearly and cumulative balances for the quarter and cumulative;  
b.  Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments per Project categories showing quarterly, 
yearly and cumulative balances for the quarter and cumulative;  
c.  Statement of Designated Account reconciling period-opening and end balances;  
d.  Statement  of  Project  commitments,  i.e.,  the  unpaid  balances  under  the  Project’s 
signed contracts; 
e.  Statement of fixed assets, 
f.  Statement of Cash Payments using SOE. 
13.  produce other financial statements on a quarterly and annually basis, which are as follows; 
a.  Journal and Payment Vouchers 
b.  Statement of Special Accounts 
c.  Cost Center Statements 
14.  Progress  report  (physical)  and  not  financial  by  contract,  component  and  category  (all 
projects). This request will involve: 
a.  A  function  will  be  designed  and  developed  to  allow  the  user  to  define  the  planned 
(estimated) physical % completion on each period (year, Quarter). 
b.  A function will be designed and developed to allow the user to enter/modify the actual 
reported on physical % completion on each period (year, Quarter). 
c.  An Inquiry function to display physical progress on each contract 
d.  A report showing detailed physical progress reporting per period 
e.  A report showing up-to-date physical progress reporting per period 
15.  .Consolidated report (financial report) of all projects managed under the software. 
16.  Recording  the  budget  of  all  the  activities  of  the  project,  and  enable  comparison  of  the  actual 
performance with budgets/targets (quarterly, annual, and cumulative for the Project).  
17.  a fixed assets listing report indicating all relevant information (such as description, location, quantity, 
serial  number,  etc.)  which  needs  to  be  updated  and  include  any  discrepancies  between  the  regular 
physical inspection and the accounting records 
18.  Enhancement on the Withdrawal Application report to include the SOE and Summary sheet  
Procurement 
19.  Keeping  detailed  records  for  all  the  contractors  and  consultants  (ID  number,  Name,  Nationality, 
Address,  Phone,  Fax,  e-mail,  contact  name  “position,  phone  number,  fax,  bank  account  bank 
address”  and  other  information  needed,  and  the  accounting  system  should  afford  information 
regarding the procurement cycle that took place before contract signature and report on the following:. 
a.  Prior review thresholds; 
b.  Procurement methods thresholds; 
c.  Procurement reference; 
d.  Activity description; 
e.  Component (as per the description schedule of the Loan); 
f.  Category (as per disbursement schedule); 
g.  Estimated amount; 
h.  Procurement method used; 
i.  Prior/Post review; 
j.  Date of issuance of advertisement; 
k.  Bank no objection on bidding documents (Goods/works) or RFP (consultants); 
l.  Date of bid (Goods/works) or RFP (consultants) submission; 
m.  Bid opening date (goods/works) or Financial Proposal opening date(consultants); 
n.  Bank No objection to evaluation report; 
o.  Bank no objection to contract draft; 
p.  Date of submission to the Bank of the Copy of signed contract; 
q.  Contract  related  data  (date  of  signature,  date  of  completion,  contract  amount,  and  contract 
amendments and payments terms). 
Security 
20.  Handling the required security according to predefined system security and privileges. 
21.  The program has adequate security features including password protection , not possible to delete a 
posted transaction, controlled access 
22.  Includes proper backup and system maintenance procedures. 
3 
Training and support 
23.  Training  of    the  Financial  officer  and  head  DFM  and  four  regional  DFMs  on  all  features  of  the 
software. 
24.  Provide a complete and a user friendly manual 
25.  Configuration and Full installation of the software in seven computers, three in the capital four in the 
different regional offices. 
C.  Delivery time table 
The commencement of services for this assignment is expected to be no later than the forth week of 
March 2012. 
The main objective of the firm is to deliver a well designed software, that facilitates reflection of project 
needs and be designed to provide the financial information required by all interested parties (the LPA, 
Ministry  of  Finance  and  IFAD)  and  fulfil  the  legal  and  regulatory  requirements  of  the  Ministry  Of 
Education. 
The firm is expected to deliver the system during the phase mentioned below: 
Ref 
Deliverable 1 : install the present system  
Deliverable 2 : needed modifications should be applied on the system 
Deliverable 3 : Training sessions on the system   
         Deliverable’s Title 
Duration 
1 week 
3 weeks 
1 week. 
4 
Annex V: Sample Monthly Budget Execution Report  
5 
ACTUALPlanned/BudgetedVarianceCurrentYear-ToCumulativeCurrentYear-ToCumulativeCurrentYear-ToCumulativeQuarterDateTo-DateQuarterDateTo-DateQuarterDateTo-Date Cash Payments per Component 1-Component 1 Sub Component 1.1  Sub Component 1.2  Sub Component 1.3 2-Component 23- Component 34-Component 4TotalCash Payments per Expenditure categoryCategory 1:WorksCactegory 2: GoodsCategory 3: Consultancy ServicesCategory 4: Credit lineCategory 5: PIU costTotalCommitments Entered (not payed) To - Date6. Monthly Budget Execution Report 
Annex VI: Sample Periodic Financial Progress Report  
Table 1: Sample Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments by Category   
1 . Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments by Category (all financiers) 
Reporting Period 
(Quarterly/Semi-
annually) 
Cumulative 
Forecast: next 6 months 
US$ 
US$ 
US$ 
 Receipts   
IFAD Loan Designated 
Account  
IFAD Loan  Direct 
payments 
IFAD Grant Designated 
Account  
IFAD Direct payment 
Government Funds 
Beneficiary Funds 
R 
S 
T 
U 
V 
Y 
R^ 
S^ 
T^ 
U^ 
V^ 
Y^ 
R* 
S* 
T* 
U* 
V* 
Y* 
Total Receipts 
P=R+S+T+U+Z+V+Y  P^=R^+S^+T^+U^+Z^+V^+Y^  P*=R*+S*+T*+U*+Z*+V*+Y* 
I. Civil Works 
II. Equipment, Goods and 
vehicles 
III. Technical assistance 
and Studies 
IV. Training and 
Workshops 
V. Credit line 
VI. Incremental Operating 
Costs 
a 
b 
c 
d 
f 
g 
a^ 
b^ 
c^ 
d^ 
f^ 
g^ 
e 
f 
g 
h 
j 
k 
6 
O=a+b+c+d+f+g 
O^=a^+b^+c^+d^+f^+g^ 
W=e+f+g+h+j+k 
X 
X^ 
=P-O+X 
L 
=P^-O^+X^ 
L^ 
"=P*-W" 
G 
Total Payments 
Foreign Exchange 
difference 
Receipts less 
Expenditures 
Opening Cash Balance   
Comprising 
IFAD Loan Designated 
Account  
IFAD Loan  Direct 
payments 
IFAD Grant Designated 
Account  
IFAD Direct payment 
Project Account 
Counterpart Accounts (for 
government and 
beneficiary funds) 
Closing Cash Balances  
=L+P-O+X 
=L^+P^-O^ 
=G+P*-W 
7 
Table 2: Financial performance per expenditure category and  financier 
2. Summary of Expenditures by Loan Categories and By Financiers (USD) 
Financing Source (USD) 
IFAD Loan 
IFAD Grant 
Government 
(budget) 
Government 
(Tax) 
Beneficiaries 
Total 
Report
ing 
period 
Cumula
tive 
Report
ing 
period 
Cumula
tive 
Report
ing 
period 
Cumula
tive 
Report
ing 
period 
Cumula
tive 
Report
ing 
period 
Cumula
tive 
Report
ing 
period 
Cumula
tive 
Loan 
Categ
ory 
Description of 
category 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
V 
VI 
Civil Works 
 Equipment, Goods 
and vehicles 
Technical assistance 
and Studies 
Training and 
Workshops 
 Credit line 
Incremental Operating 
Costs 
Total 
Table 3: Financial performance per component and per financier 
8 
9 
ComponentPlannedActualVariancePlannedActualVariancePlannedActualVariancePlannedActualVariancePlannedActualVariancePlannedActualVariancePlannedActualVariancePlannedActualVariancePlannedActualVariancePlannedActualVarianceComponent 1Sub-component 1Sub-component 2Sub-component 3Component 2Component 3Component 4TotalTotal Allocati-on per design reportRevis-ed alloca-tion3. Financial performance by financier by component (USD ‘000)Reporting period CumulativeReporting period CumulativeCumulativeCumulativeReporting period CumulativeReporting period Reporting period IFAD loanIFAD grantTotalBeneficieriesGovernment (Budget & tax) 
Table 4: Project Cash Flow Forecast 
5.  Semi-annual cash flow forecast 
Month 
1 
Month 
2 
Month 
3 
Month 
4 
Month 
5 
Month 
6 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
  Cash Inflow 
IFAD Loan 
IFAD Grant 
Government  
Beneficiary  
Other Sources 
     Total Cash Inflow 
  Cash Outflow 
 Category 1: Works  
 Category 2: Equipment, Goods and 
vehicles 
 Category 3: Technical assistance and 
Studies 
Category 4: Training and 
Workshops 
 Category 5: PMU cost  
Salaries 
Rent 
stationary 
etc. 
  Total Cash Outflow 
  Net Cash flow 
  Opening Balance 
  Funds Available 
10 
Table 5: SOE-Withdrawal Application Statement 
5. Statement Of Expenditures Withdrawal Application Statement 
By category of Expenditures in 
Local Currency 
WA submitted to IFAD 
Category  Category 
Description 
1 
2 
3 
AAAA 
BBBB 
CCCC 
Total 
In USD equiv/ 
Rejected from IFAD 
Net Reimbursed 
WA 
n.. 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
WA pending submission to 
IFAD 
WA 
n..  WA n.. 
Category  Category 
Description 
1 
2 
3 
AAAA 
BBBB 
CCCC 
Total 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
WA n.. 
WA 
n.. 
WA 
n..  Total 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
WA 
n.. 
WA 
n.. 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
xx 
Withdrawal applications are submitted for reimbursement to IFAD using the historical 
exchange rate of the transfers to the Operating Account. 
Expenditures partially or totally rejected by IFAD (if any) should be detailed here. 
This statement should be reconciled with the Statement of Receipts and Payments 
11 
12 
Table 6: Signed Contract Listing 
Reporting period: 
6. Signed Contract Listing  
Contract Information 
Total 
Contract 
Value 
Total 
Contract 
Amount 
Invoiced 
to date 
Total  
Disbursed on  
Contract 
Total 
Undisbursed 
Amount 
Disbursement 
Contract 
Contract  Contract  Supplier/  Contract 
        Category  Description 
Start 
End 
Contractor 
No. 
Name 
Description 
Category 1: 
Works  
Category 2: 
Equipment, 
goods And 
Vehicles 
Category 3: 
Consultancy 
services 
Category 4 
   Total 
Table 7: Physical Progress Report 
Description of activities 
Table 7: Physical Progress Report 
Progress and Cost 
Plan to completion 
13 
Physical 
Progress to date 
Cost to date 
Revised 
Original 
Actual   Planned  Actual   Planned 
Actual 
as % 
of Plan 
Total 
cost 
Completion 
date 
Total 
cost 
Completion 
date 
Category 
1. Works 
3. Consultancy services 
4. Training and Technical 
assistance 
5. Credit line 
Project activity by 
component/Sub-
component 
2. Irrigation 
Infrastructure 
Road infrastructure 
Road works 
Design 
Civil works -site 
clearance 
Civil works -
construction 
Civil works finishing 
1 a. Rural Market 
innovation strategy 
feasibility studies 
market survey 
1c. Women 
Capacity Building 
Workshops 
Training courses 
3. Rural Finance   
Micro Credit 
Grants 
14 
Annex VII: Fixed Asset Register 
ASS
ET  
REF. 
NO. 
ASSET 
DESCRIP
TION 
COMPON
ENT 
FINANCI
NG 
SOURC
E 
BENEFIC
ARY 
AGENCY 
LOCATI
ON 
ASSIG
NED TO 
TAG 
NUMB
ER 
SUPPLI
ER 
NAME 
PMT/INV. 
REFERE
NCE 
DATE 
OF 
PURCH
ASE 
DATE 
OF 
RECEI
PT 
PURCH
ASE 
VALUE 
REMAR
KS 
4. Fixed Asset Register 
Total 
15 
Annex VIII A: Petty Cash Request Form 
Date: _________________ 
Requested by 
: _______________________ 
Name 
  _______________________ 
Signature 
Mode of payment 
¤ 
Reimbursement  
Advance 
¤ 
Description of purchases 
(goods/services) 
Unit  
price 
Quantity 
Total 
cost** 
Budget/ 
Explanation / Comments 
Activity 
code 
TOTAL AMOUNT* 
________________ 
Approved by   
____________________________ 
Processed by    
DFM 
FM 
* Total amount cannot exceed xxxxx. 
** Attach supporting document (invoice, receipt, etc.). 
by 
_________________ 
Payment received 
Annex VIII B: Petty Cash Reconciliation Form 
Project ________________________  Date of reconciliation ______________________ 
Part i. Petty cash reconciliation 
Petty cash balance brought forward (a)   
Replenishments during the current month (b) 
Total petty cash balance (c = a + b) 
Disbursements during the current month (d) 
Petty cash book balance (e = c – d) 
Cash count balance (f) – see part ii. below 
Difference (G = E – F) 
Explanation Of Difference 
_________________________________________________________________________ 
__________________________________________________________________________ 
Part Ii - Cash Count 
           ______________ 
            ______________ 
______________ 
             ______________ 
______________ 
______________ 
______________ 
Description 
Quantity 
Total amount 
bank notes 
     500 
  1 000 
  2 000 
coins 
  10 
  20 
  50 
total in local currency 
Counted/reconciled by (DFM)___________ 
   Reviewed by (FC) __________________ 
   Date _________________ 
17 
Annex IX A: Vehicle Log 
Vehicle registration number ______________________________________             Assigned driver ______________________________ 
Date 
Time 
Departing  Arrival 
Mileage 
Departing  Arrival 
Trip 
Destination  Purpose 
Fuel purchase 
Mileage 
Quantity 
Driver 
signature 
Responsible 
staff 
Annex IX B: Vehicle History Record 
Vehicle registration number     ______________________________________                                     Assigned driver ____________________ 
Date 
Repairs 
Description of repair  Garage 
Cost 
Service & maintenance 
Description of 
service 
Garage 
Cost 
Insurance 
Type  
Period 
covered 
Cost 
Fitness tests 
Checked 
by  
Cost 
Report accidents in the space below, providing all relevant details for each occurrence: 
Date: 
Place: 
Name of driver: 
Circumstances: 
Damage to PMU vehicle: 
Damage to other vehicles: 
Injuries (indicate name of victims and describe injuries): 
Insurance settlement: 
19 
Annex X : Sample Terms of Reference for the Audit of SARP  
The following are the terms of reference (‘ToR’) on which the LPA agrees to engage audit firm ‘the 
Auditor’  to  perform  an  Audit  and  to  report  in  connection  with  the  Agreement  with  the  International 
Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD)  concerning  the  project  XXX  where  in  these  ToRs  the 
‘Contracting  Authority’  is  mentioned  this  refers  to  IFAD  which  has  signed  the  Agreement  with  the 
Recipient/Borrower  and  finances  the  services.  The  Contracting  Authority  is  not  a  party  to  this 
engagement. 
1.1   
Responsibilities of the Parties to the Engagement 
Recipient/Borrower refers to the entity that provides the services and that has signed the Agreement 
with the Contracting Authority. 
  The PMU/LPA is responsible for providing a Financial Statements for the services financed by 
the Loan/ Grant and for ensuring that these Financial Statements can be properly reconciled 
to the PMU/LPA records and accounts in respect of these services. 
  The  PMU/LPA  accepts  that  the  ability  of  the  Auditor  to  perform  the  procedures  required  by 
this engagement effectively depends upon the PMU/LPA providing full and free access to its 
staff and records and accounts. 
  The PMU/LPA shall provide the auditors with all the necessary documentation to perform the 
assignment  properly;  in  particular  the  following  information  shall  be  provided  to  the  auditors 
before the beginning of the assignment: 
a)  Project Agreement; 
b)  Annual Progress Report; 
c)  Project Implementation Manual; 
d)  Financial Management Manual; 
e)  Organizational charts along with names and titles of senior managers; 
f)  Names and qualifications of officers responsible for financial management, 
accounting and internal audit. 
g)  Description of information technology facilities and computer systems in use and 
h)  Copies of the minutes of negotiations, the project design document, the annual work 
programme and budget and the letter to the borrower if available. 
‘The Auditor’ refers to the Auditor who is responsible for performing the agreed-upon procedures as 
specified in these ToR, and for submitting a report of factual findings to the PMU/LPA.  
The Auditor shall provide: 
  A separate opinion on Project Financial Statements (PFS) 
Minimum content of the PFS: 
a)  Yearly  and  cumulative  statements  of  sources  and  application  of  funds,  which  should 
disclose separately IFAD’s funds, other donors funds and beneficiaries funds; 
b)  Statement of sources and application of funds. 
c)  Yearly  and  cumulative  SOEs  by  withdrawal  application  and  category  of  expenditures; 
reconciliation of the SA. 
d)  Reconciliation between the amounts shown as received by the project and those shown 
as being disbursed by IFAD should be attached as an annex to the PFS. As part of that 
reconciliation  the  auditor  will  indicate  the  procedure  used  for  disbursement  (SA  funds, 
letters  of  credit,  special  commitments,  reimbursement  or  direct  payment)  and  indicate 
whether  the  expenditure  is  fully  documented  or  uses  the  Summary  of  Expenditures 
format. 
e)  Notes accompanying the Financial statements 
f)  Cumulative status of funds by category 
g)  A statement of comparison between the actual expenditures and the budget estimates 
h)  Full disclosure of cash balances and  
i)  Other statements or disclosures relevant to the project .e.g. financial monitoring reports, 
credit lines etc. 
20 
  A separate opinion on the use of the Designated Accounts/Special Accounts (DA/SA); 
The  auditor  is  also  required  to  audit  the  activities  of  the  DA/SA  associated  with  the  project 
including  the  initial  advance,  replenishments,  interest  that  may  accrue  on  the  outstanding 
balances, and the year-end balances. The auditor must form an opinion as to the degree of 
compliance  with  IFAD  procedures  and  the  balance  of  the  DA/SA  at  year  end.  The  audit 
should  examine:  (i)  the  eligibility  of  withdrawals  from  the  DA/SA  during  the  period  under 
review; (ii) the operation of the DA/SA in accordance with the relevant financing agreement; 
(iii)  the  adequacy  of  internal  controls  within  the  project  appropriate  for  this  disbursement 
mechanism;  and  (iv)  the  use  of  correct  exchange  rate(s)  to  convert  local  currency 
expenditures to United States dollars. 
  A separate opinion on Withdrawal Application Statement / Statement of expenditures / 
Summary  of  Expenditures  (SOEs);  the  audit  will  include  a  review  of  SOEs  used  as  the 
basis  for  submitting  withdrawal  applications.  The  auditor  will  carry  out  tests  and  reviews  as 
necessary  and  relevant  to  the  circumstances.  SOE  expenditures  will  be  carefully  compared 
for  eligibility  with  relevant  financial  agreements,  and  the  disbursement  letter,  and  with 
reference  to  the  project  appraisal  report  for  guidance  when  necessary.  Where  ineligible 
expenditures  are  identified  as  having  been  included  in  withdrawal  applications  and 
reimbursed, auditors will note these separately. A schedule listing individual SOEs withdrawal 
applications  by  reference  number  and  amount  should  be  attached  to  the  PFS.  The  total 
withdrawals  under  the  SOE  procedure  should  be  part  of  the  overall  reconciliation  of  IFAD 
disbursements described above. The auditor’s opinion should deal with the adequacy of the 
procedures  used  by  the  project  for  preparing  SOEs  and  should  include  a  statement  that 
amounts  withdrawn  from  the  project  account  on  the  basis  of  such  SOEs  were  used  for  the 
purposes intended under the agreement. 
  A separate management letter addressing the adequacy of the accounting and internal 
control  systems  of  the  Programme,  including  compliance  with  IFAD’s  Procurement 
Guidelines and such other matters as IFAD may  notify the PMU/LPA to include in the 
audit. 
The auditor is requested to: 
a)  Comment on economy, efficiency and effectiveness in the use of project resources; 
b)  Comment on achievement of planned project results; 
c)  Comment  on  legal  and  financial  obligations  and  commitments  of  the  project  and  the 
extent of compliance or non-compliance thereof; 
d)  Comment on systems and procedures such as improvements in accounting, information 
technology  or  computer  systems,  and  operations  that  may  be  under  development,  on 
which the auditor’s comments are necessary to ensure effective controls; 
e)  Comment on other activities on which an auditor may consider it appropriate to report 
  Auditors shall certify : 
a)  Whether  the  PFS  are  drawn  up  in  conformity  with  international  accepted  accounting 
standards (IFRS or IPSAS) 
b)  Whether the PFS are accurate and are drawn up from the books of accounts maintained 
by the Project. 
c)  Whether the provisions of the Project Agreement are adhered to.  
d)  Whether Procurement has been undertaken by the Project in accordance with  Article VI 
of the Project Agreement,, IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines  
e)  Carry  out  a  physical  verification  of  any  significant  assets  purchased  and  confirm  their 
existence and use for project purposes. 
f)  Whether the project has an effective system of financial supervision or internal audit at all 
levels.  
g)  Whether  the  expenditure  claimed  through  SOEs  are  properly  approved,  classified  and 
supported by adequate documentation. 
h)  The Auditor is a member of the International Federation of DFMs (IFAC). 
1.2   
Subject of the Engagement 
21 
The subject of this engagement is the financial statements of the years 20XX, 20XY, and 20XV for the 
IFAD Loan XXX and Grant XXX.. The information, both financial and non-financial, which is subject 
to verification by the Auditor, is all information which makes it possible to verify that the expenditures 
claimed by the PMU/LPA in Financial statements have occurred, and are accurate and eligible.  
1.3   
Reason for the Engagement 
The  PMU/LPA  Service  Provider  is  required  to  submit  to  the  Contracting  Authority  an  Audit    report 
produced by an external auditor.  
1.4   
Engagement Type and Objective 
This  constitutes  an  engagement  to  perform  specific  agreed-upon  procedures  following  the  IFAD 
Guidelines on Project Audits provided to the Auditors by the PMU/LPA in Annex 1 of these TOR. The 
objective of this audit is for the Auditor to verify that the expenditures claimed by the PMU/LPA  in the 
financial statements for the services covered by the Agreement have occurred (‘reality’), are accurate 
(‘exact’)  and  eligible  and  to  submit  to  the  PMU/LPA  a  report  of  factual  findings  with  regard  to  the 
agreed-upon  procedures  performed.  Eligibility  means  that  expenditure  have  been  incurred  in 
accordance with the terms and conditions of the Agreement. 
1.5  Scope of Work 
1.5.1  The  Auditor  shall  undertake  this  engagement  in  accordance  with  these  Terms  of  Reference 
and: 
- 
- 
in accordance with the International Standard on Audit (ISA) to perform Agreed-upon Procedures 
regarding Financial Information as promulgated by the IFAC;  
In compliance with the Code of Ethics for Professional DFMs issued by the IFAC. Although ISRS 
4400 provides that independence is not a requirement for agreed-upon procedures engagements, 
the  Contracting  Authority  requires  that  the  auditor  also  complies  with  the  independence 
requirements of the Code of Ethics for Professional DFMs. 
-            In  accordance  with  International  Standards  on  Auditing  and  in  line  with  IFAD’s  Guidelines  for 
Project Audits. 
1.5.2  The Terms and Conditions of the Agreement 
The  Auditor  verifies  that  the  funds  provided  by  the  Agreement  were  spent  in  accordance  with  the 
terms and conditions of the Agreement.  
1.5.3  Planning, procedures, documentation and evidence 
The  Auditor  should  plan  the  work  so  that  effective  audit  can  be  performed.  For  this  purpose  he 
performs the procedures specified the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits and he uses the evidence 
obtained  from  these  procedures  as  the  basis  for  the  report  of  factual  findings.  The  Auditor  should 
document matters which are important in providing evidence to support the report of factual findings, 
and evidence that the work was carried out in accordance with ISA and these ToR. 
1.6   
Reporting 
The  report  on  this  audit  should  describe  the  purpose  and  the  agreed-upon  procedures  of  the 
engagement  in  sufficient  detail  in  order  to  enable  the  PMU/LPA  and  the  Contracting  Authority  to 
understand the nature and extent of the procedures performed by the Auditor. Use of the financial and 
audit reporting is compulsory. 
1.6.1     Periods covered  
The reports on this audit should cover the following: 
a) 
IFAD Loan XXX and Grant XXX for the years 20XX  
b) 
IFAD Loan XXX and Grant XXX for the years 20XY  
c) 
IFAD Loan XXX and Grant XXX for the years 20XV  
22 
Reports covering items a must be delivered no later than 120 calendar days as of the date of signing 
the agreement. 
Reports covering items b and c must be delivered within months after the end of the respective fiscal 
year . 
Annex XI: Required Aide Memoire tables for IFAD Supervision missions  
Table 1:  Cumulative expenditures by component and Financier -as at DD/MM/YYYY 
(USD '000) 
IFAD 
Loan 
IFAD Grant 
Benef. 
Government 
Total 
1. Rural Market 
Development 
1 a. Rural Market 
innovation strategy 
 1b. Rural Market 
infrastructure 
1c. Women Capacity 
Building 
2. Irrigation Infrastructure 
3. Rural Finance   
4. Programme 
Management 
Total 
Table 2: Budgeted Expenditures and Performance against previous year’s  AWPB (USD '000) 
IFAD 
Loan 
IFAD Grant 
Benef. 
Government 
Total 
Financial 
Performance 
(% ) 
1. Rural Market 
Development 
1 a. Rural Market 
innovation strategy 
 1b. Rural Market 
infrastructure 
1c. Women Capacity 
Building 
2. Irrigation Infrastructure 
3. Rural Finance   
4. Programme 
Management 
Total 
23 
Table 3A: Financial performance by financier - as at 
DD/MM/YYYY 
Approval  
(USD 
‘000) 
Current 
(USD 
‘000) 
Disbursements 
(USD ‘000) 
Per cent 
disbursed 
Financier 
IFAD loan 
IFAD grant 
Government 
Beneficiaries 
Total 
Table 3 B. Financial performance by financier by component - as at DD/MM/YYYY  (USD) 
IFAD Loan  
Act
ual  % 
Ap
pr. 
IFAD 
Grant  
   Government 
Ap
pr.  Actual  % 
Ap
pr. 
Act
ual  % 
Beneficiaries 
Act
Ap
ual  % 
pr. 
Ap
pr. 
Total 
Act
ual  % 
1. Rural 
Market 
Develop
ment 
1 a. 
Rural 
Market 
innovatio
n 
strategy 
 1b. 
Rural 
Market 
infrastruc
ture 
1c. 
Women 
Capacity 
Building 
2. 
Irrigation 
Infrastruc
ture 
3. Rural 
Finance   
4. 
Program
me 
Manage
ment 
TOTAL  
24 
TABLE 3 C: Expenditures by category - as at DD/MM/YYYY 
(USD) 
Original   Revised  
Allocation  Allocation 
Expenditures 
W/A 
pending 
Balance 
Per 
cent 
Spent 
Category 
description 
I. Civil 
Works 
II. 
Equipment, 
Goods and 
vehicles 
III. 
Technical 
assistance 
and Studies 
IV. Training 
and 
Workshops 
V. Credit 
line 
VI. 
Incremental 
Operating 
Costs 
Unallocated 
Total 
25 
Annex XII: Sample recovery plan  
26 
Particulars Reporting PeriodWA No.DateUS $EURSDR118/01/2006250 000.00$                 -€                              172 648.51-€                              172 648.510.00#VALUE!Exchange Rate:Ref. No.WA No.DateEstimated WA value(SP)Estimated WA value(USD)ProposedRecovery %Recovery Amount(USD)Commulative Recovery Amount(USD)Commulative Unjustified balance(USD)14021-Feb-12111 832.5645%50 324.6550 324.65(50 324.65)2413-Mar-1272 685.1135%25 439.7975 764.44(75 764.44)3425-May-1274 685.1135%26 139.79101 904.23(101 904.23)4437-Jul-1270 885.1142%29 771.75131 675.98(131 675.98)5445-Sep-1264 885.1140%25 954.04157 630.02(157 630.02)64531-Dec-1282 627.6680%66 102.13223 732.15(223 732.15)74610-Jun-1326 065.11100%26 267.85250 000.00(250 000.00)8503 665.77 USD           250 000.00 USD           Prepared by:Confirmed by:15-Oct-11DateDate(77 351.49)Justification:In accordance with IFAD procedures, any amount unjustified at the time of loan closing date will be promptly refunded to IFAD.Loan Closing Date:TOTALAuthorized Allocation0.00Unjustified balanceUSD                  SDR30-Jun-13Recovery PlanDesignated Account31-Dec-12IFAD Loan No.:Project Completion Date:IFAD Loan Amount (SDR)20 000 000.00 
Annex XIII: Designated account reconciliation statement (Imprest account ) 
5 A. Designated Account Reconciliation Statement (imprest account) 
Designated Account No: 
Bank Name: 
1. Total Advanced by IFAD 
2. Less total amount recovered by IFAD 
3. Equals present outstanding amount advanced to the designated 
account (line 1 less line 2) 
4.Balance of designated account per attached bank statements as of 
(Date: day/month/year) 
5. Plus balance of the project account(s) (listed separately) 
Plus balance of sub accounts (listed separately) 
Plus balance of Cash in Hand 
Total of Bank Balances (designated A/C, PA, SUB accounts& cash in hand 
balance) (line 4+line 5) 
6. Plus total amount claimed in this WA no. 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
7. Plus total amount withdrawn from the designated/PA/Grant account and 
not yet claimed for replenishment) or WAs pending submission 
 USD 
8. Plus amounts claimed in previous applications but not yet created at the 
date of bank statement and/or claimed after date of bank statement 
USD 
Application 
No. 
Date 
USD 
Amount 
$ 
$ 
$ 
9. Minus Interest earned (to be completed. If zero, please enter 
zero) 
10. Total Advance accounted for (line 5 through line 9) 
11. Explanation of any difference between the totals appearing in Lines 
3 and 10 
Non eligible amount to be refunded to the 
designated account 
calculation errors in application of percentage 
financing 
counterpart financial resources 
to be reimbursed 
cheques not yet 
cleared/presented to Bank 
e.g. 
e.g. 
e.g. 
e.g. 
12 DATE 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
USD 
SIGNATURE 
Name in full  
Title in Full 
27 
Annex XIV: Checklist for Withdrawal Application 
IFAD Financing No. ----   
WA No. --- 
Reporting period [from --- to ---] 
FORM 100 - APPLICATION FOR WITHDRAWAL 
 Yes or No 
1. Sequential numbering of withdrawal application 
2. Withdrawal application amount tallies with sequentially numbered summary sheets 
3. Categories/subcategories charged according to schedule 2 of financing agreement 
4. Percentage of financing applicable for each category or subcategory 
5. Availability of funds in categories and the overall financing amount 
6. Currency of payment 
7. Completeness and accuracy of banking instructions  
8. Complete name and address of correspondent bank 
9. WA is signed by Authorized Representative 
STATEMENT OF EXPENDITURE 
1. Eligibility of expenditures claimed 
     (a) Within SOE financial ceiling  
     (b) Expenditures under specific category [-----] eligibility 
2. Form 102 signed by designated Project DFM, PD, Authorized Representative 
3. Form 102 supported by signed Form 101 (for items reported in 2, but over the financial 
ceiling)  
DESIGNATED ACCOUNT – REPLENISHMENT REQUESTS 
1. Amount within ceiling figure agreed as a reasonable limit [-- US$ or --]; or per AWP/B 
period 
2. Amount at least equal to 20 per cent of the agreed limit; or per AWP/B projected 
requirements 
3. Amount agreed sufficient to cover a specific reporting period (revolving fund option) 
4. Exchange rate used 
5. Completeness of designated account banking and account details 
6. Enclosed designated account reconciliation and bank statements 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION (attached when/if required) 
1. Copy of contract 
2. Copy of invoice, certified by PD 
3. Copy of bank guarantee and performance guarantee (for advance payment) 
4. Copy of delivery receipt 
5. Copy of evidence of payment 
6. Completed Form 101  
7. Completed Form 102 (A or B)  
PROCUREMENT 
1. Copy of ‘no objection(s)’ provided by IFAD (attached) 
2. Copy of Contract Payment Monitoring Form(s) (attached) 
COMPLIANCE WITH CONDITION(S) FOR DISBURSEMENT 
1. In accordance with terms in section E of the Financing Agreement 
2. In accordance with terms in the Letter to the Borrower/Recipient  
EXPENDITURE INCURRED/COMMITTED BEFORE PROJECT COMPLETION DATE 
1. Expenditure verified as eligible: 
     (a) contract signed before project completion date 
     (b) goods delivered before project completion date 
     (c) services completed and/or rendered before project completion date 
Remarks: 
____________________ 
   Prepared by: Project DFM/FM   
   Dated: ____________________ 
_____________________ 
  Certified by: PD 
  Dated: _____________________ 
28 
Annex XV: Sample Project  Financial Statements 
29 
  STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS (BY CATEGORY OF EXPENDITURES) FOR THE YEAR ENDED June 30, 201X      Notes 201X 201X-1 Cumulative to date   MWK MWK MWK Balance B/F 4 XXX XXX  FINANCING          Receipts from IFAD          Initial Deposit    XXX      Replenishments to SA  XXX XXX XXX      IFAD Direct Payments 5 XXX XXX XXX Government Funds 6 XXX XXX XXX Other Donors 7    Other Receipts 8            TOTAL FINANCING  XXX XXX XXX           PROJECT EXPENDITURES:     (BY CATEGORY OF EXPENDITURES)     IFAD Financed     Vehicles, Motorcycles and Equipment 9 XXX XXX XXX  Technical Assistance, Trainings, workshops and Studies  XXX XXX XXX Support for Adaptive Research  XXX XXX XXX  Support for Knowledge Management and Communication  XXX XXX XXX  Support for Improved Agricultural Extension  XXX XXX XXX  Support for Access to Key Agricultural Inputs  XXX XXX XXX  Salaries and Allowances  XXX XXX XXX Incremental Operating Costs  XXX XXX XXX   XXX XXX XXX       
1. 
30 
  Malawi: Sustainable Agricultural Production  STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS (BY CATEGORY OF EXPENDITURES)  FOR THE YEAR ENDED June 30, 201X        Notes 201X 201X-1 Cumulative to date    MWK MWK MWK        Government Funds     1 Vehicles, Motorcycles and Equipment 9 XXX XXX XXX 2  Technical Assistance, Trainings, workshops and Studies  XXX XXX XXX 3A Support for Adaptive Research  XXX XXX XXX 3B  Support for Knowledge Management and Communication  XXX XXX XXX       4A  Support for Improved Agricultural Extension  XXX XXX XXX 4B  Support for Access to Key Agricultural Inputs  XXX XXX XXX 5  Salaries and Allowances  XXX XXX XXX 6 Incremental Operating Costs  XXX XXX XXX    XXX XXX XXX TOTAL PROJECT EXPENDITURES   XXX XXX XXX       BALANCE C/F  4 XXX XXX XXX  
31 
 Malawi: Sustainable Agricultural Production Programme (SAPP)  STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS (BY COMPONENT)  FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 201X        Notes 201X 201X-1 Cumulative to date    MWK MWK MWK  Balance B/F 4 XXX XXX   FINANCING            IFAD Credit            Initial Deposit    XXX       Replenishments to SA  XXX XXX XXX       IFAD Direct Payments 5 XXX XXX XXX  Government Funds 6 XXX XXX XXX  Other Donors 7     Other Receipts 8              TOTAL FINANCING  XXX XXX XXX              PROJECT EXPENDITURES:      (BY COMPONENT)     Comp IFAD      1 Adaptive Research and Knowledge Management     1.1 Adaptive Research  XXX XXX XXX 1.2 Knowledge Management and Communication  XXX XXX XXX    XXX XXX XXX 2 Farmer Adoption of GAPs     2.1 Awareness Raising and Sensitisation  XXX XXX XXX 2.2 Access to Key Agricultural Inputs  XXX XXX XXX    XXX XXX XXX 3 Programme Management and Coordination  XXX XXX XXX    XXX XXX XXX        Government Funds     1 Adaptive Research and Knowledge Management     1.1 Adaptive Research  XXX XXX XXX 1.2 Knowledge Management and Communication  XXX XXX XXX    XXX XXX XXX 2 Farmer Adoption of GAPs     2.1 Awareness Raising and Sensitisation  XXX XXX XXX 2.2 Access to Key Agricultural Inputs  XXX XXX XXX    XXX XXX XXX 3 Programme Management and Coordination  XXX XXX XXX    XXX XXX XXX        TOTAL PROJECT EXPENDITURES  XXX XXX XXX        BALANCE C/F 4 XXX XXX XXX   
32 
  Malawi: Sustainable Agricultural Production Programme (SAPP)  STATEMENT OF COMPARISON OF BUDGET AND ACTUAL AMOUNTS  FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 201X         201X Budget 201X Actual Variance         Notes MWK MWK MWK        FINANCING            IFAD Credit          Replenishments to SA  XXX XXX XXX      IFAD Direct Payments  XXX XXX XXX  Government Funds  XXX XXX XXX           TOTAL FINANCING  XXX XXX XXX              PROJECT EXPENDITURES:      (BY CATEGORY OF EXPENDITURES)          Cat IFAD Financed     1 Vehicles, Motorcycles and Equipment  XXX XXX XXX 2  Technical Assistance, Trainings, workshops and Studies  XXX XXX XXX 3A  Support for Adaptive Research  XXX XXX XXX 3B  Support for Knowledge Management and Communication  XXX XXX XXX 4A  Support for Improved Agricultural Extension  XXX XXX XXX 4B  Support for Access to Key Agricultural Inputs  XXX XXX XXX 5  Salaries and Allowances  XXX XXX XXX 6  Incremental Operating Costs  XXX XXX XXX    XXX XXX XXX   
33 
 Malawi: Sustainable Agricultural Production Programme (SAPP)  STATEMENT OF COMPARISON OF BUDGET AND ACTUAL AMOUNTS  FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 201X         201X Budget 201X Actual Variance         Notes MWK MWK MWK         Government Funds     1 Vehicles, Motorcycles and Equipment  XXX XXX XXX 2  Technical Assistance, Trainings, workshops and Studies  XXX XXX XXX 3A  Support for Adaptive Research  XXX XXX XXX 3B  Support for Knowledge Management and Communication  XXX XXX XXX 4A  Support for Improved Agricultural Extension XXX XXX XXX  4B  Support for Access to Key Agricultural Inputs XXX XXX XXX  5  Salaries and Allowances XXX XXX XXX  6  Incremental Operating Costs XXX XXX XXX    XXX XXX XXX                  TOTAL PROJECT EXPENDITURES XXX XXX XXX        Surplus/Deficit for the period          XXX         XXX          XXX       The excess/deficit of actual expenditures over the Budget of 10% was due to….   
34 
Sustainable Agricultural Production Programme (SAPP) STATEMENT OF DESIGNATED ACCOUNT ACTIVITIES FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 201X Account No:  ___________     Bank: ________________     Address:_______________               USD  MWK Opening Balance  Notes      XXX XXX       Add:      IFAD Replenishments:     Date WA No XXX    Date WA No XXX      XXX  XXX XXX Bank Interests    XXX XXX Total    XXX XXX       Deduct:      Transfers to Operating Accounts:    Date  XXX    Date  XXX      XXX  XXX XXX       Bank Charges    XXX XXX Exchange Rate Difference   XXX Closing Balance as at 30/06/201X  XXX XXX  (as per Bank Statement)  
35 
 Sustainable Agricultural Production Programme (SAPP)  STATEMENT OF DESIGNATED ACCOUNT RECONCILIATION  FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 201X         Account No:  ___________       Bank: ________________       Address:_______________           USD  MWK     Notes   1 Initial Deposit    XXXX XXXX 2 Less amount(s) recovered:    XXXX XXXX 3 Outstanding Amount advanced    XXXX XXXX         Represented by:      4 Special Account Balance as at 30/6/201X    XXXX XXXX        5 Plus amounts claimed but not yet credited as at 30/6/201X:       WA XXX Date     WA XXX Date      XXX   XXXX XXXX         Plus amounts withdrawn not yet claimed, composed of:               Was Prepared not yet submitted:       WA XXX      WA XXX       XXX             WAs not yet prepared: XXX            6 Total amount withdrawn not yet claimed    XXXX XXXX        7 Less Interest earned and/or plus Bank charges (if included in the Special Account)    XXXX XXXX        8 Total Designated Account Advance as at 30/6/201X    XXXX XXXX         Difference between Line 3 and line 8    XXXX XXXX         Notes:       a   Explain any difference between lines 3 and line 8    b   Indicate if amount in line 6 is eligible for financing by IFAD and provide reasons for not claiming   
Withdrawal Applications are submitted for reimbursement to IFAD using the historical exchange rate 
of the transfers to the Operating Account. Expenditures partially or totally rejected by IFAD (if any) 
should be detailed here. This statement should be reconciled with the Statement of Receipts and 
Payments. 
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 201X 
1. 
FINANCIAL  REPORTING  UNDER 
STANDARDS (IPSAS) 
INTERNATIONAL  PUBLIC  SECTOR  ACCOUNTING 
In accordance  with International  Public Sector Accounting  Standards (IPSAS),  notes to the financial 
statements of an entity should: 
  Present  any  information  about  the  basis  of  preparation  of  the  financial  statements  and  the 
specific accounting policies selected and applied for significant transactions and other events, 
and 
  Provide  additional  information  which  is  not  presented  on  the  face  of  the  financial 
statements but  is necessary for a fair presentation of the entity’s cash receipts, cash 
payments, cash balances and other statements as statement of financial position 
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES 
2 
The principle accounting policies adopted in the preparation of these financial statements are set out 
below: 
36 
Malawi: Sustainable Agricultural Production Programme (SAPP) SOEs-WITHDRAWAL APPLICATION STATEMENT FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 201X by Category of Expenditures  in Local Currency Notes   Category description Category description Total In USD Equivalent Rejected from IFAD Net Reimbursed  Cat No 1 2       WA No:                XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX    XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX    XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX    XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX  Total        XXX   WA Pending for Submission:          WA No: XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX    XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX              XXX  TOTAL XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX   
A  Basis  of  Preparation:  The  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  in  accordance  with 
International  Public  Sector  Accounting  Standards  (IPSAS)  with  particular  emphasis  on  Cash 
Basis Financial Reporting under the Cash Basis of Accounting 
B  Cash Basis of Accounting: The cash basis of accounting recognizes transactions and events 
only when cash is received or paid by the entity. 
C.  Foreign  Currency  Transactions:  Foreign  currency  translation  for  the  income  and  expenditure 
account  items  are  converted  using  the  actual  historic  exchange  rate  at  the  conversion  from 
designated to local account.  Where part of the expenditures has to be met from the proceeds of 
subsequent draw downs from designated to local account, this is done on First in First out (FIFO) 
basis.        All  local  expenditures  paid  from  the  local  accounts/currency  are  translated  back  to  the 
USD  at  the  actual  rate  used  for  the  transfer  from  designated  to  local  account.      Cash  balances 
held in foreign currency  are reported  using the closing rate.   Gains/Losses on foreign currency 
transactions/balances are dealt within the Statement of Designated Account Activities  
3 
BUDGET:  
The budget is developed on the same accounting basis (cash basis), same classification and for the 
same period as the financial statements.   Material variances (above  XXX) have been explained as 
notes to the financial statements 
DIRECT  PAYMENTS 
4 
These  payments  were  made  directly  by  IFAD  from  the  Loan/Grant  account  to  the  specified 
supplier/service provider in accordance with the terms and conditions of the financing Agreement 
Include here details of direct payments 
WA, Date, currency and amount received, amount in local currency 
5  GOVERNMENT COUNTERPART FUNDS 
Details here.  Cumulative contributions, yearly contributions (compared to budget).  For information 
only Include details of tax treatment and counterpart contributions as tax exemption. 
37 
4. CASH/FUND  BALANCES           Reconciliation  201X 201X-1  MWK MWK    Cash Accounts  XXX   XXX  Advances  XXX   XXX    XXX   XXX   Analyses of aging of advances to be included detailing and providing reasons for long outstanding advances   4-a  CASH DETAILS   200X 200X-1  MWK MWK    A/c No______  Project Operating/ Holding Account  XXX   XXX  A/c No_______ IFAD Designated Account (as per SA Statement)  XXX   XXX  Petty cash  XXX   XXX    XXX   XXX    
38 
Note 7: OTHER DONOR FUNDS   200X 200X-1  MWK MWK    List of Donors XXX XXX  XXX XXX  XXX XXX  XXX XXX Add details of cumulative and expected contributions   Note 8: OTHER RECEIPTS   200X 200X-1  MWK MWK    Interest Income XXX XXX other income (specify) XXX XXX  XXX XXX  XXX XXX   Note 9: NON-CURRENT ASSETS (this is for disclosure purposes only since under IPSAS Cash basis fixed assets should have be expensed but controlled through assets register)  Financial Statement Currency        Vehicles Motorcycles Equipment   201X 201X-1 201X 201X-1 201X 201X-1               Opening Balance XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX Additions (Statement of Receipts and Payments) XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX Disposals XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX Closing Balance XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX   This schedule includes all assets acquired from the commencement of the Project.  These assets are stated at cost.   Existence and beneficial ownership to be verified by the auditors.      Apart of the summary schedule, details schedules for yearly changes to be included.  
39 
Note 10: YEARLY PROCUREMENTS  Include here a list of the yearly procurements including methods   Note 11: ALLOCATION AND USE OF THE FUNDS OF THE LOAN/GRANTS    Allocated   Disbursed   Available Balance  Category SDR USD    SDR USD    SDR USD  1 Vehicles, Motorcycles and Equipment XXX XXXX  XXXX XXXX  XXXX XXXX 2  Technical Assistance, Trainings, workshops and Studies XXX XXXX  XXXX XXXX  XXXX XXXX 3A  Support for Adaptive Research XXX XXXX  XXXX XXXX  XXXX XXXX 3B  Support for Knowledge Management and Communication XXX XXXX  XXXX XXXX  XXXX XXXX 4A  Support for Improved Agricultural Extension XXXX XXXX  XXXX XXXX  XXXX XXXX 4B  Support for Access to Key Agricultural Inputs XXXX XXXX  XXXX XXXX  XXXX XXXX 5  Salaries and Allowances XXXX XXXX  XXXX XXXX  XXXX XXXX 6  Incremental Operating Costs XXXX XXXX  XXXX XXXX  XXXX XXXX   XXXX XXXX  XXXX XXXX  XXXX XXXX  Note 12: RECONCILIATION OF FUNDS DISBURSED BY IFAD AND FUNDS RECEIVED BY THE PROGRAMME  
Appendix II 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ASSESSMENT QUESTIONNAIRE (FMAQ)40 
Project # _______________________________________________ 
Date : 
Implementing Entity _____________________________________ 
Self-assessment  completed by  ___________________________ 
Date : 
Review completed by ___________________________________ 
Date : 
GUIDANCE: NOTES 
The FMAQ provides an indicative list of issues and questions to be considered in the financial 
management assessment. It is clearly difficult for a single questionnaire to adequately cover the 
diversity of IFAD’s operating environment and projects. The FMAQ should be customized to better 
address specific project circumstances by adapting the questions (adding, deleting, or modifying) to 
better suit the assessment objectives. 
The FMAQ has been designed to primarily cover an assessment of a Lead Project Agency which is a 
Government Department and/or a PIU.  
Before commencing the assessment it is essential to have a clear view of the probable project 
implementation arrangements - where the project financial management arrangements are 
administered through a PIU which primarily uses stand-alone financial systems the PIU is effectively 
the Implementing Entity and so focus of the FMA should be on the financial management 
arrangements in the PIU. 
Advice on applying the Financial Management Questionnaire (FMAQ) for a self -assessment should 
be sought from the CFS Finance officer.  
If there is more than one implementing agency, an FMAQ should be completed for each entity that will 
receive and disburse project funds. 
40 This questionnaire should be used as guidance for and in support of the Summary Project Fiduciary Risk 
Assessment @ Design (Annex III). 
40 
 Implementing Entity: 
Topic 
Response 
Remarks 
1. 
Organization  and Staffing 
Implementing Entity  
NOTE: 
In the case of a Government Department, the FMS should initially focus on the status of the 
country PFM systems in order to gauge level of fiduciary risks to which the proposed project may 
be exposed.  
Once an understanding of the PFM environment has been ascertained, the FMS should switch 
focus down to project level and focus on the department(s) or unit(s) that will financially 
administer the project. 
1.1  Which entity is the LPA? 
What is the entity’s legal status? 
1.2  Will financial management of the project be the responsibility of 
a the LPA or be undertaken within the-PIU?  
1.3  Has the entity implemented a donor financed project in the past 
- if so, please provide details? 
Staffing 
1.4  What is the (proposed) organizational structure of the 
accounting department? Attach an organization chart.  
1.5 
1.6 
1.7 
1.8 
1.9 
Identify the (proposed) accounts staff, including job title, 
responsibilities, educational background and professional 
experience. Attach job descriptions and CVs of key accounting 
staff. 
Are written position descriptions that clearly define duties, 
responsibilities, lines of supervision, and limits of authority for 
all of the officers, managers, and staff? 
Is the finance and accounts staff adequately qualified and 
experienced? 
Are the project accounts and finance staff trained in IFAD 
procedures? 
Are any Finance Staff appointed on contract  
What is the duration of the contracts  
Indicate key positions not contracted yet, and the estimated 
date of appointment 
1.10  What is training policy for the finance and accounting staff? 
1.11 
Is there evidence that finance staff are regularly transferred to 
other Government departments 
At what frequency are personnel transferred? 
1.12 
Is the project finance and accounting function staffed 
adequately 
41 
Topic 
Response 
Remarks 
2.  
Budgeting 
2.1  Who is responsible for preparation and approval of project 
budgets? 
2.2 
2.3 
3 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
3.4 
3.5 
3.6
Are project budgets prepared for all significant project activities 
in sufficient detail to provide a meaningful tool with which to 
monitor subsequent performance? 
Are procedures in place to plan project activities, collect 
information from the units in charge of the different 
components, and prepare the budgets? 
Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements 
Does the Implementing Entity have previous experience of 
using imprest fund and donor funding SOE procedures? 
Were there any problems or issues encountered by project 
staff in the operation of the imprest fund or SoE procedures in 
the past? 
Does the Implementing Entity have experience in the 
management of disbursements from IFAD or other donors? 
Have there been the major problems in the past in receipt of 
funds by the entity? 
Does the entity have/need to develop capacity to manage 
foreign exchange risks? 
Are the beneficiaries required to contribute to project costs? 
How are payments made for the counterpart funds?  
If counterpart funds are to be contributed in kind (in the form of 
labour), are proper guidelines formulated to record and value 
the labour contribution?  
Is part of the project implemented by communities or NGOs? 
Does the PIU have the necessary reporting and monitoring 
features built into its systems to track the use of project 
proceeds by such agencies? 
Describe (proposed) project funds flow arrangements; (attach 
flow chart and explanation of the flow of funds from IFAD, 
government and other financiers. 
3.7 
In which bank will the Imprest Account be opened? 
3.8 
Are the (proposed) arrangements to transfer the proceeds of 
the  financing (from the government / Finance Ministry) to the 
Implementing Entity satisfactory? 
42 
Topic 
Response 
Remarks 
4. 
Internal Controls 
4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
Segregation of duties - are the following functional 
responsibilities performed by different units or persons: (i) 
authorization to execute a transaction; (ii) recording of the 
transaction; and (iii) custody of assets involved in the 
transaction? 
Are the functions of ordering, receiving, accounting for, and 
paying for goods and services appropriately segregated? 
Are bank reconciliations prepared by someone other than 
those who make or approve payments? 
5. 
Accounting Systems, Policies and Procedures 
5.1 
5.2 
5.3 
5.4 
5.5 
5.6 
Does the entity have an integrated accounting system that 
allows for the proper recording of project financial transactions, 
including the allocation of expenditures in accordance with the 
respective components, disbursement categories, and sources 
of funds? Will the project use the entity accounting system? 
Are controls in place concerning the preparation and approval 
of transactions, ensuring that all transactions are correctly 
made and adequately explained? 
Is the chart of accounts adequate to properly account for and 
report on project activities and disbursement categories? 
Can cost allocations to the various funding sources be made 
accurately? 
Are the General Ledger and subsidiary ledgers reconciled and 
in balance? 
Are all accounting and supporting documents retained on a 
permanent basis in a defined system that allows authorized 
users easy access?  
5.7  What is the basis of accounting (e.g., cash, accrual)? 
5.8  What accounting standards are followed? 
5.9 
Does the project have an adequate policies and procedures 
manual to guide activities and ensure staff accountability? 
5.10  Do procedures exist to ensure that only authorized persons 
can alter or establish a new accounting principle, policy or 
procedure to be used by the entity? 
5.11 
Is there a written policies and procedures manual covering all 
routine project financial management activities? 
Are manuals distributed to appropriate personnel? 
43 
Topic 
Response 
Remarks 
Payments 
5.12  Are all invoices stamped PAID, dated, reviewed and approved, 
and clearly marked for account code assignment? 
Cash and Bank 
5.13  Does the organization maintain an adequate, up-to-date 
cashbook, recording receipts and payments? 
5.14  Are bank and cash reconciled on a monthly basis? 
5.15 
Indicate names and positions of authorized signatories of 
project bank accounts. 
Safeguard over Assets 
5.16 
Is there a Fixed Asset accounting system, with a Fixed Asset 
Register, fully implemented - as part of an integrated 
accounting system  
Is the system maintained up to date ? 
5.17  Are there periodic physical reconciliation of fixed assets and 
stocks? 
Other 
5.18  Has the project advised employees, beneficiaries and other 
recipients to whom to report if they suspect fraud, waste or 
misuse of project resources or property? 
5.19  Do policies and procedures clearly define conflict of interest 
and related party transactions (real and apparent) and provide 
safeguards to protect the organization from them? 
5.20  Do controls exist for the preparation of the project payroll and 
are changes to the payroll properly authorized 
6. 
Reporting and Monitoring 
6.1 
6.2 
Does the reporting system need to be adapted to report on the 
project components? 
Does the project have established financial management 
reporting responsibilities that specify what reports are to be 
prepared, what they are to contain, and the frequency of 
production.? 
6.3  What is the frequency of preparation of financial statements? 
Are the reports prepared in a timely fashion so as to useful to 
management for decision making? 
6.4 
6.5 
Do the financial reports compare actual expenditures with 
budgeted and programmed allocations? 
Are financial reports prepared directly by the automated 
accounting system or are they prepared by spreadsheets or 
some other means? 
44 
Topic 
Response 
Remarks 
6.6 
(In case of need of consolidated financial statements) Is the 
accounting system sufficiently equipped to ensure proper 
consolidation of entities’ financial data? 
Information Systems 
6.7 
Is the financial management system computerized? 
6.8 
Can the system produce the necessary project financial 
reports? 
6.9 
Is the staff adequately trained to maintain the system? 
6.10  Are adequate systems in place to “back up” financial records 
7. 
Internal Audit 
7.1 
Is there an internal audit department in the LPA? 
7.2  What are the qualifications and experience of internal audit 
department staff?  
7.3 
To whom does the internal auditor report? 
7.4  Will the internal audit department include the project in its work 
program? 
7.5 
Are actions taken on the internal audit findings? 
8. 
External Audit 
8.1  Who is the external auditor of the entity?  
8.2 
8.3 
Are there any delays in audit of the entity? When are the audit 
reports issued? 
Is the audit of the entity conducted according to the 
International Standards on Auditing? 
8.4  Were there any major accountability issues brought out in the 
audit report of the past three years? 
Were there any issues noted in prior audit reports related to 
the operation of project imprest accounts or use of SOE 
procedures? 
8.5  Will the entity auditor audit the project accounts or will another 
auditor be appointed to audit the project financial statements? 
8.6 
Has the project prepared acceptable terms of reference for an 
annual project audit? 
45 
GUIDANCE: The supporting documents may include the following items. 
Supporting Documents 
  Financial regulations, standards or pronouncements used by the project/entity. 
  Evidence of consideration of the work of the Internal Auditor (if applicable)  
  Chart of Accounts. 
  Project or entity Financial Management Manual.(Index page) 
  External Audit terms of reference. 
  Terms of reference and curriculum vitae for key financial and accounting personnel. 
  Copy of most recent audit report (if applicable). 
Appendix II (continued) 
FIDUCIARY RISK ASSESSMENT FRAMEWORK 
Control Area 
Key Objective  
Key Controls 
Implementing 
Organization  
Staffing 
Budgeting 
Funds Flow & 
Disbursements 
To ensure that the project 
implementation 
arrangements are (or will) 
provide adequate control of 
project finances.  
To ensure that staff will be 
adequate in terms of 
numbers, skills, capabilities, 
and experience. 
To ensure that an 
appropriate budgeting 
system is in place. 
To ensure that the 
proceeds of the loan/grant 
will be used for their 
intended purposes. 
Internal 
Controls 
To ensure that funds reach 
intended beneficiaries. 
Accounting 
Systems, 
Policies and 
procedures 
To ensure that an effective 
system of financial 
management is in place so 
that all financial transactions 
are properly authorized and 
actioned according to 
defined procedures. 
The FMA indicates that the FM systems are sufficiently 
robust and so can be can be used to manage and 
administer project finances. 
Organization structure, 
Staff in post/vacancies, 
Qualifications/experience, 
Job descriptions, Training records. 
Activity  and cash planning capacity. 
Budgetary control systems? 
Capacity for administration of AWPB? 
Bank Accounts – Central bank or commercial banks: 
reliable? 
Disbursement procedures. 
Involvement of NGOs/Community organisations in 
disbursement process. 
Downstream fund flows monitoring, documentation? 
Evidence of funds reaching intended beneficiaries. 
FM manuals and rules on use of funds. 
. 
  Appropriate financial policies and procedures are 
codified and followed 
  An effective Financial Accounting System is in place 
and is maintained on a timely basis 
  A robust budget allocation and control system is in 
place 
  Payment systems are sound with strong “internal 
check” 
  Appropriate Cash and banking arrangements in place 
to minimize risk of misappropriation of project funds 
  assets created by the project will be recorded in he 
entity’s financial records 
46 
  assets will be maintained in order to ensure 
sustainability 
To ensure that complete, 
accurate and timely reports 
will be produced. 
Underlying transaction systems adequate to provide 
accurate and timely project financial reports (to maintain 
budget control) e.g., General Ledger, Contracts Ledger. 
Reporting & 
Monitoring 
Internal Audit 
To ascertain if there is a 
strong IA function which 
monitors compliance. 
External Audit  
To ensure that Project 
Accounts will be audited to 
standards acceptable to 
IFAD. 
Appropriately staffed IA Unit in place 
(i.e., number of qualified, experienced and trained staff). 
Comprehensive Audit program. 
Audit reports available. 
Proposed arrangements meet IFAD requirements 
 
  Audit reports will be submitted within 6 months of 
“approved” Auditor 
year end. 
47 
Sri Lanka
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience Project
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Risk Framework (IRF)
Document Date:
04/11/2019
Project No.
2000002583
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
1/4
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
1. Political and governance
Medium
Medium
2. Macroeconomic
Medium
Low
3. Sector strategies and policies
Low
Low
4. Technical aspects of project or
program
Low
Low
5. Institutional capacity for
implementation and sustainability
Medium
Medium
Political changes following the December 2019 election
could result in changes of personnel at senior decision
making levels with a subsequent risk of delays in approval
of the project and the start of implementation. Some on-
going tensions in the north of the country and risks of
terrorist attacks need to be acknowledged as a risk.
Gross public debt is projected at 79.9 percent of GDP in
2018, well-above peer emerging markets. As a result
SARP will attempt to minimise grant funding and will focus
attention on loan funding and leasing along the value
chain.
Policies relating to land tenure, agricultural extension and
an enabling environment for agricultural value chain
development have been posed as potentially impacting on
the project. SARP has grant resources of US$1 million to
conduct studies to contribute to policy dialogue at national
level.
There is a low likelihood that factors related to the
technical design of the program or project may adversely
impact the achievement of the project objective. Project
implementation will be phased in line with absorptive
capacity of the public sector institutions. The detailed
design of SARP investments in water harvesting and small
irrigation, climate smart agricultural production and market
access will be informed by a comprehensive planning
process before implementation. Additionally, IFAD has
good experience implementing similar and associated
projects effectively.
Sri Lanka has an overall solid track record in project
implementation ranked moderately satisfactory by the
CSPE, 2019. Institutional instability has been a negative
factor in some of the past portfolio. Activities were
implemented effectively, albeit with some delays. A
positive aspect of Government performance has been the
capacity to devolve project implementation responsibilities
to various partner agencies and decentralized institutions
within the local government system. But issues do arise
with financial management, M&E and project staffing. At
provincial and district level coordination could pose a
challenge given the number of donor funded projects
operating in the region. Some concern should be given to
absorptive capacity. However, integration of line ministry
services at district level can be effective and efficient of
contributing to strong district ownership. SARP
implementation responsibility will be designated to the
Presidential Secretariat, which is also responsible for
implementation of SAP. Close collaboration between both
projects is proposed with a single PMU. Involvement of
experienced technical staff from SAP will also speed up
project implementation.
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
2/4
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
6. Financial management
Medium
Medium
The overall project fiduciary risk is assessed to be
Medium at the design stage.
Financial Management Assessment was undertaken at
this design. A number of fiduciary management and
process issues have negatively affected the efficiency of
past projects. The portfolios' financial management were
weakened by various factors i.e lack of qualified project
staff and high staff turnover; IFAD-financed programmes
in Sri Lanka suffered from some delays as for NADeP and
STaRR, it was more than one year from the date of entry
into force to the date of first disbursement, resulting in
slow start-up. To the extent possible, new financing
should build on existing structures and mechanisms, and
early and continuous consultation with Government is
essential to mitigate delays. 
To ensure a smooth start-up of the project including early
recruitment of service providers and implementation of
construction activities in PY1, preparatory planning,
establishment of the PSU, recruitment of staff and
procurement of service will take place at earlier stage.
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
3/4
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
There are difficulties in attracting experienced
procurement professionals and this has adversely affected
almost all donor funded projects in Sri Lanka. In addition,
poor status of progress monitoring and contract
management resulting in undue delays in completion of
contracts and limited public access to procurement need
to be addressed when taking into account mitigation
measures.
To mitigate these risks a dedicated procurement unit
should be established in the PMU consisting of a Senior
Procurement Officer and Procurement Officer. Officers
identified should be qualified and experienced with prior
experience in donor-funded projects. Wide publicity
should be given when calling for applications for the
positions and once selected, s/he should be required to
undergo extensive training in IFAD procurement
procedure arranged by the project.
7. Procurement
Medium
Medium
The project should also ensure:
• Public access to procurement information through
relevant web sites and other means of communication. 
• Participation of Senior Procurement Officer in the annual
work planning process. 
• Procurement Plans to follow IFAD's plan in compliance
with IFAD requirements 
• Clear separation of the procurement and finance
functions 
• Regular progress review meetings and submission of a
contract Register to the CPM on a monthly basis. 
• IFAD to include requirements for the submission of
Annual Procurement plans along with Annual Work Plan
and Budgets, sixty days prior to the commencement of the
year. 
• Awareness of the staff regarding IFAD policy of zero
tolerance for corruption and procedure and access points
for reporting such incidence to IFAD as well as
government authorities.
The likelihood and/or impact of stakeholder opposition to
the project is low. Project objectives, approach and
activities were discussed during the concept note
preparation mission at a stakeholder meeting composed
of representatives of the main line ministries, the External
Relations Department and the Presidential Secretariat.
The project will be coordinated through an Environmental
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to examine
the risks and impacts of the proposed activities, including
potential environmental and social vulnerabilities. The
ESMF will specify the environmental and social
management requirements (including labour and working
conditions, grievance redress system, health and safety)
that will be the responsibility of contractors and primary
suppliers hired to construct the irrigation infrastructure.
SAP will also strengthen the institutional development of
various natural resource and infrastructure management
committees to support joint management of limited
resources within catchment areas.
8. Stakeholders
Low
Low
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
4/4
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
As a result of the Dry Zone’s vulnerability to cyclical and
persistent drought events, there is a moderate to high
probability that climate change will challenge the
achievement of project objectives, taking into account the
likelihood of extreme variability of rainfall occurrences.
Land fragmentation and high population density continue
to lead to catchment degradation. However SAP is
designed in direct response to these risks so the potential
impact of these risks on project objectives is moderate.
SAP will adopt an integrated watershed and sub-
management approach that will integrate appropriate crop
and livestock production practices such as improved crop
varieties; the promotion of a wide range of cost-effective
water harvesting and soil conservation measures (contour
bunds, grass strips, planting of fodder grasses on
bunds/ridges, use of permanent, perennial vegetation on
contours, etc.); and agro-forestry (intercropping,
integration of trees on farm plots, etc.). Climate
information will be made available through mobile phone
technology to all relevant project stakeholders at sector,
district, farmer organization and community to help them
cope with climate variability and climate change effects.
Resilience will also be strengthened through the
promotion of climate smart agriculture. 
To mitigate any adverse environmental and social impacts
of the project, the larger irrigation schemes will be
subjected to an Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA) before funds are released for the
specific investments. The ESIAs will be aligned with the
national General Guidelines for ESIA (2006) and the
Environmental and Social Management Guidelines for
agriculture projects (2016). The exact nature and extent of
adaptation measures to be adopted during design and
implementation phases will be determined according to
specific site locations and proposed size of irrigation,
water harvesting and small storage technologies.
Furthermore, the whole project will be coordinated through
an ESMF to examine the risks and impacts of the
proposed activities.
9. Environment and social
High
Medium
Overall
Medium
Low
Sri Lanka
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience Project
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Document Date:
04/11/2019
Project No.
2000002583
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience (SARP) Project Design Report 
Annex 10: Exit Strategy  
Document Date: 11/10/2019  
Project No. 
EXIT STRATEGY 
SARP  has  been  designed  in  consultation  with  and  involvement  of  relevant  government  agencies, 
technical  line  departments  of  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  development  partners.  These 
consultations and discussions  have resulted in a sound approach and a suite of interventions which 
will be implemented with strong community participation and engagement of local officials. Building on 
this foundation, it  is expected that  the  investments as well  as the results of the interventions  will be 
sustained  beyond  the  project  period  and  over  the  long  term.  Sustainability  considerations  that  have 
guided project design include: 
a) Capacity building for integrated, locally owned solutions: SARP will invest in building capacities 
for climate-resilient, integrated solutions for irrigation following the ecosystem/ cascade approach. 
The  project  will  promote  institutional  planning  and  coordination  across  government  officials  and 
communities  to  overcome  the  sectoral  and  piecemeal  approach  to  water  management  that  was 
adopted  in  the  past.  Project  outputs  will  also  contribute  to  enhancing  organisational  capacity  of 
farmers to plan for and implement climate-risk informed local water management solutions, adopt 
technologies  and  systems  for  climate-smart  agricultural  production  and  integrate  climate 
information  and  advisories  for  water  management  ensuring  their  financial  and  human  resource 
viability post-project. In designing such solutions, the approach is to strongly engage communities 
at  every  level  of  planning  and  execution.  By  doing  so,  SARP  will  not  only  ensure  that  the 
investments  respond  to  beneficiary  needs  but  also  ensure  that  community  organisations, 
including youth and women’s groups, will have sufficient technical and financial capacity to keep 
improving  system  design  and  operations,  even  as  climate  variability  increases  and  seasons 
become more unpredictable.  
b) Operations and Maintenance plans: More specifically, SARP will support watershed groups to 
prepare  O&M  plans  that  include  budgeting  the  human  and  financial  resources  required  for 
implementation.  The  plans  will  reflect  local  ownership  and  commitment  to  the  long-term 
sustainability of the project activities and outcomes.  SARP will finance and leverage financing to 
support  the  human  and  technical  resources  required  for  O&M  initially,  with  a  decreasing 
contribution  towards  the  end  of  the  project  lifetime,  after  which  domestic  financing  will  be 
expected to  continue to support O&M. This  approach  will build on  farmers’ traditional system of 
managing  by  themselves  the  village  irrigation  systems.  The  project  will  improve  the  capacity  of 
FOs  to  function  more  efficiently.  Supported  by  an  increased  incomes  from  agriculture  it  is 
expected that the FO contribution would also increase.  
 c)  Farmer  producer  organizations.  Outside  the  watershed,  SARP  will  also  ensure  institutional 
sustainability  and  effectiveness  through  dedicated  support  to  farmer  producer  organizations  to 
establish them as independent economic entities and actors. Farmer/ producers will be supported 
with capacity building and technical assistance, to form more cohesive common interest groups, 
eventually  graduating  to  a  more  mature  and  evolved  organization;  based  on  regular  maturity 
assessments,  the  eventual  formation  of  sustainable  producer  companies  is  envisaged.  The 
project  will  provide  extensive  capacity  building  in  business  management  skill  development, 
support  to  registration,  and  access  to  finance  through  financial  institutions  with  a  mandate  to 
support small farmers together with targeted matching grants.  
d) Private sector development:  SARP will build the capacity of young men and women to engage 
in managing economic enterprises at community level. The engagement of women in FOs and as 
interlocutors between private sector markets for climate smart  value chain products will increase 
livelihood  options  and  income  sources  for  women  entrepreneurs  in  villages.  SARP  will 
simultaneously seek to leverage commercial private sector investments. The project will build on 
lessons  learned  and  experience  of  SAP  placing  greater  emphasis  on  strengthening  producer/ 
farmer  voice  and  encouraging  the  preparation  of  farmer-led  business  plans.  Investment 
commitments  from  the  private  sector,  including  from  farmer  producer  organizations  and 
agribusinesses,  are  also  expected  to  provide  an  important  indication  for  the  business  rationale 
and longer-term sustainability of agricultural and commercial activities. 
e) Establishment of Agrarian Service Centre Hubs: SARP will also strengthen the ASCs as one-
stop-shop  service  and  information  platforms.  Some  of  the  service  offered  such  as  quality  seed, 
mechanization hire services, and market/ weather information will be developed and managed by 
local youth. The strengthened ASCs will serve as a platform for public-private sector collaboration 
and with access to funding through the Agrarian Banks could incentivize private sector investment 
beyond the project life span.  
f)  Policy  support.  To  ensure  longer-term  sustainability,  the  project  will  also  provide  support  for 
policy dialogue informed by targeted studies to be conducted during implementation. Topics such 
as integrated watershed development, youth employment in agriculture and micro insurance have 
been  singled  out  as  priorities.  Complementary  policies  or  strategies  would  be  expected  to  help 
improve the overall enabling environment for development of the Dry Zone and hence contribute 
to long-term sustainability. 
SARP’s exit strategy, consequently, relies on building capacity at different levels; at farmer/FO level 
but  also  of  the  public  and  private  advisory  services  in  climate  smart  technologies  as  well  as  farm 
business management, marketing and commercialisation. Capacity building will be undertaken at the 
institutional, community and household levels. The skills and capacities required will be strengthened 
to  ensure  communities  are  resilient  to  climate  variability  and  climate  change  and  that  the  relevant 
institutions at all levels are able to provide the necessary support and services. 
Sri Lanka
Smallholder Agribusiness and Resilience Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Gender Checklist
Document Date:
04/11/2019
Project No.
2000002583
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Gender Checklist for SARP  
1.  The project design report contains – and project implementation is based 
on  -  gender-disaggregated  poverty  data  and  an  analysis  of  gender 
differences in the activities or sectors concerned, as well as an analysis 
of  each  project  activity  from  the  gender  perspective  to  address  any 
unintentional barriers to women’s participation.  
Design  
Sex-disaggregated data on poverty has been used in the 
analysis and gender sensitive climate vulnerability and capacity analysis has 
been conducted to guide the project activities.  
2. The project design report articulates – or the project implements – actions 
with aim to: 
  Expand women’s economic empowerment through access to and control 
over productive and household assets; 
  Strengthen women’s decision-making role in the household and 
community, and their representation in membership and leadership of 
local institutions;  
  Achieve a reduced workload and an equitable workload balance between 
women and men.    
Economic empowerment such as direct targeting of homestead gardening 
interventions and farm production to local markets through capacity building 
of women, youth and marginalized groups; collectivised women’s groups in 
marketing, advanced value chains and rural enterprises; women as change 
agents and gatekeepers of NRM & rejuvenated water systems. The selection 
criteria gives preference to women's for micro/small scale agro-enterprises - 
mushroom cultivation, dairy and goat production and value chain 
development. 
SARP promotes economic empowerment of women through promoting 
women enterprise and combinations of matching grants and loans will be 
offered to youth and women to provide commercial goods and services (input 
supplies, mechanization, spraying, transportation etc.) to farm households 
SARP builds capacities for reviving and developing women enterprises in the 
Dry zones and also of potential businesses for youth and women flourishing 
in the Dry Zone (including protected agriculture, quality seed production, semi 
commercial dairy and goat production). With 50% targets as women, the 
capacity building interventions of SARP takes into consideration their 
vulnerabilities and enable them to become change agents at the household 
and community level.  
Gender sensitive selection of interventions to maximise returns to women’s 
labour, reduce drudgery and unpaid work and through gender sensitive 
programme implementation through project components. Such as selection 
3.  The project design report includes one paragraph in the targeting section 
that explains what the project will deliver from a gender perspective. 
Yes. Refer to Appendix on Targeting and Mainstreaming Priorities 
gender sensitive value chains, nutrition sensitive value chains, homestead 
gardens, etc  
4. The project design report describes the key elements for operationalizing 
the gender strategy, with respect to the relevant project components. 
5. The design document describes - and the project implements - operational 
measures to ensure gender- equitable participation in, and benefit from, 
project activities. These will generally include: 
5.1  Allocating adequate human and financial resources to implement the 
gender strategy 
5.2 Ensuring and supporting  women’s active participation in project-related 
activities, decision-making bodies and committees, including setting 
specific targets for participation 
Elaborated under each project components. Refer to PIM.  
PMU will have a Social Inclusion and Institutions Specialist and Social 
Inclusion and Gender Facilitators 
SARP will build on staff capacity to deliver on gender responsive and socially 
inclusive programme implementation is budgeted in the project 
The community mobilization strategy would ensure that women would 
understand the project components well and meaningfully engage in them. 
Capacity building interventions of SARP, including Farmer Business School 
(FBS) has a strong participatory, youth and women-focused extension 
approach that will enable them to build the relevant skills to increase 
production; access markets and sell at competitive prices; enhance nutrition; 
collaborate with each other; and engage in beneficial and efficient decision-
making. 
5.3 Ensuring that project/programme management arrangements 
(composition of the project management unit/programme coordination unit, 
project terms of reference for staff and implementing partners, etc.) reflect 
attention to gender equality and women’s empowerment concerns 
The PMU will reflect a gender balance among its composition. Gender and 
targeting deliverables are integrated in the ToRs of the PMU staff and the 
PMU will staff a Social Inclusion and Institutions Specialist and Social 
Inclusion and Gender Facilitators to ensure the gender mandates of SARP.   
5.4 Ensuring direct project/programme outreach to women (for example 
through appropriate numbers and qualification of field staff), especially 
The community mobilization and gender strategy and the appointment of 
decentralized Social Inclusion and Gender Facilitators, will ensure the 
where women’s mobility is limited 
programmes intervention and benefits will reach the targeted women groups.  
5.5 Identifying opportunities to support strategic partnerships with 
government and others development organizations for networking and 
policy dialogue 
Partnering with WFP and UNDP, there will be greater opportunities scaling 
up results by leveraging policy changes, mobilizing additional resources and 
learning to bring the results to scale. Also deliberations are currently on-going 
between IFAD, WFP, and FAO to utilize SSCT funding for a follow-up RBA 
programme in the Dry Zone of Sri Lanka. 
6.  The project’s logical framework, M&E, MIS and learning systems specify 
in design – and project M&E unit collects, analyses and interprets sex- and 
age-disaggregated performance and impact data, including specific indicators 
on gender equality and women’s empowerment.  
SARP's M&E framework is going beyond mere monitoring participation of 
youth, women and vulnerable groups in programme activities to measuring 
the impact of programme interventions on smallholder farmers. The use of 
IPs, sex and age disaggregated data and indicators in logframe and M&E will 
specifically measure changes in gender norms, empowerment of target 
groups, adaptive capacity, secure access to resources, markets and 
services, incomes, nutrition, workload and resilience. 
 Targeting Checklist for SARP  
1.   Does the main target group - those expected to benefit most- correspond 
to IFAD’s target group as defined by the Targeting Policy (poorer households 
and food insecure)? 
2. Have target sub-groups been identified and described according to their 
different socio-economic characteristics, assets and livelihoods - with attention 
to gender and youth differences? (matrix on target group characteristics 
completed?) 
3. Is evidence provided of interest in and likely uptake of the proposed 
activities by the identified target sub-groups? What is the evidence? (matrix on 
analysis of project components and activities by principal beneficiary groups 
completed?) 
4. Does the design document describe a feasible and operational targeting 
strategy in line with the Targeting Policy, involving some or all of the following 
measures and methods: 
4.1 Geographic targeting – based on poverty data or proxy indicators to 
identify, for area-based projects or programmes, geographic areas (and within 
these, communities) with high concentrations of poor people 
DESIGN 
SARP will target three categories of households – the extreme rural poor (20%), poor 
with potential to sell in local markets (70%) and more commercially oriented smallholder 
farmers (10%). The extreme poor are non-labour constrained households that are rain 
fed producers, with small fragmented holdings, as well as the landless, who are food 
insecure.  The main category of farmers will be moderately poor households that are 
economically active in agriculture and are located in cascades with minor irrigation 
systems. These farmers have holdings of less than 1 ha. and produce surpluses of rice, 
depending on the water availability and during the yala season some cash crops, albeit 
the level of marketed sales is usually low. The households are at risk of slipping into the 
lower ranks of poverty and food insecurity due to climate and economic shocks. These 
constitute the majority of the target groups.  
Refer to PDR and PIM. The detailed are provided.  
Refer to PDR and PIM. The detailed are provided. 
SARP  will  focus  on  the  Dry  Zone  region  covering  priority  districts  in  the  North,  North 
Central, Central, and North West provinces. The project will focus on selected cascades 
in three river basins – the Malwathyu Oya, Mi Oya and Deduru Oya - that were identified 
by the Department of Agrarian Development (DAD) as most vulnerable, ecologically and 
socially. The selected cascades are located in so called ‘hot spot’ geographical areas of 
around  25,000  ha  on  average,  where  farmers  and  farming  livelihoods  are  highly 
exposed  and  vulnerable  to  increasing  climatic  variability.  The  criteria  used  for  the 
selection  of  hot  spots  are:  (a)  the  impact  of  drought  and  floods  on  crop  losses  and 
expenditures on drinking water and relief supplies; (b) the current climate vulnerability as 
reflected  by  income  poverty,  source  of  drinking  water,  and  participation  in  safety  net 
programs;  and  (c)  future  climate  vulnerability  based  on  an  index  of  42  indicators 
measuring  exposure,  sensitivity,  and  adaptive  capacity1.  The  Department  of  Agrarian 
Development  (DAD)  classifies  sub-watersheds  and  Village  Tank  Cascades  (VTCs) 
according to their resilience to climate change.  The cascades and VTCs were selected 
to avoid duplication of locations where the on-going World Bank projects are operating.2 
Additionally  decisions  were  taken  to  include  cascades  and  micro-catchments  where 
synergies  can  be  developed  with  on-going  UNDP  and  WFP  projects  to  ensure 
integrated watershed development3. The selection of the project sites took into account  
  household data on poverty;  
 
 
 
vulnerability and sensitivity to shocks and stresses (drought and flood);  
food insecurity and malnutrition;  
land  degradation,  agro-ecological  zone  (dry  zone),  seasonality  and  livelihood, 
prepared  through  the World  Food  Programme,  Vulnerability Analysis  and  Mapping 
(VAM) system;  
 
local demand and request by Government of Sri Lanka and agribusiness potential;  
  geographical  advantage  of  working  on  the  cascade  systems  and  rejuvenating  the 
water  tanks  with  the  potential  to  provide  perennial  water  sources  for  the  rural 
communities;  
 
concentration of farmers engaged in the production of selected value chains; 
  potential for agricultural diversification, agribusiness and market access; 
Selected on the basis of cascade systems aimed at avoiding duplication of activities with 
World Bank projects and to build synergies with UNDP (5 common target districts) and 
WFP (3 common target districts 
Direct  targeting  will  be  used  to  choose  activities,  taking  into  consideration  where  the 
most  vulnerable  farmers  can  be  found.  A  differential  approach  will  be  used  to  ensure 
accessibility,  relevance  and  impacts  of  different  technological  packages  for  women, 
men,  youth,  and  the  most  vulnerable.  Quotas  will  ensure  the  effective  participation  of 
4.2 Direct targeting - when services or resources are to be channelled to 
specific individuals or households 
1 The hotspots are hydrologically defined as a catchment within a river basin that contains several Village Tank Cascades (VTCs) and individual tanks. 
2 Agriculture Sector Modernization Project covering  7 districts and the Climate Smart Irrigation Project covering 11 districts and 17 river basins. 
3  The  UNDP  project  Strengthening  the  resilience  of  smallholder  farmers  in  the  Dry  Zone  covers  three  river  basins,  16  cascades  in  7  districts.  The  WFP  project,  Building  Resilience  Against 
Recurrent Natural Shocks through Diversification of Livelihoods for Vulnerable Communities in Sri Lanka, covers 5 districts.  
the  different  vulnerable  groups  in  project  activities.  Self-targeting  will  occur  through 
participation  in  the  Farmer  Field  School  (FFS)  and  Farm  Business  School  (FBS)  and 
direct  targeting  will  be  used  for  specific  activities  directed  to  women,  youth,  ex 
combatants,  the  disabled  and  other  vulnerable  groups  in  the  communities.  Mentoring 
will  be  done  to  ensure  proper  participation,  achievement  and  sustainability  of 
interventions,  especially  for  the  extreme  poor,  and  specific  disadvantaged  groups  – 
women headed households and the disabled.  
The  combined  approach  has  three  important  aspects:  (a)  ensure  the  availability  of 
water, increasing the cropping intensity and diversifying the farming system to introduce 
high  value priority commodities. (b) focusing on  value adding activities for  women and 
youth  including  post  production,  the  provision  of  support,  advisory  and  information 
services;  and  (c)  reaching  the  extreme  poor  through  cash  for  assets  and  other  cash 
transfers,  graduating  the  beneficiaries  into  small  income  generating  activities  and 
building capacities. 
4.3 Self targeting – when goods and services respond to the priority needs, 
resource endowments and livelihood strategies of target groups 
Self-targeting will occur through participation in the FFS and FBS and the proposed 
activities for these different categories of beneficiaries are summarised in PIM.  
4.4 Empowering measures - including information and communication, 
focused capacity- and confidence-building measures, organisational support, 
in order to empower and encourage the more active participation and inclusion 
in planning and decision making of people who traditionally have less voice 
and power 
The community mobilisation and social inclusion strategy would ensure that the target 
groups would understand the project components well and meaningfully engage in them 
and handholding support is provided to them. It will also enable project activities to be 
fine-tuned to respond to the local context, opportunities and the priorities of the 
households. The capacity building interventions of SARP, FFS and FBS will build their 
capacities to enable their active participation in project components while recognising 
that exclusion and vulnerabilities are more pronounced for elderly, single women, 
widows, ex-combatants and youth with disabilities.  
4.5  Enabling measures –to strengthen stakeholders’ and partners’ attitude 
and commitment to poverty targeting, gender equality and women’s 
empowerment, including policy dialogue, awareness-raising and capacity-
building 
4.6 Attention to procedural measures - that could militate against 
participation by the intended target groups 
Procedural measures are addressed in PIM to prevent the elite capture while selection 
of beneficiaries and project areas. Refer to PIM.  
4.7 Operational measures - appropriate project/programme management 
arrangements, staffing, selection of implementation partners and service 
providers  
Targeting responsibilities are explicitly mentioned in TORs for all PMU staff. Refer to 
PIM.  
5. Monitoring targeting performance. Does the design document specify 
that targeting performance will be monitored using participatory M&E, and also 
be assessed at mid-term review? Does the M&E framework allow for the 
collection/analysis of sex-disaggregated data and are there gender-sensitive 
indicators against which to monitor/evaluate outputs, outcomes and impacts? 
Yes, Please refer to M&E sections in the PIM. The M&E gives strong emphasis to 
monitoring of targeting performance and reporting against disaggregated data according 
to sex, age and IPs. 
