Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) 
Programme 
Final project design report 
Main report and appendices 
Document Date:     1-Feb 2017 
Programme No.     2000000929 
      4870-LK 
Report No. 
Asia and the Pacific Division 
Programme Management Department
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Contents 
Currency equivalents                                                                                                                     iii 
Weights and measures                                                                                                                  iii 
Abbreviations and acronyms                                                                                                         iv 
Map of the programme area                                                                                                           v 
Executive Summary                                                                                                                      vii 
Logical Framework                                                                                                                       xiii 
I.      Strategic context and rationale                                                                                               1 
A.      Country and rural development context                                                                        1 
B.      Rationale                                                                                                                       6 
II.     Programme description                                                                                                            10 
A.      Programme area and target group                                                                              10 
B.      Development objective and impact indicators                                                             14 
C.      Outcomes/Components                                                                                              14 
D.      Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies and the SECAP                            22 
III.    Programme implementation                                                                                                 25 
A.      Approach                                                                                                                     25 
B.      Organizational framework                                                                                           26 
C.      Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management                                              28 
D.      Financial management, procurement and governance                                              29 
E.      Supervision                                                                                                                 32 
F.      Risk identification and mitigation                                                                                 32 
IV.    Programme costs, financing, benefits and sustainability                                                     34 
A.      Programme costs                                                                                                        34 
B.      Programme financing                                                                                                      35 
C.      Summary benefits and economic analysis                                                                  35 
D.      Sustainability                                                                                                               36 
List of Tables 
Table 1: Key determinants of the financial sector 
Table 2: Key determinants of liquidity 
Table 3: Programme risks and risk mitigation measures 
Table 4: Programme costs by component 
Table 5: Programme components by year 
Table 6: Programme components by financiers
i 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: 
Country and rural context background 
Appendix 2: 
Poverty, targeting and gender 
Appendix 3: 
Country performance and lessons learned 
Appendix 4: 
Detailed programme description 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Appendix 6: 
Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Appendix 7: 
Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Appendix 8: 
Procurement 
Appendix 9: 
Programme cost and financing 
Appendix 10: 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 11: 
Draft programme implementation manual 
Appendix 12: 
Compliance with IFAD policies 
Appendix 13: 
Contents of the Programme Life File 
39 
49 
65 
69 
123 
151 
157 
165 
169 
183 
189 
191 
215 
ii 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Currency equivalents 
Currency Unit 
US$1.0 
= 
= 
Sri Lankan Rupee (LKR) 
LKR 150 
Weights and measures 
1 kilogram                                       =                   1000 g 
1 000 kg                                          =                   2.204 lb. 
1 kilometre (km)                              =                   0.62 mile 
1 metre                                           =                   1.09 yards 
1 square metre                               =                   10.76 square feet 
1 acre                                              =                   0.405 hectare 
1 hectare                                         =                   2.47 acres
3
3
3 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
4P                          Public-Private-Producer Partnerships 
AG                          Auditor General 
AW PB/ PP             Annual Work Plan and Budget/ Procurement Plan 
BP                          Business Plan 
CBSL                     Central Bank of Sri Lanka 
COSOP                  Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 
CRIB                      Credit Referene Information Bureau 
DA                          Designated Account 
DPM                       Deputy Programme Manager 
EDB                       Export Development Board 
EIRR                      Economic Internal Rate of Return 
FMAQ                    Financial Management Assessment Questionnaire 
FO                          Farmer Organization 
GAP                       Good Agricultural Practices 
GDP                       Gross Domestic Product 
GII                          Gender Inequality Index 
GOSL                     Government of Sri Lanka 
HNB                       Hatton National Bank 
IFAD                       International Fund for Agricultural Development 
KM                         Knowledge Management 
LBW                       Low Birth W eight 
LOC                       Line of Credit 
LPA                        Lead Programme Agency 
LTB                        Letter to the Borrower 
M&E                       Monitoring and Evaluation 
MASL                     Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka 
MFI                         Microfinance Institution 
MIS                        Management Information System 
MOF                       Ministry of Finance 
MONLAR               Movement for Land and Agricultural Reform 
NADEP                  National Agribusiness Development Programme 
NGO                       Non-Governmental Organization 
NPV                       Net Present Value 
NRM                       Natural Resource Management 
NSC                       National Steering Committee 
NSVC                     Nutrition-Sensitive Food Value Chains 
PFI                         Participating Financial Institutions 
PMU                       Programme Management Unit 
RDD                       Regional Development Department 
RIMS                      IFAD Results and Impact Monitoring System 
SAP                        Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships Programme 
SECAP                  IFAD's Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
SLEDP                   Sri Lanka Export Development Board 
SPENDP                Smallholder Plantations Entrepreneurship Development Programme 
SUN                       Scaling Up Nutrition Movement 
TA                          Technical Assistance 
TOT                        Training of Trainers 
WB-ASMP             World Bank Agiculture Sector Modernization Programme
4 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Map of the programme area 
IFAD maps
5 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
6 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Executive Summary1
Background.  IFAD’s  country  programme  and  investments  in  recent  years  have  been  refined  and 
refocused in support of the national priorities, and as outlined in the Sri Lanka 2015-2020 COSOP. On 
the basis of the partnership experience between IFAD and the Government, in particular recent efforts 
to  promote  agribusiness  and  facilitate  private  sector  and  financial  sector  engagement  through  the 
National  Agribusiness  Development  Programme  (NADeP),  the  Government  has  requested  IFAD’s 
support  to  finance  a  new  programme  towards  modernization  of  the  agricultural  sector,  with 
strengthened  engagement  of  producer/  farmer  organizations  and  the  mobilisation  of  private  and 
financial sector investment; in complement, Government has also requested IFAD support to establish 
a more conducive and regulatory environment for rural finance. 
Theory of change. The theory of change of the programme is based on a fundamental premise that a 
market-driven approach is  needed to help smallholder farmers sustainably increase their income and 
improve their livelihood. This is operationalized by public sector facilitation of  mutually beneficial (win- 
win) Public-Private-Producer Partnerships (4Ps)  between smallholder farmers and private companies 
in  response to  clear  market opportunities; by strategically combining public  and  private sector  funds 
and advice to address smallholders’ needs in terms of access to market, technology, organization and 
scale,  good  agricultural  practices,  and  affordable  credit;  and  by  creating  a  favorable  policy  and 
regulatory  environment  for  the  agribusiness  and  financial  sector  to  expand  outreach  towards  rural 
clients and become overall more competitive. 
Subsequently,  the  development  hypothesis  and  theory  of  change  is  that  smallholder  producers, 
through  tailored  support,  including  for  their  organization,  are  primed  to  benefit  (in  terms  of  income, 
livelihoods,  assets  and  social  capital)  as  key  actors  in  viable  4P  arrangements/  models  aimed  at 
improved marketing and (quality) product enhancement to meet current market demands, and overall 
contributes  to  national  agricultural  competitiveness.  This  approach  necessarily  requires  better 
organization and capacities of smallholder farmers, towards their graduation into functional producer/ 
farmer  organizations,  improving  their  technological  and  business  skills,  and  linking  them  to 
agribusiness partners, markets and  financial services. A  crucial  dimension of  sustainability will  be  to 
formalize  and  strengthen  these  organizations,  by  improving  their  outreach,  managerial  capabilities, 
services and enhancing their market engagement. 
Rationale  and  approach.  On  the  basis  of  Government’s  request  for  IFAD  assistance,  the  SAP 
programme  would  serve  as  a  key  IFAD  and  Government  instrument  to  achieve  priorities  under  the 
national policy framework and in the evolving rural (business) and institutional environment. Vis-à-vis 
the inclusion of, and benefits to smallholder producers, the justification for the programme lies with the 
following:  (i)  it  is  responsive  and  aligns  itself  to  the  rural  development  agenda  and  priorities  –  i.e. 
enhancing  agricultural/  rural  sector  competitiveness  for  inclusive  growth;  (ii)  the  institutional 
environment is  increasingly supportive and  conducive  towards  establishing and  scaling-up of  public- 
private-producer partnerships  (4Ps);  (iii)  the  programme is  primed  to  capture  existing  and  emerging 
market (and business) opportunities, further demonstrated by the private sector's growing interest in 
4Ps  –  including leveraging and  mobilizing financial investment; (iv)  the  results  and  lessons learned 
from  NADeP  can  be  applied  to  make  the  4P  model  more  effective  and  beneficial  to  the  rural  poor/ 
target  group;  and  (v)  the  programme  represents  a  major  opportunity  to  promote  dialogue  amongst 
national stakeholders around the policy environment for smallholder-sourced agribusiness. 
1  Detailed and completion design mission composition: Hubert Boirard, Country Programme Manager; Marco Camagni, 
Lead Advisor, PTA; Tamara Lampe, Team leader and institutional specialist; Patrick Nugawela, Value chain specialist; 
Alok Kumar, Rural finance specialist; Michael Marx, Rural finance specialist;l Erkan Özçelik, Economist; Beatrice Gerli, 
Gender and targeting specialist, PTA; Ed Heinemann, Policy specialist, PTA; Roberto Longo, FO specialist, PTA; 
Virginia Cameron, Finance officer, FMD; Juliane Friedrich, Nutrition specialist, PMD; Pahan Prasada, Environment and 
NRM specialist; Bodhi Wanniarchchi, M&E specialist; and the NADeP PMU.
vii 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
The  overarching  principles  that  frame  and  govern  management  and  coordination  of  the  SAP 
programme  are  the  following:  (i)  alignment  with,  and  support  for  Government policy  priorities;  (ii)  a 
demand-driven  and  flexible  approach;  (iii)   adoption  of   a  market-driven  and   private  sector-led 
approach;  (iv)  inclusive  rural  financial  services  provision;  (v)  joint  financing  (cost-sharing)  and  risk- 
sharing;  (vi)  competitive  selection  of  partners  and  viable  business  plans;  (vii)  empowerment, 
organisation and strengthening of smallholder farmers as business partners; and (viii) complementary 
support  to  market-driven  employment  (including  self-employment) activities  for  specific  segments  of 
the rural population (i.e. landless youth). 
Financing  of  the  4P  business  plan  (i.e.  investment  plan)  will  be  under  a  co-financing/  cost-sharing 
arrangement  that   includes:  (i)   matching   grants   provided   by   the   programme;  (ii)   credit   from 
participating  financial  institutions  (facilitated  by  the  programme-supported  line  of  credit)  as  part  of 
beneficiary contribution; and (iii) private sector (agribusiness) contribution. Whilst the total investment 
per beneficiary of  the 4P business plan  will vary, it  is  expected to be USD 1500  on average, shared 
approximately  on  a  one-third  co-financing  basis,  though  allowing  for  some  flexibility  in  this 
arrangement. 
Programme  area  and  target  group.  The  programme  will  have  national  coverage,  though  special 
attention and preference will be given through an evaluation/ selection process, to low income districts 
and where agri-production potential is high. The programme is demand-driven and the willingness and 
commitment  by  stakeholders  (agribusiness  and  value  chain  actors  including  the  private  sector  and 
farmer/ producer organizations) will be critical. The SAP programme will, with respect to the support to 
develop  farmer  organizations,  adopt  a  two-phased  approach  over  six  years  (pilot  phase  from 
programme years  1-3,  and  expansion phase from  years  4-6),  which is  requisite for  obtaining results 
and  emerging  lessons  which  can  be  utilised  for  scaling  up  approaches  in  line  with  Government’s 
policy   and   development   agenda,   and   to   ensure   sustainability   of   supported   FOs   within    4P 
partnerships. 
The  programme  target  group  comprises  57,500  poor  rural  households  (representing  230,000 
individuals) with  the potential to become active economic players in a  diverse array of  value chains; 
essentially, there are three target sub-groups: (i) 35,000 new rural household producers (owning less 
than  1  ha  of  land;  rely  on  agriculture  for  at  least  50%  of  their  household  income; monthly  incomes 
average USD  150-200  or  below) that  will  benefit from  increased livelihood opportunities by  virtue  of 
their  engagement  within  4P  schemes  –  this  includes  4,000  households  organized  in  70  producer/ 
farmer  organizations  (FOs);  (ii)  20,000  households  already  participating  in  4P  schemes  already 
established under the NADeP programme, who will benefit from SAP support in the form of access to 
seasonal working capital loans to ensure sustainability of their production systems; and (iii) 2,500 poor 
young women and men who will be supported to become entrepreneurs responding to the demand for 
products or services generated along the value chain and in complement to the 4Ps (they are  either 
unemployed, landless, or own less than 1 ha of land; monthly incomes range from USD 130-150). In 
the  expansion phase (years 4-6), the  programme expects to  increase outreach to  producer/ farmers 
with  additional  financing  to  the  70  producer/  farmer  organizations  (FOs)  supported  during  the  pilot 
phase, but  with the  expectation that  their membership will  increase, or  to  new  FOs, particularly FOs 
under the Mahaweli Authority. 
Programme goal and objective. The overall goal of SAP is to contribute to Sri Lanka's smallholders’ 
poverty  reduction  and  competitiveness.  The  programme  development  objective  is  to  sustainably 
increase  the  income  and  quality  of  diet  of  (initially)  57,500  smallholder  households  involved  in 
commercially-oriented production and marketing systems. 
Programme description 
Component 1:  Access to  commercial partnerships (USD  51.2  million). This  component includes 
two  sub-components:  (1.1)  Establishing  4Ps;  and  (1.2)  Institutional  strengthening  and  capacity 
building  of  producer  groups  (within  a  market-driven  model).  A  total  of  35,000  households  will  be 
directly  reached  through  4P  schemes  and  institutional  strengthening  interventions.  A  further  2,500
88
88 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
poor  young  women  and  men  will  be  supported  to  become  entrepreneurs responding  to  demand for 
products or services generated by the 4Ps. 
Under  sub-component  1.1,  the  programme  will  support  the  establishment  of  market-driven  4Ps 
under three categories: (i) new 4P schemes led by private companies (21,000 hhs); (ii) geographical/ 
outreach  expansion  or  scaling-up  of  NADEP-supported 4P  schemes  (10,000  hhs);  and  (iii)  new  4P 
schemes  explicitly  working  with  producer/  farmer  organizations  as  stakeholders  in  the  4P  business 
schemes (4,000 hhs). This implies that  the  ‘promoter’ (originator) of  the 4P schemes will  be  either a 
private-sector company or  a  farmer organization that  can show evidence of  a  confirmed  commercial 
arrangement with a private-sector company or commitment of a market buyer. 
For the overall purposes of promoting agricultural modernization and reducing producer/ farmers’ risks 
related to uptake of new technologies and activities (especially those that promote sustainable natural 
resource  management  and  climate  change  adaptation),  SAP  will  provide  some  start-up  funds  as 
complementary to  term  loans  to  farmers  and  private  sector  investment,  on  a  one-third  cost-sharing 
arrangement to the overall business investment proposed under the 4P scheme; these start-up funds 
are strictly targeted at smallholder farmers only (in the form of a matching grant). 
For  the  new  4P  schemes explicitly  working  with  producer/ farmer  organizations, the  programme will 
provide an additional support, in the form of start-up funding at group level up to USD 50,000 per FO 
for  seed  capital (such  as  acquisition of  small to  medium-sized equipment) and  initial  working capital 
needs and that will enable the group to run its business in partnership with the 4P stakeholders. 
Finally, SAP will also provide targeted support to rural youth, in order to enhance their employability or 
to become entrepreneurs, responding to the demand for products/ services generated along the value 
chain and in complement to the 4Ps. An initial 2,500 youth will be supported with start-up financing for 
their  business plans,  averaging USD  2000  in  the  form  of  credit and start-up funds  (matching grant). 
However, a youth strategy will also be developed, which will identify other opportunities to support the 
needs of youth, and can include training and mentoring programmes, internships and placements. 
Under sub-component 1.2, the programme intends to support capacity building of  producer/ farmer 
organizations (FOs), with  the rationale that strengthening of  FOs will empower the group to  become 
an effective partner under 4P schemes as well as their capacity to take informed decisions about their 
business. The start-up funding at  group (FO) level  will  be  complemented with support in the  form  of 
business mentoring, training, exchange visits and digressive support to FOs for their management. 
For the new 4P schemes explicitly working with producer/ farmer organizations as stakeholders in the 
business  4P  schemes  (4,000  hhs),  SAP  will  promote a  three  pronged  approach  taking  into  account 
both the degree of FOs’ development and the means by which FOs and farmers groups will enter as 
stakeholders into the 4Ps; three models engaging and providing support to 70 FOs are envisaged: (i) 
private-sector  led  4Ps  with  20  FOs;  (ii)  mature  FOs  or  farmer  cooperatives  (10)  already  managing 
sizable  businesses;  and  (iii)  incipient  FOs  (40),  mainly  under  the  Mahaweli  Authority  of  Sri  Lanka 
(MASL)  areas.  Under  the  first  model,  SAP  will  encourage  private  sector  companies  to  lead  the 
development of partnerships with farmer groups; under the second model, the relatively more mature 
FOs will already be engaged in the business of processing and/ or value addition, and the provision of 
seed  and  working capital financing  will  support  them  to  expand their  business to  the  benefit of  their 
farmer members; and under the third model, the specific attention will be given towards supporting the 
FOs to develop their bankable business plans and gradually evolve into functional business-oriented 
entities  (with  financial  support  also  provided  on  a  gradual  basis  to  ensure  management  and 
absorption capacity). 
Component  2:  Access  to  rural  finance  (USD  43.6  million).  This  component  shall  have  two  sub- 
components:  (2.1)  Financing  of  4Ps;  and  (2.2)  Institutional  strengthening  for  the  financial  services 
sector. The component follows the strategies, modes of intervention and investment opportunities that 
emerge under component 1, and aims at facilitating access to rural financial services in a sustainable 
rates.
manner 
affordable 
and 
at 
9 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Under  component  2.1,  SAP  shall  collaborate  with  participating  financial  institutions  (PFIs)  that  are 
capable and  interested to  expand their services into the rural sector, in  particular  to serve the  target 
groups  supported  under  SAP  and  co-finance  the  programme;  these  target  groups  include:  (i)  the 
35,000 households taking part in the new 4Ps; (ii) an additional 20,000 households already engaged 
under 4Ps (through NADEP) who will be supported with access to seasonal working capital; and (iii) 
2,500  rural  youth.  This  shall  be  done  through  three  products:  (i) working  capital  (WC)  loans  for 
farmers; (ii) term loans for farmers (for investment); and (iii) youth loans. 
The main justification for these products offered through a line of credit is that the financing needs of 
farmers, including  working  capital and  term  finance, are  not  likely to  be  financed  by  banks  or  MFIs, 
unless the  liquidity is  provided externally. To  encourage PFIs to provide  their  lending services to  the 
rural  poor,  and  bear  the  full  risk  of  default,  additional  capital  will  therefore  have  to  be  provided. 
However, a major emphasis will be laid on the mobilization of savings among farmers and the youth, 
facilitating  their  capital  build-up  over  time.  Through  their  savings,  they  will  gradually  increase  their 
collateral, reduce their risk exposure vis-a-vis the PFI and also reduce their interest expense. Savings 
will be promoted as a habit, following the different products offered in the formal and informal sectors. 
Under  component  2.2,  the  CBSL  will  be  supported  in  the  elaboration  and  dissemination  of  new 
regulations  for  the  microfinance  sector,  thus  ensuring  adequate  participation  opportunities  for  rural 
communities,  and  in-training  of  licensed  MFIs  on  these  new  regulations.  Furthermore,  some  critical 
support  to  PFIs,  including  commercial  banks  and  deposit-taking  MFIs,  will  be  provided  to  enhance 
their  capacity in  rural,  micro  and  agricultural finance  for  low  income  groups, mostly  through  training 
and technical assistance. 
Component 3: Programme management and policy dialogue (USD 5.8 million).  This component 
comprises  two  sub-components:  (3.1)  Programme  and  knowledge  management;  and  (3.2)  Policy 
dialogue. 
Under  sub-component  3.1,  the  existing  NADeP  PMU  will  be  restructured  and  strengthened  with 
additional  capacity  to  evolve  into  the  SAP  PMU,  and  effectively  carry  out  its  key  responsibilities  of 
planning, coordination, facilitation and brokerage, and monitoring and evaluation. In view of the policy 
agenda  to  promote  pro-poor  partnerships  with  the  private  sector,  and  given  the  multitude  of  SAP 
programme    stakeholders    comprising    multiple    ministries    and    public    agencies,    private    sector 
companies,  business  associations,  financial  institutions,  producers  and  their  organizations,  the 
element of  learning  and  knowledge dissemination and management is  critical to  sustainability of  the 
programme interventions and future uptake and up-scaling of  the model and  approaches tested and 
promoted  by  SAP.  In  addition,  priority  cross-cutting  issues  such  as  nutrition  and  natural  resources 
management/  climate  change  adaptation  will  be  pursued  at  a  high-level,  to  inform  and  feed  into 
programme operations on the one hand, and to as well be informed by the findings and results arising 
from programme interventions. 
Under  sub-component  3.2,   the   activities  to   be   supported   will   aim   at   improving  the   policy 
environment for equitable and sustainable smallholder farmer–sourced agribusiness development. To 
achieve this, the  policy dialogue agenda will be  built  on two broad thrusts. First, the  programme will 
bring  together  the  key  stakeholders  –  government,  agribusiness,  financial  service  providers  and 
smallholder  farmers,  to  enable  them  to  collectively  identify  the  policy  constraints  they  face,  and 
promote consensus as to the need for policy change where appropriate. Second, it  will draw out the 
key  lessons  and  successes  emerging  from  the  implementation  experience,  and  feed  these  back  to 
Government  for  reflection  in  national  policies,  strategies  and  programmes  as  appropriate.  In  both 
cases,  the  programme  will  also  look  to  turn  relevant  policy  analysis  into  policy  change.  This  will 
require the  development of  strategies tailored  to  the  topic  or  issue  in  question,  and  may  involve the 
preparation of  policy briefs,  video  films  etc;  advocacy activities; and  exposure visits  for  senior  policy 
makers  and  other  stakeholders; and  support  for  drafting  policy  documents  or  regulations;  for  public 
policies.
consultations; 
operationalisation 
kickstarting 
new 
the 
or 
of 
1
0 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Programme  cost  and  financing.  The  total  investment  and  recurrent  costs  over  the  six-year 
implementation  period,  including  physical  and  price  contingences,  is  estimated  at  USD  105  million 
(LKR 17 billion), including IFAD financing (blend terms) of  USD 54.4 million. The contribution by the 
Government of Sri Lanka amounts to USD 19.3 million; this however comprises USD 0.7 million in the 
form of forgone taxes and  duties, and USD 18.5 million in reflows from previous IFAD-financed lines 
of  credit (i.e. this  is  not  'new' financing or  investment)  –  these funds will go  towards the SAP line  of 
credit   for   on-lending   to   beneficiary  smallholder  producers/  farmers   (core   target   group).   The 
contribution of the  PFIs amounts to USD 9.8 million, which is in  line  with the strategy leveraging PFI 
own-funds for use under the line of credit (LoC). The co-financing by the private sector partners under 
the 4P schemes is estimated at USD 17 million, which can take the form of contributions in cash, in- 
kind  and  working  capital.  Beneficiary  contributions  from  farmers  and  farmers’  organisations  are 
estimated at USD 4.5 million. 
Benefits. In terms of financial analysis, six combination crop and activity models illustrate the mix of 
crops  at  the  household  level  and  community  level;  in  summary,  the  programme  is  expected  to 
increase  household  incomes  by  63%  on  average.  Taking  into  consideration  the  benefit  and  cost 
streams, the overall programme analysis suggests an EIRR of 52% and an NPV of USD 349,708,192 
over  a  twenty-year period.  The  gross  value  of  production increases  approximately by  56%  from  the 
without  situation,  while  outflows  increase  65%,  including labour.  Sensitivity analysis  for  a  number of 
negative scenarios found the EIRR to remain robust with no negative returns. 
Organisational framework. In general, SAP will largely replicate the institutional and implementation 
structure  of  NADeP.  The  executing  agency  or  lead  programme  agency  (LPA)  is  the  Presidential 
Secretariat, which by virtue of its high-level status, is best placed to ensure effective mobilisation and 
coordination amongst the various public agencies (including the Central Bank) and with private sector 
partners  (including  financial  institutions,  companies,  associations,  etc.)  who  have  either  direct 
implementation  responsibilities,  or  a  supporting  role  (e.g.  research,  training,  mobilisation  of  farmer 
organizations, complementary extension  services,  etc.).  In  support  of  farmer  organizations  and  4Ps 
covering a range of value chains/ sub-sectors, the key agencies implicated in the programme include: 
the  Mahaweli  Authority (especially its  well-developed  network  and  organizational structure);  Ministry 
of Agriculture; Department of Export Agriculture; Department of Agriculture; and Exports Development 
Board. 
Through  the  LPA,  responsibility  for  programme  management  is  delegated  to  the  Programme 
Management Unit (PMU) based in Colombo, which will evolve from, and leverage the experience and 
strong  human  resources  of  the  current  NADeP  PMU.  The  PMU  will  work  under  the  guidance  of  a 
National Steering Committee, chaired by the Secretary to the President or his representative. 
Sustainability. Through the  mechanism of  the  4P  partnerships, sustainability is  implicitly embedded 
into  the  programme; the  sustainability of  the  4P  arrangement is  further  reinforced  by  the  enhanced 
linkages  to  the  formal  financial  sector  (commercial  banks)  for  rural/  microfinance.  It  is  reasonably 
expected that  the  process  of  dialogue and  negotiation between producers, their  representatives and 
the private sector in finalizing the proposed BPs and in its implementation, is serving to build a culture 
of trust and normalize working relationships. As mutually beneficial arrangements, the mechanisms of 
the  partnership  will  continue  beyond  the  programme  lifetime.  As  well,  the  arrangements  facilitated 
under the 4P investment plans are entirely geared at facilitating access to affordable financial sevices 
for  farmers,  and  at  maintaining  good  business  relationships  between  farmers,  agribusinesses  and 
financial  institutions.  The  ties  are  further  strengthened  through  the  continuous  savings  process  of 
farmers. Furthermore, the interventions at the meso and macro level thorugh capacity building support 
to CBSL and PFIs will serve to improve financial inclusion over the long-term. 
Adherence to IFAD policies. The SAP programme is fully aligned with IFAD's Strategic Framework 
2016-2025, in  pursuit of  the mutually reinforcing strategic objectives, especially by  way of  promoting 
investment  in  productive  capacities  and  encouraging  better  and  deeper  market  participation  (and 
benefits) through the vehicle of 4Ps. The principles of engagement (targeting; empowerment; gender 
equality; innovation, learning and scaling up; and partnerships) are furthermore, fully embedded in the
1
1 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
programme, through  the  4P  and  institutional strengthening approach,  and  operating  modalities.  The 
programme  design  also  adheres  to  IFAD  policies  and  strategies  as  regards  to  partnerships,  rural 
finance,  targeting  and  gender  mainstreaming,  environment  and  natural  resource  management, 
climate change and social, environmental and climate assessment, and scaling up (see Appendix 12). 
The  environmental and  social  category is  considered  to  be  B,  while  the  climate  risk  classification is 
deemed to be Medium Risk. 
Scaling up. The programme will build on lessons learned and experience of past and ongoing IFAD- 
financed  programmes,  including  the  4P  models  developed  under  NADeP;  further  emphasis  will 
however be given to strengthening producer/ farmer voice and encouraging more farmer-led business 
proposals (i.e. the ‘promotors’ of the proposed 4Ps is  open to companies, organizations, etc.). Some 
opportunities that could be captured and integrated into the new programme include: (i) geographical 
expansion of existing 4Ps, where private companies are committed to expanding outreach in terms of 
additional smallholders involved and geographic coverage with matching investment; (ii) identification 
and  support  of  new  4Ps  led  by  private companies; and  (iii)  an  evolved model with  producer/ farmer 
organizations taking responsibility for coming up with the initial 4P concept and then supported by the 
programme  to  develop  it.  Farmer/  producers  will  be  supported  with  capacity  building  and  technical 
assistance, to  form more cohesive common interest groups, eventually graduating to  a  more mature 
and  evolved  organization;  based  on  regular  maturity  self-assessments,  the  eventual  formation  of 
sustainable producer companies is envisaged. 
Scaling-up will also take place at the rural financial sector level by: (i) deepening the engagement with 
commercial  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  and  leveraging  their  own  funds;  (ii)  leveraging 
existing  credit  line  facilities,  previously financed  by  IFAD;  (iii)  introduction/  inclusion  of  microfinance 
institutions  in  the  overall  4P  model  and  approach;  (iv)  testing  and  rolling  out  specific  and  tailored 
financial  products  (e.g.  youth  start-up  capital,  agricultural  seasonal  credit,  etc.);  (v)  supporting 
enhanced financial literacy of  individuals and  producer organizations; and  (vi)  developing and  rolling 
for  microfinance.
the 
out  operational  guidelines  as  part  of 
framework 
regulatory 
xii 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Design completion report 
Logical Framework 
Indicators2
Means of Verification 
Name 
Baseline 
YR1 
Source 
Frequency 
Responsibility 
Results Hierarchy 
Goal: Contribute to Sri Lanka’s 
smallholders poverty reduction 
and competitiveness 
Development Objective: 
Sustainably increase the income 
and quality of diet of smallholders 
(57,500 hhs) involved in 
commercially-oriented production 
and marketing systems 
Outcomes/ Components: 
Outcome 1: 
Improved access of smallholder 
farmers and their organizations to 
markets in partnership with the 
private sector 
Outputs: 
1.1 4P business arrangements in 
place 
1.2 Organisational strengthening 
and capacity development of 
producer organizations and their 
members 
 % of households with 
improvements in asset ownership 
(RIMS 3rd level) 
 Prevalence of childhood 
malnutrition in the programme 
area reduced 
 % of supported households 
reporting an increase in income 
(60% on average) (RIMS 2nd
level) 
 % of 4P partnerships/ 
agreements in operation after 3 
years (RIMS 2nd  level) 
 % increase in average volume 
and value of sales through 4P 
agreements 
 No. of farming households 
engaged in 4Ps implemented 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
 % of supported rural producers 
members of rural producers 
organizations reporting new or 
improved services provided by 
their organization (disaggregated 
by sex and age)* 
 % of programme-supported 
producer groups registered 
 Number of female and male 
members trained in nutrition 
0 
0 
Mid- 
Term 
30% 
End 
Target 
70% 
5% 
10% 
40% 
70% 
50% 
75% 
15% 
40% 
Assumptions  (A)  /  Risks 
(R) 
RIMS; 
Impact 
surveys; 
National 
database 
RIMS; 
AOS;      IP 
reports 
Progress 
reports;  IP 
reports; 
AOS; 
market 
studies 
Yearly; 
baseline/ 
completion 
LPA; 
Programme 
 Political commitment 
 Stable macro-economic 
conditions 
Yearly 
Programme; 
IPs 
 Availability and uptake of 
GAP and technologies 
 Steady market demand 
and conditions 
Yearly 
Programme 
 Willingness and mutual 
benefits to producers 
and companies 
Bi-annually 
IPs; 
Programme 
 Steady market demand 
and conditions 
20,000 
30,000 
45,000 
57,500  Progress 
Bi-annually  Programme 
reports 
AOS; 
partcip. 
Surveys; 
Progress 
reports 
33% 
50% 
40% 
70% 
Yearly 
Programme 
 Willingness and mutual 
benefits to producers 
and companies 
  Mature institutions 
 Commitment and 
willingness of 
beneficiaries and their 
institutions 
 Favourable and stable 
market conditions and 
demand 
2  Baseline will be defined during programme design.
13
13
13
13 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Indicators2
Means of Verification 
Name 
Baseline 
YR1 
 Number of programme 
6,000 
38,000 
Mid- 
Term 
45,000 
End 
Target 
57,500  CBSL   and 
Source 
Results Hierarchy 
Outcome 2: 
57,500 households supported 
under SAP have access to rural 
financial services in a sustainable 
manner and at affordable rates 
Outputs: 
2.1 Small producers access 
targeted and pro-poor financial 
products 
beneficiaries (40% female) in 
rural areas accessing targeted 
and pro-poor financial services 
(disaggregated by sex and age)* 
 Funds leveraged through PFI 
own-resources (as % of total 
loans outstanding funded from 
the LOC) 
 Number of rural youth (40% 
female) receiving credit to 
finance their income generating 
activity (disaggregated by sex 
and age)* 
0 
0 
2.2 Institutional strengthening and 
capacity building of Central Bank 
and PFIs 
Outcome 3: 
Improved policy environment for 
equitable and sustainable 
smallholder farmer–sourced 
agribusiness development 
 PAR <30 days of PFIs 
 Share of agricultural loans in total 
N.A 
loan portfolio 
 No. of existing/ new laws, 
0 
regulations, policies or strategies 
to which SAP has contributed to 
that are proposed for approval, 
ratification, or amendment to 
policy makers 
Frequency 
Responsibility 
Assumptions  (A)  /  Risks 
(R) 
PFI 
reports; 
Progress 
reports 
Progress 
reports 
Yearly 
Programme; 
CBSL; PFIs 
 CBSL and PFI 
commitment 
Bi-annually  Programme 
 Willingness of PFIs and 
enabling regulatory 
framework 
CBSL/  PFI 
reports 
Bi-annually  CBSL; PFIs 
 Stable macro-economic 
conditions 
Progress 
reports 
Yearly 
Programme; 
CCC 
 Quality, relevance and 
acceptability of 
recommendations of 
analysis 
25% 
45% 
1000 
2500 
5% 
+1% 
point 
3 
3% 
+2.5% 
points 
6 
Output: 
3.1 Analysis conducted on 
prioritised policy 
issues/constraints and 
programme models/lessons 
learned 
 No. of studies carried out 
0 
2 
8 
18 
Progress 
reports 
Yearly 
Programme 
 Focus  of  PMU  on  policy 
agenda maintained 
14
14
14 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
I.     Strategic context and rationale 
A.     Country and rural development context 
1.       Economy and poverty. In recent years, and following the end of the 26-year civil war in 2009, 
the  Sri  Lankan  economy  has  continued  to  grow  at  a  steady  rate,  averaging  6-7  percent  up  to  the 
present day. Sri Lanka is now a lower middle-income country with a population of 20.5 million and per 
capita GDP of US$ 3,811, compared with US$ 2,400 in 2010. W hilst growth has contributed to poverty 
reduction,  32%  of  the  population  remain  ‘nearly’  poor  or  ‘poor’  (25%  of  the  population  are  ‘nearly’ 
poor,  whilst  almost  7%  are  defined  ‘poor’).  Poverty  headcount  in  1990  was  24%,  progressively 
declining to 8.9% in 2009/10 and 6.7% in 2012/13.  The vast majority of poor (86.6% of the total) live 
3in rural areas and estates, with high dependency on the agricultural sector. Population groups most 
affected  by  poverty  are  agricultural  smallholders,  plantation  workers,  underemployed  and  landless 
labourers,  particularly  youth  and  women,  and  people  engaged  in  micro-enterprise.  In  terms  of  the 
youth, they represent approximately 24%  of  the  total  population, and  are  the  group  with  the  highest 
unemployment rate, particularly among young women. Rural women in Sri  Lanka enjoy better status 
and  rights  compared  to  other  countries  in  the  region  but  they  are  however  confronted  with  limited 
economic opportunities. Women comprise 53% of the agricultural labour force often as unpaid family 
labour,  yet traditional norms are biased in favour of men, resulting in obstacles to women’s equitable 
access to resources (land, capital – including credit) and markets, and the control of assets. 
2.       Food  and  nutrition  security.  Over  the  last  three  decades, the  food  security situation  in  Sri 
Lanka  has  improved  significantly  over  the  years;  according  to  the  2014  Global  Hunger  Index,  Sri 
Lanka is now ranked 39 out of 76 countries and above all South Asian countries with a score of 15.1. 
However, whilst availability of food at the national level is secure, this does not necessarily translate to 
food  and  nutrition security  at  household level  for  all  segments of  the  population, especially socially 
and nutritionally4 vulnerable groups5. As well, under-nutrition remains a concern in Sri Lanka, reflected 
by a stunting rate among children under five years of age of 15% and a wasting rate in the same age 
group  of  21%.  In  particular,  the  high  rate  of  low  birth  weight  (18%)  is  crucial  as  Low  Birth  Weight 
(LBW)  is  a  major  predictor  of  undernutrition.  The  high  rate  of  LBW  indicates  also  issues  around 
gender  imbalance  and  particular  challenges  with  regard  to  maternal  nutrition  and  nutrition  of 
adolescent girls. In some areas, early marriages and consequently early pregnancies are of concern. 
3.       In  October  2012  Sri  Lanka  joined  the  Scaling  Up  Nutrition  Movement  (SUN)  and  has  since 
made  considerable  effort  and  progress  to  mainstream  nutrition  in  a  multi-sectoral  approach  and  in 
partnership  with  the  donor  community.  Today,  there  are  a  number  of  entry  points  to  partner  and 
engage in nutrition policy and its operationalization6. 
4.       Rural and agricultural sector. Sri Lanka’s agricultural sector is characterised by the plantation 
(mainly tea, rubber and coconut) and non-plantation cropping sub-sectors (mainly rice, maize, fruits, 
vegetables  and  other  crops  grown  in  small-holdings), and  despite  declining  share  in  GDP  (11%  in 
2012), remains the backbone of the economy and an important source of employment, engaging one 
third of the labour force. Since 2006, the sector has served to contribute to poverty reduction, driven 
by increasing agricultural wages, increases in domestic food prices, and increasing international price 
for tea (a major export commodity); subsequently, this has led to higher wages and improved returns 
to  self-employed  farm  labour.  However,  the  sustainability  of  these  gains  are  not  assured  and  will 
remain modest unless there is complementary improved agricultural productivity and modernization of 
the sector with further diversification, improved commercialization and value addition. W ith regards to 
3  http://www.statistics.gov.lk/poverty/PovertyIndicators2012_13.pdf 
4  Nutritionally vulnerable people are the ones with a particular demand on nutrients/nutrition support (e.g. children from 6 to 23 
months, pregnant and lactating women) 
5  For example, the most recent comprehensive food security and vulnerability assessment (CFSVA), undertaken by WFP and 
GoSL in April 2012, determined that 1.3 million persons in the Northern and Eastern Provinces were still food insecure. 
6  See Appendix 1 for detailed discussion of nutrition policy/ institutional environment.
1 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
the  sector,  the  Government’s  primary  concerns  include:  low  and  declining  productivity;  misuse  of 
agrochemicals  (including  fertilizer)  which  affects  water  supply  and  food  quality;  the  practice  of 
inappropriate technologies; poor water management; and lack of market competitiveness due to poor 
quality products and inadequate food safety measures. 
5.       Market opportunities7. Despite some of the challenges faced in shaping the agricultural sector 
to  be  more  competitive,  there  is  significant  market  potential  for  Sri  Lankan  agricultural  products,  to 
serve  both  the  export  and  local  markets.  A  rapid  market  analysis  as  a  measure  to  support  the 
identification  of  key  value  chains  with  high  potential,  primarily  takes  into  consideration  the  market 
‘destination’ – i.e. (i) export-oriented value chains/ sub-sectors; and (ii) local (national)-oriented value 
chains/  sub-sectors. In  terms  of  exports,  the  value  chains  for  fruits  (mango,  pineapple,  passion  fruit 
and  papaya),  vegetables  (green  chili,  jalapeno  pepper,  low-country  vegetable  such  as  bitter  and 
snake  gourd),  protected  vegetables  (gherkins,  bell  pepper,  cucumber  and  tomato),  spices  (pepper, 
cinnamon,  clove  and  nutmeg),  and  other  sub-sectors  such  as  seaweed,  honey  and  sesame  seeds, 
offer high potential to meet export market demand. Per 2015-2016 data, the key export markets for Sri 
Lankan produce are  the  EU,  Middle  East  and  Maldives (in  recent  years,  Sri  Lanka annually exports 
more than USD 6 million in fruits and USD 1 million in vegetables); as  well, the spice sub-sector has 
an export market that includes Japan, the United States and  Middle East countries (USD 630,000 in 
annual exports). These export markets are capable of absorbing more Sri Lankan produce. 
6.       For  the  local  market,  in  addition  to  fruits  and  vegetables,  seeds,  maize,  soya  bean,  treacle, 
protected  vegetables  such  as  bell  pepper,  cherry  tomato  and  cucumber,  dairy  (mainly  milk,  though 
some  processed),  pulses  (black  and  green  gram),  millet  and  groundnuts  have  high  local  market 
potential.  At  present,  today’s  local  production  is  insufficient  to  cover  the  market  demand  (e.g.  for 
maize,  Sri  Lankan  annual  production  in  2015  was  around  390,000  MT,  with  maize  imports  of  more 
than  100,000  MT  at  a  value  of  USD  24  million;  in  dairy,  only  350,000  MT  of  milk  was  produced 
nationally, whilst 71,000 MT of milk products were imported at a value of USD 400 million). 
7.       The  private  sector  is  well  cognizant  of  the  market potential,  and  demonstrates willingness to 
partner with smallholder farmer/ producers in order to effectively respond to the market opportunities; 
the  majority  of  these  private  sector  companies  are  large  enterprises,  including  supermarket  chains, 
processors  and  exporters.  Promoting  partnerships  between  smallholder  producers  and  the  private 
sector is  primarily based on market potential/ opportunities (economic criteria) as a key factor, which 
is further strengthened by social and environmental considerations. 
8.       Producer/   farmer   organizations.   The   rural   landscape   in   terms   of   the   organization, 
organizational  structure  and  cohesion  amongst  farmer/  producers  is  mixed.  Officially,  more  than 
15,000  farmer  organizations  (FOs)  have  been  established  nationally,  registered  under  the  Agrarian 
Development  Act  No.  46  of  2000  and  falling  under  the  mandate  of  the  Department  of  Agrarian 
Development;  a  further  1007  organizations  have  been  established  under  the  Mahaweli  irrigation 
scheme  (which  covers  more  than  450,000  ha  or  30%  of  Sri  Lanka’s  land  mass),  initially  with  the 
primary purpose  of  managing  water-use, and  are  registered by  the  Mahaweli Authority of  Sri  Lanka 
(MASL). There are several other organizations registered under the Companies Act No. 7 of 2007 as 
limited liability companies and farmers’ / traders’ associations. Also there are few farmers / traders co- 
operatives  registered  under  the  Co-operative  Societies Act.  As  well,  there  exist  countless  forms  of 
‘groups’  or  ‘societies’  at  village  and  community  levels,  some  of  whom  are  registered  under  the 
Voluntary Social Service Organizations (Registration and Supervision) Act No. 31 of  1980 (amended 
Act   No.   8   of   1998),   though   many   of   whom   remain   informal   and   un-registered.  Whilst   no 
comprehensive  maturity  assessment  of  these  various  organizations  /  institutions  (both  formally 
registered  and  informal)  has  been  undertaken, in  terms  of  their  functions  and  services  to  members, 
and  vis-à-vis  their  marketing  capacities  and  strategies,  the  overwhelming  majority  are  relatively 
immature or  nascent.  Furthermore, the  process  of  registration of  rural  organizations is  cumbersome 
and lacks clarity, and once registered, these rural organizations do not benefit from regular monitoring 
7  See Appendix 4, Annex 3 for the detailed market analysis of each potential value chain and list of private sector 
companies.
2 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
and  support. The  exception are  those FOs  registered by  MASL,  who  are  being monitored by  MASL 
field officers; whilst this monitoring has mainly been related to their water m anagement capacities, the 
MASL  has  recently  strengthened  its  monitoring  of  FO  economic  activities  and  member  services 
performed. MASL’s annual performance rewards scheme, presents a tool to screen better-performing 
FOs and to assess their maturity and financial status. As for farmer companies / co-operatives, there 
are several organizations engaged in agribusiness currently. Products handled by these organizations 
include foliage, cut flowers, fruits & vegetable, seed paddy, virgin coconut oil, dairy and dry fish, all as 
producers/manufacturers  and  most  as  marketers  in  the  local  market  with  a  few  catering  to  export 
markets through established exporting companies. There are about 15 such organizations currently in 
operation,  membership  of  them  varies  from  100  –  500.  Some  of  these  organizations  have  been  in 
business for more than five years with reasonable financial standing. 
9.       Climate  change  and  environmental  considerations.  Climate  change  has  impact  on  Sri 
Lankan  rural  agriculture  mainly  through  the  changes  in  seasonality  of  precipitation.  The  monsoon 
rains  occur  in  a  bi-modal  pattern  every  year;  in  between  the  two  main  monsoons,  there  is  inter- 
monsoon precipitation  which  occurs  in  all  the  coastal  regions  and  of  sporadic intensity. Precipitation 
replenishes  the  extensive  river  and  reservoir  system  which  serves  as  the  backbone  for  agricultural 
water requirement in the dry periods island-wide. Based on field observations, cropping patterns and 
decisions do not incorporate alternatives that could be attributed to climate change. However, there is 
increasing evidence of delays in planting decisions (sometimes as long as for four weeks in the life of 
a 12-week crop) due to variations in the precipitation pattern. Climate change introduces a substantial 
5000  mm.
variability 
precipitation 
ranging 
annual 
from 
800 
the 
to 
in 
Drought  tolerant  and  flood/salinity  resistant  varietal  development  has  been  an  agronomic
10. 
priority for crop development at the national policy and institutional research level (especially at Rice 
Research and Development Institute and Field crop research and development institute). For rice and 
field crops, there had been development of drought-tolerant varietal development in terms of the water 
requirement and the length of the crop cycle. It should be further noted that prolonged droughts have 
implications  for  livestock  husbandry  in  terms  of  direct  water  requirement,  ambient  temperature  and 
establishment.
water 
fodder 
for 
The agricultural sector  in  Sri  Lanka contributes to carbon emissions through deforestation for
11. 
agricultural  land  use  and  land  management  practices  (i.e.  fertiliser,  soil  carbon  stocks)  mainly.  The 
poor  transport  logistics  and  poor  road  infrastructure  contribute  to  agriculture-related  emissions 
indirectly.
Main  challenges  faced  by  smallholder  farmer/  producers.  IFAD  has  historically  targeted
12. 
rural  households  with  low  income  levels  equivalent  to  approximately USD  70  -  150  per  month,  per 
household. Within the rural sector, this group face multiple challenges which overwhelmingly includes 
limited access  to  the  following: land,  technologies, extension services, markets and  access  to  credit 
through  formal  systems;  this  subsequently  leads  them  to  be  characterised  by  indebtedness  to 
moneylenders and  further  exacerbates the  lack  of  access  to  land  in  terms  of  forgone  rights  to  farm 
‘collateral’).
their 
(used 
land 
as 
Policy direction and institutional issues. Following the 2015 elections, the newly established
13. 
Ministry  of  Policy  Planning  and  Economic Affairs  coordinates  official  development  assistance  in  the 
country, ensuring alignment with the national priorities for development. The Government of Sri Lanka 
(GoSL) in its recent budget speeches, including the Prime Minister's Economic Statement of October 
2016,  have  set  key  targets  related  to  poverty  reduction,  including  the  creation  of  1  million  job 
opportunities and  raising  per  capita  income to  US$  4,000,  and  the  importance of  improved financial 
inclusion.  For  the  agricultural  sector  in  particular,  the  strategic  orientation  is  to  achieve  agricultural 
modernisation,  sustainable  improvements  in  production  through  increased  productivity,  sustained 
incomes for producers and enhanced market competitiveness. This calls for development assistance 
to  promote  increased  productivity,  adoption  of  good  agricultural  practices,  diversifying  products  and 
markets, and  enhancing linkages to  the  private sector. As  part  of  these  efforts, the  Government has 
indicated  a  keen  interest  to  build  capacity  of  existing  produce/  farmer  organizations  such  as  those
3 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
established under  the  Mahaweli  system,  to  serve  as  a  key  entry  point  and  catalyst  for  agricultural 
modernization and transformation.
Financial sector landscape. There is growing recognition that the shift towards transformation
14. 
of  the rural/  agricultural sector precipitates a  need  to  mobilise investments, notably facilitated by the 
formal financial sector. Sri Lanka’s financial sector system is relatively diverse, and consists of a wide 
range  of  service  providers,  including:  (i)  formal  financial  institutions,  comprising  25  licensed 
commercial  banks  (LCBs);  7  licensed  specialized  banks  (LSBs);  46  licensed  finance  companies 
(LFCs) and 7  specialist leasing companies (SLCs); (ii)  semi-formal institutions (co-operatives, NGO– 
MFIs, CBOs, and state programmes such as Samurdhi); and (iii) informal sources of finance such as 
associations.
money 
savings 
rotating 
lenders 
credit 
and 
and 
The  NPLs  of  the  banking  sector  stood  at  3.4%  and  the  total  capital  adequacy  ratio  (CAR)
15. 
declined from 16.6% to 14.2% in 2015. The Statuary Liquid Asset Ratio (SLAR) of domestic banking 
units decreased by 566 basis points during the  year as a result of increased lending activities in this 
year. This was also reflected in the loans-to-deposits ratio of the banking sector, which increased to 
87.3% at the end of 2015, up from 83.1% in 20148. The average weighted deposit rate (AW DR) stood 
at 6.4% and the interest spread was in the range of 3.5% to 14% for the lending rate. W hile the lower 
krate  reflects  government  or  donor  initiated  and  funded  programmes  with  prescribed  margins,  the 
latter is the lending rate of clients not well known and without sufficient collateral and/or track records.
The number of  LFCs and  SLCs in  Sri Lanka grew at  a rapid pace in the last decade, largely
16. 
backed by high growth momentum and credit demand in the economy. In the last 4-5 years however, 
many of  these  institutions  grappled  with  operational and  governance problems which  had  impact on 
in  Sri  Lanka.
the  asset  quality  and  profitability  of 
financial  services  sector 
the 
The  informal  sector  includes  thrift  and  credit  societies,  moneylenders,  credit  cooperative
17. 
societies, micro  finance  institutions (MFIs),  donor-initiated village  savings  and  loan  associations and 
rotating  savings  associations  (chit  funds).  These  institutions  are  not  regulated  by  the  Central  Bank 
(the new Microfinance (MF) Act has not been implemented) and are mostly self-regulated or at times 
under  various government ministries and  departments, namely the Department of  Divineguma which 
is  a  consolidation  of  the  Samrudhi  Authority,  Southern  Development  Authority,  and  the  Udararata 
Development  Authority.  The  department  of  Divineguma  holds  64%  of  the  total  informal  financial 
assets, which is estimated to be 1%9  of the overall financial assets of the country.
Non-Banking  Financial  Institutions  (NBFIs)  have  the  largest  outreach  in  terms  of  number  of
18. 
borrowers  and  loan  outstanding, second  to  public/  private  companies and  NGOs. The  challenge for 
NBFIs  is  to  maintain  their  portfolio  quality.  The  skills  gap  in  terms  of  loan  appraisal,  suitability  of 
products and services and high interest rates are some of  the reasons for default. The average loan 
outstanding  is  LKR  56,943  (USD  320);  this  loan  is  mostly  for  a  short  term  period  (6  months),  for 
turnover.
trading 
enterprises 
other 
high 
with 
or 
Regulation and supervision. The banking sector in Sri Lanka is regulated and supervised by
19. 
the Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL). LCBs, LSBs, LFCs and SLCs fall under the purview of CBSL. 
The  new  Microfinance  Act,  passed  in  July  2016,  is  expected  to  be  operational  by  2017.  The  Act 
provides for two sets of  MFIs, including MF companies which  would be regulated by the CBSL, and 
NGO-type  MFIs  which  are  to  be  regulated  by  the  NGO  Secretariat.  Thrift  and  credit  societies  and 
cooperative  rural  banks  are  under  the  regulation  of  the  department  of  cooperative  development.  In 
addition,  a  movable  collateral  registry  law  is  being  drafted  and  is  expected  to  be  passed  in  2017.
20. 
Worker’s  remittances  grew  by  9.5%  to  USD  7,108  million  in  2014  compared  to  USD  6,407
million in 201310. The remittances remained the foremost and stable exchange earner of  Sri Lanka. 
However,  due  to  the  decline  in  oil  prices  and  the  increasing  budget  deficit  of  gulf  economies, it  is 
expected that remittances inflow to Sri Lanka will decline in 2015-2016. 
8  CBSL Annual Report 2015 
9  MF Annual Review 2014 
10  Ministry of Finance annual report
4 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
21.  Despite  the  comparatively  high  penetration  of  basic  financial  services,  Sri  Lanka  lags  in
financial inclusion parameters such as credit penetration, life insurance penetration, pension coverage 
as well as credit access for small businesses and farm-based activities when compared to India and 
other south Asian countries. Overall, 79% of the people have bank accounts with FIs but only 29% out 
of that borrowed and only 3.1% borrowed for farm or business activities11 which is much lower than 
the  south Asian  average  of  8.6%.  The  majority  of  the  loans  and  advances  go  for  consumer  credit, 
which is also validated by the fact that 97%12 of Credit Reference Information Bureau (CRIB) issued 
credit.
reports 
consumer 
was 
on 
As at end 2015, total loans outstanding to agriculture was 9%, of which 5.9% was for short-term
22. 
lending,  1.9%  for  medium  term  and  only  1.2%  for  long  term  lending13.  In  terms  of  interest  rates, 
commercial banks  are  lending  at  14-19%. W hilst  CBSL requires  banks  to  lend  at  least  10%  of  the 
portfolio  to  the  agriculture  sector,  the  majority  of  these  loans  are  diverted  to  large-scale  farmers  or 
farm-based  agribusiness.  The  MF  sector  lending  is  primarily  geared  towards  lending  to  small-scale 
farmers  and  business.  Furthermore,  it  is  estimated  that  30%14    of  the  lower  segment  (small-scale 
farmers) have  been  flagged by  CRIB, due  to  defaults  or  having acted  as  a  guarantor to  a  defaulter. 
Once flagged under CRIB, any individual future credit becomes virtually impossible to obtain15  as they 
blacklisted.
become 
The supply-side constraints to lending to the agriculture sector are due to the risk perception of
23. 
the  banks  incurred  in  agriculture,  high  transaction  costs,  liquidity  shortages,  information  asymmetry 
and ultimately the operational capacity of banks to lend to smallholder famers. With some exceptions, 
the do not have the physical infrastructure and manpower to handle thousands of small  scale loans. 
The  demand-side  constraints  are  primarily  related  to  the  perceived  high  interest  rates16,  complex 
credit  procedures  resulting  in  delays  in  disbursement,  immovable  collateral-based  lending  and  the 
poor attitude of the banking staff in serving the sector. Some of the more dynamic banks have stated 
to  overcome  this  by  working  with  supply  chains,  disbursement of  loans  in  kind  to  suppliers  and  the 
distribution  of  simple  debit  cards  to  farmers,  which  will  receive  the  net  amount  of  their  sales  after 
deduction of loan capital and interest due through their debit cards, The more innovative and dynamic 
banks  are  keen  to  expand  their  services  to  the  agricultural  sector,  have  trained  their  staff  on  good 
micro and agricultural finance practices and see  programmes such as the SAP as good entry points. 
lending.
For 
constraint 
liquidity 
banks, 
these 
key 
the 
for 
is 
The  comparatively  high  interest  rates  charged  by  the  banks  are  linked  to  the  high  yield  on
24. 
government securities. The median and mean of treasury bills  (T-bills) yield rates since 1996 to 2016 
are 11.7% and 11.6% respectively. This has been further aggravated by a comparatively high budget 
deficit, which is seen by many as unsustainable. Sri Lanka’s recorded budget deficit was 7.4% of the 
country's Gross  Domestic Product  in  2015. The  government budget  deficit  in  Sri  Lanka  averaged  - 
7.6%  of  GDP from  1990  until 2015,  reaching an  all-time high of  -5.4 percent of  GDP in  2013  and  a 
record low of -10.2 percent of GDP in 200117.  In the medium term, the T-Bill yields are not expected 
to decline, as government will keep borrowing to fund the government budget deficit. 
Table 1: Key determinants of the financial sector 
Key determinants of the financial sector 
Inflation rate 
Budget Deficit 
T-Bills Rate 
AWDR 
2015-16 (%) 
0.9 - 4 
7.4 
11.38 
6.38 
11 World Bank Global FINDEX Indicators 2014 data. All population figures include age 15+ years only 
12  CBSL Annual report 2015 
13  CBSL Annual report 2015 
14  30% of the NADeP smallholder famers dropped out of the programme due to CRIB report 
15  Commercial banks downgraded their product and services to the lowest segment without the necessary skills to lend to 
this specific market segment; the misalignment and limited financial education, resulted in increasing defaults by 2010 
16  The lending rate of LCB and LSCs are in between  12-18%, and MFIs interest rate is between 22%- 52% 
17  tradingeconomics.com/sri-lanka/government-budget
5 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Commercial lending rate 
Non-Performing Loan (NPL) rate 
14-18 
3.4% 
25.  The high  yield on government securities provides less incentive for FIs to lend money. At this
rate,  much  of  the  lending  to  the  agriculture  sector  is  not   sufficiently  profitable  to  offer  good 
shareholder returns, and even less so if the operating costs of lending are higher than average.
Demand for  credit. As  discussed above,  the  lower  income brackets of  the  population suffer
26. 
from  inadequate  access  to  reliable  and  sustainable  sources  of  financing.  Despite  the  high  credit  to 
deposit  ratio,  the  domestic credit  to  the  private sector  as  a  percentage of  GDP is  only 40.3%  in  Sri 
Lanka, which is lower than in India (53%) and Bangladesh (44%). This indicates that domestic credit 
is  not  adequately  available  to  the  private  sector  enterprises,  particularly  micro,  small  and  medium 
enterprises (MSMEs). In 2012, the total credit gap for MSMEs in Sri Lanka was estimated at USD 3.5 
billion18, which is likely to have slightly widened since then. 
Table 2: Key determinants of liquidity 
Key determinants of liquidity 
Bank Liquid Reserve to Bank Asset Ratio 
Gross Savings (% of GDP) 
LCBs 
Credit to Deposit Ratio 
Borrowing to Asset 
LSBs/LFCs 
Credit to Deposit Ratio 
Borrowings to Assets 
2015 
5.73 
27.9 
87 
21.7 
165 
31 
2014 
10.4 
29.4 
83.1 
20 
145.8 
26.6 
27.  The  banks'  liquid  reserve  to  bank  asset  declined  to  5.73%,  extending  further  pressure  on
available  cash.  Banks'  credit  to  deposit  ratio  is  very  high  and  only  just  complies  with  minimum 
regulatory requirements. Borrowing by the banks are at a moderate level, which is only 21% and 31% 
of  the  total  asset  for  LCBs  and  LSBs/  LFCs  respectively. At  present,  the  available  deposits  clearly 
sector.
cannot 
agriculture 
portfolio 
growth 
drive 
loan 
the 
the 
for 
The gap between demand and supply can primarily be attributed to the inability or unwillingness
28. 
of  FIs to supply additional credit  at current interest rates, on the  one hand, and  the  unwillingness of 
smallholders  or  entrepreneurs  to  borrow  at  the  prevailing  interest  rates.  This,  in  turn,  has  been 
perpetuated to a large extent by the high borrowing by the government, mopping up the liquidity and 
reducing the incentive for FIs to lend to what is perceived as a difficult and risky market. 
B. 
Rationale 
29. 
IFAD  and  GoSL  partnership.  IFAD’s  country  programme  and  investments  in  recent  years
have  been  refined  and  refocused  in  support  of  the  national  priorities,  and  as  outlined  in  the  latest 
2015-2020 COSOP. On the basis of  the partnership experience between IFAD  and the Government, 
in  particular  recent  efforts  to  promote  agribusiness  and  facilitate  private  sector  and  financial  sector 
engagement through the  National Agribusiness Development Programme (NADeP), the  Government 
has requested IFAD’s support to finance a new  programme towards modernization of the agricultural 
sector,  with  strengthened  engagement  of  producer/  farmer  organizations  and  the  mobilisation  of 
private and financial sector investment; in complement, Government has also requested IFAD support 
finance.
to 
environment 
conducive 
regulatory 
a  more 
establish 
rural 
and 
for 
Theory  of  change.  The  theory  of  change  of  the  programme  is  based  on  a  fundamental
30. 
premise  that  a  market-driven  approach  is  needed  to  help  smallholder  farmers  sustainably  increase 
their  income  and  improve  their  livelihood.  This  is  operationalized  by  public  sector  facilitation  of 
mutually beneficial (win-win) Public-Private-Producer Partnerships (4Ps) between smallholder farmers 
and  private  companies  in  response  to  clear  market  opportunities; by  strategically combining  public 
18  IFC SME finance Gap for Sri Lanka 2011-12
6 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
and  private  sector  funds  and  advice  to  address  smallholders’ needs  in  terms  of  access  to  market, 
technology, organization and scale, good agricultural practices, and affordable credit; and by creating 
a  favorable  policy  and  regulatory  environment  for  the  agribusiness  and  financial  sector  to  expand 
competitive.
outreach 
become 
towards 
overall 
clients 
more 
rural 
and 
Subsequently, the development hypothesis and theory of change is that smallholder producers,
31. 
through  tailored  support,  including  for  their  organization,  are  primed  to  benefit  (in  terms  of  income, 
livelihoods,  assets  and  social  capital)  as  key  actors  in  viable  4P  arrangements/  models  aimed  at 
improved marketing and (quality) product enhancement to meet current market demands, and overall 
contributes  to  national  agricultural  competitiveness.  This  approach  necessarily  requires  better 
organization and capacities of smallholder farmers, towards their graduation into functional producer/ 
farmer  organizations,  improving  their  technological  and  business  skills,  and  linking  them  to 
agribusiness partners, markets and  financial services. A crucial  dimension of  sustainability will  be  to 
formalize  and  strengthen  these  organizations,  by  improving  their  outreach,  managerial  capabilities, 
engagement.
services 
enhancing 
market 
their 
and 
Special  attention  will  also  be  given  to  capacity  building  and  income  generating  activities  in
32. 
which youth, in particular those who do not have land and other assets to be involved in farming, can 
be  involved.  These  opportunities  will  be  explored  primarily  in  the  value  chains  supported  by  the 
programme offering products or services to meet the demand generated by the development of 4Ps.
IFAD comparative advantage lies in  its  experience in promoting the 4P approach worldwide
33. 
as  well as  its  long-lasting experience in  Sri  Lanka promoting rural  development. The Government of 
Sri  Lanka  recognizes  IFAD  as  a  key  partner  in  helping  the  country  to  move  towards  a  more 
competitive  and  market-driven  agriculture  sector  taking  advantage  of  market  opportunities  at  the 
national and international level which can drive a change among smallholders and their households in 
business.
terms 
sustainable 
profitable 
farming 
seeing 
and 
as 
of 
a 
Scaling-up. The programme will build on lessons learned and experience of past and ongoing
34. 
IFAD-financed programmes, including the  4P models developed under NADeP; further emphasis will 
however be given to strengthening producer/ farmer voice and encouraging more farmer-led business 
proposals (i.e. the ‘promotors’ of the proposed 4Ps is  open to companies, organizations, etc.). Some 
opportunities that could be captured and integrated into the new programme include: (i) geographical 
expansion of existing 4Ps, where private companies are committed to expanding outreach in terms of 
additional smallholders involved and geographic coverage with matching investment; (ii) identification 
and  support  of  new  4Ps  led  by  private companies; and  (iii)  an  evolved model  with  producer/ farmer 
organizations taking responsibility for coming up with the initial 4P concept and then supported by the 
programme  to  develop  it.  Farmer/  producers  will  be  supported  with  capacity  building  and  technical 
assistance, to  form more cohesive common interest groups, eventually graduating to  a  more mature 
organization.
and 
evolved 
Scaling-up  will  also  take  place  at  the  rural  financial  sector  level  by:  (i)   deepening  the
35. 
engagement with commercial banks and other financial institutions and leveraging their own funds; (ii) 
leveraging  existing  credit  line  facilities,  previously  financed  by  IFAD;  (iii)  introduction/  inclusion  of 
microfinance institutions in the overall 4P model and approach; (iv) testing and rolling out specific and 
tailored  financial  products  (e.g.  youth  loans,  seasonal/  working  capital  credit,  etc.);  (v)  supporting 
enhanced financial literacy of  individuals and  producer organizations; and (vi)  developing and  rolling 
for  microfinance.
the 
out  operational  guidelines  as  part  of 
framework 
regulatory 
IFAD and GoSL partnership in promotion of public-private-producer partnerships (4Ps)19.
36. 
The model of public-private-producer partnerships (4Ps) promoted and tested under NADeP serve as 
a  starting  point  for  ensuring  the  active  participation and  integration  of  women  and  men  smallholder 
farmers  and  producers  within  the  framework  of  the  national  initiatives  to  advance  agricultural 
modernization and  competitiveness. To-date,  NADeP  is  the  first  programme financed  through  public 
funds,  to  spearhead  the  promotion  of  partnerships  with  the  private  sector  for  value  chain  and 
19  Further detail and analysis of lessons learned regarding 4Ps, are provided under the Section II D on lessons learned.
7 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
agribusiness  development.  Through  the  experience  of  NADeP,  the  approach  and  methodology  to 
engage the  4P stakeholders and develop the  4P business plan and  arrangements have been tested 
and  refined20; the  process  of  evaluation and  approval of  proposals have  been  established, including 
the criteria against which the proposals are reviewed (this includes assurance of the market potential, 
benefits  and  income  to  the  target  group,  gender  considerations,  sustainability  of  the  proposed 
activities,  impact,  etc.);  the  co-financing  mechanisms  have  been  improved;  partnerships  have  been 
negotiated with 9 commercial banks sensitized to rural sector needs; the market potential of key value 
chains/ agribusiness activities have been verified; and a technical team with the requisite capacity and 
operational.
skills 
place 
fully 
and 
in 
is 
is 
The interest by the private sector to engage in these partnerships is also confirmed, with more
37. 
than 50 proposals received by NADeP from more than 20 companies, and following only two calls for 
proposals. After  application  of  the  rigorous  process  of  evaluation  and  appraisal,  only  17  proposals 
were approved and finalized, implicating approximately 20,000 beneficiary rural households for a total 
investment  sum  of  USD  15.4  million,  who  are  engaging  in  dairy,  seaweed,  fruit  and  vegetable 
(passion  fruit,  gherkins,  etc.)  production,  as  well  as  bee-keeping and  other  artisanal  undertakings  – 
these 4Ps vary in terms of outreach, from 100 to more than 2400 beneficiary households. In terms of 
co-financing arrangements, the best practice has been to distribute the total per beneficiary household 
investment cost of the 4P intervention (USD 1500 on average) in a cost-sharing arrangement through: 
(i)  matching  grants  provided  by  the  programme;  (ii)  credit  from  participating  financial  institutions 
(facilitated  by  the  programme-supported  line  of  credit)  as  part  of  beneficiary  contribution;  and  (iii) 
private  sector  (agribusiness)  contribution.  Typically,  the  matching  grants  cover  investment  in  both 
‘collective’ goods  and  a  percentage  of  the  productive  assets;  the  credit  is  largely  utilized  to  finance 
working  capital,  agricultural  inputs,  and  the  remaining  balance  for  investments in  productive  assets. 
The  private  sector  company  contribution  includes  the  provision  of  specialized  technical  assistance 
and  extension  services  and  in  some  cases  in-kind  credit  to  cover  production  financing  needs  (e.g. 
inputs). Although the  ongoing 4Ps  are  still  at  an  early stage, sampling indicates  that  the  4Ps  are  on 
household.
average, 
income  of  USD 
annum,  per 
incremental 
yielding 
650 
per 
Alignment with GoSL (and IFAD) priorities. The  proposed SAP  programme is  aligned  with
38. 
Government’s  development  policy  framework,  as  outlined  in  the  2015  election  manifesto,  budget 
statements  and  the  recently  established  2016-2018  National  Food  Production  Programme.  Critical 
national  priorities  and  strategic  direction  identified  include:  the  creation  of  1  million  jobs;  the 
restoration of people’s livelihoods, reactivation of services and facilities, rehabilitation of infrastructure 
and development of human capabilities; and promoting the development of enterprises and domestic 
agriculture  as  a  means  for  enhancing  market  competitiveness  and  promoting  inclusive  economic 
growth.  As  well,  SAP  responds  to  the  efforts  by  the  Government  and  CBSL  to  establish  a  more 
conducive  financial  sector  environment  in  support  of  rural/  agricultural  sector  growth  and 
modernization.  IFAD’s  particular  comparative  advantage  in  support  of  these  national  priorities  are 
reflected  in  the  current  2015-2020  COSOP  and  its  two  development  objectives,  namely:  (i) 
smallholders benefit from sustainable productivity enhancement in a more resilient livelihood system; 
to  markets.
and 
rural  women 
and  men 
connected 
effectively 
poor 
are 
(ii) 
39. 
Today,  the  rural  smallholder  landscape  is  evolving.  Notably,  linkages  between  smallholder
producers  and  the  private  sector,  as  well  as  the  financial  sector,  have  recently  become  more 
‘institutionalized’,  evidenced  by  the  current  Government’s  recognition  and  promotion  of  said 
partnerships  and  with  the  policy  narrative  encouraging  small  and  medium  rural  entrepreneurship. 
Correspondingly,  various  development  partners  (including  the  World  Bank  through  its  Agriculture 
Sector  Modernization Programme) have  also  started to mobilise their  support in  favour of  promoting 
agribusiness  initiatives.  In  this  changing  environment  however,  it  will  be  critical  to  leverage  and 
capture the opportunities to fully integrate and meet the interests of small producers, ensuring that this 
target  group  are  not  overlooked.  This  presents  an  opportunity  for  IFAD-supported  programmes,  to
20  See Appendix 4 annexes for detailed overview of the 4P methodology. 
8 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
ensure that small producers voice and representation are part and parcel to the overall modernization 
efforts.
Promoting  dialogue  to  strengthen  the  policy  framework  for  inclusive  and  sustainable
40. 
smallholder-sourced  agribusiness  development.  IFAD’s  support  for  the  establishment  of   4P 
partnerships  involving  Government,  smallholder  farmers  and  agribusiness  –  both  under  the  current 
NADeP  and  the  planned  SAP  –  has  on  one  hand  responded  to  the  key  policy  priorities  of  the  Sri 
Lankan  Government, and  on  the  other  located  IFAD  as  a  trusted  partner  of  the  Government in  this 
area. This  context now offers  SAP an  important opportunity to  support Government in  responding to 
the challenges of the sector: the resources it offers, the experiences it gains, and the constituency of 
national stakeholders it  builds, can  all combine to  bring lessons, evidence and  support to  nationally- 
owned policy  processes; while the  programme’s location in  the  Presidential Secretariat can  facilitate 
contribution.
the 
transition 
concrete 
analysis 
policy 
from 
to 
The  programme  will  focus  explicitly  on  supporting  Government  to  strengthen  the  policy
41. 
framework  for  smallholder  farmer–agribusiness relations,  (as  well  as  for  other  priority  policy  issues 
such  as  rural  youth  employment,  smallholder  farmer  organization,  food  safety  and  climate-resilient 
technologies). In doing so, the programme can expand its development impact beyond the immediate 
and direct target group of the programme, and support the development of equitable and sustainable 
smallholder-sourced agribusiness in  Sri  Lanka as  a  whole. To  achieve this,  the  policy agenda under 
the programme will be realistic in scope, and shaped by the specific focus of the programme and the 
resources  IFAD  brings  to  the  table.  Its  success  will  be  at  least  in  part  dependent  on  the  effective 
results.
implementation  of 
achievement  of 
development 
programme 
and 
the 
the 
Capturing  market  and  business  opportunities.  Effectively  seizing  the  emerging  market
42. 
opportunities requires a multi-pronged approach which includes addressing production and marketing 
constraints  on  the  one  hand,  whilst  also  capturing  opportunities  presented  by  the  increasingly 
conducive  business  and  institutional environment, particularly to  mobilize  and  leverage  investments. 
With respect to market considerations, the high unmet market demand for high-value cash crops (both 
local  and  export  markets)  is  driving  the  private  sector  (agribusiness  companies  notably)  to  seek 
partnerships  with  primary  small  producers  to  meet  the  volume,  scale  and  quality  requirements 
necessary for  Sri  Lankan  products  to  be  competitive  on  the  market.  Subsequently, existing  supply- 
side constraints which  include post-harvest losses, limited technological know-how, limited extension 
services and lack of access to finance/ credit, need to be  addressed in order  to scale-up farming for 
increased production and productivity; enhancing farmer/ producer market knowledge and information 
(regarding  specific  ‘demands’  of  the  market,  pricing  and  quality)  will  also  be  important  to  improve 
commercialization.
marketing 
and 
Under the principle that the market opportunities should inform investment, the proposed SAP
43. 
programme will  not  pre-determine the  geographic areas  of  intervention, nor  the  specific  sub-sectors 
and products to be supported. However,  through a process of market analysis and considering social 
and environmental dimensions, value chains/ sub-sectors have been ‘prioritised’ and for each sector a 
list of private companies interested in sourcing these products has been prepared. The value chains/ 
sub-sectors  within  the  prioritized  list,  in  general  implicate  large  numbers  of  the  target  group,  i.e. 
smallholder  producer  households21. The  aim  of  the  exercise  has  been  to  confirm  the  “market  pull” 
behind  the  NADeP  approach  and  its  potential  for  replication  and  scaling  up  under  the  SAP 
programme, hence  the  list  of  prioritized sectors  remains indicative and  by  no  means  excludes other 
potential sub-sectors or  products which  would be  identified during  programme implementation by 4P 
partners.
Results  and  emerging  lessons  from  the  promotion  of  4Ps.  Although  the  17  4Ps  under
44. 
NADeP  are  still  ongoing  and  at  various  stages  of  implementation,  they  are  starting  to  yield  good 
results  which  can  be  captured  and  built  upon.  In  addition  to  the  matching  grant  provided  by  the 
programme, co-financing plays  a  critical role  to  augment ownership, both  from  the  company (capital
21  See Appendix 4, Annex 3  for more detail about the analysis of sectors and products, and the prioritisation process. 
9 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
contribution,  services,  etc.)   and   producers  (through  credit   and   in-kind).  Under   the   4Ps,   the 
programme, company and beneficiary (through facilitated access to credit from PFIs) are contributing 
on  average,  to  one-third  of  the  total  investment  cost.  Today,  the  4Ps  cover  a  range  of  sectors, 
including:  dairy,  fruits  and  vegetables,  gherkin  production,  seaweed  production,  bee-keeping  and 
maize.
Under  ongoing  4P  BPs,  estimated  incremental  income  arising  from  the  BP  investments
45. 
averages  to  USD  650  (LKR  92,000)  per  annum  or  USD  54  (LKR  7,700)  per  month. This  additional 
income  is  significant  when  considering  that  the  majority  of  households  in  the  target  group  report  a 
monthly  income  of  LKR  10,000  (USD  70)22.  Through  the  provision  of  equipment,  machineries  and 
technologies, important results are  expected; amongst others, key benefits have  included improved 
water availability and water-use efficiency; improved pest management; reduced women’s workload; 
increased yields and quality of produce.
Despite there are multiple options or models of 4Ps, the Sri Lanka NADeP model largely follows
46. 
an    integrated    model,    such    as    the    outgrower    scheme.    Under    this    modality,    ownership    and 
responsibility is  enhanced for the small producer, and  the private sector (company) is  encouraged to 
meaningfully  commit  resources  and  investment  in  the  business  proposal  (in  the  case  of  NADeP, 
companies  are  providing  technical  assistance,  extension  services,  and  inputs  in  addition  to  the 
committed  investment).  Similarly,  the  financial  sector  has  growing  cognizance  of  the  viability  of 
investing  in  small  producers  and  small-scale  agri-business. Presently,  the  programme management 
unit  (PMU),  serves  as  a  facilitator  and  broker  for  promotion  of  4Ps  and  change.  Through  the 
programme’s  brokerage  role,  the  constraints,  potential  opportunities,  and  overall  objectives  are 
defined (i.e. collectively providing the rationale for a  4P arrangement) and all potential partner actors 
are  sensitized  on  these  issues.  This  allows  for  detailed  evaluation  and  subsequent  negotiation  to 
proposal.
finalize 
business 
the 
4P 
In IFAD’s Sri Lanka experience, deepening the engagement between small producers and the
47. 
private  and  financial  sectors  is  a  long-term  process,  which  requires  investing  time  in  building  trust 
amongst the actors; under NADeP, 5  years of sensitization, negotiation and networking were required 
to result in finalizing viable 4P arrangements/ partnerships (mainly in outgrower schemes). These 4Ps 
should  continue  to  be  promoted; it  is  well  recognized that  partnership  with  the  private-sector (i.e.  a 
public-private  partnership)  offers  a  means  to  potentially  mobilize  additional  resources  in  terms  of 
investment capital, know-how, technology (including its dissemination) and even other inputs, towards 
the productive activities of small producers. Not least, these partnerships also offer a ready market or 
access to markets. The relevance and effectiveness of these partnerships is however enhanced with 
attention to the role and strengthened voice of the small producer within the partnership, calling for the 
4th  ‘P’. Under an overall framework of agricultural modernization and rural transformation, adoption of 
a  4P  model  offers  an  opportunity  for  small  producers  to  be  contributing  actors,  simultaneously 
benefitting from increased incomes and improved livelihood conditions. 
II.    Programme description 
A. 
Programme area and target group 
Geographic targeting. The  programme will  have national coverage, though special attention
48. 
and  preference  will  be  given  through  an  evaluation/  selection  process,  to  low  income  districts  and 
where  agri-production  potential  is  high.  The  programme  is  demand-driven  and  the  willingness  and 
commitment  by  stakeholders  (agribusiness  and  value  chain  actors  including  the  private  sector  and 
farmer/  producer  organizations)  will  be  critical.  To  the  extent  feasible,  the  programme  will  also  give 
preference  to  invest  in  activities  that  are  geographically  within  a  'cluster'  of  farmers  (500  –  1000 
farmers), in order to achieve economies of scale and efficiency. 
22  This is on the basis of sampling undertaken in 8 ongoing 4P sub-projects.
10 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
49.  Target group and outreach. The  SAP programme is  premised on  ensuring inclusiveness of
smallholder  producers  in  a  market-driven  model  through  4P  business  partnerships  and  other 
interventions aimed at building producer/ farmer organization capacity and enhancing access to rural 
finance. The programme target group comprises 57,500 poor rural households (representing 230,000 
individuals) with  the potential to  become active economic players in  a  diverse array of  value chains. 
The  targeting  strategy  is  based  on 
leveraging  existing  mechanisms  for  change  and  rural 
transformation, building on synergies and (NADeP) scaling up potential. 
  
  
  
The  first  target  subgroup  are  35,000  rural  household  producers  that  will  benefit  from 
increased livelihood opportunities by virtue of their engagement within 4P schemes – this 
includes  4,000  households  organized  in  70  producer/  farmer  organizations  (FOs). 
Although the programme is demand driven and the willingness and commitment of all 4P 
parties  is  critical,  the  same  set  of  targeting  criteria  as  in  NADeP,  ensures  the  pro-poor 
nature  of  these  partnerships. Producer/  farmers  implicated  in  the  4P  arrangements own 
less than 1 ha of land, rely on agriculture for at least 50% of their household income and 
have  monthly  incomes averaging LKR  25-30,000 (USD  150-200) or  below. With  respect 
to the support to develop farmer organizations, SAP adopts a two-phased approach over 
six  years (pilot phase from programme years 1-3, and expansion phase from  years 4-6), 
which  is  requisite  for  obtaining  results  and  emerging  lessons  which  can  be  utilised  for 
scaling up approaches in line with Government’s policy and development agenda, and to 
ensure  sustainability  of  supported  FOs  within  4P  partnerships.  In  the  expansion  phase 
(years  4-6),  the  programme  expects  to  increase  outreach  to  producer/  farmers  with 
additional financing to  the  70  producer/ farmer organizations (FOs) supported during the 
pilot phase, but  with the  expectation that their membership will increase, or  to  new FOs, 
particularly FOs under the Mahaweli Authority. 
The  second  target  subgroup  are  the  20,000  households  participating  in  4P  schemes 
already  established  under  the  NADeP  programme,  who  will  benefit  from  SAP  support 
through access to credit for seasonal/ working capital needs. 
The last target subgroup is represented by 2,500 poor young women and men who will be 
supported  to  enhance  their  employability  or  become  entrepreneurs,  responding  to  the 
demand for  products or  services generated along  the  value chain  and  in  complement to 
the 4Ps. This youth represent a particularly vulnerable target group as they are generally 
unemployed,  have  low  monthly  incomes  (less  than  LKR  20-25,000),  and  are  either 
(30%).
landless 
(70%) 
than 
land 
own 
less 
ha 
or 
of 
1 
Farmers’   organizations.   In   Sri   Lanka,   the   producer/farmer   organization   structure   has
50. 
historically been  focused on  maintenance of  irrigation systems and  water  management, primarily for 
paddy  farming,  whilst  also  addressing  social  and  welfare  needs  of  the  community. Today,  producer 
organizations  are  gradually  evolving  to  take  up  more  'economic'  responsibilities,  and  are  exploring 
new opportunities beyond traditional paddy farming. The Mahaweli System FOs in particular, after 35 
years  in  existence,  are  now  able  to  produce  non-paddy-crops  with  a  significant  contribution  to  the 
national  economy,  and  which  has  enormous  potential  for  development; business  linkages  along  the 
agricultural value chains and buyer/seller contracts (forward sales agreements) are being increasingly 
practiced.
These producer organizations will be supported (in response to the demand) to progressively
51. 
provide  relevant  and  adequate  services  to  meet  member  needs  (e.g.  procurement  of   inputs, 
marketing  and  commercialisation).  This  may  also  include  taking  responsibility  for  management  of 
post-harvest  handling  and  processing  facilities  to  increase  value  addition  and  margins  as  part  of  a 
viable business plan. It  is  expected that  with SAP support a large number of these organizations will 
be  able  to  “graduate”  over  time  in  order  to  reach  a  mature  and  self-sufficient  level  and  become 
business-oriented producer/ farmer companies. To this end the programme will help prepare maturity/ 
capacity  self-assessments  and  capacity  building  plans  to  upscale  activities  and  towards  their 
graduation.
11 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
52.  The  SAP  approach  will  then  be  modular  and  providing  support  to  FOs  and  producers’
organizations at different stages of their business development. The few existing cooperatives already 
in business will be further supported to enlarge their business, to make it sustainable and  promoting 
women  and  youth  leadership.  The  less  organized  FOs  will  be  in  turn  supported  to  start  up  their 
business either under 4P partnerhsips led by private companies or through 4P schemes led by FOs.
A gender strategy will ensure women's inclusion across the three target subgroups, promoting
53. 
their  economic  empowerment through  their  inclusion  in  productive activities; the  use  of  labor-saving 
technologies to  free up  time and support to  give  voice and  enhance  women's leadership within their 
communities and  rural  organizations will  also  be  pursued. At  least  40%  of  SAP  beneficiaries  will  be 
women.  The  overall  responsibility  for  implementation  of  the  strategy  rests  with  the  programme 
director,  supported  by  specialist  technical  assistance,  and  delivered  through  social  mobilisers. 
Programme  staff  with  oversight  for  4P  sub-projects  and  youth  activities  will  supervise  delivery  on 
gender activities by the  field  agents  and  service providers dealing in  capacity development activities 
mobilization.
and 
social 
Rural women in Sri Lanka enjoy better status and rights compared to other countries in South
54. 
Asia; literacy rates are high and similar to men's (98.6% and 97.7% respectively); they have relatively 
better  access to  services (maternal mortality ratio  is  35  in  100,000)  and  the  gender  inequality index 
(GII) is 0,37023, ranking among high human development countries. However, availability of economic 
opportunities in rural areas represent a key challenge for rural women, who face severe discrimination 
with  regards  to  owning  land  and  accessing  credit.  The  most  vulnerable  women  are  those  in  post- 
conflict areas in the north of the country, those affected by the tsunami on the east coast, and female 
elderly).
heads 
households 
(generally 
widows 
and/ 
or 
of 
The  SAP  gender  strategy  aims  at  addressing  the  challenges  to  women  by:  i)  promoting
55. 
women's inclusion in economic opportunities through the 4Ps schemes; ii) supporting their leadership 
and  decision-making  capacity  to  undertake  economic  activities,  and  within  their  groups  and  their 
communities; and iii) supporting the management of their workload. The entry points to intervene will 
(youth)  entrepreneurial  activities.
be 
through  4P  partnerships, 
rural  organizations  and 
In  order  to  support  women's  inclusion  in  economic  opportunities  under  the  4Ps,  gender
56. 
considerations  will   be   incorporated  amongst  the   evaluation/  assessment  criteria   in   review  of 
proposals,  and  trained  field  staff  will  assess  women's  specific  needs.  Particular  attention  will  be 
placed  on  exposing  both  women  and  men  in  the  household  to  trainings  and  capacity  development 
opportunities.  Although  the  4Ps  are  market-driven  partnerships,  preference  will  be  given  to  value 
chains/  sub-sectors  that  have  a  high  degree  of  women's  participation (e.g.  papaya,  green  chili,  bell 
pepper  and  maize  sub-sectors).  Skills  upgrading  and  labor  saving  technologies  will  be  actively 
promoted  in  the  context  of  these  partnerships,  which  has  been  demonstrated  in  NADeP  with  the 
beneficiaries.
reduced 
workload 
female 
of 
The  promotion  of  youth  and  women's  active  participation  in  rural  organizations  is  part  of  the
57. 
SAP strategy to  empower all  producers/ farmers under 4P schemes. Women's role and participation 
in rural organizations varies enormously across the rural landscape, with no clear correlation with type 
of  organization,  size  and  structure.  For  this,  rural  organization  members  will  gauge  their  levels  of 
inclusiveness and gender sensitivity as a central dimension of their overall maturity self -assessment, 
strengthening.
developing 
progressive 
capacity 
building 
related 
their 
plan 
for 
a 
Lastly, business and entrepreneurial activities promoted by SAP for landless youth will build on
58. 
the experience of NADeP and the evidence of their very positive impact (where 79% of beneficiaries 
were  young  women).  Improved  access  to  credit  and  a  package  of  entrepreneurial  and  vocational 
training,  with  business  mentorship,  will  support  young  women  in  particular,  to  take  advantage  of 
23The GII is a composite measure that reflects inequality in achievements between women and men in reproductive health, 
empowerment and the labour market. The index ranges between “0”, which means women fare equally well, to “1.0”, which 
indicates that women fare as poorly as possible in all dimensions measured. 
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/hdr_2015_statistical_annex.pdf
12 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
economic opportunities arising from 4P schemes (e.g. engaging in post-production activities such as 
drying fish and fruit, fodder production to accompany dairy development, etc.).
59. 
SAP  will  also  promote  policy  engagement  for  the  removal  of  gender-based  constraints  in
access  to  credit  by  interacting  with  key  stakeholders  and  supporting  the  development  of  gender- 
sensitive operational guidelines of the microfinance department in the Central Bank of Sri Lanka.
Rural youth. In Sri Lanka, youth between the ages of 15-29, represent 24% of the population;
60. 
they face challenges related to education, civic engagement, political participation and employment in 
particular. Young people's unemployment stands at 20.8% for those aged 15-24, and 9.4% aged 25- 
29; the challenges of  young women’s participation in  the labour force is  even more pronounced with 
an  unemployment  rate  of  27.4%  and  17.5%  for  the  two  age  brackets  respectively.  Youth 
unemployment as  a  proportion  of  total  unemployment is  high  at  61.6%  for  young  men  and  45%  for 
young  women,  which  indicates  an  unequal  distribution  of  the  problem  of  unemployment,  and  is  a 
significant  and  persistent  issue  for  the  country.  Furthermore,  a  noticable  feature  about  Sri  Lanka’s 
youth  unemployment is  that educated young  people  make  up  a  significant  proportion  of  Sri  Lanka’s 
unemployed;  nearly  50%  of  youth  unemployed  have  completed  their  GCE  A  Levels  or  above, 
demonstrating  that  many  of  the  youth  unemployed  have  in  fact,  attained  a  reasonable  level  of 
education. Per the Labour Force Survey (2015), provincial disparities also exist, and in 7 out of the 9 
provinces, youth unemployment as a proportion of total unemployment is above 50%; it is particularly 
high  in  the  Central,  Eastern  and  Sabaragamuwa  provinces.  It  can  be  reasonably  assumed  that 
various reasons account for the high rate of unemployment amongst the youth, including geographical 
disparities, gender, class and status, ethnicity, and cultural norms; especially, differences in the quality 
of  education and  challenges  in  transitioning from  (theoretical) education to  practical  experience and 
factors.
training 
constraining 
are 
The problem of unemployment is therefore showcased as being unequally distributed and as a
61. 
mismatch  of  skills  and  limited  economic  opportunities,  especially  for  those  with  highler  levels  of 
education; there  is  a  need  therefore, for  interventions to  enable  the  youth  to  better  enter  the  labour 
force  and  successfully  secure  employment  or  self-employment  opportunities.  As  regards  self- 
employment,  this  too  is  constrained  by  the  inability  of  youth  to  access  finance  and  their  lack  of 
business skills and basic financial literacy; in rural areas, youth who are self-employed or choose this 
access.
terms 
option, 
and  market 
income 
show 
have 
little 
of 
to 
in 
Subsequently,  within  the  business  and  commercial  orientation  of  the  programme,  special
62. 
attention  will be  given to  the  rural  youth.  A first  target of  2,500  youth (landless and/ or  unemployed) 
will be  supported to  enhance their  employability or  become entrepreneurs that can  provide services/ 
products  to  meet  the  demand  generated  by  the  development  of  value  chains  under  the  4Ps.  In 
addition,  through  a  20%  quota  on  the  main  target  group  of  small  producer/  farmers  engaged  in  4P 
partnerships, the  programme will  reach  out  to  a  further  7,000  youth.  In  order  to  implement effective 
interventions  that  may  include  technical  and  vocational  training,  managerial  training,  financial  and 
business  planning  (including  know-your-numbers  training),  provision  of  business  start-up  capital  or 
other  investment/ fixed  asset  capital,  mentorship or  apprenticeship/ placement programmes, a  more 
detailed  youth  strategy  will  be  elaborated  within  the  first  six-months  of  the  programme,  with  the 
objective to better understand the heterogenous nature and needs of the rural youth, and to elaborate 
responsive  measures.  The  youth  strategy  will  also  define  the  implementing  partners  or  service 
activities.
implement 
providers 
the 
to 
Across the youth interventions, the role of agribusiness private sector partners will be critical in
63. 
helping to  identify the  needs and  opportunities that  exist in  the  agribusiness sector  (i.e.  the  demand 
for  products/  services/  human  resource  capacity),  and  which  the  youth  could  fulfil  with  the  SAP's 
support.  In  order  to  ensure  a  close  proximity to  the  youth,  guidance  and  follow-up,  the  programme 
envisages a  strong role for  social mobilisers to  provide a  quasi-mentoring of  the  youth, especially in 
liaison  with  commercial  banks.
development  of 
their  business  plans  and  as 
first 
13 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
64.  Nutrition. Nutrition  and  gender  are  very  closely  linked  and  therefore, the  gender  strategy to
include  women  and  young  females  applies  to  nutrition  as  well.  Sri  Lanka  has  an  exceptional  high 
figure of  wasting (acute undernutrition), reaching 21%,  low birth  weight of  18%  and  women's (15-49 
years)  anaemia  at  26%.  The  stunting  (chronic  undernutrition)  rate  is  reported  as  15%.  These  are 
alarming figures and need to be addressed in a multi-sectoral manner. The multi-sectoral approach to 
nutrition in Sri Lanka allows SAP to get engaged directly, or through partnerships with main actors like 
UNICEF and WFP. Three avenues are suitable for nutrition enhancement: 
(a)      Promotion of  food  with  high  nutrient value (e.g.  legumes, fruits and  vegetables, animal 
source protein) through the value chain approach; 
(b)      Nutrition education targeting the female and male smallholder farmers (incl. female and 
male youth); and 
(c)      Capacity building in  nutrition targeting all  stakeholders and  in  particular the  agricultural 
extension service.
The promotion of nutrition sensitive value chains through the consumption pathway is feasible
65. 
in  the  case  of  cereals,  vegetables,  fruits  and  animal  products  (here:  dairy  and  poultry).  It  is  less 
possible  in  the  case  of  spices  in  which  the  income  pathway  plays  a  more  important  role.  Nutrition 
education  will  enhance  informed  decision  making  with  regard  to  quality  and  quantity  of  the  diet  at 
household  level.  Increased  dietary  diversity  is  key  for  an  improved  nutritional  outcome.  Capacity 
building  in  nutrition,  in  particular  for  change  agents  like  extension officers  and  social  mobilisers,  will 
increase  the  outreach  of  nutrition  messaging.  Taking  into  consideration  the  high  percentage  of  low 
birthweight babies, the understanding of the intergenerational cycle of malnutrition and its effects also 
on economic development, is the important information to be transmitted in the context of SAP. 
B. 
Development objective and impact indicators 
The  overall  goal  of  SAP  is  to  contribute  to  Sri  Lanka's  smallholders’ poverty  reduction  and
66. 
competitiveness. The  programme  development  objective  is  to  sustainably  increase  the  income  and 
quality  of  diet  of  57,500  smallholder  households  involved  in  commercially-oriented  production  and 
marketing  systems.  This  will  be  achieved  through  a  process  of  forming  and  building  capacity  of 
producer   groups   and   organizations   (in   terms   of   organizational   structure   and   governance, 
management and business-orientation; and provision of services to meet producer member's needs), 
and strengthened networking under partnerships with the private sector. Key indicators at impact-level 
include  the  RIMS  anchor  indicators  of  household assets  and  child  nutrition. The  outcome  indicators 
are  the  following: (i)  %  of  4P  partnerships/ agreements in  operation after  3  years;  (ii)  %  increase in 
average  volume  and  value  of  sales  through  4P  agreements; and  (iii)  the  number  of  beneficiaries in 
rural areas accessing targeted and pro-poor financial products. 
C. 
Outcomes/Components 
67. 
The development objective and expected outcomes and results will be achieved through three
components: (i) Access to commercial partnerships; (ii) Access to rural finance; and (iii)  Programme 
management and policy dialogue.
The expected outcomes of the programme are the following: (i) improved access of smallholder
68. 
farmers  and  their  organizations  to  markets,  in  partnership  with  the  private  sector;  (ii)  57,500 
households supported under SAP have access to rural financial services in a sustainable manner and 
at  affordable  rates;  and  (iii)  improved  policy  environment  for  equitable  and  sustainable  smallholder 
farmer–sourced agribusiness development. 
Component 1: Access to commercial partnerships (USD 51.2 million)
69. 
This  component  includes  two  sub-components: (1.1)  Establishing 4Ps;  and  (1.2)  Institutional
strengthening  and  capacity  building  of  producer  groups  (within  a  market-driven  model).  A  total  of 
35,000  households  will  be  directly  reached  through  4P  schemes  and  institutional  strengthening
14 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
interventions. A further 2,500 poor young women and men will be supported to become entrepreneurs 
responding to demand for products or services generated by the 4Ps.
4P planning, development and appraisal process. The 4P arrangements (outlined in  what
70. 
will be the 4P business plan)  are based on the  expectation that  they respond to  common objectives 
among  the  partners  and  address  the  major  constraints  in  farm-level  production/  productivity  and  in 
marketing.  The  identification  of  4P  partners  and  plans  will  build  on  the  current  NADeP  procedure 
based  on  a  call  for  proposals  (expression  of  interest),  and  where  reputable  agribusiness  private 
proposals.
companies 
organisations 
farmers 
submit 
invited 
and 
will 
be 
to 
The  proposed  4P  business  plans  will  be  evaluated  against  multiple  criteria,  transparently
71. 
communicated to potential stakeholders through sensitization and consultation workshops and forums 
in advance of the call for interest. To this end, SAP will prepare ‘educational’ material as relates to the 
key  social   (e.g.   gender   and   youth   specificities)   and   environmental  (including  climate   change 
adaptation24) issues and best practices or  approaches which SAP will promote and give preference 
for  in  the  evaluation of  4P  proposals.  Following a  first  appraisal  and  short-listing (based  on  a  set  of 
criteria including financial strength; business experience (at least 2  years in business with unqualified 
audited  accounting  statements);  commitment  and  interest  in  pro-poor  development),  the  SAP  PMU 
will facilitate, broker and negotiate the  final 4P scheme across the partners, shaping and developing 
the final 4P proposal. The detailed process, including appraisal criteria is provided in Appendix 4 with 
in  Appendix  5.
additional  elements  with 
to  FOs  4P  appraisal  process 
regards 
The 4P appraisal process, as well as a rapid market assessment of potential value chains/ sub -
72. 
sectors, are  elaborated in the appendices. Key criteria reviewed during appraisal include: the market 
prospects  (national/export); expected  economic  benefits  in  terms  of  farmers’ incomes  increase  from 
participating  in  the  4P  (through  a  combination  of  improved  farmer  gate  prices,  improved  on-farm 
productivity  and  participation  in  upstream  value  added  processing);  overall  profitability  of  the 
investment proposal (internal rate of return, incremental benefit/cost ratio, payback period); as well as 
social  and  gender  or  youth-related and  environmental  aspects  (improvement of  sustainable  farming 
methods).
practices, 
protection 
fertilizers, 
organic 
plant 
use 
of 
The   planning/   development   process   and   subsequent   implementation   of   4Ps   will   be
73. 
concentrated in  the first three  years of  the  programme cycle,  with the  remaining programme lifetime 
dedicated  to  monitoring  and  consolidation  of  activities  and  results  for  sustainability.  The  exception 
relates to support to 4Ps implicating farmer groups/ organizations, which will be implemented over two 
phases  –  a  pilot  phase  (programme  years  1-3)  and  an  expansion  phase  (programme  years  4-6).
Financing of the 4P business plan. Financing of the 4P business plan (i.e. investment plan)
74. 
will  be  under  a  co-financing/  cost-sharing  arrangement  that  includes:  (i)  matching  grants/  start-up 
funds provided by the  programme; (ii)  credit from  participating financial institutions (facilitated by the 
programme-supported  line  of  credit)  as  part  of  beneficiary  contribution;  and  (iii)  private  sector 
(agribusiness)  contribution  (this  will  be  in  the  form  of  extension  or  other  services  rendered  to  the 
target group (monetized), in-kind contributions, etc.). Whilst the total investment per beneficiary of the 
4P business plan will vary, it is expected to be USD 1500 on average, shared approximately on a one- 
third co-financing basis, though allowing for flexibility in this arrangement -  each 4P partnership (and 
the  co-financing arrangement) will  be  negotiated, taking  into  consideration the  additional net  income 
generated  for  farmer/  producers  and  the  total  cost  per  beneficiary.  The  matching  grant  should  be 
considered  as  start-up  funds,  to  complement the  fixed  assets  investment financed  through  credit25
(and serving as beneficiary contribution).
75. 
Under  sub-component  1.1,  the  programme  will  support  the  establishment  of  market-driven
4Ps  under  three  categories:  (i)  new  4P  schemes  led  by  private  companies  (21,000  hhs);  (ii) 
24  As a first measure, the SAP SECAP Review Note will be streamlined and repackaged as a guideline for 4P 
stakeholders and for their consideration in preparing the 4P proposals. 
25  See Component 2 for details regarding financial products and credit offered by participating financial institutions 
(PFIs) through the programme-supported line of credit.
15 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
geographical/ outreach expansion or scaling-up of NADEP-supported 4P schemes (10,000 hhs); and 
(iii)  new  4P  schemes  explicitly  working  with  producer/  farmer  organizations  as  stakeholders  in  the 
business 4P schemes (4,000 hhs). This implies that the ‘promoter’ (originator) of the 4P schemes will 
be  either  a  private-sector company or  a  farmer organization that  can  show evidence of  a  confirmed 
commercial  arrangement  with  a  private-sector  company  or  commitment  of  a  market  buyer.
Matching  grants  and  start-up  funds.  For  the  overall  purposes  of  promoting  agricultural
76. 
modernization  and  reducing  producer/  farmers’  risks  related  to  uptake  of  new  technologies  and 
innovative  activities  (especially  those  that  promote  sustainable  natural  resource  management  and 
climate change adaptation), SAP will provide some start-up funds as complementary to term loans to 
farmers and private sector investment, on a  flexible one-third cost-sharing arrangement to the overall 
business  investment  proposed  under  the  4P  scheme;  these  start-up  funds  are  strictly  targeted  at 
smallholder farmers only (in the form of a matching grant), and can also be used as partial collateral 
borrowing.
and 
reduces 
cost 
the 
of 
77. 
Equipment  or  assets  which  promote  health  and  safety  standards,  improved  climate  change
adaptation/ natural resource management, or are particularly gender or  nutrition-sensitive, may also 
be eligible for matching grants.
78. 
FOs.  For  the  new  4P  schemes  explicitly  working  with  producer/  farmer  organizations,  the
programme will provide an additional support, in the form of start-up funding at group level up to USD 
50,000 per  FO  for  seed capital needs (such as  acquisition of  small to  medium-sized equipment and 
post-harvet  assets,  e.g.  collection  centres,  storage  facilities,  processing  plants)  and  initial  working 
capital  needs  that  will  enable  the  group  to  run  its  business  in  partnership  with  the  4P  stakeholders.
Youth  entrepreneurship initiative.  SAP  will  also  provide  targeted  support  to  rural  youth,  in
79. 
order to become entrepreneurs, and responding to the demand for services generated along the value 
chain and in complement to the 4Ps. An initial 2,500 youth will be supported with start-up financing for 
their business plans, averaging USD 2000 in the form of start-up funds (matching grant) and credit.  A 
basic training curriculum for  youth business plan  preparation has already been tested under NADeP, 
and will be refined by SAP, though the business plan training is only the first step in capac ity building 
support for youth and is linked to their ability to apply for the special youth credit  (see Component 2). 
Identification of the youth, and their mobilisation will be a joint responsibility between social mobilisers, 
private  sector  partners  and  community  leaders  (involved  in  4Ps),  vis-à-vis  the  principle  that  youth 
businesses  would  be  responsive  to  the  service  or  product  needs  around  the  4P  schemes.
A  youth  strategy  will  be  commissioned as  a  first  starting  point  to  better  understand diversity
80. 
amongst  the  rural  youth,  and  subsequently  their  challenges,  aspirations,  critical  needs  and  the 
opportunities  where  SAP  can  intervene  in  supporting  the  youth.  This  strategy  will  draw  from  the 
consultations with  youth  in  rural  communities, the  experience and  sensitization activities undertaken 
companies.
by 
the  dialogue  with  private 
social  mobilisers,  and 
sector 
the 
via 
In order to more effectively draw out the demand for products/ services around the 4P, SAP will
81. 
through its consultation and sensitization activities, encourage the private sector companies to identify 
the  critical  product  or  services  gaps  along  the  value  chain,  and/  or  the  gaps  in  human  resources 
capacities. These gaps will be communicated to the youth, to establish their interest and commitment 
to  engage  in  these  particular  activities.  Social  mobilisers,  by  virtue  of  their  close  community-level 
knowledge and training in the SAP principles and approaches, will communicate SAP’s  open call for 
interest for  youth to take part in the initiative. To facilitate youth in stepping forward, social mobilisers 
will provide support to the youth with some initial and basic training on how to develop basic business 
plans  and  will  work  with  those  youth  with  potential  to  finalize  their  business  plans;  the  social 
mobilisers  will  also  have  the  role  of  connecting  the  youth  to  PFIs,  who  will  ultimately  appraise  the 
loan.
business 
approve 
whether 
decide 
plan 
and 
the 
on 
to 
82. 
Once the youth business plan and credit has been approved, the support to youth will also be
complemented by capacity building support. A range  of  topics such as  financial literacy, know-your- 
numbers, and managerial training will be offered, and youth with approved business plans can choose
16 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
their  priority  needs;  the  specific  technical  training  that  will  also  likely  be  required,  has  also  been 
provisioned for.
83. 
To  the  extent  possible,  the  programme  will  also  attempt  to  facilitate  or  broker  a  mentorship
programme  for  those  youth  demonstrating  strong  leadership  and  entrepreneurial  potential,  with 
established business experts.
Under sub-component 1.2, the programme intends to support capacity building of  producer/
84. 
farmer  organizations  (FOs),  with  the  rationale  that  strengthening  of  FOs  will  empower  the  group  to 
become an  effective partner under 4P schemes  as well  as  their  capacity to  take  informed decisions 
about their  business. The  start-up funding at  group (FO)  level  will  be  complemented with support in 
the  form  of  business  mentoring,  training,  exchange  visits  and  degressive  support  to  FOs  for  their 
management.
For the new 4P schemes explicitly working with producer/ farmer organizations as stakeholders
85. 
in  the  business  4P  schemes  (4,000  hhs),  SAP  will  promote  a  multi-pronged  approach  taking  into 
account both the degree of FOs’ development and the means by which FOs and farmers groups  will 
enter  as  stakeholders  into  the  4Ps;  three  models  engaging  and  providing  support  to  70  FOs  are 
envisaged: (i) private-sector led 4Ps with 20 FOs; (ii) mature FOs or farmer cooperatives (10) already 
managing sizable businesses; and (iii) incipient FOs  (40), mainly under the Mahaweli Authority of Sri 
Lanka (MASL) areas. Under the first model, SAP will encourage private sector companies to lead the 
development of partnerships with farmer groups; under the second model, the relatively more mature 
FOs will already be engaged in the business of processing and/ or value addition, and the provision of 
seed  and  working capital financing  will  support  them  to  expand  their  business to  the  benefit of  their 
farmer members; and under the third model, the specific attention will be given towards supporting the 
FOs to develop their bankable business plans and gradually evolve into functional business -oriented 
entities  (with  financial  support  also  provided  on  a  gradual  basis  to  ensure  management  and 
absorption capacity). The  nascent nature of  these FOs  requires a  stronger field presence to  support 
for  collaboration  with  MASL.
their 
institutional  strengthening,  which 
rationale 
the 
is 
Producer/ farmer organizations eligible for support include those registered under the following:
86. 
(i)  Social  Services Act;  (ii)  Agrarian  Development Act  (this  includes  organizations registered by,  and 
operating  within  the  remit  of  the  Mahaweli  Authority);  (iii)  Co-operative  Socieities  Law  and  (iv) 
Company’s  Act.  For  those  groups  not  yet  registered,  whenever  appropriate,  the  programme  will 
facilitate their legal registering: awareness building and reflection process with the members to enable 
them  to  analyse  pros  and  cons  of  the  four  possible  registration  options  and  ultimately  choose  the 
plans.
option 
needs 
suits 
their 
best 
that 
and 
The package of capacity building support will be flexible depending on needs and audience (by
87. 
group,  organization,  individual),  though  primarily  relates  to  technical  assistance/  training;  the  areas 
which  can  be  covered  include:  organizational  structure;  governance  and  management;  market 
finance;  business  plan 
intelligence  and  marketing,  negotiation  skills;  basic  accounting  and 
development,  contract  development  with  other  chain  stakehodlers,  collective/bulk  marketing  and 
procurement  of  inputs,  management  of  common  storage  facilities  and  equipment,  technology 
development  for  agricultural  intensification  and  productivity  enhacement,  financial  literacy  and 
intelligence for linkages with banks. In the latter case, trainings will be promoting savings mobilization, 
approaches  to  implement  their  savings  schemes,  with  a  view  to  satisfy  social  needs,  business 
expansion and collateral requirements of the banks. Trainings will also promote sustainable adoption 
of  climate  resilient  crop  development  that  will  be  accompanied  with  environmental  measures.  As 
relates to promotion of improved environmental/ climate change adaptation best practices, FOs will be 
sensitized  by  the  TA  arm  of  the  PMU  and  MASL  on  the  SAP  priorities,  and  consultations  will  take 
place to determine how best to integrate good practices in the activities of the FOs. Subsequently, the 
training  needs,  the  access  to  the  technologies  and  information  (sourcing  information/  extension 
services from  public and private agencies  and the onwards dissemination to  members) and the self- 
the  FO  business  plan  development  process.
monitoring  needs  will  be  defined  during 
17 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Implementation responsibilities under Component 1. The bulk of interventions and activities
88. 
under  Component  1  relate  to:  (i)  the  implementation  of  4P  schemes;  and  (ii)  capacity  building/ 
institutional  strengthening  of  producer/  farmer  organizations.  W ith  respect  to  the  4P  schemes,  the 
SAP Programme Management Unit (PMU) will have  the first level of  responsibility for facilitating and 
brokering the  4Ps,  through  sensitization  and  awareness raising  in  the  lead  up  to  SAP  effectiveness 
and  within  the  first  six  months  of  implementation.  Today,  through  NADeP,  the  private  sector  is 
cognizant  of  the  4P  model  being  promoted,  but  could  benefit  from  further  knowledge  of  the 
specificities,  principles,  expectations,  responsibilities,  limitations  and  opportunities  of  the  4P  model, 
and can be encouraged to expand and deepen their participation. In addition to sensitization, the PMU 
will  be  responsible  for  inviting  expressions  of  interest  and  will  conduct  a  first  and  independent 
assessment of the proposals received. Further to this, in terms of 4P development and appraisal, the 
PMU  will  take  the  lead  through  its  in-house  specialists,  though  will  mobilise  additional  resources  or 
facilitators to broker and cement the 4Ps as required. Once the 4P has been approved, it is expected 
that in the majority of cases, the implicated private sector company will take the lead in brokering the 
partnership  and  support  of  financial  institutions  leading  to  tripartite  agreements  among  smallholder 
producers, PFIs and the private sector company under a viable 4P scheme, and will implement the 4P 
sub-projects at the field-level. In terms of capacity building and institutional strengthening, the process 
of  maturity self-assessment and  capacity needs  assessment will  be  supported by  the  PMU  (through 
its  specialists  and  via  the  social  mobilisers)  and  Mahaweli  Authority  (for  those  FOs  registered  by 
them);  subsequently,  the  capacity  building  needs  will  be  consolidated  by  the  PMU,  who  will  also 
source  the  necessary  service  providers  to  respond  and  deliver  the  services  required.  Detailed 
implementation  responsibilities  for  component  1  and  the  process  of  selecton  of  FOs  under  the 
in  Appendix  5.
different  models  of  FOs  participation 
in  4P  schemes  are  presented 
The   selection   of   business   ventures   (under   private-sector   and   FO-led   4Ps),   will   follow
89. 
competitive open selection processes. In  the particular case of  incipient FOs in  the  Mahaweli areas, 
the process of sensitization and competitive selection will be in turn, managed by MASL, who will also 
benefit from institutional strengthening support from SAP. 
Component 2: Access to rural finance (USD 43.6 million)
The  limited  lending  to  agricultural sector  activities  and  the  subsequent impact  on  agricultural
90. 
development as outlined in Section I, highlights the need to promote and make accessible, agricultural 
financial  products  for  the  smallholder  farmers  under  4Ps.  This  component  principally  follows  the 
strategies, modes of intervention and investment opportunities that emerge under Component 1, and 
aims at facilitating access to rural financial services in a sustainable manner and at affordable rates. It 
shall  have  two  sub-components:  (2.1)  Financing  of  4Ps;  and  (2.2)  Institutional  strengthening.  The 
component provides  the  products  and  liquidity  that  are  needed  to  serve  the  target  groups  and  help 
objectives.
achieve 
overall 
the 
Under  sub-component  2.1,  a  line  of  credit  (LOC)  shall  be  established  under  the  Regional
91. 
Development Department of  the  CBSL. This  LOC  shall  be  used  exclusively to  refinance PFIs  which 
have granted loans to eligible participants under a 4P business/investment plan through the following 
target groups: 
(a)      Farmers, engaged in a 4P scheme or activities under the FO; 
(b)      Youths in the age bracket of 18-30 years, as per the standard government definition.
92. 
For these two target groups, three different products shall be offered: 
(a)      Working  capital  loans  for  farmers  engaged  in  4P   arrangements  supported  under 
component 1, mostly not exceeding USD 350 for about one hectare of cultivation; grace 
periods may be negotiated, and the duration of loans shall not exceed 11 months; 
(b)      Term loans for investments in equipment and machinery up to a duration of five years for 
farmers engaged in  4P arrangements supported under component 1,  with grace periods
18 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
determined  in  accordance  with  cash  flow;  the  average  loan  borrowing  amount  per 
individual farmer is USD 500. 
(c)      Working capital and investment loans for a duration of up to two years for youths, which 
may be combined with start-up funds as approved under Component 1. 
PFIs provide their financial services and charge the rates agreed upon under the 4P plan, will
93. 
bear  the  full  risk  of  default  on  repayment,  conduct  their  loan  appraisal  in  conformity  with  their  own 
standards  and  procedures,  and  may  accept  or  reject  a  loan  application.  PFIs  apply  their  standard 
collateral  regime,  which  according  to  the  experience  made  before  does  not  constitute  a  barrier  for 
groups.
SAP 
target 
It is programmeed that 55,000 smallholders and 2,500 landless youths will get access to credit
94. 
through the SAP-financed line of credit for on-lending by the PFIs. Once the borrowers under the 4P 
schemes  have  liquidated  their  previous  loan,  they  will  also  be  eligible  for  term  loans.  Over  the  six 
years,  the  total  number  of  loans  is  293,000,  representing  a  loan  volume  of  USD  106  million.
Contributions to for working capital purposes will vary over time. In the first year, each group of
95. 
farmers,  or  each  farmer,  will  have  to  pay  10%  of  the  expected  loan  amount  into  a  blocked  savings 
account at  the respective PFI. This contribution will gradually increase to 30% of  the loan amount in 
year,  after  which  it  will  be  constant.  Farmers  are  expected  to  continue  savings,  but  are  no  longer 
required to keep these savings in their savings account that will be blocked by the PFI at the time of 
disbursement. PFI contributions will start with 20% in year 1, and will then gradually increase to 70% 
in  year 5. Consequently, the amount taken from  the LOC  will start  with  70%  in  year 1,  and  will then 
gradually decrease to  zero from the fifth  year onwards. This model will apply to  all borrowers served 
LOC.
the 
under 
96. 
The net financing requirements for the LOC have been calculated at USD 12.0 million, including
total contributions of PFIs to the tune of USD 9.7 million, of farmers amounting to USD 4.7 million, and 
of the GOSL of USD 17.4 million, the latter being the reflows of past lines of credit.
Pricing of the LOC facility. The interest rate of the facility should be cost-recovering. As the
97. 
Government  will  have  to  pay  back  the  loan  in  foreign  currency,  the  devaluation  of  the  Sri  Lankan 
Rupee (LKR) will be included in the calculation of the costs. The pricing of the LOC shall be the sum 
of  cost  of  capital for  the  Government (including the  anticipated devaluation of  LKR)  +  administrative 
cost of the CBSL + interest spread for PFIs to cover administrative/operating cost, cost of funds, loans 
losses and profit markup. Using present market terms, refinance of PFIs will be made at slightly below 
6% p.a., including a 2% points mark-up to cover the devaluation risk. In case PFIs would add about 
4%  for  their  costs  and  risks,  the  final  costs  for  the  end  borrower  would  be  slightly  below  10%  p.a. 
Interest  rates  charged  under  the  SAP  shall  be  subject  to  an  annual  review  conducted  during  the 
supervision mission. Rates will then be adjusted where necessary in mutual consent. Given the poor 
experience  in  the  past  with  fixing  the  interest  rates,  instead  of  envisaging  a  flexible  mode  of 
adjustment, any  changes  also  do  not  require  the  ratification  of  IFAD  and  the  PSC.  For  details,  see 
4.
Appendix 
Implementation  arrangements.  The  line  of  credit  shall  be  administered  by  the  Regional
98. 
Development Department  (RDD)  of  the  CBSL.  The  RDD  is  a  specialized  department managing  the 
lines  of  credit  of  various  donors  and  government-run  schemes.  The  subsidiary  loan  agreement 
between the GoSL and CBSL and CBSL and PFIs will specify the terms and conditions of the line of 
credit and sub loans. The SLAs for the existing line of credit will be amended, as will be the operating 
above.
guidelines 
purposes 
utilised 
ensure 
stated 
funds 
are 
the 
the 
for 
to 
Selection of PFIs. PFIs shall be accredited based on the following criteria: (i) minimum of two
99. 
years  of  term-lending  operations  for  which  audited  accounts  are  available;  (ii)  NPL  below  5%;  (iii) 
fulfillment of all prudential regulations as required by the CBSL; and (iv) willingness to enter into a tri - 
partite agreement with smallholder producers and the  private sector company under the 4P scheme.
19 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
At least four commercial banks and some MFIs would qualify under these terms, which have already 
been accepted by the four most capable commercial banks.
Exit   strategy   and   post-programme   arrangements  on   the   LOC.   By   the   end   of   the
100. 
programme, the exit strategy of the line of credit will be its transformation into a revolving fund, which 
may be called the Farming System Sustainability Fund. This fund will be endowed from the reflows of 
this and other LOC as per the mutual agreement of the GOSL and IFAD. The Fund will be dedicated 
to short, medium and long  term loans for agriculture. The RDD of CBSL will continue to manage this 
Fund  for  the  duration  of  the  Financing  Agreement  between  the  GOSL  and  IFAD.  The  Fund  will 
become  a  permanent  and  strategic  tool  to  stimulate  agricultural  development  through  smallholder- 
credit.
farmer 
oriented 
Under sub-component 2.2, the programme will aim at institutional strengthening of CBSL on
101. 
the new regulations for the microfinance sector, plus some training for the MF Inspection Department 
on  Monitoring  and  Prevention  of  Common  Frauds  and  System Audit  and  Inspection,  and  other  MFI 
tools.  Procurement  of  the  services  required  is  done  by  the  CBSL  in  accordance  with  its  existing 
AWPB.
procurement 
guidelines 
current 
basis 
the 
the 
on 
of 
Some  critical  support  to  PFIs,  including  commercial  banks  and  deposit-taking  MFIs,  will  be
102. 
provided  to  enable  these  provide  more  inclusive,  effective  (specific  and  targeted)  and  efficient 
financial  services  and  products  to  smallholder  farmer/  producers  and  other  target  segments  of  the 
population. Most  of  this  support comprises technical  assistance on  value  chain  financing, micro  and 
small client‘s credit underwriting skills, and reporting, depending on the expressed needs. PFIs will be 
encouraged  to  recruit  additional  lending  officers  with  backgrounds  in  agribusiness, as  the  HNB  has 
success.
done 
great 
with 
To  simplify  operations,  procurement  of  these  services  shall  be  made  by  the  PMU  in  close
103. 
collaboration  with  the  respective  PFIs,  to  ensure  that  only  that  would  be  procured  that  what  would 
represent the interest of the PFI. It is important to treat the outcomes of this TA as professional secret, 
which shall  not  be  distributed to  other competing institutions. The  eligibility criteria for  the  support to 
PFIs  shall  comprise:  (1)  Active  engagement  of  a  PFI  branch  in  disbursing  credit  to  smallholder 
farmers using the SAP 4P line of credit, with preference to remote districts; (2)  branch serving es can 
at  least  500  smallholder  farmers  under  the  4P  line  of  credit;  and  (3)  regular  reporting  to  the  PMU. 
Selection criteria may comprise the number of farmers served so far, the volume of loans to the target 
groups,  the  staffing  of  branches  with  lending  officers  that  have  agribusiness  backgrounds  or  have 
situation.
received 
programme, 
training 
SAP 
NPL 
and 
the 
the 
via 
All PFIs that partner with SAP will have to adhere to specific reporting obligations as stipulated
104. 
in the programme implementation manual. 
Component 3: Programme management and policy dialogue (USD 5.8 million)
Component 3 will serve Components 1 and 2. It will comprise a series of activities to manage,
105. 
facilitate the  implementation of,  and monitor, report  and draw lessons from, the  operational activities 
carried  out  under  the  other  two  components.  Component  3  comprises  two  sub-components:  (3.1) 
engagement.
Programme 
management; 
knowledge 
Policy 
(3.2) 
and 
and 
Under  sub-component  3.1,  programme  and  knowledge  management  (including  fiduciary
106. 
management) will be entrusted to SAP Programme Management Unit (PMU), which is an evolved unit 
comprising the  experienced staff  of  the  existing NADeP PMU  and  technical assistance/ consultants. 
Following  some  restructuring,  the  PMU  will  be  strengthened  with  additional  capacity  to  effectively 
carry out  its  key responsibilities of  planning,  coordination, facilitation  and  brokerage, and  monitoring 
and  evaluation.  The  programme  will  establish  management,  finance  and  administrative  procedures 
including  accounting,  auditing  and  a  monitoring and  evaluation system  in  line  with  IFAD  guidelines, 
and  which  will  feed  into  relevant  national  monitoring  systems.  Given  the  scope  of  the  proposed 
programme,  key  managerial  positions  within  the  PMU  include  a  Programme  Director,  Deputy 
Programme  Director,  Agribusiness  Manager,  Rural  Finance  Manager  and  Finance  (and  Admin)
20 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Manager,  heading  competent  staff  within  their  respective  units.  Technical  assistance  in  the  form  of 
consultants  will  also  continue  to  bring  a  higher  level  of  professionalism  and  expertise  to  the 
programme.  In  order  to  support  specific  interventions  (e.g.  as  relates  to  institutional  strengthening, 
capacity  building  or  4P  facilitation  where  required),  institutional  service  providers  will  be  contracted.
To  support  the  policy  agenda  to  promote  pro-poor  partnerships  with  the  private  sector,  and
107. 
given  the  multitude  of  SAP  programme  stakeholders  comprising  multiple  ministries  and  public 
agencies, private  sector  companies, business associations, financial institutions,  producers and  their 
organizations,  the  element  of  learning  and  knowledge  dissemination  and  management  is  critical  to 
sustainability  of  the  programme  interventions  and  future  uptake  and  up-scaling  of  the  model  and 
approaches  tested  and  promoted  by  SAP.  To  facilitate  this  knowledge  management,  specialised 
information  and  communication  materials  will  be  developed.
studies, 
training  manuals  and 
As  well, the institutional housing of the SAP programme within the Presidential Secretariat as
108. 
the lead programme agency, presents a  very strong opportunity to ensure high-level policy dialogue, 
coordination with key public institutions, and to promote a multi-sectoral approach and support to the 
programme. The  high-level  engagement will  also  translate to  the  operational  level,  with  coordinated 
partnership amongst the key public institutions (the Mahaweli Authority especially). In addition, priority 
cross-cutting issues such as nutrition and natural resources management/ climate change adaptation 
will be pursued at a high-level, to inform and feed into programme operations on the one hand, and to 
interventions.
findings  and  results  arising 
as  well  be 
from  programme 
informed  by 
the 
Further detail on programme management, implementation and institutional arrangements are
109. 
provided in the appendices.
Under  sub-component  3.2  (policy  dialogue),  the  activities  to  be  supported  will  aim  at
110. 
improving  the  policy  environment  for  equitable  and  sustainable  smallholder  farmer–sourced 
agribusiness  development.  To  achieve  this,  the  policy  dialogue  agenda  will  be  built  on  two  broad 
thrusts.
Under  the  first  thrust,  the  programme  will  create  space  for  policy  dialogue  between  national
111. 
stakeholders  and  then  support  that  dialogue. At  the  national  level,  4P  multi-stakeholder meetings 
will   be   established,  with   participation  of   representatives  of   relevant   government  agencies,  of 
producers  and  their  organizations  involved  in  agricultural  value  chains,  of  private  sector  processors 
and  exporters,  and  of  interested  banks  and  MFIs.  These  4P  multi-stakeholder  meetings,  which  the 
PMU  will  convene twice  per  year,  will  be  professionally facilitated by  a  partner  organization such  as 
the Institute of Policy Studies of Sri Lanka. The meetings will serve as an opportunity for the different 
actors along the programme-supported agricultural value chains to interact, and specifically, to identify 
and  bring  to  the  attention  of  Government  critical  policy  and  regulatory  issues  affecting  the  sector 
(which  may  in  some  cases  have  been  already  pre-identified  by  the  PMU);  to  prioritise  these  and 
propose research, where needed, to  better analyse the issues and identify solutions; and to  validate 
the findings and advocate for policy change. Commodity-specific or other follow-up meetings involving 
a  sub-set  of  the  participants may  also  be  held,  where  there  is  demand  to  do  so.  A preliminary and 
partial scoping exercise has identified a number of possible policy issues for the programme to pursue 
(see Appendix 4), though these would be validated and prioritised – or replaced by other issues – by 
the  4P  multi-stakeholder  meetings  before  any  subsequent  work  would  be  undertaken.
The process of policy dialogue will be enhanced by strengthening the capacity of smallholder
112. 
farmer representatives to enable them to participate effectively in the meetings.  The capacity building 
activities under sub-component 1.2 will include support to farmer organizations to develop their policy 
skills.
dialogue 
advocacy 
and 
All policy issues prioritised for follow-up action by the 4P multi-stakeholder meetings will then
113. 
be presented to the National Steering Committee for its endorsement. While the approach to be taken 
relative to specific policy issues will vary case-by-case, further policy research/analysis is  likely to be 
required,  in  order  to  identify  detailed  policy  options.  The  programme  will  support  such  analysis  (a 
provision has  been made for two such studies per  year  –  total 10  –  to be carried out),  which  will  be
21 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
conducted  by  contracted  research  organizations  and/or  researchers.  The  research  will  be 
subsequently  reviewed  and  the  recommendations  of  that  research  endorsed  by  the  4P  multi- 
meetings.
stakeholder 
Under  the  second  thrust,  the  lessons  of  programme  implementation  experience  will  be
114. 
analysed. The PMU will identify particularly successful approaches and models piloted or developed; 
analyse  these  (the  programme  will  support    data  collection  for  the  analysis,  where  necessary);  and 
where  appropriate  promote  their  adoption  /  scaling  up  by  government  under  a  national  strategy  or 
programme would be promoted. The need for, and scope of, such studies would be identified as a key 
part of the knowledge management function of the programme. At this stage, a provision for two such 
studies  per  year,  from  2020  onwards,  has  been  made  in  the  programme  cost  tables.  A  number  of 
4.
possible 
Appendix 
identified 
topics 
study 
been 
have 
for 
in 
Under  both  thrusts,  the  programme  will  look  to  turn  relevant  policy  analysis  into  policy
115. 
change.This  will  require  the  development  of  specific  strategies  tailored  to  the  topic  or  issue  in 
question, which should be endorsed once again by the NSC, Depending on the needs of the specific 
policy  in  question,  the  PMU  may  prepare  policy  briefs,  video  films  etc.  It  may  conduct  advocacy 
activities,  including  with  parliamentarians  as  necessary;  and  offer  exposure  visits  to  senior  policy 
makers  and  other  stakeholders,  to  enable  them  to  visit  sites  both  within  Sri  Lanka  and  in  other 
countries in Asia and Africa, to  view cases  where  proposed policies have  been  successfully applies. 
The programme will also offer support: to the process of drafting policy documents or regulations; for 
public consultations around specific draft policy documents; or for kickstarting the operationalisation of 
new  policies,  where  policy change  has  been  effected. In  pursuing specific  policy  agendas, alliances 
with  other  advocacy  groups  and  organizations  will  be  developed  wherever  this  can  strengthen  the 
impact.
scope 
achieving 
policy 
for 
Overall responsibility for managing sub-component 3.2 will lie  with the PMU  – specifically, the
116. 
Programme Director, supported by  DPM, M&E  and  KM,  as  well  as  the  relevant  technical  specialists 
within  the  PMU.  He/she  will  be  responsible  for:  planning  and  managing  the  biannual  4P  Business 
Forum,  and  ensuring  that  decisions  made  there  are  followed  up;  managing  and  supervising  the 
processes of conducting policy research and analysis; facilitating discussion within the PMU, in order 
to identify approaches and models to be assessed, and managing these assessments; managing the 
development of issue-specific policy advocacy plans; and presenting both the prioritised policy issues 
and  advocacy  plans  to  the  National  Steering  Committee  for  its  endorsement. Other  partners  in  the 
implementation of the sub-component would include: (a) relevant government agencies; organizations 
of smallholder farmers; representatives of agribusiness – aggregators, processors and exporters etc; 
academia/policy researchers, as  participants in  the  4P Multistakeholder Meetings; (b)  the  Institute of 
Policy  Studies,  which  may  be  invited  to  facilitate  the  4P  Stakeholder Meetings;  and  (c)  universities, 
policy research institutes and consultants, as contracted service providers to conduct policy analysis. 
D. 
Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies and the SECAP 
Lessons  learned.  The  SAP  programme  is  informed  by  the  lessons  learned  stemming  from
117. 
past  and  ongoing  programmes/ programmes supported by  IFAD  in  Sri  Lanka  and  other  countries  in 
the  region;  in  particular, SAP  incorporates detailed  lessons  of  NADeP. These  lessons  learned  cover 
an  array  of  issues,  related  to  agribusiness and  4Ps,  programme management, gender,  approaches, 
etc.; the most relevant lessons to SAP are provided below: 
(a)      Financing administration and programme management: in the past, IFAD-financed 
programmes have suffered from delayed loan effectiveness and resulting slow start-up; 
to the extent possible, new financing should build on existing structures and 
mechanisms, and early and continuous consultation with Government is essential to 
mitigate delays; as well the selection and retention of qualified staff is a critical element to 
ensure timely implementation and performance; when delayed, there is further 
consequence in terms of long implementation delays.
22 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
(b)      Factors affecting efficiency of value chains: investment in technology to improve on-farm 
productivity, primary level processing to reduce product losses and transportation costs, 
and risk reduction related to farming (and ensuring steady supplies) have bearing on the 
efficiency of value chains; investing in an integrated package of activities is more 
conducive to achieving efficiencies. 
(c)      Marketing margins: programmes seeking to channel improved profit margins to farmer/ 
producers need to consider supporting their involvement/ uptake in primary processing, 
in addition to the conventional forms of support to their on-farm production. 
118. 
The detailed lessons learned from NADeP implementation are as follows: 
(a)      Growing interest by the private sector to enter into 4P arrangements: there is evidence of 
growing private sector interest in the 4P model, demonstrated by the 50+ business 
proposals received by NADeP after only two calls for proposal. The appeal of the 4P 
model from the point of view of the private sector is that the matching grant element of 
the investment can address non-profit related issues such as improved technologies 
leading to quality, better organization, etc. As well, the private sector appreciates the 
linkage between small producers and the financial sector for credit, as this lends itself to 
the credibility of the small producer’s commitment to the investment and production. 
(b)      Private-sector partner profile: the preferred private sector partner would be experienced 
and financially secure and established companies, as opposed to small (new) companies 
or NGOs/ CBOs with limited market experience and capacities. The rationale is that 
established companies have the capacity to provide extension services, offer a ready 
market with absorption capacity, and don’t require any additional financing for their own 
operations. In the context of inexperienced farmer/ producers, engaging with 
inexperienced companies presents a greater risk to achieving good results and increased 
income for the target group. 
(c)      Joint collaboration to develop technical and financial business proposals: the process of 
developing viable 4P business proposals requires strong negotiation and clarity, to 
ensure that all actors are aware of the ‘rules of engagement’ and responsibilities; this 
refers to the co-financing arrangements and expectations of the commitment and value 
added of each partner in the 4P; as well, the business model and the final expected 
income to farmers are important elements of the final proposal. In the case of the private 
sector specifically, their willingness to provide technical and extension services is critical. 
The actual process of finalizing a business proposal has been demonstrated to be 
relatively fast, requiring six months on average. 
(d)      Graduation approach to avoid complexity: the experience of establishing 4Ps is still 
relatively nascent in the Sri Lanka context, and building trust across partners is a longer- 
term process. Subsequently, the partnership to be nurtured should be modest (such as 
the outgrower scheme) in the first instance. NADeP experience suggests that there is 
need to first establish 4Ps that are characterized by linking the private sector with 
individual farmers who are identified and grouped by the company itself; a progressive 
second level would pursue 4Ps that link the private sector to better organized producer 
organizations; and finally, the most progressive model would be to promote producer 
organization-led business proposals. Once the trust has been strengthened, only then is 
there more flexibility to deepen the scope of the partnership. It is also worth noting that at 
present, per NADeP’s experience, very few farmer organizations have reached a level of 
maturity to take on ‘business’ and financial responsibilities/ functions; the assumptions of 
producer organizations should be reviewed closely. 
(e)      Rural finance needs: Overwhelmingly, small producers continue to identify the lack of 
affordable short-term working capital to finance their regular agricultural seasonal needs; 
in general, the financial products on the market are currently often entirely inaccessible,
23 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
and where credit institutions are ready to provide loans, many farmers feel that the rates 
are too high, given that even the hypothetically high returns may easily erode as a result 
of delayed or excessive rains, pests, insect infestations or other mishaps. In an interest 
rate sensitive society, they often prefer not to borrow if they perceive that the balance 
between additional costs and additional risks is not in their favor. There is, therefore, 
scope to promote seasonal agricultural loans (at more feasible interest rates) to meet 
short-term working capital needs. W ith this product, small producers would be able to 
purchase inputs in support of increasing their production/ productivity, and will similarly 
avoid the risk of indebtedness to moneylenders and loss of their rights to cultivate their 
own land (where land is used as ‘collateral’ by moneylenders). The same applies to 
investments and term finance. 
(f)       Formal financial sector system capacity: The CBSL, commercial banks and MFIs have all 
identified capacity constraints as preventing them from being able to service, reach out 
and meet the needs of the target group (small producers engaged in the rural/ 
agricultural sector). The capacity constraints relate to human resources in terms of 
manpower (number of loan officers) and skills set. Subsequently, the complementary 
trained ‘social mobilisers’ offered by NADeP, are highly appreciated and the approach 
should be replicated, as it allows for more efficient pre-screening of potential clients and 
brings the segment specific needs upfront. The provision of support to the CBSL and 
performing PFIs is also geared at closing the knowledge and skills gaps. uilt 
(g)      Savings: Even though some banks and development programmes have in the past 
adopted the self-help group linkage models with its in-built savings approach, only few 
banks are at present actively engaged in mobilizing savings from among rural borrowers. 
However, the PFIs contacted would highly appreciate the creation of a savings habit 
among their 4P clients, as it would reduce the liquidity constraints, build financial 
reserves among the clients for any mishaps, and create the basis for more significant 
investments in machinery and equipment. The planned interventions of the social 
mobilizers to create a systematic savings process, and savings as a habit, is therefore 
highly needed. 
(h)      Line of credit (LOC): Disbursement under the NADeP LOC accelerated by more than 
300% in one year, following a re-negotiation of the interest rate from 13.25% to 6.5% to 
the end borrower. The reasons for the accelerated performance may be attributable to 
the fact that the new interest rate is much more attractive to the end-borrower, also 
because the interest rates in the market had overall declined in the meantime. While the 
available allocation for self-help groups was USD 6 million before, PFIs have fully 
committed these funds within one year, and have already appraised an additional USD 9 
million in demand for loans, which they would have approved if funds were available 
under the LOC. NADeP has supported and strengthened linkages between the PFIs and 
target groups through trained social mobilisers; and the PMU chairs joint meetings on a 
monthly basis with PFIs and CBSL to monitor, follow-up and resolve issues. Whilst 
national figures show that less than 29% of clients receive credit and that loan 
outstanding to agriculture is only 9%, in the case of the NADeP LOC, almost 40% of 
NADeP-linked clients received credit (7,100 out of 18,000 registered through self-help 
groups; 79% of borrowers are women) of an average loan size of USD 650. About 48% 
of these loans were used primarily for agriculture-related activities. This confirms the 
need for a LoC to help rural farmers test the innovations emerging under the 4P 
investment plans and thereby increase incomes and the stability of income flows. 
(i)       Role of the 4P broker: appraising the 4P business plans requires specialists who are 
familiar with the language of business on the one hand, as well as agronomists (with 
technical and field knowledge of farm production, etc.), in order to ensure that the 
underlying assumptions and cost-benefit analysis undertaken by the appraisal/
24 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
evaluation team is sound. Based on the NADeP experience, the PMU with its in-house 
Technical Assistance team is the best placed ‘broker’ of 4Ps. The broker team has direct 
interest and is committed to establishing 4Ps; the team also has demonstrated technical 
capacity, and has shown this by developing 15 4Ps within one year. 
(j)       Household monitoring: Farmer/ producers are not fully sensitized on monitoring their 
income derived from production sales vis-à-vis their expenditure requirements; in 
general, there is need for producers to monitor their expenditure, production, sales and 
income at the farm-level to better inform their farming/ production decisions; this kind of 
household/ farm monitoring also supports testing of assumptions made on cost-benefit 
analysis of production and farming models that are part of the BP proposals. 
(k)      Supporting the rural youth: As expressed to social mobilisers with close contact to youth 
in rural communities, access to finance is one of the key challenges for rural youth. Their 
financing needs which can help them to start-up small business are in the range of USD 
1000-3000, though they require support from social mobilisers who are also interlocuters 
with PFIs (and know loan officer appraisal priorities), to shape their business plan and 
request for financing. This model of working with social mobilisers as a go-between the 
youth and PFIs, works well in mobilizing start-up funds for youth; the specific line of credit 
dedicated to youth, also supports the approach. 
Adherence to  IFAD  policies  and  SECAP. The  SAP  programme is  fully  aligned  with  IFAD's
119. 
Strategic Framework 2016-2025, in  pursuit of  the mutually reinforcing strategic objectives, especially 
by  way  of  promoting investment in  productive capacities and  encouraging better  and  deeper market 
participation  (and  benefits)  through  the  vehicle  of  4Ps.  The  principles  of  engagement  (targeting; 
empowerment;    gender    equality;    innovation,    learning    and    scaling    up;    and    partnerships)    are 
furthermore,  fully  embedded  in  the  programme,  through  the  programme  4P  and  institutional 
strengthening approach, and operating modalities. With respect to rural finance, SAP adheres to  the 
lines  of  credit.
financing  and 
IFAD  guidelines 
for  value  chain 
the  use  of 
for 
The programme design also adheres to IFAD policies and strategies for targeting and gender
120. 
mainstreaming,  environment  and  natural  resource  management,  climate  change  and  social, 
environmental  and  climate  assessment,  and  scaling  up  (see  Appendix  12).  The  environmental  and 
social  category  is  considered to  be  B,  while  the  climate  risk  classification is  deemed  to  be  Medium 
Risk. 
III.   Programme implementation 
A. 
Approach 
The  overarching principles  that  frame  and  govern  management and  coordination of  the  SAP
121. 
programme  are  the  following:  (i)  alignment  with  Government  priorities  (includes  collaboration  with 
other  development  partners  and  opportunities);  (ii)  a  demand-driven  and  flexible  approach;  (iii) 
adoption  of  a  market-driven  and  private  sector-led  approach;  (iv)  inclusive  rural  financial  services 
provision; (v) joint financing (cost-sharing) and risk-sharing; (vi) competitive selection of partners and 
viable  business  plans;  (vii)  empowerment, organisation and  strengthening of  smallholder farmers  as 
business  partners;  and  (viii)  complementary  support  to  market-driven  self-employment  activities  for 
youth).
specific 
population 
segments 
landless 
rural 
(i.e. 
the 
of 
The mechanism by which these principles are embodied is through the promotion of mutually
122. 
beneficial  (win-win)  Public-Private-Producer  Partnerships  (4Ps)  between  private  companies  and 
smallholder  farmers.  These  4Ps   will   build   on   the   lessons  learned  from   the   ongoing  NADeP 
programme  and  adopt  some  of  the  good  practices  identified  by  IFAD  in  applying  this  approach 
worldwide.  This  is  key  to  ensure  that  the  4P  partners  have  incentives  to  respect  the  contractual 
agreements, avoiding  for  example  side-selling,  and  maintaining  fair  pricing,  which  serves  to  ensure 
partnership.
sustainability 
the 
success 
and 
the 
of 
25 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
In  the  first  instance,  the  decision to  support  a  4P  requires  a  strong rationale for  a  4P.  In  the
123. 
process of setting up the partnership, the programme should assess whether the following questions 
are  properly addressed: what is  the  aim  and  what  are  the  objectives to  be  achieved;  to  what  extent 
are  the  interests  (incentives)  of  different  actors  aligned  towards  a  common  objective;  and  is  the 
partnership responding to  a  sustainable market demand. Secondly, it  is  important to  make  a  careful 
selection  of  the  4P  partners  both,  private  companies  and  producer/  farmers.  To  this  end  SAP  will 
adopt  a  competitive  process  (based  on  expressions  of  interest  and  call  for  proposals),  well  tested 
under  the  ongoing  NADeP  programme;  however,  special  attention  will  be  given  in  supporting  the 
design  of  4Ps  initiated  by  farmers  organisations,  as  they  have  less  capacity  compared  with  private 
companies. Subsequently, technical  assistance through  a  qualified service  provider  will  be  critical  to 
develop a viable and bankable 4P business plan in consultation with the potential commercial partner. 
A  third  element  is  related  to  the  negotiation  of  the  business  model  proposed  in  the  4P  scheme 
(whether the model is an integrated outgrower scheme (like some of those supported under NADeP), 
a  simple commercial agreement between two  parties, or  a  more complex co-investment into  a  post- 
harvest handling /  processing facility)  – i.e. how will all the parties profit/benefit from  the partnership, 
ensuring  the  partnership  is  truly  a  win-win  arrangement.  Fourthly,  in  the  negotiation  of  the  4P,  the 
partners/  parties  must  agree  on  their  respective  roles  and  responsibilities,  including  each  partner’s 
share  of  risks  and  benefits;  as  well,  unforeseen  circumstances  (e.g.  natural  disaster,  pest  and 
disease, price drop) which may affect the capacity of one of the parties to honour the agreement need 
to  be  considered  and  discussed.  Finally,  as  currently  being  applied  in  NADeP,  the  4Ps  should  be 
based on cost-sharing arrangements agreed upon by all parties. To this end, it is critical to ensure that 
the  agribusiness  sector  actually  contribute  to  the  partnership  with  funding  and  know-how  made 
available to farmers. The same applies to the financial sector which is requested to step in under SAP 
funds.
as 
co-finance 
full-fledge 
partner 
willing 
own 
with 
its 
to 
In  complement  to  the  4Ps,  special  attention  will  be  given  to  income  generating  activities  in
124. 
which youth, in particular those who do not have land and other assets to be involved in farming, can 
be  profitably  involved.  These  opportunities  should  be  explored  during  the  preparation  of  the  4P 
business plans  by  requesting the  promoter/ originator(s) to  identify,  based  on  the  product and  value 
chain,  complementary  goods  and  services  demanded  by  4P  partners  (e.g.  veterinary  services, 
equipment).
organic 
maintenance 
compost, 
of 
Finally,  the  design  of  the  SAP  programme  acknowledges  the  importance  of  promoting  an
125. 
enabling  policy  and  regulatory environment for  the  private  sector  to  operate  and  respond  to  market 
opportunities.  Therefore,  it  will 
the 
agribusiness/agriculture and  the  rural  finance  sector  where  key  policy  issues  could  be  identified  by 
programme  stakeholders.  This  will  be  supported  by  joint  performance  monitoring,  knowledge 
dissemination  (and  management)  and  specific  technical  assistance  as  part  of  an  integrated  policy 
dialogue and engagement process. 
B. 
Organizational framework 
facilitate  spaces  of  dialogue  and 
interaction  with  both 
126. 
In  general, SAP  will  largely replicate the  institutional and implementation structure of  NADeP,
building on the strong leadership in place, and  which has helped guide NADeP in its transformation 
into a well-performing programme.
Executing  and  key  agencies.  The  executing  agency  or  lead  programme  agency  (LPA)  for
127. 
SAP  is  the  Presidential Secretariat, which  by  virtue  of  its  high-level status,  is  best  placed  to  ensure 
effective  mobilisation  and  coordination  amongst  the  various  public  agencies  (including  the  Central 
Bank) and  with  private sector partners (including financial institutions, companies, associations, etc.) 
who either directly have implementation responsibilities, or  a  supporting  role (e.g. research, training, 
mobilisation  of  farmer  organizations,  complementary  extension  services,  etc.).  In  support  of  farmer 
organizations and 4Ps covering a range of  value chains/ sub-sectors, the key agencies implicated in 
the   programme   include:   the   Mahaweli   Authority   (especially   its   well-developed   network   and
26 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
organizational  structure);  Ministry  of  Agriculture;  Department  of  Export  Agriculture;  Department  of 
Agriculture; and Exports Development Board.
A  National  Steering  Committee  (NSC)  will  provide  programme  oversight  and  direction,
128. 
chaired by the  Secretary to  the  President or  his  representative. The  SAP NSC  will  be  based  on  the 
NSC for  NALeP,  with  minor adjustments made on  one hand to  allow for  adequate representation by 
non-government programme stakeholders, while on the other to ensure that the committee remains of 
a size that is manageable. It will be chaired by the Secretary to the President, and will comprise 11 of 
the  current  members  representing  government or  government agencies,  plus  representatives of  the 
Mahaweli Authority and  the  Department of  Export Agriculture of  the  Ministry of  Primary Industries. It 
will  additionally include  representation from  the  Ceylon  Chamber of  Commerce (in  turn  representing 
the  interests  of  agribusiness)  plus  a  representative  of  the  participating  financial  institutions.(The full 
membership is shown in Appendix 5). The NSC will meet at least twice-yearly to review and approve 
the SAP Annual Work Plan and Budgets prior to its submission to IFAD for no objection; and to review 
implementation  and  financial  progress.  It  will  additionally  appoint  the  4P  evaluation  committee  and 
endorse the 4P schemes to be submitted to IFAD for no objection; and it  will also endorse the policy 
issues prioritised for follow-up action by the 4P multi-stakeholder meetings and the advocacy strategy 
analysed.
developed 
policy 
issue 
each 
for 
Management  structure.  Through  the  LPA,  responsibility  for  programme  management  is
129. 
delegated to the Programme Management Unit (PMU) based in Colombo, which will evolve from, and 
leverage  the  experience  and  strong  human  resources  of  the  current  NADeP  PMU;  the  PMU  will  be 
further  augmented  by  technical  assistance/  consultants  who  will  bring  a  higher  level  of  business 
orientation and  professionalism to  the  programme (in  respect  of  the  business-oriented nature  of  the 
programme). In  terms  of  overall  responsibilities, the  PMU  is  tasked  with  delivery  of  the  programme 
and its performance; as well, key functions of the PMU relate to planning, coordination, facilitation and 
brokerage  (amongst  4P  stakeholders),  and  monitoring  and  evaluation.  Given  the  scope  of  the 
proposed  programme,  key  managerial  positions  within  the  PMU  include  a   Programme  Director, 
Deputy  Programme  Director,  Agribusiness  Manager,  Rural  Finance  Manager  and  Finance  (and 
Admin)  Manager,  heading  competent  staff  within  their  respective  units;  specialists  in  areas  of  M&E 
and  gender  and  youth  will  also  form  part  of  the  PMU  (the  PMU  organigramme  is  provided  in  the 
appendix).
130. 
In  order  to  support  specific  interventions  (e.g.  as  relates  to  institutional  strengthening  or
capacity building or 4P facilitation where required), institutional service providers will be contracted by 
the PMU.
Other  partnerships.  In  addition  to  the  direct  partnerships  to  be  established  under  the  4P
131. 
arrangements   and   with   relevant   public   agencies,   SAP   will   seek   to   establish   strong   and 
complementary linkages with the recently approved USD 125 million W B-financed Agriculture Sector 
Modernization Programme (WB-ASMP), under  the  Ministry of  Primary Industries as  lead  agency. As 
conceived, SAP’s specific target group comprises the rural poor and vulnerable; under the 4P model, 
these  are  largely  individuals  or  informal  groups/  organizations  with  limited  capacities  (in  terms  of 
organization,  marketing,  business  and  services-orientation).  The  WB-ASMP  on  the  other  hand,  is 
supporting the  development of  agribusiness companies and  eligible  producer  organizations  who  are 
already registered under the Companies Act, and which suggests that these are already mature and 
business-oriented institutions26. W hilst  the  SAP  target  group  differs from  the WB target  group, they 
can however be organized, supported and strengthened to graduate to a level that they then become 
eligible  for  the W B  support. With  representation of  the  Ministry of  Primary Industries in  SAP’s  NSC, 
effective knowledge sharing between the two programmes and  the opportunities to build linkages and 
synergies is expected. Finally, the SAP programme can also cooperate with the WB-ASMP in the area 
of policy engagement and dialogue. 
26  It is worth noting that the WB-ASMP matching grant facility is provided on a 50-50 ratio; with a minimum grant in the amount 
of USD 5000 (up to USD 75,000), the expectation is that the PO can mobilise an additional USD 5000 through own profits or 
credit; in either case, this suggests that the POs have a much greater capacity then the IFAD target group.
27 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
C. 
Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management 
Extensive   early   planning   and   preparation   by   stakeholders,   and   subsequent   rigorous
132. 
assessment is part and parcel of programme implementation, as a means to promote sustainability in 
the  financing  of  4P  business  plans  and  towards  building  capacity  of  farmer  groups  for  eventual 
transformation  into  farmer  organizations  and  companies.  As  the  model  of  4Ps  is  still  relatively 
innovative, a solid M&E system will be put in place to facilitate timely and responsive monitoring and 
decision-making, as well as learning for broader dissemination. 
Planning 
The  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  (AW PB)  and  Procurement  Plan  (PP)  represents  the
133. 
outcome of the participatory and consultative planning process to be adopted by the SAP programme; 
they further serve as the instruments for identifying specific targets and activities; the AWPB and PP 
integrates  management  priorities  for  implementation,  forecasts  procurement  requirements  and 
facilitates the mobilization of staff and financial resources. The draft AW PB and PP is approved by the 
programme National Steering Committee (NSC) and subsequently submitted to IFAD for no objection. 
Monitoring and evaluation 
The main purpose of an M&E system is to provide comprehensive, frequent and reliable data
134. 
and  information  for  sound  result-based management and  decision-making. It  is  thus  intended  to  be 
management  tool  that  can  inform  programme  management  of  whether  implementation  is  going  as 
planned  or  corrective  action  is  needed.  Beyond  that  however,  it  should  also  contribute  to  the 
programme’s  learning  agenda  as  to  what  works,  what  doesn’t  and  why;  and  it  should  promote 
accountability – enabling the PMU to report to Government and IFAD on its performance and impact.
remedial  actions.  Participatory  M&E, 
The  programme  M&E  system  will  be  based  on  the  logframe  and  will  report  on  the  RIMS
135. 
indicators; though the lower level performance indicators identified in the programme logframe may be 
further refined where necessary during implementation. All data will be disaggregated by sex and age 
where applicable, so as to be able to produce information on different target groups and beneficiaries 
(women, men and youth). M&E will be utilised as a management tool, and will include an assessment 
of  progress  and  adoption  of  best  practices  and  recommendations,  identification  of  constraints  and 
proposed 
in-depth 
assessments, will be undertaken on a regular basis. The baseline situation will be established within 
six months of  the  programme becoming operational, though for  each  4P approved, specific baseline 
surveys will also take place. Outcome surveys  will be carried out on an annual basis, per  guidelines 
development by IFAD’s APR Division. The final impact evaluation will serve to assess the contribution 
of  the  SAP  programme  towards  achieving  the  development  objective,  relying  heavily,  though  not 
exclusively, on the rigorous monitoring and evaluation of the financed 4P schemes (sub-projects) and 
their  results;  a  final  survey  will  be  conducted,  which  will  collect  data  and  information  related  to  the 
etc.).
RIMS 
including  qualitative  surveys  and 
malnutrition, 
impact-level 
(household 
indicators 
assets, 
child 
The overall responsibility for M&E activities will lie with the Deputy Programme Manager of the
136. 
PMU,  assisted  by  two  development  assistants,  who  would  collectively  be  responsible  for  collecting 
and  analyzing  the  data.  Data  collection  and  inputting  into  the  web-based  system  would  be  the 
responsibility of the Social Mobilisers, the 4P partners (companies, FOs), service providers and PFIs, 
on the basis of agreed reporting formats and timing. Specifically, in consideration of the 4P schemes 
and the attention to promoting FO-led 4Ps, M&E and RIMS training will be provided to those involved 
FOs).
in 
implementation 
programme 
(especially 
level 
the 
the 
the 
of 
of 
at 
137. 
The  M&E  system  will  be  expected  to  generate  comprehensive  and  reliable  information  to
improve planning and decision making for results-based management during the programme life. The 
system will provide, and analyse, data on the following: 
(a)      Output monitoring; focusing on physical and financial inputs, activities and outputs; 
(b)      Outcome monitoring; assessing the use of outputs and measuring benefits; and
28 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
(c)      Impact assessment; assessing impact for target groups in comparison with objectives. 
Annual  and   quarterly  reports  would  be  produced  which   would  contain  data  relevant  to
138. 
programme inputs (financial), outputs and emerging outcome/impact.
The  M&E  system  will  be  participatory and  decentralized; and  all  data,  analysis  and  reporting
139. 
would be disaggregated by sex and age where appropriate.
Progress  reporting  and  evaluation  formats  would  be  designed  to  capture  sex  and  age-
140. 
disaggregated  data  at  all  levels  and  to  record  progress  against  the  baseline  data.  Programme  staff 
responsible for data collection and monitoring should be trained in understanding and applying gender 
analysis. A key role  of  the  PMU's M&E  Specialist would be to  effectively integrate gender  and  youth 
specific  indicators  within  the  programme's  performance  measurement  framework  and  to  ensure 
programme stakeholders with  M&E  responsibilities have  the  awareness and  skills  to  measure these 
gender and  youth-specific indicators. Both  the  gender and  youth strategies  will  also  inform  the M&E 
needs.
and 
system 
The  Management  Information  System  (MIS).  The  M&E  system  will  be  part  of  a  larger  MIS
141. 
system to be developed within the first year of implementation, and which will serve as an information 
and  knowledge  sharing  platform.  The  SAP-developed  MIS  system  will  integrate  programme-based 
information   (M&E   data   and   fund   disbursement),   lessons   learned,   finance,   inventory,   task 
management, payroll management, leave management, microfinance data, etc. It is expected that all 
partners including the  private sector companies, government agencies and other public users  will be 
given  access  (with  varying  levels  of  user-permission)  to  the  system  once  fully  established,  which 
contributes to  enhanced knowledge management. The system  would  include some highly innovative 
features, such  as  an  ‘app’ (application) developed specifically to  feed  the  system,  and  which  allows 
enhanced  and  efficient  data  collection  in  real  time  at  the  field-level  (i.e.  a  data  collection  app).  In 
complement,  an  SMS  communication  and  broadcasting  system  will  be  developed  to  reduce  the 
communication gap between field-level farmers and the programme. 
Learning and knowledge management 
Learning  and  knowledge  management  are  integral  to  the  successful  implementation  and
142. 
sustainability  of  the  models  and  approaches  to  be  promoted  by  SAP.  By  virtue  of  the  multiple 
programme stakeholders, especially the 4P partners/ parties, knowledge sharing  and management is 
critical for effective coordination, and towards instilling a lasting and sustainable model of partnership. 
This is also closely linked to the policy engagement efforts, which seek to ensure that the policy and 
regulatory framework is  conducive. Subsequently, the  analysis of  data  and  information generated by 
the  M&E  system  will  be  central  to  feed  into  knowledge  management,  and  dissemination,  learning 
events,  and  promotional,  advocacy  and  policy  forums  are  key  activities  to  be  pursued  under  the 
programme. 
D. 
Financial management, procurement and governance 
The proposed financial management arrangements for the programme incorporate a number of
143. 
measures intended to  reduce risks  to  acceptable  levels, ensuring that: (i)  the  programme funds and 
assets created are used for their intended purposes in an efficient and effective way; and (ii) reliable 
and timely financial reports are prepared and submitted to GoSL and IFAD. 
Financial Management and disbursement arrangements
Financial  management.  Taking  into  consideration  the  experience  of  IFAD-financed  project
144. 
NADEP,  a  financial  management  assessment  was  undertaken  during  the  second  design  mission  in 
relation to the new SAP project. The assessment was guided IFAD's guidelines on assessing financial 
management risk  at  design  and  its  findings  are  detailed  in  appendix  7.  The  overall  project  financial 
stage.
management 
assessed 
Medium 
design 
risk 
be 
to 
at 
is 
29 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
145.  The  Presidential  Secretariat  as  the  Lead  Project  Agency  (LPA),  will  be  accountable  for  the
financial  management  of  the  project  and  for  putting  in  place  procedures  meeting  IFAD's  fiduciary 
requirements to ensure that funds are used for the intended purposes.
Organisation and staffing. The existing NADeP PMU is expected to be retained/ transferred
146. 
as  a  dedicated  and  autonomous  PMU  established  under  the  Presidential  Secretariat,  though 
strengthened  to  include  additional  positions  relevant  to  achieving  the  SAP  project  objectives.  This 
PMU  will  be  responsible  for  implementing  all  operational-level  fiduciary  functions.  The  Finance 
department  of  the  PMU  will  consist  of  a  Finance  Manager,  released  on  a  full-time  basis  from  the 
Government Service, to be assisted by a Deputy Finance Manager and two Accounts Assistants. The 
Finance  department,  reporting  to  the  Project  Manager,  will  take  on  the  key  functions  of  project 
administration.
Fiduciary functions. The PMU and Finance unit in particular, will be responsible for fiduciary
147. 
functions  that  include:  preparation  of  the  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget  (AW PB)  and  Procurement 
Plan  (PP)  (through  the  consultative  process  the  technical/  operational  departments,  and  project 
stakeholders); submission of applications to withdraw advances from the Designated Account to meet 
project  expenditures  based  on  available  budgetary  provision;  release  of  adequate  funds  to  project 
partners  for  undertaking  project  activities;  preparation  of  withdrawal  applications  (WA)  based  on 
actual  expenditure  statements;  preparation  and  updating  the  annual  procurement  plan,  maintaining 
Fixed Asset Register (FAR) of the project, preparation of  annual financial statements ,  preparation of 
quarterly  financial  reports  for  submission  to  IFAD  and  the  LPA,  maintaining  the  Audit  Log  and 
responding  to  the  Auditor  General  on  issues  raised  and  action  taken  to  resolve  them  with  copy  to 
/  Detailed  audit  Report.
IFAD  within  one  month 
the  receipt  of  Management  Letter 
from 
Budgeting. The PMU shall prepare mid-year its submission for the national budget to ensure
148. 
timely  appropriations of  IFAD  and  GoSL funding  in  the  autumn  as  part  of  parliamentary processes. 
The  detailed  annual  budget,  linking  all  the  planned  activities  to  component  and  cost  categories 
outlined  in  the  Financing  Agreement  will  be  prepared  in  consultation  with  project  stakeholders  and 
submitted to the National Steering Committee and IFAD for approval prior to  year end.  Monitoring of 
AW PB  execution  by  the  PMU  will  be  ensured  by  automated  financial  reporting  system.  Interim 
financial  reports  will  be  submitted to  IFAD  on  a  quarterly basis,  including  a  report  of  budget  versus 
actuals.
Disbursement arrangements and  flow  of  funds.  A designated account (DA)  in  US  Dollars
149. 
will  be  opened  at  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka  (CBSL),  managed  by  the  General  Treasury.    Two 
accounts  for  day  to  day  operations,  managed  under  dual  signature  by  the  Project  Manager  and 
Finance  Manager,  will  be  opened  at  Bank  of  Ceylon  or  another  bank  designated  by  the  Borrower, 
respectively for  IFAD  and  GoSL  funded  expenditure.  The  PMU  will  be  responsible  for  ensuring  the 
flow  of  funds  from  the  Designated  Account  and  General  Treasury  respectively,  through  imprest 
applications approved by the LPA, submitted via the Treasury to CBSL.   A dedicated account will be 
opened  at  CBSL,  operated  by  RDD,  for  operations  under  the  line  of  credit.  Fund  transfer  requests 
from the DA to the CBSL RDD account will follow the same approval mechanism as described above.
An initial deposit, agreed during negotiations and specified in the LTB, will be released by IFAD
150. 
to the credit of the DA.   Replenishments of the DA will be effected through submission of Withdrawal 
Applications (WAs) and accompanying Statements of Expenditures (SOEs), in accordance with IFAD 
procedures  as  set  out  in  the  LTB  and  Loan  Disbursement Handbook. Other  available  disbursement 
threshold  –  and  reimbursements.
methods  will  be  direct  payments  –  above  a  specified 
A start-up  advance may be  provided  once  the  financing agreement has  become effective, to
151. 
facilitate  implementation  readiness  activity  pending  satisfaction  of  the  disbursement  conditions 
specified  in  the  financing  agreement.  The  ceiling  of  the  start-up  advance  will  not  normally  exceed 
negotiations.
USD 
300,000 
agreed 
and 
will 
be 
at 
30 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
152.  Transfers  of  grants  to  beneficiaries  will  be  made  by  the  PMU  directly  to  beneficiaries'  bank
accounts, on  the  basis  of  certification by companies  participating in  the  4P schemes that  goods  or 
works have been duly received or completed.
Transfers  to  entities  implementing  SAP  activities,  including  farmers'  organisations,  will  be
153. 
governed  by  legal  agreements  (MoUs  or  contracts).  Transfers  will  be  treated  as  advances,  with 
monthly reporting on the use of funds, and these accounts will appear as reconciling items on the DA 
liquidated.
reconciliation 
accounted 
statement 
been 
have 
they 
until 
and 
for 
Internal  controls.   Today  under  NADeP,  controls  and  procedures  in  place  are  adequate  to
154. 
address the needs of the proposed project. The Government Established Code, Financial Regulations 
and  Administrative  Circulars  are  followed,  in  addition  to  which  project-specific  procedures  are 
documented and being integrated in the finance section of NADEP's PIM, which will form the basis of 
SAP's  finance  manual.  Roles  and  duties  for  processing,  reviewing,  recording,  custody  and 
authorization  of  financial  transactions  under  NADEP  are  appropriate  segregated.  Disbursement 
finance  manual.
IFAD's 
conditions 
approval 
include 
SAP 
the 
will 
for 
of 
155. 
Accounting. NADEP's  accounts are  kept  on  a  dual  entry,  accrual  basis,  following  Sri  Lanka
accounting   standards.   Records   are   maintained   timely   and   regularly.   Counterpart   funds   are 
appropriately recorded and reported.
Accounting records are maintained manually in  physical books with analysis performed using
156. 
Excel.   The  prevalence  of  manual  financial  reporting  systems  has  been  a  shortcoming  of  NADEP 
financial management to date.   However a  multi-project software package is  in  the process of  being 
procured by the LPA to record NADEP accounts for the remaining implementation period and  will be 
available  for  SAP  financial  reporting  at  start-up.  The  software  will  be  customised  to  provide 
information useful to PMU management and meeting IFAD's requirements for financial reporting.  The 
Auditor  General  has  agreed  to  the  automation  of  the  project's  accounts,  subject  to  AG  staff 
software.
involvement 
installation 
training 
and 
the 
the 
of 
in 
Financial reporting. The NADEP PMU has established financial reporting responsibilities that
157. 
specify reports to be prepared and the frequency of production (monthly, quarterly, annually [audited]). 
The  automation  of  financial  records,  as  described  above,  is  expected  to  significantly  enhance  the 
reliability  of  financial  reports  and  the  PMU's  reporting  capabilities,  which  for  SAP  will  include 
IFAD.
submission 
financial 
reports 
interim 
of 
to 
The PMU's capacity to record in-kind contributions of private companies, beneficiaries and PFIs
158. 
will  need  to  be  enhanced.  In  this  connection, NADEP has  recently created  an  MIS  system  which  is 
kept updated by the Finance Unit as regards grant transfers to beneficiaries. The system will need to 
be improved as regards transfers under the credit line and will be  adapted to SAP purposes at start- 
up.
Internal  audit.  Following  a  Government  circular,  all  donor-financed  projects  must  foresee
159. 
internal  audit  arrangements.  NADEP  has  recently  recruited  an  internal  auditor  as  part  of  the  staff 
complement. This arrangement is  expected to  be  reviewed to  align  with  best practice, whereby the 
internal audit function would be segregated from  project management. The LPA's Internal Audit unit 
will be  requested to  include SAP in  its  annual  work-plan.   The frequency and  scope  will  be  agreed 
IFAD.
during 
negotiations. 
submitted 
Internal 
reports 
audit 
will 
be 
to 
As for the line of credit, CBSL has an internal audit department which reports to the Monetary
160. 
Board of CBSL.
External  audit.  The  supreme  audit  institution,  the  Auditor  General  of  Sri  Lanka  (AG),  is
161. 
mandated under the Sri Lanka Constitution to audit donor-funded projects, in addition to all accounts 
pertaining to  government revenues  and  the  use  of  public  resources. In  line  with  IFAD's  guidelines, 
the  scope  of  annual  audits  includes  a  review  of  the  financial  statements,  designated  account  and 
expenditure.
expenditure 
statements 
reported 
of 
in 
31 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
162.  Audit reports for IFAD-funded projects in Sri Lanka are generally submitted with  some delay
(two  to  four  months)  and  do  not  always  fully  meet  IFAD's  standards  and  guidelines.  However, 
communication between IFAD and AG has recently been strengthened and the timeliness and quality 
improving.
of 
reports 
audit 
is 
163. 
Under NADEP, IFAD has requested the AG to provide an opinion on the usage of resources
under  the  4P  contracts,  and  a  similar  requirement  is  foreseen  for  SAP.  Audit  provisions  will  be 
included in MoUs with farmers' organisations and the Mahaweli authority.
164. 
The lines of credit managed by CBSL's RDD for NADEP are subject to annual audit. The SLA
for  the  management  of  the  line  of  credit  under  SAP  will  require  an  audit  opinion  pertaining  to  the 
operation of the SAP LOC.
Financing  terms.  If  approved  in  2017,  IFAD  financing  to  SAP  will  be  on  Blend  terms  and
165. 
subject  to  interest  on  the  principal  amount  outstanding  at  a  fixed  rate  of  1.25%  per  annum,  with  a 
service charge of 0.75%. The loan shall have a maturity period of 25  years, including a grace period 
of  five  years.  The  simulated  amortization  schedule  for  repayment  will  be  provided  during  Loan 
Negotiations.  Under IFAD's newly adopted Single Currency lending framework, GoSL has expressed 
a preference to receive the loan in USD. 
Procurement  arrangements
Procurement. The SAP programme will adopt the National Procurement Guidelines that were
166. 
drafted in  association  with  major funding agencies such  as  the World  Bank,  the ADB  and  the  JICA, 
and  which  are  largely  consistent  with  IFAD’s  Procurement  Guidelines  and  Handbook.  However,  in 
case  of  any  inconsistency,  IFAD  Guidelines  will  supersede  the  National  Procurement Guidelines.  In 
addition, SAP will recruit a Procurement Officer within the PMU to support the programme and ensure 
guidelines.
alignment 
procurement 
applicable 
with 
the 
Procurement plan.  As  indicated  by  IFAD’s  Procurement Guidelines,  IFAD  review  of  and  no
167. 
objection  to  the  consolidated  procurement  plan  is  compulsory;  the  18-month  procurement  plan  and 
subsequent  annual  procurement  plans  must  have  been  submitted  by  the  PMU  in  advance.  Any 
changes  and  amendments  to  the  procurement  plan  shall  also  be  subject  to  IFAD’s  No  Objection. 
Procurement  related  supervision  for  post  review  procurement  actions  will  be  done  along  with  the 
annual Supervision Mission or Implementation Support/ Follow up Missions fielded by IFAD. 
Governance
All procurement for goods, works and services financed from resources funded or administered
168. 
by  IFAD  require  bidding  documents  and  the  contracts  to  include  a  provision  requiring  suppliers, 
contractors and consultants ensure compliance with IFAD  zero tolerance to anticorruption policy and 
to permit IFAD to inspect their accounts, records and other documents relating to the bid submission 
and contract performance, and to have them audited by the Auditor General. 
E. 
Supervision 
SAP will be directly supervised by IFAD, with at least a yearly formal supervision mission to be
169. 
fielded  with  the  programme  and  Government  participation.  Emphasis  will  however  be  placed  on 
providing  implementation support  missions  on  a  more  frequent  basis,  and  especially during  start-up 
and the first two years of programme implementation. A mid-term review is expected in year 3. 
F. 
Risk identification and mitigation 
Implementation during SAP could be subject to several risks as presented in the Table below.
170. 
Measures have subsequently been incorporated in design, to mitigate these risks. 
Table 3: Risks and risk mitigation 
Risk 
Risk before 
mitigation 
Measures for risk mitigation 
Residual risk 
32 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Component 1 
1. Lack of responsiveness by 
private sector to social and 
environmental issues 
Medium / 
High 
2. Contractual breaches (e.g. 
side selling) 
Medium / 
High 
3. Sub-quality of produce 
Medium 
4. Rising cost of inputs (and 
lower profit margins) leads to 
producers abandoning the 4P 
scheme 
Medium / 
High 
5. Crop failures and yield 
reduction 
Medium 
6. Commodity market 
volatility 
Medium 
6. Unsustainability of rural 
organizations 
Medium 
Component 2 
7. Credit and finance risks - 
default risk and moral hazard 
Medium 
8. Non-materialisation of PFI 
co-financing 
Medium 
Low/ Medium 
Low/ Medium 
Low 
Low/ Medium 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
- Company selection criteria include assessment 
of their social responsibilities 
- 4P Baseline include these aspects 
- Monitoring and reporting during 4P execution 
- Trust building, participatory and consultative 
forum 
- Sensitization and clarity for all partners, 
regarding the mutually beneficial nature of the 4P 
scheme 
- Contractual clauses offering competitive market 
prices 
- Private sector provision of services (including 
extension) and other types of support (e.g. for 
emergencies) to build trust and loyalty among 
farmers 
- Dispute settlement arrangements 
- Tri-partite agreements 
- Avoid committing 100% of the production under 
4P agreement 
- Provision of quality inputs with spot checks 
- Coordination and advisory support from public 
R&D agencies 
- Price differentiations by quality grade 
- Bulk buying of inputs with private sector support 
- Promotion of technologies/ best practice to 
increase productivity (reducing unit costs) 
- Reconsider the choice of crops looking for those 
with greater margins 
- Assessment of land suitability 
- Promotion and training on good agricultural 
practices and management; complementary on- 
farm investments 
- 4P scheme assessed firstly on market demand 
and against market conditions 
- Let the private sector lead the choice of 
markets/products: informed and mature private 
sector has best placed knowledge of the market 
- Selection based on organizational capacity 
assessment 
- Participatory development of capacity 
development plans; related cap. bdg support 
- Adoption of progressive and graduation 
approach (conservative) 
- Tri-partite agreements and provision of mostly in- 
kind credit are expected to reduce the production, 
price, marketing and finance risks 
- Sales proceeds to be directly paid into farmers’ 
bank accounts, encouraging farmers to save and 
build a positive credit history 
- PFI co-financing ensures strong credit appraisal 
and establishment of monitoring and recovery 
strategies 
- Financial literacy training for potential clients to 
reduce PFI risk perception 
- Provision of capacity building support to PFIs 
- Sensitization and selection of PFIs based on 
assessment of capacity and willingness 
- Make sure 4P business plans are viable and 
bankable 
- Key role of the private company in ensuring an 
early involvement of PFIs 
33 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Cross-cutting aspects (NRM/ climate change, gender, nutrition, policy, programme management) 
9. Deteriorating climatic 
conditions (risk to production) 
and negative environmental 
impact 
Medium/ High 
10. Private sector’s limited 
knowledge of gender issues 
Medium 
11. Male domination over 
additional household income 
(generated by the 
programme) 
Medium 
12. Little improvement in 
policy environment for 
equitable and sustainable 
smallholder-sourced 
agribusiness development 
13. Implementation delays 
Low 
Medium 
- Screening of 4P proposals from environmental/ 
NRM perspective during appraisal 
- Promotion of climate-resilient varieties and 
technologies/ practices 
- Weather/ climate knowledge infrastructure (for 
producers and companies) – timely and verifiable 
information linked with MIS 
- Monitoring of natural resource base and 
awareness raising regarding linkages between 
environmental conservation and farm profitability 
- Post-harvest technology and infrastructure 
(storage) to reduce price risk 
- Inclusion of a minimum set of gender equality 
standards in the 4P agreement (e.g. equal 
treatment, same wages for male and females with 
similar functions) 
- Awareness raising and technical support 
provided by gender and youth-trained staff, social 
mobilisers, etc. 
- Periodic gender assessments 
- Awareness raising/ promotion of joint bank 
accounts with the both spouse names; PFIs to 
encourage/ reinforce 
- Awareness raising/ promotion of joint decision 
making at household level 
- Use support to organizations as entry point to 
address gender-based issues within the 
household 
- Regular policy fora and consultations with active 
participation by farmer/ producers, FOs and 
companies; 
- Leadership from the Presidential Secretariat 
- Retention of NADeP PMU (staff, institutional 
setting, etc.) 
- IFAD direct supervision and implementation 
support 
Low/ Medium 
Low 
Low 
Very low 
Very low 
IV.   Programme costs, financing, benefits and sustainability 
A. 
Programme costs 
The  total  investment  and  recurrent  costs,  including  physical  and  price  contingences,  is
171. 
estimated  at  USD  105  million  (LKR  17.1  billion).  Table  4  below  presents  the  programme  costs  by 
components;  Table  5  shows  the  programme  costs  (including  contingencies)  by  component  and  by 
year. 
Table 4: Programme Costs by Component 
1. C1: Access to Commercial  Partnerships 
2. C2: Access to Rural Finance 
3. C3: Project Management,  KM, M&E, Croscutting  Issues 
Total BASELINE  COSTS 
Physical  Contingencies 
Price Contingencies 
Total PROJECT  COSTS 
(LKR '000) 
Foreign 
Total 
Local 
(US$ '000) 
Foreign 
Total 
% 
Foreign 
% Total 
Base 
Exchange  Costs 
51,170.5 
7,573,226.8 
- 
43,621.4 
6,455,967.3 
- 
51,504.0 
5,430.6 
855,234.0 
51,504.0  14,884,428.1  100,222.5 
7.9 
2,337.6 
4,435.8 
2,284,073.7 
58,345.3  17,170,839.4  104,666.1 
1,172.2 
5,669.2 
51,170.5 
- 
43,621.4 
- 
348.0 
5,778.6 
348.0  100,570.5 
15.8 
4,444.2 
364.4  105,030.5 
7.9 
8.4 
- 
- 
6 
- 
50 
- 
- 
51 
43 
6 
100 
- 
4 
104 
Local 
7,573,226.8 
6,455,967.3 
803,730.0 
14,832,924.1 
1,165.4 
2,278,404.5 
17,112,494.0 
Table 5: Programme Components by Year – Including Contingencies
34 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
2018 
2019 
Totals Including Contingencies 
2022 
2021 
2020 
2023 
Total 
1. C1: Access to Commercial Partnerships 
2. C2: Access to Rural Finance 
3. C3: Project Management, KM, M&E, Croscutting Issues 
53,463.4 
45,425.9 
6,141.1 
Total PROJECT COSTS                                                                                                 32,702.9          28,778.2          17,719.6          10,797.3          7,306.5          7,725.9          105,030.5 
11,074.5 
5,694.7 
950.4 
15,672.8 
12,120.9 
984.5 
13,834.6 
17,537.3 
1,331.1 
7,114.4 
2,711.9 
970.9 
3,106.0 
3,256.7 
943.9 
2,661.1 
4,104.5 
960.3 
B. 
Programme financing 
Of the forecasted total programme base costs, USD 51.2 million (or 51% of the total) will go to
172. 
finance Component 1: Access to Commercial Partnerships; USD  43.6 million (or  43% of  the total) to 
finance  Component  2:  Access  to  Rural  Finance;  and  USD  5.8  million  (or  6%)  for  Component  3: 
Programme management and Policy dialogue. The remaining USD 4.4 million are for contingencies. 
Table 6: Programme Components by Financiers 
1. C1:  Access  to Commercial  Partnerships 
2. C2:  Access  to Rural  Finance 
3. C3:  Project  Management, KM,  M&E,  Croscutting  Issues 
36,312.0 
12,641.3 
5,436.0 
To 
tal  PROJECT  COSTS                                                                                               54,389.3 
67.9 
27.8 
88.5 
51.8 
- 
9,820.7 
- 
9,820.7 
- 
21.6 
- 
9.4 
16,967.0 
- 
- 
16,967.0 
31.7 
- 
- 
16.2 
184.5 
18,469.7 
705.1 
19,359.3 
0.3 
40.7 
11.5 
18.4 
IFAD  Loan 
Amount             % 
Private  Financial 
Institutions 
Amount            % 
Private  Sector 
Partners 
Government (incl. 
taxes) 
Amount             % 
Amount             % 
Beneficiary 
Contribution 
Amount            %  
- 
4,494.3 
- 
Total 
Amount 
% 
For. 
Exch. 
Local (Excl. 
Taxes) 
Duties & 
Taxes 
1. C1: Access  to Commercial  Partnerships 
2. C2: Access  to Rural Finance 
3. C3: Project  Management,  KM, M&E, Croscutting  Issues 
184.5 
97.4 
360.2 
Total PROJECT  COSTS                                                                                           4,494.3             4.3         105,030.5         100.0         364.4            104,024.0           642.1 
173.  The IFAD financing of USD 54.4 million (loan on blend terms) will fund 52% of total programme
costs, of which the IFAD financing represents 68%, 28% and 89% of the financing for components 1, 
2 and 3 respectively, as shown in Table 6 above.
53,463.4 
45,425.9 
6,141.1 
53,279.0 
45,328.5 
5,416.5 
- 
- 
364.4 
50.9 
43.3 
5.8 
- 
9.9 
- 
Per the current costings, the contribution by the Government of Sri Lanka amounts to USD 19.3
174. 
million;  this  however  comprises  USD  18.5  million  in  reflows  from  previous  IFAD-financed  lines  of 
credit (i.e. this is not ‘new’ financing or investment), which will go towards the SAP line of credit for on- 
lending to beneficiary smallholder farmers and youth; through the on-lending mechanism, these funds 
will eventually translate into beneficiary contribution, over and above the USD 4.5 million contribution 
contributions.
from 
savings 
in-kind 
their 
and 
The  contribution  of  PFIs  amounts  to  USD  9.8  million,  which  is  in  line  with  the  strategy  of
175. 
leveraging  PFI  own-funds  towards  the  available  line  of  credit.  Co-financing  by  the  private  sector 
partners  under  the  4P  schemes  is  estimated  at  USD  17  million,  which  can  take  the  form  of 
contributions in cash, in-kind and working capital. 
C. 
Summary benefits and economic analysis 
On  the  basis  that  the  two  main  areas  of  investment  by  the  programme  are:  (i)  Access  to
176. 
Commercial Partnerships;  and  (ii)  Access  to  Rural  Finance,  the  main  quantifiable  benefits  expected 
from  improved market  access measures  comprises the  following  elements:  (i)  increased agricultural 
and  off-farm  production,  resulting  in  higher  incomes;  (ii)  production  guided  by  value  chain  priorities 
with  respect  to  farmer  and  producer  organisations;  (iii)  greater  variety  of  income  and  higher  value- 
added  products  sold  at  consumer  markets  by  producer  organisations;  (iv)  increased  income  from 
short-term   employment  and   self-employment  for   local   villagers;   and   (v)   greater   value   chain 
beneficiaries.
forward  market 
integration,  with 
backward 
linkages, 
target 
and 
by 
In  terms  of  financial  analysis,  six  combination  crop  and  activity  models  illustrate  the  mix  of
177. 
crops at  the  household level and community level. Combination models over an  area of  one acre  of 
arable  land  were  used  to  illustrate  the  benefits  of  the  programme  for  activities  related  to  crop 
production, reflecting also the average plot-size of farms in the programme area, and to better reflect
35 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
the  reality  in  the  field,  where  mixed  farming  occurs.  These  models  are  presented  in  Appendix  10, 
though in summary, the programme is expected to increase household incomes by 63% on average.
Taking  into  consideration  the  benefit  and  cost  streams,  the   overall  programme  analysis
178. 
suggests  an  EIRR  of  52%  and  an  NPV  of  USD  349,708,192  over  a  twenty-year  period.  The  gross 
value  of  production  increases  approximately  by  56%  from  the  without  situation,  while  outflows 
increase  65%,  including  labour.  Sensitivity  analysis  for  a  number  of  negative  scenarios  found  the 
EIRR to remain robust with no negative returns in 11 scenarios. 
D. 
Sustainability 
Overall, sustainability of the programme takes into consideration the rapidly developing context
179. 
in  Sri  Lanka.  The  expectation  is  that  at  the  end  of  the  programme  period,  there  is  a  very  strong 
likelihood that the private sector and banking sector are able to continue to develop their relationships 
with  farmers  groups,  and  without  the  need  for  government  or  exteranal  pdevelopment  partner 
interventions.  Effectively,  SAP  is  facilitating  the  solid  foundation  and  transition  to  sustainable  4Ps.
Through the  mechanism of  the  4P partnerships, sustainability is  implicitly embedded into  the
180. 
programme; the sustainability of the 4P arrangement is further reinforced by the enhanced linkages to 
the  formal financial sector  (commercial banks) for  rural/  microfinance. It  is  reasonably expected that 
the  process  of  dialogue  and  negotiation  between  producers,  their  representatives  and  the  private 
sector  in  finalizing  the  proposed  BPs  and  in  its  implementation, is  serving  to  build  a  culture  of  trust 
and  normalize  working  relationships.  As  mutually  beneficial  arrangements,  the  mechanisms  of  the 
partnership  will  continue  beyond  the  programme  lifetime.  Simultaneously,  the  promotion  of  rural 
finance  linked  to  the  4P  arrangement,  is  building  the  understanding  and  capacity  of  financial 
institutions  (notably  loan  officers)  to  appraise  small  producer  needs  and  requests,  and  changing 
mindsets towards accepting farming as a business. The range of ‘partners’ involved in the 4P scheme, 
strategy.
is 
itself, 
exit 
the 
in 
Sustainability of  the  4P  model  will  largely depend  on  the  technical,  financial  and  institutional
181. 
capacity of producer groups/ organisations involved in implementing the programme; the commitment 
of  the  private  sector  partners  and  participating  financial  institutions  to  sustain  the  system;  and  the 
policy environment for equitable and sustainable smallholder-sourced agribusiness development. The 
attention  to  and  provision  of  capacity  building  and  institutional  strengthening  support  across  the 
components,  matched  by  the  support  for  policy  dialogue,  are  the  main  approaches  to  instil  a 
interventions.
of 
foundation 
sustainability 
programme 
the 
for 
At the level of producer/ farmers and their organizations, these participating organisations will
182. 
be  assisted  and  supported  to  increase  their  member  services  delivery  capacity  and  their  ability  to 
manage  and  operate  as  business  or  entrepreneurial  ventures  starting  from  the  first  year.  A 
sustainability  ‘action  plan’  will  be  introduced  as  part  of  the  4P  model,  jointly  elaborated  by  the  4P 
partners (producers/ producer organizations and companies) to establish a road map for the duration 
partnership.
of 
and 
continuation 
the 
As  regards  financial  services  at  the  micro  level,  the  SAP  will  seek  partnerships  with  PFIs
183. 
committed to the rural sector. The arrangements facilitated under the 4P investment plans are entirely 
geared  at  facilitating  access  to  affordable  financial  services  for  farmers,  and  at  maintaining  good 
business relationships between farmers, agribusinesses and financial institutions. The ties are further 
strengthened  through  the  continuous  savings  process  of  farmers.  Furthermore,  the  interventions  at 
the meso and macro level  through capacity building support to CBSL and PFIs will serve to  improve 
financial  inclusion  over  the  long-term.  These  are  complemented  by  the  policy  dialogue  and 
engagement,  which  will  contribute  to  improve  the  policy  environment,  hopefully  opening  access  to 
poor.
financial 
services 
further 
favour 
rural 
the 
of 
in 
184. 
The environmental sustainability and climate resilience of the activities initiated under the 4Ps
are  also  taken  into  consideration and  recommendations have  been  made,  notably related  to  water
36 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
management,  soil  rehabilitation,  agrochemical  management  and  avoidance  of  common  property 
exploitation (see SECAP review).
37 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:    Country and rural context background 
Appendix 1:   Country and rural context background 
Country background 
1.       Economy and poverty. In recent years, and following the end of the 26-year civil war in 2009, 
the Sri Lankan economy has continued to grow at a steady rate, averaging 6-7 percent up to the 
present day. Sri Lanka is now a lower middle-income country with a population of 20.5 million and per 
capita GDP of US$ 3,811, compared with US$ 2,400 in 2010. W hilst growth has contributed to poverty 
reduction, 32% of the population remain ‘nearly’ poor or ‘poor’ (25% of the population are ‘nearly’ 
poor, whilst almost 7% are defined ‘poor’). Poverty headcount in 1990 was 24%, progressively 
declining to 8.9% in 2009/10 and 6.7% in 2012/13.  The vast majority of poor (86.6% of the total) live 
27in rural areas and estates, with high dependency on the agricultural sector. Population groups most 
affected by poverty are agricultural smallholders, plantation workers, underemployed and landless 
labourers, particularly youth and women, and people engaged in micro-enterprise. In terms of the 
youth, they represent approximately 24% of the total population, and are the group with the highest 
unemployment rate, particularly among young women. Rural women in Sri Lanka enjoy better status 
and rights compared to other countries in the region but they are however confronted with limited 
economic opportunities. Women comprise 53% of the agricultural labour force often as unpaid family 
labour, yet traditional norms are biased in favour of men, resulting in obstacles to women’s equitable 
access to resources (land, capital – including credit) and markets, and the control of assets. 
2.       Food  and  nutrition  security.  Over  the  last  three  decades, the  food  security situation  in  Sri 
Lanka  has  improved  significantly  over  the  years;  according  to  the  2014  Global  Hunger  Index,  Sri 
Lanka is now ranked 39 out of 76 countries and above all South Asian countries with a score of 15.1. 
However, whilst availability of food at the national level is secure, this does not necessarily translate to 
food  and  nutrition security  at  household level  for  all  segments of  the  population, especially socially 
and  nutritionally28   vulnerable  groups29.  As  well,  under-nutrition  remains  a  concern  in  Sri  Lanka, 
reflected by a stunting rate among children under five years of age of 15% and a wasting rate in the 
same age group of  21%. In particular, the high rate of  low birth  weight (18%) is crucial as  Low Birth 
Weight  (LBW)  is  a  major  predictor  of  undernutrition.  The  high  rate  of  LBW  indicates  also  issues 
around  gender  imbalance  and  particular challenges with  regard  to  maternal nutrition  and  nutrition of 
adolescent girls. In some areas, early marriages and consequently early pregnancies are of concern. 
3.       Nutrition  policy  environment.  In  October  2012  Sri  Lanka  joined  the  Scaling  Up  Nutrition 
Movement (SUN)  and  has  since made considerable effort and  progress to  mainstream nutrition in  a 
multi-sectoral approach and  in  partnership  with  the  donor  community. Today,  there  are  a  number  of 
entry points to partner and engage in nutrition policy and its operationalization. At the time, Sri Lanka 
established  an  Inter-ministerial  National  Nutrition  Council  and  a  multi-sectoral  National  Steering 
Committee  for  Nutrition;  nutrition  was  also  one  of  the  key  priorities  of  the  government  “Mahinda 
Chintana”  development  plan.  In  addition,  a  National  Nutrition  Secretariat  had  been  set  up  at  the 
Presidential  Secretariat  to  provide  technical  and  coordinating  support  in  collaboration  with  UNICEF. 
The  National  Nutrition  Council  (NNC)  of  Sri  Lanka  is  chaired  by  the  President,  and  the  Additional 
Secretary of the Presidential Secretariat is the appointed SUN Government Focal Point. The National 
Steering  Committee  on  Nutrition  is  the  implementation  body  of  the  NNC  that  brings  together  17 
Ministries      (including      Planning,      Agriculture,      Fisheries,      Livestock,      Health,      W omen’s 
Affairs/Empowerment,  Education,  Social  Services,  Poverty  alleviation,  and  Trade  and  Industry)  in 
close  collaboration  with  civil  society,  non-governmental  organisations,  and  is  supported  by  United 
Nations  (UN)  Agencies.  The  Scaling  Up  Nutrition  People’s  Forum  is  the  established  Civil  Society 
Alliance  that  supports  implementation of  actions  at  the  ground  level  with  Save  the  Children  as  the 
27  http://www.statistics.gov.lk/poverty/PovertyIndicators2012_13.pdf 
28  Nutritionally vulnerable people are the ones with a particular demand on nutrients/nutrition support (e.g. children from 6 to 23 
months, pregnant and lactating women) 
29  For example, the most recent comprehensive food security and vulnerability assessment (CFSVA), undertaken by WFP and 
GoSL in April 2012, determined that 1.3 million persons in the Northern and Eastern Provinces were still food insecure.
39 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:    Country and rural context background 
main  implementing  partner.  Recently,  a  Media  Awareness  Forum  was  conducted  to  sensitise 
stakeholders from  the media industry; including editors, journalists, program directors, television and 
radio presenters and to discuss the ethics of media in advertising campaigns and nutrition awareness. 
4.       The  National  Nutrition  Policy  (NNP)  2010  –  2018  provides  a  platform  for  inter-sectoral 
coordination in order to accelerate efforts to achieve optimum nutrition for all. The NNP is linked with a 
workable  National  Nutrition  Strategic  Plan  (2009)  which  identifies  the  key  health  related  and  non- 
health interventions aimed at improving nutritional status. A multi-stakeholder NNP Review Committee 
has been established and a meeting was convened to finalise the Terms of Reference (ToR). The ToR 
outlines the Committee’s role to critically evaluate the NNP and ensures that the NNP is aligned with 
the  Global  World  Health  Assembly  Targets  2025  and  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals  (SDGs), 
with  strengthened  mechanisms  for  implementation.  Nutrition  is  also  mainstreamed  in  the  sectoral 
policies, including: National Agriculture Policy; National Livestock Development Policy and Strategies; 
School  Canteen  Policy;  Non  Communicable  Disease  Policy;  and  Early  Child  Care  Development 
Policy. 
5.       Draft  Advocacy  Action  Plans  for  Civil  Society  Organisations  are  under  development  on  the 
specific  themes  of  Food  Security  and  Communication  for  Better  Nutrition.  The  national  legislation 
covers the Food Act, salt  iodisation, food labelling, food advertisement, consumer protection and the 
International Code of Marketing of Breast-Milk Substitutes. Maternity leave covers 6 months pay in the 
public sector and 3 months in the private sector. The Multi-sectoral Action Plan on Nutrition (MsAPN) 
is the Common Results Framework (CRF) that sets targets and milestones to reduce the prevalence 
of  under-nutrition, anaemia and stunting amongst key population groups, as  well  as  to  improve food 
security and provide access to safe water, sanitation and hygiene to households-at-risk. The MsAPN 
has  been  jointly  agreed  upon  by  the  17  Ministries and  in-country partners. Currently,  the  MsAPN  is 
being reviewed by experts to avoid dilution, foster prioritisation and enhance on-going nutrition related 
activities at the national, provincial, district and divisional levels. The national multi-sector institutional 
environment  is  also  reflected  at  the  provincial  level  in  two  provinces;  its  expansion  to  all  nine 
provinces  is  expected.  A  monitoring  cell  will  track  the  overall  implementation  based  on  the  World 
Health  Organisation  results-based  framework,  and  have  been  agreed  by  line  ministries  to  facilitate 
joint analysis of  information gathered. A monitoring guidance note  was also developed to  be used at 
the district level and a database is being created to monitor activities. The MsAPN has b een partially 
costed. Nutrition specific interventions of  this  plan  are  being costed  with  the  help  of  the World Bank 
through  the  One  Health  Tool.  Financing  is  provided  by  different  sources  including  government  and 
donors. A dedicated budget line for nutrition was opened up in the Ministry of Health and the finances 
were allocated from the Treasury. In order to implement the MsAPN, each ministry was instructed by 
the  Treasury  to  create  a  separate  budget  line  for  nutrition,  through  a  pooling  of  resources  (public- 
private partnerships, allocations from provincial funds). 
Rural and agricultural sector 
6.       Policy direction and institutional issues. Following the 2015 elections, the newly established 
Ministry  of  Policy  Planning  and  Economic Affairs  coordinates  official  development  assistance  in  the 
country, ensuring alignment with the national priorities for development. The Government of Sri Lanka 
(GoSL) in its recent budget speeches, have set key targets related to poverty reduction, including the 
creation of 1 million job opportunities and raising per capita income to US$ 4,000. For the agricultural 
sector  in  particular,  the  strategic  orientation  is  to  achieve  sustainable  improvements  in  production 
through 
for  producers  and  enhanced  market 
competitiveness. This calls for development assistance to promote increased productivity, adoption of 
good agricultural practices, diversifying products and  markets, and  enhancing linkages to  the private 
sector.  As  part  of  these  efforts,  the  Government  has  indicated  a  keen  interest  to  build  capacity  of 
existing  produce/  farmer  organizations  such  as  those  established  under  the  Mahaweli  system,  to 
serve as a key entry point and catalyst for agricultural modernization and transformation. 
increased  productivity,  sustained 
incomes 
7.       Characteristics  of  the  rural  and  agricultural  sector.  Sri  Lanka’s  agricultural  sector  is 
characterised by  the  plantation  (mainly  tea,  rubber  and  coconut)  and  non-plantation cropping  sub-
40 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:    Country and rural context background 
sectors  (mainly rice,  maize, fruits,  vegetables and  other  crops  grown  in  small-holdings), and  despite 
declining  share  in  GDP  (11%  in  2012),  remains  the  backbone  of  the  economy  and  an  important 
source of  employment, engaging one  third  of  the  labour force. Since 2006, the  sector has served to 
contribute  to  poverty  reduction,  driven  by  increasing  agricultural  wages,  increases  in  domestic  food 
prices,  and  increasing  international price  for  tea  (a  major  export  commodity); subsequently, this  has 
led to higher wages and improved returns to self-employed farm labour. However, the sustainability of 
these  gains  are  not  assured  and  will  remain  modest  unless  there  is  complementary  improved 
agricultural  productivity  and  modernization  of  the  sector  with  further  diversification,  improved 
commercialization and value addition. W ith regards to the sector, the Government’s primary concerns 
include:  low  and  declining  productivity;  misuse  of  agrochemicals  (including  fertilizer)  which  affects 
water  supply  and  food  quality;  the  practice  of  inappropriate  technologies;  poor  water  management; 
and  lack  of  market  competitiveness  due  to  poor  quality  products  and  inadequate  food  safety 
measures. 
8.       Climate  change  and  environmental  considerations.  Climate  change  has  impact  on  Sri 
Lankan  rural  agriculture  mainly  through  the  changes  in  seasonality  of  precipitation.  The  monsoon 
rains  occur  in  a  bi-modal  pattern  every  year;  in  between  the  two  main  monsoons,  there  is  inter- 
monsoon precipitation  which  occurs  in  all  the  coastal  regions and  of  sporadic intensity. Precipitation 
replenishes  the  extensive  river  and  reservoir  system  which  serves  as  the  backbone  for  agricultural 
water requirement in the dry periods island-wide. Based on field observations, cropping patterns and 
decisions do not incorporate alternatives that could be attributed to climate change. However, there is 
increasing evidence of delays in planting decisions (sometimes as long as for four weeks in the life of 
a 12-week crop) due to variations in the precipitation pattern. Climate change introduces a substantial 
variability in the annual precipitation ranging from 800 to 5000 mm. 
9.       Drought  tolerant  and  flood/salinity  resistant  varietal  development  has  been  an  agronomic 
priority for crop development at the national policy and institutional research level (especially at Rice 
Research and Development Institute and Field crop research and development institute). For rice and 
field crops, there had been development of drought-tolerant varietal development in terms of the water 
requirement and the length of the crop cycle. It should be further noted that prolonged droughts have 
implications  for  livestock  husbandry  in  terms  of  direct  water  requirement,  ambient  temperature  and 
establishment.
water 
fodder 
for 
The agricultural sector  in  Sri  Lanka contributes to carbon emissions through deforestation for
10. 
agricultural  land  use  and  land  management  practices  (i.e.  fertiliser,  soil  carbon  stocks)  mainly.  The 
poor  transport  logistics  and  poor  road  infrastructure  contribute  to  agriculture-related  emissions 
indirectly.
11.  Market  opportunities30.  Despite  some  of  the  challenges  faced  in  shaping  the  agricultural
sector to be more competitive, there is significant market potential for Sri Lankan agricultural products, 
to  serve  both  the  export  and  local  markets. A  rapid  market  analysis  as  a  measure  to  support  the 
identification  of  key  value  chains  with  high  potential,  primarily  takes  into  consideration  the  market 
‘destination’ –  i.e. (i) export-oriented value chains/ sub-sectors; and (ii) local (national)-oriented value 
chains/  sub-sectors. In  terms  of  exports,  the  value  chains  for  fruits  (mango,  pineapple,  passion  fruit 
and  papaya),  vegetables  (green  chili,  jalapeno  pepper,  low-country  vegetable  such  as  bitter  and 
snake  gourd),  protected  vegetables  (gherkins,  bell  pepper,  cucumber  and  tomato),  spices  (pepper, 
cinnamon,  clove  and  nutmeg),  and  other  sub-sectors  such  as  seaweed,  honey  and  sesame  seeds, 
offer high potential to meet export market demand. Per 2015-2016 data, the key export markets for Sri 
Lankan produce are  the  EU,  Middle  East  and  Maldives (in  recent  years,  Sri  Lanka annually exports 
more than USD 6 million in fruits and USD 1 million in vegetables); as  well, the spice sub-sector has 
an export market that includes Japan, the United States and  Middle East countries (USD 630,000 in 
annual exports). These export markets are capable of absorbing more Sri Lankan produce. 
30  See Appendix 4, Annex 3 for the Identification of Agribusiness Opportunities and Markets in Selected Value Chains 
(incl. detailed market analysis of each potential value chain) and list of potential commercial partnerships with private 
sector companies.
41 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:    Country and rural context background 
12.  The private sector is well cognizant of the market potential, and are demonstrating willingness
to  partner  with  smallholder  farmer/  producers  in  order  to  more  effectively  respond  to  the  market 
opportunities,  and  which  has  win-win  benefits;  the  majority  of  these  private  sector  companies  are 
larger companies, including supermarket chains, processors and exporters. Promoting the partnership 
between  smallholder  producers  and  the  private  sector  in  the  first  instance,  assesses  the  market 
potential/  opportunities  (economic  criteria)  as  an  underlying  and  key  factor,  which  is  further 
considerations.
and 
strengthened 
environmental 
social 
by 
13. 
Producer/   farmer   organizations.   The   rural   landscape   in   terms   of   the   organization,
organizational  structure  and  cohesion  amongst  farmer/  producers  is  mixed.  Officially,  more  than 
15,000  farmer  organizations  (FOs)  have  been  established  nationally,  registered  under  the  Agrarian 
Development  Act  No.  46  of  2000  and  falling  under  the  mandate  of  the  Department  of  Agrarian 
Development;  a  further  1007  organizations  have  been  established  under  the  Mahaweli  irrigation 
scheme  (which  covers  more  than  450,000  ha  or  30%  of  Sri  Lanka’s  land  mass),  initially  with  the 
primary purpose  of  managing  water-use, and  are  registered by  the  Mahaweli Authority of  Sri  Lanka 
(MASL). There are several other organizations registered under the Companies Act No. 7 of 2007 as 
limited liability companies and farmers’ / traders’ associations. Also there are few farmers / traders co- 
operatives  registered  under  the  Co-operative  Societies Act.  As  well,  there  exist  countless  forms  of 
‘groups’  or  ‘societies’  at  village  and  community  levels,  some  of  whom  are  registered  under  the 
Voluntary Social Service Organizations (Registration and Supervision) Act No. 31 of 1980 (amended 
Act No. 8 of 1998), though many of whom remain informal and un-registered.
As   a   commercialization  effort,   there   have   been   several   farmer  companies  as   peoples’
14. 
companies  under  the  Company’s Act  (this  provision  was  taken  off  with  the  2007  amendment to  the 
Company’s Act) established in the country during the period 1980 – 1990, with the patronage of state 
agencies  like  the  Department  of  Agriculture,  Ministry  of  Irrigation,  Department  of  Export Agriculture, 
Sri  Lanka  Export  Development  Board  (SLEDB)  and  the  MASL.  People’s  companies  by  Act  were 
safeguarded  against  possible  private  ownership  by  imposing  restrictions  on  membership  and  share 
trading.  Only  farmers  and  other  stakeholders  involved  in  agriculture  living  within  a  particular 
geographical region  can  become  shareholders and  shares  cannot  be  traded  except  among  farmers 
eligible for membership. In addition, the maximum number of shares one can own was limited to 10% 
of shares issued at a given time according to the relevant provision of the Act. The progress to-date of 
these  companies, however has  been  rated  poor  according to  these  agency sources; in  fact most  of 
these  companies  have  ceased  to  exist  (note  that  only  one  company  out  of  35  peoples’ companies 
established by the SLEDB exists today). However, there are few farmer associations, registered under 
the Companies Act No. 7 of 2007 are in good operation currently which includes Marginalized Organic 
Producers'  Association,  Laksawi  Group  Pvt  Ltd.  and  The  Lanka  Fruit  &  Vegetable  Producers, 
Processors and Exporters Association. Also there are a few farmer cooperatives successfully involved 
in  agribusiness.  These  include  Small  &  Medium  Organic  Agriculture  Farmers’  Cooperative  and 
Nuwara-Eliya  Foliage  Cooperative.  Products  handled  by  these  organizations  include  foliage,  cut 
fish,  all  as 
flowers, 
producers/manufacturers  and  most  as  marketers  in  the  local  market  with  a  few  catering  to  export 
market through established exporting companies. There are about 15 such organizations currently in 
operation, membership of them varies from 100  – 500. It is evident that some of these organizations 
financial  standing.
have  been 
fruits  &  vegetable,  seed  paddy,  vergin  coconut  oil,  dairy  and  dry 
five  years  with  acceptable 
in  business 
for  more 
than 
Acccording to MASL records, out of 1,007 FOs, 36 have reached a level of business enterprise,
15. 
having reasonable assets built-up with processing machinery, warehousing, goods transport vehicles, 
etc. There are 150 FOs categorised as 'enterprising FOs'. Some of these FOs are engaged in various 
businesss activities  in  agricultural value  chains  (fruits  &  vegetable, dairy,  paultry, goat  farming, seed 
production etc.) and few have gone for value-addition (youghut). The average membership is around 
120  per  FO.  MASL  recognizes  that  FOs  in  Systems  B,  C,  H  and  Walawa  are  ahead  of  others  in 
enterprising.
business 
42 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:    Country and rural context background 
16.  Business oriented Community-based Organizations. Business is carried out in some cases by
other  forms of  community organizations registered under the  Voluntary Social Service Organizations 
(Registration and  Supervision) Act  No. 31 of  1980 (amended Act  No.   8  of  1998). No restrictions for 
these organizations to engage in businesses but they are not recognized as legal business entities for 
bank financing and contracting. There are exceptions, but in such most cases business achievements 
dependent on  the  person  managing the  institution. This  paper  does  not  attempt to  make  a  situation 
institutions.
analysis 
these 
of 
Whilst no comprehensive maturity assessment of these various organizations / institutions (both
17. 
formally  registered  and  informal)  has  been  undertaken,  in  terms  of  their  functions  and  services  to 
members,  and  vis-à-vis  their  marketing  capacities  and  strategies,  the  overwhelming  majority  are 
relatively  immature  or  nascent.  Furthermore,  the  process  of  registration  of  rural  organizations  is 
cumbersome  and  lacks  clarity,  and  once  registered,  these  rural  organizations  do  not  benefit  from 
regular  monitoring  and  support.  The  exception  are  those  FOs  registered  by  MASL,  who  are  being 
monitored  by  MASL  field  officers;  whilst  this  monitoring  has  mainly  been  related  to  their  water 
management capacities, the MASL has recently strengthened its monitoring of FO economic activities 
and  member  services  performed.  MASL’s  annual  performance  rewards  scheme,  presents  a  tool  to 
status.
to  assess 
screen  better-performing  FOs  and 
their  maturity  and 
financial 
Main  challenges  faced  by  smallholder  farmer/  producers.  IFAD  has  historically  targeted
18. 
rural  households  with  low  income  levels  equivalent  to  approximately USD  70  -  150  per  month,  per 
household. Within the rural sector, this group face multiple challenges which overwhelmingly includes 
limited access  to  the  following: land,  technologies, extension services, markets and  access  to  credit 
through  formal  systems;  this  subsequently  leads  them  to  be  characterised  by  indebtedness  to 
moneylenders and  further  exacerbates  the  lack  of  access  to  land  in  terms  of  forgone  rights  to  farm 
their land (used as ‘collateral’). 
Financial market review
Financial sector landscape. There is growing recognition that the shift towards transformation
19. 
of  the rural/  agricultural sector precipitates a  need  to  mobilise investments, notably facilitated by the 
formal financial sector. Sri Lanka’s financial sector system is relatively diverse, and consists of a wide 
range  of  service  providers,  including:  (i)  formal  financial  institutions,  comprising  25  licensed 
commercial  banks  (LCBs);  7  licensed  specialized  banks  (LSBs);  46  licensed  finance  companies 
(LFCs) and 7  specialist leasing companies (SLCs); (ii)  semi-formal institutions (co-operatives, NGO– 
MFIs, CBOs, and state programmes such as Samurdhi); and (iii) informal sources of finance such as 
associations.
money 
savings 
rotating 
lenders 
credit 
and 
and 
Although  a  large  number  of  LCBs  exist,  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  is  primarily
20. 
dependent on  the  performance and  financial  strength of  the  6  largest  LCBs,  consisting of  two  state 
banks and four  private domestic banks. The LCBs own 49% of the total formal financial sector assets 
as compared to LSBs  with 9.1%; the  LFCs and  SLCs own 6.7%  and 0.6%  of  the total assets of  the 
financial sector respectively, as shown in the table below. 
Table 1: Total assets and deposit liabilities in the formal financial system as at end December 2014 (a) 
Financial Institution 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka 
Institutions Regulated by the Central Bank 
Deposit Taking Institutions 
Licensed Commercial Banks 
Licensed Specialized Banks 
Licensed Finance Companies 
Other Financial Institutions 
Primary Dealers 
Specialized Leasing companies 
Assets 
Deposits 
Rs. bn.  % share 
12.2 
1,464.3 
66.6 
8,016.4 
64.4 
7,751.7 
48.9 
5,884.6 
1087.5 
779.6 
264.7 
191.1 
73.6 
9.0 
6.5 
2.2 
1.6 
0.6 
Rs. bn. 
n.a 
5,100.3 
5,100.3 
3,976.8 
709.6 
413.9 
n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 
% Share 
n.a 
98.2 
98.2 
76.6 
13.7 
8.0 
n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 
43 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:    Country and rural context background 
Institutions not Regulated by the Central Bank 
Deposit Taking Institutions 
Rural Banks (b) 
Thrift and Credit Co-operative Societies (b) 
Contractual Savings Institutions 
Employees' Provident Fund 
Employees' Trust Fund 
Approved Private Provident Funds (c) 
Public Service Provident Fund 
Insurance Companies (d) 
Other Financial Institutions 
Stock Broking Companies (e) 
Unit Trusts/ Unit Trust Management  Companies (e) 
Market Intermediaries* (e)(f) 
Credit Rating Agencies (e) 
Venture Capital Companies 
Total Assets 
Source: Central Bank of Sri Lanka 
n.a.: not available 
2,560.7 
112.4 
103.5 
8.9 
2,272.9 
1,486.9 
199.1 
134.2 
41.0 
411.7 
175.5 
11.3 
128.6 
29.6 
0.3 
6.2 
12,041.4 
21.3 
0.9 
0.9 
0.1 
18.9 
12.3 
1.7 
1.1 
0.3 
3.4 
1.5 
0.1 
1.1 
0.2 
0.0 
0.1 
100.0 
94.5 
94.5 
89.6 
4.9 
n.a 
n.a. 
n.a 
n.a 
n.a 
n.a 
n.a 
n.a 
n.a 
n.a 
n.a 
n.a 
5,194.8 
1.8 
1.8 
1.7 
0.1 
n.a 
n.a. 
n.a 
n.a 
n.a 
n.a 
n.a 
n.a 
n.a 
n.a 
n.a 
n.a 
100.0 
21.  The importance of LSBs is relatively low in comparison to the LCBs, both in terms of size and
their impact on financial intermediation, as they do not play a major intermediary role in the payment 
system. 91% of total deposits were held by the LCBs and only 9% by LSBs and SLCs. About 65% of 
sources  of  funds  of  LCBs  are  constituted  by  deposits  and  22%  by  borrowings.  Time  deposits  and 
savings  deposits  constitute  57.7%  and  31.2%  of  total  deposits  respectively,  which  indicates  yield 
depositors.
consciousness 
side 
the 
the 
on 
of 
The  NPLs  of  the  banking  sector  stood  at  3.4%  and  the  total  capital  adequacy  ratio  (CAR)
22. 
declined from 16.6% to 14.2% in 2015. The Statuary Liquid Asset Ratio (SLAR) of domestic banking 
units decreased by 566 basis points during the  year as a result of increased lending activities in this 
year. This was also reflected in the loans-to-deposits ratio of the banking sector, which increased to 
87.3%  at  the  end  of  2015,  up  from  83.1%  in  201431. The  average  weighted  deposit  rate  (AWDR) 
stood at 6.4% and the interest spread was in the range of 3.5% to 14% for the lending rate. W hile the 
lower  krate  reflects  government or  donor  initiated  and  funded  programmes with  prescribed margins, 
the  latter  is  the  lending  rate  of  clients  not  well  known  and  without  sufficient  collateral  and/or  track 
records.
The number of  LFCs and SLCs in  Sri Lanka grew at  a rapid pace in the last decade, largely
23. 
backed  by  a  high  growth  momentum  and  credit  demand  in  the  economy.  In  the  last  4-5  years 
however, many of these institutions grappled with operational and governance problems which had a 
negative  impact  on  the  asset  quality  and  profitability  of  the  overall  financial  sector  in  Sri  Lanka.  In 
order to improve the state of financial health of the concerned financial institutions (FIs), in 2013-14, 
the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka (CBSL)  rolled  out  the  blueprint for  consolidation in  the  LFC  and  SLC 
segment  to  strengthen  the  balance  sheets  of  the  beleaguered  FIs.  However,  there  is  little  analysis 
publicly available on the impact of it on these measues on the FIs. 
Table 2: Selected performance indicators of LCBs and LSBs 
2013 
2014 
14.3 
17.5 
5.2 
24.4 
12.6 
15.6 
3.6 
13.1 
Licensed Commercial Banks 
1. Capital Adequacy Ratio - Tier I Capital Ratio (%) 
2. Capital Adequacy Ratio - Total Capital Ratio (%) 
3. Gross NPA as a % of Total Loans & Advances 
4. Net NPA as a % of Capital Funds 
31  CBSL Annual Report 2015
44 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:    Country and rural context background 
5. Sectoral Credit Distribution (%) 
Agriculture & Fishing 
Manufacturing 
Tourism 
Transport 
Construction 
Traders 
New Economy 
Financial & Business Services 
Infrastructure 
Other Services 
Other Customers 
6. Return on Assets (%) 
7. Return on Equity (%) 
Licensed Specialized Banks (LSBs) 
1. Capital Adequacy Ratio - Tier I Capital Ratio (%) 
2. Capital Adequacy Ratio - Total Capital Ratio (%) 
3. Gross NPA as a % of Total Loans & Advances 
4. Net NPA as a % of Capital Funds 
5. Return on Assets (%) 
6. Return on Equity (%) 
(Source: CBSL) 
12.2 
11.8 
2.9 
2.9 
12.4 
16.9 
1.2 
4.0 
6.5 
3.1 
26.2 
2 
17.4 
20.6 
18.6 
9.3 
37.6 
1.0 
8.6 
10.5 
11.9 
3.5 
2.8 
13.1 
17.3 
1.5 
5.0 
7.9 
3.7 
22.9 
2.1 
16.8 
17.3 
15.7 
9.5 
45.9 
1.7 
15.1 
The  informal  sector  includes  thrift  and  credit  societies,  moneylenders,  credit  cooperative
24. 
societies, micro  finance  institutions (MFIs),  donor-initiated village  savings  and  loan  associations and 
rotating  savings  associations  (chit  funds).  These  institutions  are  not  regulated  by  the  Central  Bank 
(the new Microfinance (MF) Act has not been implemented) and are mostly self-regulated or at times 
under  various government ministries and  departments, namely the Department of  Divineguma which 
is  a  consolidation  of  the  Samrudhi  Authority,  Southern  Development  Authority,  and  the  Udararata 
Development  Authority.  The  department  of  Divineguma  holds  64%  of  the  total  informal  financial 
assets, which is  estimated to be 1%32  of the overall financial assets of the country. The  table below 
shows some key performance indicators for the microfinance sector. The entire MF sector serves less 
than 6% of the largest commercial bank in the country. 
Table 3: MF sector in Sri Lanka 2014-2015 
Number of Institutions 
reporting 
Active borrowers 
Gross loan portfolio (in LKR 
million) 
Active women borrowers (in 
%) 
Total staff 
Total assets (in LKR million) 
OSS (Median) in % 
PaR (Median) in % 
NBFIs 
Guarantee 
Companies 
NGOs 
Private/Public 
companies 
Total 
2 
6 
13 
14 
35 
305,191 
28,892 
70.5 
1308 
34,289 
119.7 
9.63 
94,452 
2,127 
83 
382 
2,443 
104.7 
3.8 
45,379 
1,360 
93 
778 
2,500 
106.52 
3.01 
200,829 
4,461 
645,851 
36,777 
92 
80 
3638 
44,539 
1,170 
5,307 
109.81   
1.95   
(Source: Lanka Microfinance Association & Ministry of Finance)
The above data further show that Non-Banking Financial Institutions (NBFIs) have the largest
25. 
outreach in terms of number of borrowers and loan outstanding, second to public/ private companies 
and NGOs. The challenge for NBFIs is to maintain their portfolio quality. The skills gap in terms of loan 
appraisal,  suitability  of  products  and  services  and  high  interest  rates  are  some  of  the  reasons  for 
32  MF Annual Review 2014
45 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:    Country and rural context background 
default. The average loan outstanding is LKR 56,943 (USD 320); this loan is mostly for a short term 
period (6 months), for trading or other enterprises with high turnover. 
Table 4: List of regulatory and supervisory institutions 
Type of FI 
Licensed Commercial Banks 
Regulatory Body 
Central    Bank    of    Sri    Lanka 
(CBSL) 
CBSL 
Licensed Specialized Banks 
Licensed Finance Companies 
CBSL 
Specialized Leasing Companies  CBSL 
SANASA    -    Thrift    and    credit 
cooperative societies 
Cooperative   Rural   Banks   and 
other cooperative societies 
Farmer organizations 
Department      of      Cooperative 
Development (DCD) 
DCD 
Dept. of Divineguma 
MFI companies & NGO MFIs 
Department         of         Agrarian 
Development 
Divineguma            Development 
Department 
CBSL and NGO Registrar 
Main governing Act 
Banking Act 
Banking Act 
Finance Business Act 
Finance Leasing Act 
Cooperative Society Act (CSA) 
CSA 
Agrarian Development Act 
Divineguma Act 
Microfinance Act 201633
26.  Regulation and supervision. The banking sector in Sri Lanka is regulated and supervised by
the Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL). LCBs, LSBs, LFCs and SLCs fall under  the purview of CBSL. 
The  new  Microfinance  Act,  passed  in  July  2016,  is  expected  to  be  operational  by  2017.  The  Act 
provides for two sets of  MFIs, including MF companies which  would  be regulated by the CBSL, and 
NGO-type  MFIs  which  are  to  be  regulated  by  the  NGO  Secretariat.  Thrift  and  credit  societies  and 
cooperative  rural  banks  are  under  the  regulation  of  the  department  of  cooperative  development.  In 
addition,  a  movable  collateral  registry  law  is  being  drafted  and  is  expected  to  be  passed  in  2017.
27. 
Worker’s  remittances  grew  by  9.5%  to  USD  7,108  million  in  2014  compared  to  USD  6,407
million in 201334. The remittances remained the foremost and stable exchange earner of  Sri Lanka. 
However,  due  to  the  decline  in  oil  prices  and  the  increasing  budget  deficit  of  gulf  economies, it  is 
expected that remittances inflow to Sri Lanka will decline in 2015-2016.
Nearly  10%  of  Sri  Lankans  (about  two  million)  are  migrant  workers,  and  their  remittances
28. 
account  for  about  6%  of  GDP.  The  vast  majority  of  senders  come  from  rural  areas.  One  of  the 
commercial  banks,   Hatton   National  Bank   (HNB),   channels  about   twenty   per   cent   of   official 
international  remittances,  making  it  the  second  largest  channel  in  the  country.  HNB  has  opened 
offices  in  several  Gulf  countries  and  India  (where  over  60%  of  Sri  Lankan  remittances  originate), 
reduced  fees  for  migrant  workers  who  transfer  money  to  HNB  accounts  in  Sri  Lanka  and  linked 
savings and loan products to these flows. An IFAD grant funded pilot programme developed a tailored 
savings scheme for migrants and their families in rural areas (women in particular), offering a safe and 
affordable  way  for  them  to  send  money  home  by  transferring  directly  into  a  recipient’s  savings 
account.  However,  as  the  farmers  to  be  supported  under  the  SAP  are  not  those  that  are  currently 
working overseas, and as there is no systematic link between overseas workers and the members in 
farmer groups to be  selected under SAP, it  will  not  be possible under SAP to establish a  systematic 
link    between    remittances    and    investment    finance.    However,    alternative    options    to    mobilise 
remittances as a source of funding for business plans of target groups will be explored during project 
trainings.
implementation,  and 
this  can  be  promoted 
financial 
through 
literacy 
the 
Despite  the  comparatively  high  penetration  of  basic  financial  services,  Sri  Lanka  lags  in
29. 
financial inclusion parameters such as credit penetration, life insurance penetration, pension coverage 
as well as credit access for small businesses and farm-based activities when compared to India and 
other south Asian countries. Overall, 79% of the people have bank accounts with FIs but only 29% out 
33  The operating guidelines to govern these institutions are being developed by CBSL 
34  Ministry of Finance annual report
46 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:    Country and rural context background 
of that borrowed and only 3.1% borrowed for farm or business activities35 which is much lower than 
the  south Asian  average  of  8.6%.  The  majority  of  the  loans  and  advances  go  for  consumer  credit, 
which is also validated by the fact that 97%36 of Credit Reference Information Bureau (CRIB) issued 
credit.
reports 
consumer 
was 
on 
As at end 2015, loans outstanding to agriculture were 9% of total loans, of which 5.9% points
30. 
were for short-term lending, 1.9% for medium term and only 1.2% for long term lending37. In terms of 
interest  rates,  commercial  banks  are  lending  mostly  at  14-19%.  While  the  CBSL  requires  banks  to 
lend at  least 10% of  the portfolio to the agriculture sector, the majority of  these loans are  granted to 
large-scale  farmers  and  farm-based  agribusinesses.  The  MF  sector  lending  is  primarily  geared 
towards lending to  small-scale farmers and business. Furthermore, it  is  estimated that 30%38 of  the 
lower segment (small-scale farmers) have been flagged by CRIB, due to defaults or having acted as a 
guarantor  to  a  defaulter.  Once  individuals  are  flagged  under  CRIB,  any  individual  future  credit 
blacklisted.
becomes 
impossible 
obtain39 
become 
virtually 
they 
as 
to 
The supply-side constraints to lending to the agriculture sector are due to the risk perception of
31. 
the  banks  incurred  in  agriculture,  high  transaction  costs,  liquidity  shortages,  information  asymmetry 
and ultimately the operational capacity of banks to lend to smallholder famers. With some exceptions, 
the do not have the physical infrastrure and manpower to handle thousands of small scale loans. The 
demand-side constraints  are  primarily related  to  the  perceived  high  interest  rates40,  complex  credit 
procedures  resulting  in  delays  in  disbursement,  immovable  collateral-based  lending  and  the  poor 
attitude  of  the  banking  staff  in  serving  the  sector.  Some  of  the  more  dynamic  banks  have  stated  to 
overcome  this  by  working  with  supply  chains,  disbursement  of  loans  in  kind  to  suppliers  and  the 
distribution  of  simple  debit  cards  to  farmers,  which  will  receive  the  net  amount  of  their  sales  after 
deduction of loan capital and interest due through their debit cards, The more innovative and dynamic 
banks  are  keen  to  expand  their  services  to  the  agricultural  sector,  have  trained  their  staff  on  good 
micro and agricultural finance practices and see programmes such as the SAP as good entry points. 
lending.
For 
constraint 
liquidty 
banks, 
these 
key 
the 
for 
is 
The  comparatively  high  interest  rates  charged  by  the  banks  are  linked  to  the  high  yield  on
32. 
government securities. The median and mean of treasury bills (T-bills) yield rates since 1996 to 2016 
are 11.7% and 11.6% respectively. This has been further aggravated by a comparatively high budget 
deficit, which is seen by many as unsustainable. Sri Lanka’s recorded budget deficit was 7.4% of the 
country's Gross  Domestic Product  in  2015. The  government budget  deficit  in  Sri  Lanka  averaged  - 
7.6%  of  GDP from  1990  until 2015,  reaching an  all-time high of  -5.4 percent of  GDP in  2013  and  a 
record low of -10.2 percent of GDP in 200141.  In the medium term, the T-Bill yields are not expected 
to decline, as government will keep borrowing to fund the government budget deficit. 
Table 5: Key determinants of the financial sector 
Key determinants of the financial sector 
Inflation rate 
Budget Deficit 
T-Bills Rate 
AWDR 
Commercial lending rate 
Non-Performing Loan (NPL) rate 
2015-16 (%) 
0.9 - 4 
7.4 
11.38 
6.38 
14-18 
3.4% 
35 World Bank Global FINDEX Indicators 2014 data. All population figures include age 15+ years only 
36  CBSL Annual report 2015 
37  CBSL Annual report 2015 
38  30% of the NADeP smallholder famers dropped out of the programme due to CRIB report 
39  Commercial banks downgraded their product and services to the lowest segment without the necessary skills to lend 
to this specific market segment; the misalignment and limited financial education, resulted in increasing defaults by 
2010 
40  The lending rate of LCB and LSCs are in between  12-18%, and MFIs interest rate is between 22%- 52% 
41  tradingeconomics.com/sri-lanka/government-budget
47 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:    Country and rural context background 
33.  The high  yield on government securities provides less incentive for FIs to lend money. At this
rate,  much  of  the  lending  to  the  agriculture  sector  is  not  sufficiently  profitable  to  offer  good 
shareholder returns, and even less so if the operating costs of lending are higher than average.
Demand for  credit. As  discussed above,  the  lower  income brackets of  the  population suffer
34. 
from  inadequate  access  to  reliable  and  sustainable  sources  of  financing.  Despite  the  high  credit  to 
deposit ratio,  the  domestic credit  to  the  private sector  as  a  percentage of  GDP is  only 40.3%  in  Sri 
Lanka, which is  lower than in India (53%) and Bangladesh (44%). This indicates that domestic credit 
is  not  adequately  available  to  the  private  sector  enterprises,  particularly  micro,  small  and  medium 
enterprises (MSMEs). In 2012, the total credit gap for MSMEs in Sri Lanka was estimated at USD 3.5 
billion42, which is likely to have slightly widened since then. 
Table 6: Key determinants of liquidity 
Key determinants of liquidity 
Bank Liquid Reserve to Bank Asset Ratio 
Gross Savings (% of GDP) 
LCBs 
Credit to Deposit Ratio 
Borrowing to assets 
LSBs/LFCs 
Credit to Deposit Ratio 
Borrowings to assets 
2015 
5.73 
27.9 
87 
21.7 
165 
31 
2014 
10.4 
29.4 
83.1 
20 
145.8 
26.6 
35.  The  banks'  liquid  reserve  to  bank  asset  declined  to  5.73%,  extending  further  pressure  on
available  cash.  Banks'  credit  to  deposit  ratio  is  very  high  and  only  just  complies  with  minimum 
regulatory requirements. Borrowing by the banks are at a moderate level, which is only 21% and 31% 
of  the  total  asset  for  LCBs  and  LSBs/  LFCs  respectively. At  present,  the  available  deposits  clearly 
sector.
cannot 
agriculture 
portfolio 
growth 
drive 
loan 
the 
the 
for 
The gap between demand and supply can primarily be attributed to the inability or unwillingness
36. 
of  FIs to supply additional credit  at current interest rates, on the  one hand, and  the  unwillingness of 
smallholders  or  entrepreneurs  to  borrow  at  the  prevailing  interest  rates.  This,  in  turn,  has  been 
perpetuated to a large extent by the high borrowing by the government, mopping up the liquidity and 
reducing the incentive for FIs to lend to what is perceived as a difficult and risky market. 
42  IFC SME finance Gap for Sri Lanka 2011-12
48 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:    Poverty, targeting and gender 
Appendix 2:   Poverty, targeting, gender, food security and nutrition 
Poverty 
1.       Over the last years, following the end of the 26-year civil war in 2009, the Sri Lankan economy 
has continued to grow at a steady rate, averaging 6-7 percent up to the present day. Sri Lanka is now 
a  lower  middle-income country  with  a  population  of  20.5  million  and  per  capita  GDP  of  US$  3,811, 
compared with US$ 2,400 in 2010. Thanks to constant investments in health and education, Sri Lanka 
has also experienced a notable increase in Human Development Indicators (HDI)43, now ranking 72 
among  the  high  human  development  countries  and  far  higher  than  other  South Asia  countries  and 
most of East Asia ones. Its HDI value spurred from 0.620 in 1990 up to 0,757 in 2014, picking up after 
the end of the conflict; it resulted in literacy rate of 91% reached through free education, low leve ls of 
infant  and maternal mortality and  life  expectancy of  74  years.  Moreover, population expresses a  fair 
trust  in  national  government  (77%)  and  judiciary  system  (74%),  portraying  a  good  relationship  of 
confidence between institutions and citizens44. 
2.       The country has an overall lower percentage of its population below the official poverty line in 
comparison  to  other  South  Asian  countries.  Poverty  headcount  in  1990  was  24%  and  kept  on 
declining  ever  since,  arriving  at  8.9%  in  2009/10  and  6.7%  in  2012/13.  Sri  Lanka  key  development 
challenge is a tendency towards increased inequality, despite its economic growth. The Gini Index has 
been  on  the  growth  for  the  last  20  years,  increasing  from  32.4  up  to  36.4  in  201445.  In  2010,  the 
poorest 20% of Sri Lankan citizens received only 4.5% of total household income, whole the richest 
20% enjoyed 54.1%. 
Figure 1: Distribution of poverty headcount index by district 2012/1346
43  Human Development Index (HDI) is a composite index measuring average achievement in three basic dimensions of human 
development—a long and healthy life, knowledge and a decent standard of living. 
44  http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/hdr_2015_statistical_annex.pdf ; 
http://www.lk.undp.org/content/dam/srilanka/docs/localpublications/Executive%20Summary.pdf?download 
45 World Bank and HDI report 
46  http://www.statistics.gov.lk/poverty/PovertyIndicators2012_13.pdf
49 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:    Poverty, targeting and gender 
3.       Leaving the  country as  migrant  worker oversea has  been  a  widespread response to  poverty, 
particularly  for  less  educated  people  from  rural  areas.  It  is  estimated  that  the  Sri  Lanka  migrant 
population  working  overseas  numbers  at  around  1.7  million  (SLBFE,  2009)  and  that  annually more 
than  200,000  persons  are  moving  out  of  the  country  for  the  purpose  of  employment.  Private 
remittances sent by such migrant workers are a major source for investments in education and health 
(particularly  if  coming  from  a  female  migrant),  increasing  poor  families'  ability  to  cope  with  shocks, 
purchasing  land  or  other  productive  assets,  and  releasing  from  indebtedness.  The  majority  of  the 
migrants  come  from  lower  income  population  and  the  25-39  age  group  and  -  even  if  they  have 
traditionally been women-   nowadays women migrants equal males. However, the high incidence of 
female migrants bears consequences on families cohesion and wellbeing47. 
Rural poverty 
4.       Poverty reduction has taken place among all geographical areas yet rural areas still account for 
86.6% of  the total poor,  where poor people are  1,163,00048. As  a result of  nearly 30  years of  armed 
conflict,  poverty  in  Northern  and  Eastern  provinces  is  comparatively higher  than  in  the  others. The 
number of people under the poverty line is higher in  Ratnapura, Kur,  Galle and  Batticaloa district -as 
shown  in   Figure  1.   Poor   rural  areas  are   characterized  by   limited  employment  opportunities, 
constraints  to  public  services  outreach  in  remote  areas,  low  penetration  of  financial  services  and 
vulnerability  to  climate  shocks  or  erratic  weather  patterns.  In  terms  of  the  youth,  they  represent 
approximately 24%  of  the  total  population,  and  are  the  group  with  the  highest  unemployment  rate, 
particularly among young women. 
5.       The  vast  majority  of  poor  live49   in  rural  areas  and  estates,  with  high  dependency  on  the 
agricultural  sector.   Population   groups   most   affected   by   poverty  are   agricultural  smallholders, 
plantation workers, underemployed and landless labourers, particularly youth and women, and people 
engaged  in  micro-enterprise. Rural  women  in  Sri  Lanka  enjoy  better  status  and  rights  compared  to 
other  countries  in  the  region  but  they  are  however  confronted  with  limited  economic  opportunities, 
unequal  access  to  land  and  credit. Women  comprise  53%  of  the  agricultural  labour  force,  often  as 
unpaid  family  labour,  yet  traditional  norms  are  biased  in  favor  of  men,  resulting  in  obstacles  to 
women’s equitable access to resources (land, capital – including credit) and markets, and the control 
of assets. 
Food security and nutrition 
6.       Over the last three decades, the food security situation in Sri Lanka has improved significantly 
over  the  years;  according  to  the  2014  Global  Hunger  Index,  Sri  Lanka  is  now  ranked  39  out  of  76 
countries and above all South Asian countries with a score of 15.1. However, whilst availability of food 
at  the  national  level  is  secure,  this  does  not  necessarily  translate  to  food  and  nutrition  security  at 
household  level  for  all  segments  of  the  population,  especially  socially  and  nutritionally   vulnerable 
groups . 
7.       Sri  Lanka  has  a  very  particular  nutrition  situation  with  very  high  rates  of  under-five  wasting 
(21%),  moderate  rates  of  stunting  (15%),  low  birth  weight  (18%),  women  anaemia  (26%),  and  0-5 
months exclusive breastfeeding (76%). The nutritional problems in Sri Lanka are very complex but an 
important contributor to  the  situation  is  inadequate  maternal nutrition. Although,  the  high  rate  of  low 
birth weight implies early pregnancies as well, according to UNICEF early pregnancies are only seen 
in some geographical pockets in the country but do not occur countrywide. 
8.       Seasonal  food  price  volatility  is  an  important  determinant  of  food  and  nutrition  security 
according to UNICEF. This results to a limited accessibility of high nutrient value food throughout the 
year.  Another  factor  which  was  mentioned  was  food  safety,  starting  from  unhealthy  application  of 
pesticides and insecticides up to unsafe food preparation at household level. 
47  file:///C:/Users/b.gerli/Documents/mission/2016.11.01%20Sri%20Lanka/background/migration_profile_ips.pdf 
48  http://www.statistics.gov.lk/poverty/PovertyIndicators2012_13.pdf 
49  http://www.statistics.gov.lk/poverty/PovertyIndicators2012_13.pdf
50 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:    Poverty, targeting and gender 
9.       As stated in the Multisector Action Plan for Nutrition – Vision 2016  “For some unknown reason 
the  nutrition  indicators  do  not  match  those  of  health;  the  nutritional  status  of  children,  women,  and 
adolescents  have  remained  stagnant  for  over  a   decade  and  are  not  keeping  up  with  the  present 
development”.
levels 
socio-economic 
of 
It  is  very  commendable that  the  new  Multisectoral Action  Plan  for  Nutrition  is  in  preparation,
10. 
strongly supported by UNICEF and  other partners like WFP. This provides SAP an  opportunity to be 
actively involved in shaping nutrition interventions in a multi-sectoral manner in Sri Lanka and partner 
nutrition.
agencies 
with 
other 
in 
High  wasting rates  require  a  particular emphasizing on  nutrition-specific interventions that  go
11. 
beyond the scope of IFAD supported programmes. However, nutrition-sensitive are as much required 
as  nutrition-specific  interventions  to  address  not  only  the  immediate  but  the  underlying  causes  of 
malnutrition  as  well.  Therefore,  opportunities  in  SAP  will  be  developed  along  food  value  chains, 
feasible.
making 
nutrition-sensitive 
appropriate 
whenever 
them 
and 
Nutrition-sensitive food value chains (NSVC) potentially have a positive impact on the nutrition
12. 
security in  a  country. The  focus  of  NSVC  is  on  shaping the  food  systems with  regard to  availability, 
affordability and diversity of food. NSVCs target not only the producers and other value chain actors 
but also the consumers addressing not only quantity but quality of their diets as well. The shift is from 
the  supply  side  to  the  demand  side  by  accompanying  measures  such  as  nutrition  education  and 
etc.
Behaviour 
Communication 
nutrition 
Change 
in 
13. 
The impact on the nutrition situation of  the targeted population is  higher if  the food promoted
plays a  substantial role  in  the  diet  or  can replace food  with less  nutrient value. This  represents the 
own production pathway.
In the case of the SAP the own production pathway has limitations as some of the products do
14. 
not have or do only have a  limited nutrient value e.g. spices. The greatest potential for a substantial 
nutritional  impact  in  SAP  will  be  the  dairy  value  chain  or  any  other  value  chain  promoting  the 
level.
consumption 
household 
sourced 
protein 
animal 
at 
of 
15. 
Fruits and vegetables do also have nutritional value in particular with regard to micronutrients.
This  would directly address the nutritional gap  in  Sri  Lanka, which is  a  combination of  quantity and 
quality of the diets.
The income pathway is the second pathway for the SAP. In this case, it is expected that higher
16. 
income in combination with nutrition interventions such as nutrition education but also gender equality 
(allocation of the family budget and informed decision-making) lead to the purchase of food with high 
nutritional value. In this case, the determinants of food choices need to be identified and addressed in 
nutrition  messaging  and  nutrition  education  –  preferably  Behaviour  Change  Communication.
The income pathway is a very important pathway also for women’s empowerment. Elements of
17. 
the  value  chain  offer  opportunities  for  women  including  adolescent  girls  to  get  involved  without 
increasing the  workload tremendously. An  example from  the  field  visit  is  the  drying of  pepper. Other 
options  could  be  post-harvest processing  e.g.  solar  drying  and  other  conservation and  preservation 
methods  to  increase  the  availability  and  accessibility  throughout  the  year  and  thereby  contribute  to 
waste.
and 
minimise 
reduce 
food 
food 
loss 
A  third  pathway  to  enhance  nutrition  is  the  market  pathway.  By  leveraging  the  potential  of
18. 
markets  for  nutrition,  NSVC  can  catalyse  improvements  in  the  overall  food  environment. Acting  on 
demand and supply can contribute to increased availability, affordability, food safety, nutritional quality 
and  acceptability of  foods  in  the  marketplace. This  pathway broadens the  impact to  the  wider  set  of 
consumers that  can  benefit from  a  more  nutritious food  system. Again,  interventions under  the  SAP 
are fostering this pathway as well. In particular, the food safety component can play an important role 
nutrition.
to 
improve 
The theory of change has to identify the pathway applicable for the chosen intervention and will
19. 
define the activity promoted and how this activity will lead to better nutritional outcomes.
51 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:    Poverty, targeting and gender 
20.  There   are   two   critical   mediators   of   impact   across   the   three   pathways.   First,   women’s
empowerment  and  gender  equality.  Given  the  implications  of  women’s  time  allocation,  decision 
making and control over resources for household nutrition, as  well as their own health and nutritional 
status  being  crucial  for  child  nutrition,  women’s  empowerment and  gender  equality  are  essential for 
catalysing  the  effects  of  these  pathways.  Second,  nutrition  awareness.  W ithout  nutrition  awareness 
and appropriate knowledge and practices, increases in income and production will have limited effects 
on changing food choices and diets, and so  limited impact on improving nutrition. Behaviour change 
communication  and  nutrition  education  and  information  are  essential  to  turn  changes  in  production 
habits.
consumption 
and 
changes 
feeding 
income 
eating 
and 
into 
in 
– 
The  importance  of  nutrition  education  and  behaviour  change  communication  counts  for  the
21. 
entire family and should not be limited to  women and girls only. In Sri Lanka issues around cooking, 
eating,  and  feeding  are  greatly  determined  by  in-laws  in  particular  mother  and  grandmother  in  law. 
This  needs  to  be  considered  when  developing  a  nutrition  education  strategy  including  defining  the 
target  group.  The  nutrition  education  component  needs  to  be  very  explicit  on  the  improvement  of 
girls.
maternal 
adolescent 
nutrition 
nutrition 
and 
of 
Nutrition  education  and  behaviour  change  communication  are  part  of  the  capacity  building
22. 
activities in SAP and will be integrated in the overall capacity strengthening strategy.
When  appropriate  and  feasible,  promotion  of  integrated  homestead  food  production  (home
23. 
gardens complemented by small livestock including fish) will contribute to better nutrition outcomes. 
Programme area and target group
Geographic targeting. The SAP programme is  conceived to  have  national coverage, though
24. 
special attention and preference will be given through an evaluation/ selection process, to low income 
districts  and  where  agri-production  potential  is  high.  The  programme  is  demand-driven  and  the 
willingness  and  commitment  by  stakeholders  (agribusiness  and  value  chain  actors  including  the 
private sector and farmers/ producer organizations) will be critical50. The programme will also assess 
the  scaling  up  potential  of   target  groups  living   in   areas  with   ongoing   NADEP  4Ps,  seizing 
opportunities  of  deepening  the  outreach  of  such  partnerships  with  the  inclusion  of  additional 
farmers.
smallholder 
The following table summarizes the prioritization criteria for the selection of districts: incidence
25. 
of poverty and relevance of agriculture in rural poor livelihoods. 
District51
Incidence of poverty 
Poverty 
head  count 
index (%) 
1.4 
2.1 
3.1 
6.2 
7.8 
6.6 
9.9 
7.1 
4.9 
8.3 
Number   of 
poor 
population 
(thousands) 
31 
47 
37 
83 
37 
46 
102 
57 
29 
48 
Colombo 
Gampaha 
Kalutara 
Kandy 
Matale 
Nuwara Eliya 
Galle 
Matara 
Hambantota 
Jaffna 
Relevance of agriculture 
(Percentage    distribution 
of employed population  in 
  each 
for 
agricultrue 
district – 201452) 
28.5% 
5.7 % 
14.7 % 
23 % 
37.9 % 
54.3 % 
32.6 % 
36.5 % 
39.3 % 
25.8 % 
50  At design the geographic targeting strategy will be developed taking into consideration issues related to management and 
monitoring of the programme on a national scale. The scope for the concentration of programme activities in geographic 
clusters would be explored. 
51  http://www.statistics.gov.lk/poverty/PovertyIndicators2012_13.pdf 
52  http://www.statistics.gov.lk/samplesurvey/LFS_Annual%20Report_2014.pdf
52 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:    Poverty, targeting and gender 
Mannar 
Vavunia 
Mullaitivu 
Kilinochchi 
Batticaloa 
Ampara 
Trincomalee 
Kurunegala 
Puttalam 
Anuradhapura 
Polonnaruwa 
Badulla 
Moneragala 
Ratnapura 
Kegalle 
20.1 
3.4 
28.8 
12.7 
19.4 
5.4 
9.0 
6.5 
5.1 
7.6 
6.7 
12.3 
20.8 
10.4 
6.7 
19 
6 
26 
14 
101 
35 
34 
102 
38 
63 
26 
98 
92 
112 
55 
39.1 % 
33.8 % 
44.6 % 
38.8 % 
25.8 % 
33.3 % 
30.5 % 
35 % 
23.6 % 
55 % 
43 % 
63.3 % 
56.9 % 
41 % 
21.3 % 
26.  Key  characteristics  of  the  target  population.  The  SAP  target  group  constitutes  of  small
holder farmers already active in agricultural production or  young rural people interested in developing 
an entrepreneurial activity revolving around rural production systems. Given the country-wide scope of 
the  programme,  the  livelihood  of  smallholders  varies  depending  on  the  area,  combining  food  crops 
(rice, maize) with cash crops of  different kind (spices, protected agriculture, etc.). This diversification 
strategy enables to sell on local markets both surplus of food crops and cash crops, gaining through 
higher  margins  or  value  addition.  An  extent  of  68.5%  of  the  gross  cultivated areas  of  the  country is 
under  food  grains,  which  includes  28%  cultivated  for  rice.  The  food  grain  category  is  usually 
considered as low value crops and comprises finger-millet, maize, lentils, sorghum and other serials. 
Vegetables, fruits, and condiments cover another 15.3% of land extent53.
Land fragmentation. Comparing the Census of Agriculture in  1982 and  2002, data highlight a
27. 
significant jump in the number of farmers with an agricultural land holding of less than 1acre (0.40ha), 
increasing from  42% to  63%. Such small land size limit income generating capacity of  the crop they 
grow. The relationship between poverty and land extent owned is demonstrated in the following table. 
Youth is the age group with more limited access to land, partly due to their exclusion during the land 
distribution programmes promoted in the past decades (Land Development Ordinance in  1935, Land 
Development Act in 1981 and Agrarian Services Act in 2000). 
The extent of land owned and prevalence of poverty 
Extent of land owned 
Household owns agricultural lands 
Land area < 10 perches 
1/4ac -1 ac 
> 1 ac 
Land less 
Source: Center for Poverty Analysis (CEPA), 2007
Absolute poverty 
(HCI) 
18.2 
24.0 
20.4 
17.3 
32.0 
Relative poverty 
(HCI) 
28.4 
34.6 
31.5 
27.1 
45.0 
Reduced  income  availability  of  smallholders  engaged  in  agriculture  is  related  to  a  variety  of
28. 
causes.  Among  others,  poor  access  to  marketing  facilities  and  agricultural  infrastructure,  lack  of 
market  oriented  cultivation  practices,  selling  products  for  cheaper  without  processing  and  adding 
values, low quality seeds. Moreover, formal financial institutions have  very low level of penetration in 
rural  areas,  reducing  opportunities  for  productive  investments,  upgrading  existing  infrastructure  and 
often  trapping  small  holders  into  vicious  circles  of  indebtedness  with  informal  providers  of  credit  in 
their communities. 
53  Sri Lanka Integrated Survey- SLIS, 1999-2000).
53 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:    Poverty, targeting and gender 
29.  SAP  targeting  strategy.  The  SAP  programme  is  premised  on  ensuring  inclusiveness  of
smallholder  producers  in  a  market-driven  model  through  4P  business  partnerships  and  other 
interventions aimed at building producer/ farmer organization capacity and enhancing access to rural 
finance. The programme target group comprises 57,500 poor rural households (representing 230,000 
individuals) with  the potential to  become active economic players in  a  diverse array of  value chains. 
The  targeting  strategy  is  based  on 
leveraging  existing  mechanisms  for  change  and  rural 
transformation, building on synergies and (NADeP) scaling up potential. 
  
  
  
The  first  target  subgroup  are  35,000  rural  household  producers  that  will  benefit  from 
increased livelihood opportunities by virtue of their engagement within 4P schemes – this 
includes  4,000  households  organized  in  70  producer/  farmer  organizations  (FOs). 
Although the programme is demand driven and the willingness and commitment of all 4P 
parties  is  critical,  the  same  set  of  targeting  criteria  as  in  NADeP,  ensures  the  pro-poor 
nature  of  these  partnerships. Producer/ farmers  implicated  in  the  4P  arrangements own 
less than 1 ha of land, rely on agriculture for at least 50% of their household income and 
have  monthly incomes averaging LKR  25-30,000 (USD  150-200) or  below. With  respect 
to the support to develop farmer organizations, SAP adopts a two-phased approach over 
six  years (pilot phase from programme years 1-3, and expansion phase from  years 4-6), 
which  is  requisite  for  obtaining  results  and  emerging  lessons  which  can  be  utilised  for 
scaling up approaches in line with Government’s policy and development agenda, and to 
ensure  sustainability  of  supported  FOs  within  4P  partnerships.  In  the  expansion  phase 
(years  4-6),  the  programme  expects  to  increase  outreach  to  producer/  farmers  with 
additional financing to the  70  producer/ farmer organizations (FOs) supported during the 
pilot phase, but  with the expectation that their membership will increase, or  to  new FOs, 
particularly FOs under the Mahaweli Authority. 
The  second  target  subgroup  are  the  20,000  households  participating  in  4P  schemes 
already  established  under  the  NADeP  programme,  who  will  benefit  from  SAP  support 
through access to credit for seasonal/ working capital needs. 
The last target subgroup is represented by 2,500 poor young women and men who will be 
supported  to  enhance  their  employability  or  become  entrepreneurs,  responding  to  the 
demand for  products or  services generated along  the  value chain  and  in  complement to 
the 4Ps. This youth represent a  particularly vulnerable target group as they are generally 
unemployed,  have  low  monthly  incomes  (less  than  LKR  20-25,000),  and  are  either 
(30%).
landless 
(70%) 
than 
land 
own 
less 
ha 
or 
of 
1 
30. 
Rural organizations The rural setting characterised by a large variety of informally and/or un-
organized  small  farmer/  producers  compared  to  those  well-organized,  gives  rise  to  two  levels  of 
groups to be targeted by the programme, namely: 
(a)      individual or informally organized small farmer/ producers implicated in contract farming/ 
outgrower schemes – this includes under new and existing (to be expanded/ scaled-up) 
4P business plans and youth benefitting from entrepreneurial opportunities; 
(b)      nascent producer ‘groups’ or organizations under established agricultural schemes (such 
as Mahaweli).
The  programme  will  provide  targeted  support  to  the  latter,  to  cement  their  cohesion  and
31. 
organization  into  formal  ‘producer  organizations  that  will  serve  as  a  springboard  for  further 
development.  SAP  will  support  the  empowerment  of  producers/  farmers  through  a  progressive 
strengthening  of  these  rural  groups/organization  on  different  dimensions:  a)  good  governance  and 
democratic  management;  b)  capacity  of  improving  production  –  both  in  quantitative  and  qualitative 
terms c) Sustainable financial management d) inclusiveness and gender equality. The programme will 
support the  organizations to  self-assess their  level of  maturity on  these four  dimension and  define a 
capacity  building  plan  to  address  shortcomings.  Through  producer  organizations,  the  graduation  of 
their members and of  the institutions as a services-oriented and market-oriented body themselves is
54 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:    Poverty, targeting and gender 
envisaged   within   the   larger   national   framework   of   advancing   agricultural   modernization   and 
competitiveness.
These producer organizations will be supported (in response to the demand) to progressively
32. 
provide  relevant  and  adequate  services  to  meet  member  needs  (e.g.  procurement  of   inputs, 
marketing  and  commercialisation).  This  may  also  include  taking  responsibility  for  management  of 
post-harvest  handling  and  processing  facilities  to  increase  value  addition  and  margins  as  part  of  a 
viable business plan. It  is  expected that  with SAP support a large number of these organizations will 
be  able  to  “graduate”  over  time  in  order  to  reach  a  mature  and  self-sufficient  level  and  become 
companies.
business-oriented 
producer/ 
farmer 
The  SAP  approach  will  then  be  modular  and  providing  support  to  FOs  and  producers’
33. 
organizations at different stages of their business development. The few existing cooperatives already 
in  business will be further supported to enlarge their  business, to make it sustainable and promoting 
women  and  youth  leadership.  The  less  organized  FOs  will  be  in  turn  supported  to  start  up  their 
business either under 4P partnerhsips led by private companies or through 4P schemes led by FOs. 
Overview of SAP target groups 
Target groups 
1) 35,000 rural household 
producers that will benefit from 
increased livelihood 
opportunities provided by 
entering into 4Ps partnerships. 
2) 20,000 households 
participating in P4 partnerships 
established under the NADEP 
programme, who will benefit 
from SAP support in order to 
ensure sustainability of their 
production systems and 
strengthen their organizations 
3)2,500 poor young women and 
men that will be supported in 
becoming entrepreneurs to 
meet the demand of services 
generated by the development 
of value chains under the 4Ps 
Programme activity 
  21,000 households will 
engage in newly formed 4Ps 
partnership 
  10,000 households will 
engage in already existing 
4Ps agreements, 
incrementing their outreach 
  Producer groups / 
organizations. capacities will 
be strengthened to empower 
a total of 4,000 members to 
initiate new 4Ps. 
Organizations participating in 
already existing 4Ps are 
eligible for post-production 
support only. 
  farming system sustainability 
support. Short-term credit of 
maximum USD 350 to further 
strengthen production 
systems by meeting liquidity 
needs 
  Package of support to 
entrepreneurial plans – 
mainly services revolving 
around 4Ps value chains. I) 
vocational/ technical  training 
ii)  business/  entrepreneurial 
skills ii) access to USD 1500 
credit 
Targeting 
criteria 
  own less than 
1 ha of land 
  rely on 
agriculture for 
at least 50% 
of their 
household 
income 
  monthly 
incomes of 
LKR 25- 
30,000 or 
below 
  Unemployed 
  Monthly 
income of less 
than LKR 25- 
20,000, 
  At least 70% 
of them are 
landless and 
the remaining 
30% owe less 
than 1ha. 
Women 
Youth 
40% 
(14,400) 
20% 
(7,200) 
NADEP 
benef. 
No 
No 
No but also 
NADEP 
beneficiaries 
are eligible 
Yes 
No quota 
No 
40% 
(4,000) 
100% 
Preference 
will be 
given to 
youth. 
Application 
s from 
individuals 
up to 35 will 
also be 
considered 
Gender
34. 
Women in Sri Lanka enjoy better status and rights compared to other countries in South Asia.
Literacy  rates  are  high  and  similar  to  men's  ones  (98.6%  and  97.7%  respectively),  they  have  a
55 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:    Poverty, targeting and gender 
relatively  good  access  to  service  (maternal  mortality  ratio  is  35  in  100,000)  and  gender  inequality 
index  (GII)  is  0,37054,  ranking  among  high  human development countries.  Interestingly, indicators of 
perception of individual well-being report that man and women are equally satisfied with their freedom 
of  choice  (81%  of  interviewed  males  and  females)  ,  unveiling  a  rather  balanced  society.55
Yet,  women in  Sri  Lanka  still  confront key gender challenges in  the  field  of  employment and
35. 
economic  empowerment.  Notwithstanding  the  higher  percentage  of  female  students  entering  the 
university (53.8%), the rate of women’s participation in the labour force is only 34.4% and the majority 
of graduate unemployment prevails among females. Moreover, women's wages tend to be lower than 
those of men in the same positions, be engaged in informal labour, less likely to be self-employed due 
credit.
and 
to 
ownership 
difficult 
access 
capital 
low 
to 
36. 
Gender-based challenges are exacerbated in rural areas, where employment opportunities are
even  more  reduced  and  asset  ownership  represents  an  important  determinant  for   agricultural 
production. Key challenges for rural women in Sri Lanka include: 
(a)      Lack of or inadequate productive assets, particularly land. Inheritance practice tend to 
favour men over women and joint titling practices are very limited. Rural women lack 
awareness of land rights and mechanisms for enforcing them. Many are hesitant to 
exercise their rights because of social and cultural pressures; 
(b)          Limited  access  to  credit  due  to  lack  of  collateral  and  higher  perception  of  risk.  When 
available, women tend to have little control and decision making power over credit; 
(c)          Relatively  low  engagement  in  the  labour  force  and  lack  of  remunerative  or  productive 
employment.  Engagement  of  a  substantial  portion  of  the  labour  force  as  unpaid  family 
workers and/or poorly paid labour; 
(d)        Low  productivity  and  profitability  in  agriculture  and  limited  alternative  economic 
opportunities, which translate into very high rates of young rural women unemployment - 
up  to  31.2%.  Low-income  families,  even  those  with  secondary  or  university  education, 
lack opportunities to upgrade their skills and achieve upward economic empowerment; 
(e)      Malnutrition, particularly in adolescent and fertile age; 
(f)       Limited access to markets due to constraints on mobility posed by responsibilities within 
the household; 
(g)      Vulnerability to disasters and impact of climate changes.
The most vulnerable women are those in post conflict areas in the north of the country, women
37. 
affected  by  the  tsunami  on  the  east  coast  and  women  heads  of  households  in  poverty  groups  – 
generally widows and the elderly. In 2010, 23.2% households in Sri Lanka (1.2 million)  were women- 
the  age  group  40  and  above56.
(80%)  are 
headed  households  and 
its  majority 
in 
The  majority  of  rural  women  are  active  in  the  agricultural  sector  as  part  of  the  household
38. 
livelihood.  Their  role  and  contribution  varied  depending  on  the  type  of  crop  and  the  activity.  For 
instance,  women's  role  tends  to  be  prominent  in  pollination,  picking  and  sorting.  Value  chains  that 
tend  to  be  have  a  higher  involvement  of  women  are  mango,  green  chillies,  bitter  gourd,  protected 
agriculture  vegetables  (particularly  bell  pepper,  gherkins,  tomatoes),  staple  crops  (rice  and  maize), 
pepper.
sesame 
sea 
weed, 
and 
39. 
The  SAP  gender  strategy  will  ensure  rural  women's  inclusion  across  the  three  target
subgroups: at least 40% of programme beneficiaries should be women. It will promote their economic 
54The GII is a composite measure that reflects inequality in achievements between women and men in reproductive health, 
empowerment and the labour market. The index ranges between “0”, which means women fare equally well, to “1.0”, which 
indicates that women fare as poorly as possible in all dimensions measured. 
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/hdr_2015_statistical_annex.pdf 
55  HDI 
56  Household Income and Expenditure Survey (HIES) 2009/2010
56 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:    Poverty, targeting and gender 
empowerment through inclusion in productive activities, use of labor saving technology to free up their 
time and support to voice and leadership within their communities and organizations.
The strategy revolves around three cornerstones: i) promoting women's inclusion in economic
40. 
opportunities brought about by the 4Ps schemes; ii) supporting their leadership and decision-making 
capacity economic activities, groups and their communities; iii) manage workload increase that might 
occur as a consequence of increased engagement in economic activities. Key entry points to achieve 
these  three  goals  will  be  the  4Ps  partnerships, rural  organizations/groups and  youth  entrepreneurial 
activities. 
(a)      In order to support women's inclusion in economic opportunities provided by 4Ps, gender 
considerations  will  be  incorporated  among  the  criteria  to  review  partnership  proposals 
and  trained  field  staff  will  address  women's  specific  needs  in  production.  Particular 
attention will be placed on exposing both women and men of a beneficiary household to 
trainings  and  capacity development opportunities. 4Ps  are  market-led partnerships and, 
when  profitable  and  convenient  for  all  parties,  preference  will  be  given  to  value  chains 
with  a  high  degree  of  women's participation, such  as  papaya, green chilies, bell  pepper 
and  maize.  Skills  upgrading  and  labor  saving  technologies  will  be  actively  promoted  in 
the context of these partnerships, using NADEP positive impact on workload reduction as 
supporting evidence. 
(b)      The promotion of  youth and women's active participation in rural organizations is part of 
SAP  strategy of  empowering all  producers/ farmers under  4Ps  schemes. Women's role 
and  participation  in  rural  organizations  varies  enormously  across  the  rural  landscape, 
with  no  clear  correlation  with  type  of  organization,  size  and  structure.  For  this,  rural 
organizations members will gauge their levels of  inclusiveness and gender sensitivity as 
a  central  dimension  of  their  overall  maturity  self-assessment,  developing  a  related 
capacity building plan for their progressive strengthening. 
(c)      Business and entrepreneurial activities promoted by SAP for landless youth build on the 
evidence  of  their  very  positive  impact  achieved  in  NADEP,  where  79%  of  beneficiaries 
were  young  women.  Enhanced  access  to  credit  and  a  package  of  entrepreneurial  and 
vocational training will support additional young women in taking advantage of economic 
opportunities arising from 4Ps schemes (e.g. engaging in post processing activities such 
as  drying fish  and  fruit,  fodder production to  accompany dairy development and  so  on).
41. 
Lastly,  SAP  will  promote  policy  engagement  for  the  removal  of  gender-based  constraints  in
access  to  credit  by  interacting  with  key  stakeholders  and  supporting  the  development  of  gender- 
sensitive operational guidelines of the microfinance department. 
Youth
In  Sri  Lanka,  youth  between  the  ages  of  15-29,  represent  24%  of  the  population;  they  face
42. 
challenges related to education, civic engagement, political participation and employment in particular. 
Young  people's  unemployment  stands  at  20.8%  for  those  aged  15-24,  and  9.4%  aged  25-29;  the 
challenges  of  young  women’s  participation  in  the  labour  force  is  even  more  pronounced  with  an 
unemployment rate of  27.4% and 17.5% for the two  age brackets respectively. Youth unemployment 
as  a  proportion of  total  unemployment is  high  at  61.6% for  young men  and  45%  for  young  women, 
which  indicates  an  unequal  distribution  of  the  problem  of  unemployment,  and  is  a  significant  and 
persistent  issue  for  the  country.  Furthermore,  a  noticable  feature  about  Sri  Lanka’s  youth 
unemployment  is   that educated young  people  make  up   a   significant  proportion  of   Sri   Lanka’s 
unemployed;  nearly  50%  of  youth  unemployed  have  completed  their  GCE  A  Levels  or  above, 
demonstrating  that  many  of  the  youth  unemployed  have  in  fact,  attained  a  reasonable  level  of 
education. Per the Labour Force Survey (2015), provincial disparities also exist, and in 7 out of the 9 
provinces, youth unemployment as a proportion of total unemployment is above 50%; it is particularly 
high  in  the  Central,  Eastern  and  Sabaragamuwa  provinces.  It  can  be  reasonably  assumed  that 
various reasons account for the high rate of unemployment amongst the youth, including geographical
57 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:    Poverty, targeting and gender 
disparities, gender, class and status, ethnicity, and cultural norms; especially, differences in the quality 
of  education  and  challenges in  transitioning from  (theoretical) education to  practical  experience and 
training are constraining factors. 
Unemployed 
population and rate by 
all sectors, and gender 
Youth unemployment 
rate by sex 
Urban 
Rural 
Estate 
15 - 24 
25 - 29 
Male 
29,295 (3.5) 
122,822 (2.9) 
5,677 (2.7) 
157,794 (3.0) 
Female 
27,775 (6.7) 
190,016 (8.0) 
7,911 (4.6) 
225,702 (7.6) 
Total 
57,070 (4.6) 
312,839 (4.8) 
13,588 (3.5) 
383,497 (4.7) 
Male 
16.6 
4.4 
Female 
27.4 
17.5 
Total 
20.8 
9.4 
Youth unemployed 
rate by provinces 
Youth unemployment 
as a proportion to 
total unemployment 
Youth unemployment 
as a proportion of total 
unemployment by 
gender and level of 
education 
      Sabarag 
amuwa 
    29.6 
South 
Central 
Uva 
East  North 
27.9 
25.5 
22.0 
21.7 
18.8 
North 
Central 
16.3 
West 
15.9 
North 
Western 
15.2 
    57.5 
51.5 
58.5 
54.3 
57.8 
57.0 
55.0 
45.5 
42.8 
Grade 6 - 10 
GCE (O/L) 
GCE (A/L) & above 
Male 
61.6 
Female 
45.0   
52.2 
58.7 
49.9 
43.  The problem of unemployment is therefore showcased as being unequally distributed and as a
mismatch  of  skills  and  limited  economic  opportunities,  especially  for  those  with  highler  levels  of 
education; there  is  a  need  therefore, for  interventions to  enable  the  youth  to  better  enter  the  labour 
force  and   successfully  secure  employment  or   self-employment  opportunities.  As   regards  self- 
employment,  this  too  is  constrained  by  the  inability  of  youth  to  access  finance  and  their  lack  of 
business skills and basic financial literacy; in rural areas, youth who are self-employed or choose this 
access.
terms 
option, 
and  market 
income 
show 
have 
little 
of 
to 
in 
Subsequently,  within  the  business  and  commercial  orientation  of  the  programme,  special
44. 
attention  will  be  given  to  the  rural  youth  as  potential  change  agents.  A  first  target  of  2,500  youth 
(landless  and/  or  unemployed)  will  be  supported  to  enhance  their  employability  or  become 
entrepreneurs that can provide services/ products to meet the demand generated by the development 
of  value  chains  under  the  4Ps.  In  addition,  through  a  20%  quota  on  the  main  target  group  of  small 
producer/ farmers engaged in 4P partnerships, the programme will reach out to a further 7,000 youth.
In order to implement effective interventions that may include technical and vocational training,
45. 
managerial training, financial and business planning (including know-your-numbers training), provision 
of  business  start-up  capital  or  other  investment/  fixed  asset  capital,  mentorship  or  apprenticeship/ 
placement  programmes,  a  more  detailed  youth  strategy  will  be  elaborated  within  the  first  six- 
months of the programme57, with  the objective to  better understand the  heterogenous nature and 
needs  of  the  rural  youth,  and  to  elaborate responsive measures. The  youth strategy will  also  define 
activities.
the 
implementing 
implement 
providers 
partners 
service 
the 
or 
to 
46. 
Across the youth interventions, the role of agribusiness private sector partners will be critical in
helping to identify the needs and opportunities that exist in the agribusiness sector (i.e. the demand 
for  products/ services/ human resource capacity) ,  and  which  the  youth could fulfil  with  the support 
57  The TORs for the youth strategy will be finalised prior to SAP's entry into force.
58 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:    Poverty, targeting and gender 
provided by the programme. In order to ensure a close proximity to the youth, guidance and follow-up, 
the  programme envisages as  well  a  strong role for  social mobilisers to  provide a  quasi-mentoring of 
the youth, especially in development of their business plans. 
Implementation arrangements and M&E
The overall responsibility for the implementation of the gender and youth strategies relies upon
47. 
the  programme director,  supported by  long-term  specialized technical assistance (TA). The TA team 
will supervise delivery on gender and  youth activities by field agents and service providers dealing in 
capacity development activities and social mobilization -  in particular social mobilizers. Responsibility 
for the implementation of the gender and  youth strategies will be included as relevant in the ToRs of 
mobilisers.
PMU 
social 
team 
staff, 
and 
the 
TA 
It will be key to provide adequate training and technical support on gender and youth issues to
48. 
the  PMU,  private  partners,  service  providers,  field  agents  (mostly  social  mobilizers)  and  producers' 
organizations/groups. The gender and youth TA will work in close cooperation with the PMU business 
unit  to  assess  4P  proposals,  provide  capacity  building  trainings  when  needed  and  overview 
assessment.
maturity 
organizations' 
Possible  procedural  obstacles  to  women  and  youth  and  the  poor’s  access  to  credit  are  also
49. 
analyzed and addressed in the PIM.
50. 
The PMU will strive to maintain a good gender balance among the staff recruited for SAP. 
A  technical  specialist  in  gender  and  targeting  will  participate  during  supervision  and/  or
51. 
implementation  support  missions.  The  expert  would  assess  the  progress  and  performance  of  the 
project  with  reference  to  gender,  youth  and  poverty  targeting,  assess  transformative  processes, 
highlight  key  issues,  achievements  and  constraints.  The  specialist  would  review  the  level  of  the 
partner  institutions’  role  and  performance  for  gender  mainstreaming  and  identify  areas  for  further 
improvement.
The  programme  M&E  system  will  be  based  on  the  logframe  and  will  report  on  the  RIMS
52. 
indicators; all data, progress reporting and evaluation format will be disaggregated by sex and age, so 
as  to  be  able  to  produce  information on  different target  groups  and  beneficiaries (women, men  and 
youth). 
(a)      Programme staff responsible for data collection and monitoring would be trained in 
understanding and using gender and age indicators. 
(b)      Detailed gender and youth-sensitive indicators for the progamme M&E system will be 
developed with the support of the gender and youth specialist TA. Among other 
indicators, the ME system will report in a sex and age disaggregated manner on the 
performance of loans and organizations/groups. 
(c)      Gender, youth and poverty considerations will also be included in baseline survey and 
potential impact assessment. 
(d)      Participatory self-assessment and monitoring will be promoted as much as possible, 
particularly using the organizations' maturity assessment tool as an entry point to trigger 
discussion over inclusion and gender and youth issues.
59 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:    Poverty, targeting and gender 
ANNEX I Targeting and Gender Checklists 
Targeting Checklist 
Targeting checklist 
Design 
1.  Does  the  main  target  group  –  those 
expected  to  benefit  most  –  correspond  to 
IFAD’s  target  group  as  defined  by  the 
Targeting  Policy  (poorer  households  and 
food insecure)? 
2.  Have target sub-groups been identified 
and described according to their different 
socio-economic characteristics, assets and 
livelihoods – with attention to gender and 
youth differences (matrix on target group 
characteristics completed)? 
3. Is evidence provided of interest in and 
likely uptake of the proposed activities by 
the identified target sub-groups? What is 
the evidence (matrix on analysis of 
programme components and activities by 
principal beneficiary groups completed)? 
4. Does the design document describe a 
feasible and operational targeting strategy 
in line with the Targeting Policy, involving 
some or all of the following measures and 
methods: 
4.1 Geographic targeting – based on 
poverty data or proxy indicators to identify, 
for area-based programmes or 
programmes, geographic areas (and within 
these, communities) with  high 
concentration of poor people; 
The SAP target group constitutes of small holder farmers already 
active in agricultural production or young rural people interested 
in developing an entrepreneurial activity revolving around rural 
production systems. 
 
Farmers /producers will own not more than 1 ha of land, 
rely on agriculture for at least 50% of their household 
income and have monthly incomes of LKR 25-30,000 or 
below. 
  Youth  target  group  represent  a  particularly  vulnerable 
segment   of   the   rural   population   as   they  should   be 
unemployed,  have  a  monthly  income  of  less  than  LKR 
20-25,000,  at  least  70%  of  them  are  landless  and  the 
remaining 30% own less than 1ha. 
There are three target sub-groups in the programme. 
1.  36,000 rural producer households that will benefit from 
increased livelihood opportunities provided by entering into 
4Ps partnerships. Farmers /producers will own not more 
than 1 ha of land, rely on agriculture for at least 50% of their 
household income and have monthly incomes of LKR 25- 
30,000 or below (40% women, 20% youth) 
2.  The second target group are 20,000 households 
participating in P4 partnerships established under the 
NADEP programme, who will benefit from SAP support in 
order to ensure sustainability of their production systems and 
strengthen their organizations Targeting criteria are therefore 
the same as in the previous (no quota as they were NADEP 
target group) 
3.    The  last  target  group  is  constituted  by  10,000  poor  young 
women  and  men  that  will  be  supported  in  developing  their 
entrepreneurial initiatives. they should be unemployed, have 
a monthly income of less than LKR 20-25,000, at least 70% 
of  them  are  landless  and  the remaining  30%  own  less  than 
1ha.  (40% women, 100%youth) 
The programme target group comprises 66,000 poor rural 
households with the potential to become active economic players 
in a diverse array of value chains. The targeting strategy is based 
on leveraging existing mechanisms for change and rural 
transformation and it will assess synergies and scaling up 
potential with the current NADeP target group under existing 4Ps. 
This programme builds on the successful model of of NADEP, in 
which interest and uptake of the same target group has been 
proven. 
The programme target group comprises 66,000 poor rural 
households with the potential to become active economic players 
in a diverse array of value chains. The targeting strategy is based 
on leveraging existing mechanisms for change and rural 
transformation and it will assess synergies and scaling up 
potential with the current NADeP target group under existing 4Ps 
60 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:    Poverty, targeting and gender 
4.2 Self-targeting – when good and 
services respond to the priority needs, 
resource endowments and livelihood 
strategies of target groups; 
4.3 Direct targeting – when services or 
resources are to be channelled to specific 
individuals or households; 
4.4 Empowering measures – including 
information and communication, focused 
capacity- and confidence-building 
measures, organizational support, in order 
to empower and encourage the more 
active participation and inclusion in 
planning and decision-making of people 
who traditionally have less voice and 
power; 
4.5  Enabling  measures  –  to  strengthen 
stakeholders’  and  partners’  attitude  and 
commitment  to  poverty  targeting,  gender 
equality  and  women’s  empowerment, 
including  policy  dialogue,  awareness- 
raising and capacity-building; 
4.6  Procedural  measures  –  that  could 
militate    against    participation     by     the 
intended target groups; 
4.7  Operational  measures  –  appropriate 
management 
programme/programme 
of 
selection 
arrangements, 
implementation  partners  and 
service 
providers. 
staffing, 
The programme is demand-driven and the willingness and 
commitment by stakeholders (agribusiness and value chain 
actors including the private sector and farmers/ producer 
organizations) will be critical 
One key target group consists in 10,000 poor young women and 
men that will be supported in developing their entrepreneurial 
initiatives 
In order to support women's inclusion in economic opportunities 
provided by 4Ps, gender considerations will be incorporated 
among the criteria to review partnership proposals and trained 
field staff will address women's specific needs in production. 
Particular attention will be placed on exposing both women and 
men of a beneficiary household to trainings and capacity 
development opportunities. 
SAP will promote policy engagement for the removal of gender- 
based constraints in access to credit by interacting with key 
stakeholders and supporting the development of gender-sensitive 
operational guidelines of the microfinance department. 
Adequate  training  and  technical  support  on  gender  and  youth 
issues  will  be  provided  to  the  PMU,  private  partners,  service 
providers,  field  agents  (mostly  social  mobilizers)  and  producers' 
organizations/groups. 
Possible  procedural  obstacles  to  women  and  youth  and  the 
poor’s  access  to  credit  are  also  analyzed  and  addressed  in  the 
PIM 
 
The gender and youth officer will supervise delivery on 
gender activities by field agents and service providers 
dealing in capacity development activities and social 
mobilization -  in particular social mobilizers 
The PMU will strive to maintain a good gender balance 
among the staff recruited for SAP 
 
  Adequate   training   and   technical  support   on   gender  and 
youth  issues  will  be  provided  to  the  PMU,  private  partners, 
service providers, field agents (mostly social mobilizers) and 
producers' organizations/group 
5.  Monitoring  targeting performance. Does 
the design document specify that targeting 
performance  will  be  monitored  using 
participatory  M&E,  and  also  be  assessed 
at  mid-term 
the  M&E 
framework  allow  for  the  collection/analysis 
of  sex-disaggregated  data  and  are  there 
gender-sensitive  indicators  against  which 
to monitor/evaluate outputs, outcomes and 
impacts? 
review?  Does 
The programme M&E system will be based on the logframe and 
will report on the RIMS indicators; all data, progress reporting 
and evaluation format will be disaggregated by sex and age, so 
as to be able to produce information on different target groups 
and beneficiaries (women, men and youth). 
Detailed gender-sensitive indicators for the programme M&E 
system will be developed with the support of the gender and 
youth specialist. Among other indicators, the ME system will 
report in a sex and age disaggregated manner on the 
performance of loans and organizations/groups. 
61 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:    Poverty, targeting and gender 
Gender Checklist 
Gender checklist 
Design 
1. The programme design report contains – 
and programme implementation is based on 
– gender-disaggregated poverty data and 
an analysis of gender differences in the 
activities or sectors concerned, as well as 
an analysis of each programme activity 
from the gender perspective to address any 
unintentional barriers to women’s 
participation. 
2. The programme design articulates – or 
the programme implements – actions with 
aim to: 
  Expand women’s economic 
empowerment through access to and 
control over productive and household 
assets; 
  Strengthen women’s decision-making 
role in the household and community 
and their representation in membership 
and leadership of local institutions; 
  Achieve a reduced workload and an 
equitable workload balance between 
women and men. 
3. The programme design report includes 
one paragraph in the targeting section that 
explains what the programme will deliver 
from a gender perspective. 
4. The programme design report describes 
the key elements for operationalizing the 
gender strategy, with respect to the relevant 
programme components. 
Sex-disaggregated data and gender –specific issues have been 
used to portray women's role in value chain and access to rural 
finance 
SAP gender strategy promotes women economic empowerment 
through inclusion in economic opportunities brought about by the 
4Ps schemes 
The promotion of youth and women's active participation in rural 
organizations is part of SAP strategy of empowering all 
producers/ farmers under 4Ps schemes. Rural organizations 
members will gauge their levels of inclusiveness and gender 
sensitivity as a central dimension of their overall maturity self- 
assessment, developing a related capacity building plan for their 
progressive strengthening. 
Labor saving technologies will be actively promoted in the 
context of these partnerships, using NADEP positive impact on 
workload reduction as supporting evidence. 
A gender strategy will ensure women's inclusion across three 
target subgroups promoting their economic empowerment 
through inclusion in productive activities, use of labor saving 
technology to free up their time and support to voice and 
leadership within the communities and rural organizations. At 
least 40% of SAP beneficiaries should be women. 
The SAP gender strategy aims at addressing these 
challenges by i) promoting women's inclusion in 
economic opportunities brought about by the 4Ps 
schemes; ii) supporting their leadership and decision- 
making capacity economic activities, groups and their 
communities; iii) manage workload increase that might 
occur as a consequence of increased engagement in 
economic activities. 
Gender will be incorporated in SAP components as follows: 
In order to support women's inclusion in economic 
 
opportunities provided by 4Ps, gender considerations will be 
incorporated among the criteria to review partnership 
proposals. trained field staff will address women's specific 
needs in production. Preference will be given to value 
chains with a high degree of women's participation 
  SAP will promote policy engagement for the removal of 
gender-based constraints in access to credit by interacting 
with key stakeholders and supporting the development of 
gender-sensitive operational guidelines of the microfinance 
department. 
  Business and entrepreneurial activities promoted by SAP for 
landless youth build on the evidence of their very positive 
impact achieved in NADEP, where 79% of beneficiaries 
were young women. Enhanced access to credit and a 
package of entrepreneurial and vocational training will 
62 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:    Poverty, targeting and gender 
support additional young women in taking advantage of 
economic opportunities 
5. The design document – and the 
programme implements – operational 
measures to ensure gender-equitable 
participation in, and benefit from, 
programme activities. These will generally 
include: 
5.1 Allocating adequate human and 
financial resources to implement the gender 
strategy. 
5.2 Ensuring and supporting women’s 
active participation in programme-related 
activities, decision-making bodies and 
committees, including setting specific 
targets for participation. 
5.3 Ensuring that programme/programme 
management arrangements (composition of 
the programme management 
unit/programme coordination unit, 
programme terms of reference for staff and 
implementing partners, etc. reflect attention 
to gender equality and women’s 
empowerment concerns. 
5.4 Ensuring direct programme/programme 
outreach to women (for example through 
appropriate numbers and qualification of 
field staff), especially where women’s 
mobility is limited. 
5.5 Identifying opportunities to support 
strategic opportunities with government and 
other development organizations for 
networking and policy dialogue. 
6. The programme’s logical framework, 
M&E, and learning systems specify in 
design – and programme M&E unit collects, 
analyses and interprets sex- and age- 
disaggregated performance and impact 
data, including specific indicators on gender 
equality and women’s empowerment. 
The overall responsibility for the implementation of the strategy 
relies upon programme director, supported by a gender and 
youth officer. The gender and officer will supervise delivery on 
gender activities by field agents and service providers dealing in 
capacity development activities and social mobilization -  in 
particular social mobilizers. 
The promotion of youth and women's active participation in rural 
organizations is part of SAP strategy of empowering all 
producers/ farmers under 4Ps schemes. Women's role and 
participation in rural organizations varies enormously: rural 
organizations members will gauge their levels of inclusiveness 
and gender sensitivity as a central dimension of their overall 
maturity self-assessment, developing a related capacity building 
plan for their progressive strengthening. 
The overall responsibility for the implementation of the strategy 
relies upon programme director, supported by a gender and 
youth officer. The gender and youth officer will supervise 
delivery on gender activities by field agents and service 
providers dealing in capacity development activities and social 
mobilization -  in particular social mobilizers. 
The PMU will strive to maintain a good gender balance among 
the staff recruited for SAP. 
Responsibility for the implementation of the gender strategy will 
be included as relevant in the ToRs of PMU staff (e.g. in the 
business unit and loan officer). 
Adequate training and technical support on gender and youth 
will be provided to service providers and field agents (mostly 
social mobilizers) . 
SAP commits to policy engagement for the removal of gender- 
based constraints in access to credit. It will also network with key 
stakeholders and supporting the development of gender- 
sensitive operational guidelines of the microfinance department. 
All data, progress reporting and evaluation format will be 
disaggregated by sex and age, so as to be able to produce 
information on different target groups and beneficiaries (women, 
men and youth). 
Gender-sensitive indicators for the programme M&E system will 
be developed with the support of the gender and youth 
specialist. 
In depth studies and KM products on gender impact will be 
developed during the course of programme implementation. 
63 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3:    Country performance and lessons learned 
Appendix 3:   Country performance and lessons learned 
Past results, impact and performance 
1.       IFAD has financed a total of 17 programmes in Sri Lanka since 1978, with loan commitments of 
US$  262.8  million  and  a  total  value  of  about  US$  464.9  million.  Currently,  three  programmes  are 
ongoing. IFAD’s programme approaches have evolved over time: those in the 1980s followed mainly 
the  integrated  rural  development  approach;  in  the  1990s,  programmes  gradually  adopted  a 
collaborative    approach    involving    NGOs,    community    organizations    and    the    private    sector    in 
programme planning  and  implementation; and  since  the  early  2000s,  programmes have  focused  on 
the  commercialization of  agriculture and  the  value  chain  approach.  IFAD  has  concentrated on  three 
geographic  zones:  the  dry  zone  in  northern  and  eastern  parts  of  the  country,  smallholder plantation 
areas in Central Province, and eastern and southern coastal districts affected by the 2004 tsunami. An 
ongoing  programme  is  located  in  the  Northern  Province,  contributing  directly  to  post-conflict 
reconstruction. Altogether, IFAD-financed programmes in Sri Lanka have benefited more than 557,000 
households or 2.2 million poor people. 
2.       IFAD programmes have contributed to increasing the incomes of beneficiary households. In the 
dry  zone,  programme-supported seed  production  led  to  farmers’  incomes  more  than  doubling.  The 
incomes  of  women  participants  in  the  loan  scheme  increased  by  32  per  cent  for  agro-based 
enterprises and 47 per cent for trading. In smallholder plantation areas, the use of water storage tanks 
and  protective  netting  improved  vegetable  productivity,  with  a  40  per  cent  increase  in  beneficiaries’ 
gross  income.  The  increase  in  monthly  income  of  beneficiary  households  under  the  coastal 
programme averaged 15 per cent. 
3.       Improved food security has been reported by all completed programmes. In the dry zone, crop 
productivity  was  improved  thanks  to  practices  introduced  through  IFAD  programme  interventions. 
Programme-supported   small-scale   irrigation   schemes   improved   water   availability   for   paddy 
production,  leading  to  increases  in  cropping  intensity of  50  per  cent  in  the  maha  (rainy)  season  of 
2010-2011  and  410  per  cent  in  the  yala  (dry)  season  of  2011.  About  20  per  cent  of  programme- 
supported  coastal  households  reported  improved  food  security,  compared  with  13  per  cent  of  non- 
beneficiary households. 
4.       Through  the  Post-Tsunami  Coastal  Rehabilitation  and  Resource  Management  Programme, 
IFAD  gained  experience  in  post-conflict  fragile  areas  of  Eastern  Province  where  it  worked  during 
2010-2013  with  institutions  that  were  struggling  to  emerge.  Flexible  operations,  willingness  to  work 
with multiple partners and  a  devolved programme management system facilitated IFAD interventions 
in these areas, which achieved almost all their expected outcomes. A rural finance initiative under the 
programme  piloted   the   provision  of   business  development  services  to   the   target  population, 
convincing banks to accept collateral from social groups for loans to SMEs. About 80 per cent of loan 
beneficiaries were women. 
5.       Empowerment is an important impact of IFAD programme interventions. Women participants in 
programme activities have accounted for around 40-60 per cent of the total, and women hold nearly 
half the key positions in rural organizations. The majority of  loan  beneficiaries are also  women (60- 
100 per cent). 
Lessons learned 
6.       Overall, and based on IFAD’s operational experience in Sri Lanka, the main lessons include: (i) 
IFAD interventions in improved land productivity for domestic crop and plantation agriculture, irrigation 
rehabilitation,   fisheries,   rural   enterprise   development,   rural   and   microfinance,   value   chain 
development  and  rural  infrastructure  development  contribute  to  poverty  reduction;  (ii)  geographic 
targeting  with  carefully  selected  poverty-stricken  divisions  as   programme  areas  is  an  effective 
strategy; (iii) the private sector’s involvement with IFAD programmes is  strong and sustainable when 
flexible  implementation arrangements, critical volumes of  products to meet market needs and  strong
65 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3:    Country performance and lessons learned 
strategic  alliances  are  available; (iv)  programmes  seeking  to  channel  improved  profit  margins  to 
farmer/  producers  need  to  consider  supporting  their  involvement/  uptake  in  primary  processing,  in 
addition  to  the  conventional  forms  of  support  to  their  on-farm  production;  (v)  when  programme 
beneficiaries  are  over-dependent  on  public  extension  services,  programme  expectations  are  less 
likely  to  be  met;  (vi)  rural  grassroots  institutions  are  strong  in  common  property  development  and 
management,  but  are  not  always  effective  in  market-based  commercial  enterprises;  (vii)  rural  and 
microfinance  is  an  effective  instrument  for  providing  financial  services  to  the  poor;  (viii)  programme 
management, M&E,  financial  management and  procurement are  common  and  recurrent  issues  –  in 
the  past,  IFAD-financed  programmes  have  suffered  from  delayed  loan  effectiveness  and  resulting 
slow  start-up;  to  the  extent  possible,  new  financing  should  build  on  existing  structures  and 
mechanisms, and early and continuous consultation with Government is  essential to mitigate delays; 
as  well  the  selection  and  retention  of  qualified  staff  is  a  critical  element  to  ensure  timely 
implementation  and  performance;  when  delayed,  there  is  further  consequence  in  terms  of  long 
implementation  delays;  and  (ix)  high  staff  turnover  hinders  efficient  programme  implementation  – 
efficiency  is  improved  by  retaining  experienced  and  performing  staff,  with  support  from  technical 
assistance/ consultants for specific needs. 
7.       Whilst  the  overall  lessons  learned  are  well  considered,  the  SAP  programme  incorporates 
detailed lessons from the implementation of NADeP in particular; these detailed lessons learned are 
as follows: 
(a)      Growing interest by the private sector to enter into 4P arrangements: there is evidence of 
growing private sector interest in the 4P model, demonstrated by the 50+ business 
proposals received by NADeP after only two calls for proposal. The appeal of the 4P 
model from the point of view of the private sector is that the matching grant element of 
the investment can address non-profit related issues such as improved technologies 
leading to quality, better organization, etc. As well, the private sector appreciates the 
linkage between small producers and the financial sector for credit, as this lends itself to 
the credibility of the small producer’s commitment to the investment and production. 
(b)      Private-sector partner profile: the preferred private sector partner would be experienced 
and financially secure and established companies, as opposed to small (new) companies 
or NGOs/ CBOs with limited market experience and capacities. The rationale is that 
established companies have the capacity to provide extension services, offer a ready 
market with absorption capacity, and don’t require any additional financing for their own 
operations. In the context of inexperienced farmer/ producers, engaging with 
inexperienced companies presents a greater risk to achieving good results and increased 
income for the target group. 
(c)      Joint collaboration to develop technical and financial business proposals: the process of 
developing viable 4P business proposals requires strong negotiation and clarity, to 
ensure that all actors are aware of the ‘rules of engagement’ and responsibilities; this 
refers to the co-financing arrangements and expectations of the commitment and value 
added of each partner in the 4P; as well, the business model and the final expected 
income to farmers are important elements of the final proposal. In the case of the private 
sector specifically, their willingness to provide technical and extension services is critical. 
The actual process of finalizing a business proposal has been demonstrated to be 
relatively fast, requiring six months on average. 
(d)      Graduation approach to avoid complexity: the experience of establishing 4Ps is still 
relatively nascent in the Sri Lanka context, and building trust across partners is a longer- 
term process. Subsequently, the partnership to be nurtured should be modest (such as 
the outgrower scheme) in the first instance. NADeP experience suggests that there is 
need to first establish 4Ps that are characterized by linking the private sector with 
individual farmers who are identified and grouped by the company itself; a progressive 
second level would pursue 4Ps that link the private sector to better organized producer
66 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3:    Country performance and lessons learned 
organizations; and finally, the most progressive model would be to promote producer 
organization-led business proposals. Once the trust has been strengthened, only then is 
there more flexibility to deepen the scope of the partnership. It is also worth noting that at 
present, per NADeP’s experience, very few farmer organizations have reached a level of 
maturity to take on ‘business’ and financial responsibilities/ functions; the assumptions of 
producer organizations should be reviewed closely. 
(e)      Rural finance needs: Overwhelmingly, small producers continue to identify the lack of 
affordable short-term working capital to finance their regular agricultural seasonal needs; 
in general, the financial products on the market are currently often entirely inaccessible, 
and where credit institutions are ready to provide loans, many farmers feel that the rates 
are too high, given that even the hypothetically high returns may easily erode as a result 
of delayed or excessive rains, pests, insect infestations or other mishaps. In an interest 
rate sensitive society, they often prefer not to borrow if they perceive that the balance 
between additional costs and additional risks is not in their favor. There is, therefore, 
scope to promote seasonal agricultural loans (at more feasible interest rates) to meet 
short-term working capital needs. W ith this product, small producers would be able to 
purchase inputs in support of increasing their production/ productivity, and will similarly 
avoid the risk of indebtedness to moneylenders and loss of their rights to cultivate their 
own land (where land is used as ‘collateral’ by moneylenders). The same applies to 
investments and term finance. 
(f)       Formal financial sector system capacity: The CBSL, commercial banks and MFIs have all 
identified capacity constraints as preventing them from being able to service, reach out 
and meet the needs of the target group (small producers engaged in the rural/ 
agricultural sector). The capacity constraints relate to human resources in terms of 
manpower (number of loan officers) and skills set. Subsequently, the complementary 
trained ‘social mobilisers’ offered by NADeP, are highly appreciated and the approach 
should be replicated, as it allows for more efficient pre-screening of potential clients and 
brings the segment specific needs upfront. The provision of support to the CBSL and 
performing PFIs is also geared at closing the knowledge and skills gaps. uilt 
(g)      Savings: Even though some banks and development programmes have in the past 
adopted the self-help group linkage models with its in-built savings approach, only few 
banks are at present actively engaged in mobilizing savings from among rural borrowers. 
However, the PFIs contacted would highly appreciate the creation of a savings habit 
among their 4P clients, as it would reduce the liquidity constraints, build financial 
reserves among the clients for any mishaps, and create the basis for more significant 
investments in machinery and equipment. The planned interventions of the social 
mobilizers to create a systematic savings process, and savings as a habit, is therefore 
highly needed. 
(h)      Line of credit (LOC): Disbursement under the NADeP LOC accelerated by more than 
300% in one year, following a re-negotiation of the interest rate from 13.25% to 6.5% to 
the end borrower. The reasons for the accelerated performance may be attributable to 
the fact that the new interest rate is much more attractive to the end-borrower, also 
because the interest rates in the market had overall declined in the meantime. While the 
available allocation for self-help groups was USD 6 million before, PFIs have fully 
committed these funds within one year, and have already appraised an additional USD 9 
million in demand for loans, which they would have approved if funds were available 
under the LOC. NADeP has supported and strengthened linkages between the PFIs and 
target groups through trained social mobilisers; and the PMU chairs joint meetings on a 
monthly basis with PFIs and CBSL to monitor, follow-up and resolve issues. Whilst 
national figures show that less than 29% of clients receive credit and that loan 
outstanding to agriculture is only 9%, in the case of the NADeP LOC, almost 40% of
67 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3:    Country performance and lessons learned 
NADeP-linked clients received credit (7,100 out of 18,000 registered through self-help 
groups; 79% of borrowers are women) of an average loan size of USD 650. About 48% 
of these loans were used primarily for agriculture-related activities. This confirms the 
need for a LoC to help rural farmers test the innovations emerging under the 4P 
investment plans and thereby increase incomes and the stability of income flows. 
(i)       Role of the 4P broker: appraising the 4P business plans requires specialists who are 
familiar with the language of business on the one hand, as well as agronomists (with 
technical and field knowledge of farm production, etc.), in order to ensure that the 
underlying assumptions and cost-benefit analysis undertaken by the appraisal/ 
evaluation team is sound. Based on the NADeP experience, the PMU with its in-house 
Technical Assistance team is the best placed ‘broker’ of 4Ps. The broker team has direct 
interest and is committed to establishing 4Ps; the team also has demonstrated technical 
capacity, and has shown this by developing 15 4Ps within one year. 
(j)       Household monitoring: Farmer/ producers are not fully sensitized on monitoring their 
income derived from production sales vis-à-vis their expenditure requirements; in 
general, there is need for producers to monitor their expenditure, production, sales and 
income at the farm-level to better inform their farming/ production decisions; this kind of 
household/ farm monitoring also supports testing of assumptions made on cost-benefit 
analysis of production and farming models that are part of the BP proposals. 
(k)      Supporting the rural youth: As expressed to social mobilisers with close contact to youth 
in rural communities, access to finance is one of the key challenges for rural youth. Their 
financing needs which can help them to start-up small business are in the range of USD 
1000-3000, though they require support from social mobilisers who are also interlocuters 
with PFIs (and know loan officer appraisal priorities), to shape their business plan and 
request for financing. This model of working with social mobilisers as a go-between the 
youth and PFIs, works well in mobilizing start-up funds for youth; the specific line of credit 
dedicated to youth, also supports the approach.
68 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
Appendix 4:   Detailed programme description 
Approach vis-à-vis the Theory of Change 
1.       Theory  of  change.  The  theory  of  change  of  the  programme  is  based  on  a  fundamental 
premise  that  a  market-driven  approach  is  needed  to  help  smallholder  farmers  sustainably  increase 
their  income  and  improve  their  livelihood.  This  is  operationalized  by  facilitating  mutually  beneficial 
(win-win)  Public-Private-Producer  Partnerships  (4Ps)  between  smallholder  farmers  and  private 
companies in response to clear market opportunities and by strategically combining public and private 
sector  funds  and  advice  to  address  smallholders’ needs  in  terms  of  access  to  market,  technology, 
organization  and  scale,  good  agricultural  practices,  and  affordable  credit,  as  well  as  creating  a 
favorable  policy  and  regulatory  environment  for  the  agribusiness  and  financial  sector  to  expand 
outreach towards rural clients and become overall more competitive. 
2.       Subsequently, the development hypothesis and theory of change is that smallholder producers, 
through  tailored  support,  including  for  their  organization,  are  primed  to  benefit  (in  terms  of  income, 
livelihoods,  assets  and  social  capital)  as  key  actors  in  viable  4P  arrangements/  models  aimed  at 
improved marketing and (quality) product enhancement to meet current market demands, and overall 
contributes  to  national  agricultural  competitiveness.  This  approach  necessarily  requires  better 
organization  and  strengthening  of  smallholder  farmers,  towards  their  graduation  into  functional 
producer/ farmer organizations, improving their technological and business skills, and linking them to 
agribusiness partners, markets and  financial services. A crucial  dimension of  sustainability will  be  to 
formalize  and  strengthen  these  organizations,  by  improving  their  outreach,  managerial  capabilities, 
services and enhancing their market engagement. 
3.       Special attention will also be given to income generating activities in which youth, in particular 
those  who  do  not  have  land  and  other  assets  to  be  involved  in  farming,  can  be  involved.  These 
opportunities  will  be  explored  primarily  in  the  value  chains  supported  by  the  programme  offering 
products or services to meet the demand for services generated by the development of 4Ps. 
4.       Approach and principles of engagement. The overarching principles that frame and govern 
management  and   coordination  of   the   SAP   programme  are   the   following:   (i)   alignment   with 
Government priorities (includes collaboration with other development partners and opportunities); (ii) a 
demand-driven  and  flexible  approach;  (iii)   adoption  of   a  market-driven  and   private  sector-led 
approach;  (iv)  inclusive  rural  financial  services  provision;  (v)  joint  financing  (cost-sharing)  and  risk- 
sharing;  (vi)  competitive  selection  of  partners  and  viable  business  plans;  (vii)  empowerment, 
organisation and strengthening of smallholder farmers as business partners; and (viii) complementary 
support to  market-driven self-employment activities for  specific segments of  the  rural  population (i.e. 
landless youth). 
5.       The mechanism by which these principles are  embodied is through the promotion of mutually 
beneficial  (win-win)  Public-Private-Producer  Partnerships  (4Ps)  between  private  companies  and 
smallholder  farmers.  These  4Ps   will   build   on   the   lessons  learned  from   the   ongoing  NADeP 
programme  and  adopt  some  of  the  good  practices  identified  by  IFAD  in  applying  this  approach 
worldwide.  This  is  key  to  ensure  that  the  4P  partners  have  incentives  to  respect  the  contractual 
agreements, avoiding  for  example  side-selling,  and  maintaining  fair  pricing,  which  serves  to  ensure 
the success and sustainability of the partnership. 
6.       In  the  first  instance, the  decision to  support  a  4P  requires  a  strong rationale for  a  4P.  In  the 
process of setting up the partnership, the  programme should assess whether the following questions 
are  properly addressed: what is  the  aim  and  what are  the  objectives to  be  achieved; to  what  extent 
are  the  interests  (incentives)  of  different  actors  aligned  towards  a  common  objective;  and  is  the 
partnership responding to  a  sustainable market demand. Secondly, it  is  important to  make  a  careful 
selection  of  the  4P  partners  both,  private  companies  and  producer/  farmers.  To  this  end  SAP  will 
adopt  a  competitive  process  (based  on  expressions  of  interest  and  call  for  proposals),  well  tested
69 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
under  the  ongoing  NADeP  programme;  however,  special  attention  will  be  given  in  supporting  the 
design  of  4Ps  initiated  by  farmers  organisations,  as  they  have  less  capacity  compared  with  private 
companies. Subsequently, technical  assistance through  a  qualified service  provider  will  be  critical  to 
develop a viable and bankable 4P business plan in consultation with the potential commercial partner. 
A  third  element  is  related  to  the  negotiation  of  the  business  model  proposed  in  the  4P  scheme 
(whether the model is an integrated outgrower scheme (like some of those supported under NADeP), 
a  simple commercial agreement between two  parties, or  a  more complex co-investment into  a  post- 
harvest handling /  processing facility)  – i.e. how will all the parties profit/benefit from  the partnership, 
ensuring  the  partnership  is  truly  a  win-win  arrangement.  Fourthly,  in  the  negotiation  of  the  4P,  the 
partners/  parties  must  agree  on  their  respective  roles  and  responsibilities,  including  each  partner’s 
share  of  risks  and  benefits;  as  well,  unforeseen  circumstances  (e.g.  natural  disaster,  pest  and 
disease, price drop) which may affect the capacity of one of the parties to honour the agreement need 
to  be  considered  and  discussed.  Finally,  as  currently  being  applied  in  NADeP,  the  4Ps  should  be 
based on cost-sharing arrangements agreed upon by all parties. To this end, it is critical to ensure that 
the  agribusiness  sector  actually  contribute  to  the  partnership  with  funding  and  know-how  made 
available to farmers. The same applies to the financial sector which is requested to step in under SAP 
as full-fledge partner willing to co-finance with its own funds. 
7.       In  complement  to  the  4Ps,  special  attention  will  be  given  to  income  generating  activities  in 
which youth, in particular those who do not have land and other assets to be involved in farming, can 
be  profitably  involved.  These  opportunities  should  be  explored  during  the  preparation  of  the  4P 
business plans  by  requesting the  promoter/ originator(s) to  identify,  based  on  the  product and  value 
chain,  complementary  goods  and  services  demanded  by  4P  partners  (e.g.  veterinary  services, 
organic compost, maintenance of equipment). 
8.       4P planning and development process. The 4P arrangements (outlined in what will be the 4P 
business  plan)  are  based  on  the  expectation  that  they  respond  to  common  objectives  among  the 
partners  and  address  the  major  constraints  in  farm-level  production/  productivity  and  in  marketing. 
The identification of 4P partners and plans will build on the current NADeP procedure based on a call 
for proposals (expression of interest). Under SAP, both private companies and farmers organisations 
(with a specific call for proposal process for FOs at incipient stage of development in Mahaweli area – 
see appendix 5 on implementation arrangements) will be invited to submit proposals. The proposed 
4P business plans will be evaluated against multiple criteria, transparently communicated to potential 
stakeholders through sensitization and consultation workshops and forums in  advance of  the  call for 
interest. To this end,  SAP will prepare ‘educational’ material as relates to the key social (e.g. gender 
and  youth  specificities)  and  environmental  (including  climate  change  adaptation58)  issues  and  best 
practices  or  approaches  which  SAP  will  promote  and  give  preference  for  in  the  evaluation  of  4P 
proposals. Following a first appraisal, the  SAP PMU  will facilitate, broker and negotiate the final 4P 
scheme across the partners, shaping and developing the final 4P proposal. 
9.       The 4P appraisal process, as well as a rapid market assessment of potential value chains/ sub - 
sectors,  is  elaborated  in  the  annexes.  Key  criteria  reviewed  during  appraisal  include:  the  market 
prospects  (national/export); expected  economic  benefits  in  terms  of  farmers’ incomes  increase  from 
participating  in  the  4P  (through  a  combination  of  improved  farmer  gate  prices,  improved  on-farm 
productivity  and  participation  in  upstream  value  added  processing);  overall  profitability  of  the 
investment proposal (internal rate of return, incremental benefit/cost ratio, payback period); as well as 
social  and  gender  or  youth-related  and  environmental  aspects  (improvement of  sustainable  farming 
methods).
practices, 
protection 
fertilizers, 
organic 
plant 
use 
of 
10. 
The   planning/   development   process   and   subsequent   implementation   of   4Ps   will   be
concentrated in the first three years of the  programme cycle, with the remaining programme lifetime 
dedicated  to  monitoring  and  consolidation  of  activities  and  results  for  sustainability.  The  exception 
58  As a first measure, the SAP SECAP Review Note will be streamlined and repackaged as a guideline for 4P 
stakeholders and for their consideration in preparing the 4P proposals.
70 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
relates to support to 4Ps implicating farmer groups/ organizations, which will be implemented over two 
phases – a pilot phase (programme years 1-3) and an expansion phase (programme years 4-6).
Financing of the 4P business plan. Financing of the 4P business plan (i.e. investment plan)
11. 
will  be  under  a  co-financing/  cost-sharing  arrangement  that  includes:  (i)  matching  grants/  start-up 
funds provided by the  programme; (ii)  credit from  participating  financial institutions (facilitated by  the 
programme-supported  line  of  credit)  as  part  of  beneficiary  contribution;  and  (iii)  private  sector 
(agribusiness)  contribution  (this  will  be  in  the  form  of  extension  or  other  services  rendered  to  the 
target group (monetized), in-kind contributions, etc.). Whilst the total investment per beneficiary of the 
4P business plan will vary, it is expected to be USD 1500 on average, shared approximately on a one- 
third  co-financing basis,  though  allowing for  some flexibility  in  this  arrangement. The matching grant 
should be considered as start-up funds, to complement the fixed assets investment financed through 
credit59 
contribution).
beneficiary 
serving 
(and 
as 
With  respect  to  producer/  farmer  organizations  (FOs),  SAP  will  promote  a  three  pronged
12. 
approach taking into account both the degree of FOs’ development and the means by which FOs and 
farmers groups will enter as stakeholders into the 4Ps. The three models are the following:: (i) private- 
sector led 4Ps; (ii) mature FOs or farmer cooperatives already managing sizable businesses; and (iii) 
incipient FOs, mainly under the Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka (MASL) areas. Under the first model, 
SAP  will  encourage  private  sector  companies,  on  a  voluntary  basis,  to  lead  the  developm ent  of 
partnerships  with  farmer  groups;  under  the  second  model,  the  relatively  more  mature  FOs  already 
engaged  in  the  business  of  processing  and/  or  value  addition,  will  be  receving  seed  and  working 
capital financing to expand their business to the benefit of their members; and under the third model, 
a specific attention will be given towards supporting the FOs to develop their bankable business plans 
and  gradually  evolve  into  functional  business-oriented  entities.  The  nascent  nature  of  these  FOs 
requires a strong field presence amd proximity support for their institutional strengthening. As a result 
an institutional collaboration is proposed with Mahaweli Authority (see appendix 5 for the elements of 
such collaboration). The overall approach of engaging FOs into 4P arrangements will be gradual, with 
an intial support to 70 FOs along the models outlined above for the first three years of the programme, 
and  following  a  mid-term  assessment,  the  model  can  be  refined,  scaled-up  and  expanded.
Finally,  the  design  of  the  SAP  programme  acknowledges  the  importance  of  promoting  an
13. 
enabling  policy  and  regulatory environment for  the  private  sector  to  operate  and  respond  to  market 
opportunities.  Therefore,  it  will 
the 
agribusiness/agriculture and  the  rural  finance  sector  where  key  policy  issues  could  be  identified  by 
programme  stakeholders.  This  will  be  supported  by  joint  performance  monitoring,  knowledge 
dissemination  (and  management)  and  specific  technical  assistance  as  part  of  an  integrated  policy 
dialogue and engagement process. 
facilitate  spaces  of  dialogue  and 
interaction  with  both 
Description of Programme Components
14. 
The development objective and expected outcomes and results will be achieved through three
components: (i) Access to commercial partnerships; (ii) Access to rural finance; and (iii)  Programme 
management and policy dialogue. 
Component 1: Access to commercial partnerships (USD 51.2 million)
15. 
This  component  includes  two  sub-components: (1.1)  Establishing 4Ps;  and  (1.2)  Institutional
strengthening  and  capacity  building  of  producer  groups  (within  a  market-driven  model).  A  total  of 
35,000  households  will  be  directly  reached  through  4P  schemes  and  institutional  strengthening 
interventions. A further 2,500 poor young women and men will be supported to become entrepreneurs 
4Ps.
responding 
generated 
products 
services 
demand 
the 
for 
by 
or 
to 
16. 
Under  sub-component  1.1,  the  programme  will  support  the  establishment  of  market-driven
4Ps  under  three  categories:  (i)  new  4P  schemes  led  by  private  companies  (21,000  hhs);  (ii) 
59  See Component 2 for details regarding financial products and credit offered by participating financial institutions 
(PFIs) through the programme-supported line of credit.
71 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
geographical/ outreach expansion or scaling-up of NADEP-supported 4P schemes (10,000 hhs); and 
(iii)  new  4P  schemes  explicitly  working  with  producer/  farmer  organizations  as  stakeholders  in  the 
business 4P schemes (4,000 hhs). This implies that the ‘promoter’ (originator) of the 4P schemes will 
be  either  a  private-sector company or  a  farmer organization that  can  show evidence of  a  confirmed 
commercial  arrangement  with  a  private-sector  company  or  commitment  of  a  market  buyer.
Matching  grants  and  start-up  funds.  For  the  overall  purposes  of  promoting  agricultural
17. 
modernization  and   reducing   producer/   farmers’  (and   youth)   risks   related   to   uptake   of   new 
technologies  and  innovative  activities  (especially  those  that  promote  sustainable  natural  resource 
management   and   climate   change   adaptation),   SAP   will   provide   some   start-up   funds   as 
complementary to  term  loans  to  farmers  and  private  sector  investment,  on  a  one-third  cost-sharing 
arrangement to the overall business investment proposed under the 4P scheme; these start-up funds 
are  strictly  targeted  at  smallholder  farmers  only  (in  the  form  of  a  matching  grant),  and  can  also  be 
used as partial collateral, thereby reducing the cost of borrowing. Flexibility will however be exercised; 
in  practice,  and  as  has  been  the  experience  of  NADeP,  each  4P  partnership  (and  the  co-financing 
arrangement)  will  be  negotiated,  taking  into  consideration  the  additional  net  income  generated  for 
beneficiary.
farmer/ 
producers 
total 
cost 
and 
per 
the 
18. 
Equipment  or  assets  which  promote  health  and  safety  standards,  improved   climate  change
adaptation/ natural resource management, or are particularly gender or nutrition-sensitive, may also 
be eligible for matching grants.
19. 
FOs.  For  the  new  4P  schemes  explicitly  working  with  producer/  farmer  organizations,  the
programme will provide an additional support, in the form of start-up funding at group level up to USD 
50,000 per FO as  start-up financing for  seed capital needs (such as  acquisition of  small to medium- 
sized equipment and  post-harvet assets, e.g. collection centres, storage facilities, processing plants) 
and initial working capital needs that will enable the group to run its business in partnership with the 
4P  stakeholders.
Youth  entrepreneurship initiative.  SAP  will  also  provide  targeted  support  to  rural  youth,  in
20. 
order to become entrepreneurs, and responding to the demand for services generated along the value 
chain and in complement to the 4Ps. An initial 2,500 youth will be supported with start-up financing for 
their business plans, averaging USD 2000 in the form of start-up funds (matching grant) and credit.  A 
basic training curriculum for  youth business plan preparation has already been tested under NADeP, 
and will be refined by SAP, though the business plan training is only the first step in capacity building 
support for youth and is linked to their ability to apply for the special youth credit (see Component 2). 
Identification of the youth, and their mobilisation will be a joint responsibility between social mobilisers, 
private  sector  partners  and  community  leaders  (involved  in  4Ps),  vis-à-vis  the  principle  that  youth 
businesses  would  be  responsive  to  the  service  or  product  needs  around  the  4P  schemes.
A  youth  strategy  will  be  commissioned as  a  first  starting  point  to  better  understand diversity
21. 
amongst  the  rural  youth,  and  subsequently  their  challenges,  aspirations,  critical  needs  and  the 
opportunities  where  SAP  can  intervene  in  supporting  the  youth.  This  strategy  will  draw  from  the 
consultations  with  youth  in  rural  communities, the  experience and  sensitization  activities undertaken 
companies.
by 
the  dialogue  with  private 
social  mobilisers,  and 
sector 
the 
via 
In order to more effectively draw out the demand for products/ services around the 4P, SAP will
22. 
through its consultation and sensitization activities, encourage the private sector companies to identify 
the  critical  product  or  services  gaps  along  the  value  chain,  and/  or  the  gaps  in  human  resources 
capacities. These gaps will be communicated to the youth, to establish their interest and commitment 
to  engage  in  these  particular  activities.  Social  mobilisers,  by  virtue  of  their  close  community-level 
knowledge and training in the  SAP principles and approaches, will communicate SAP’s open call for 
interest for  youth to take part in the initiative. To facilitate youth in stepping forward, social mobilisers 
will provide support to the youth with some initial and basic training on how to develop basic business 
plans  and  will  work  with  those  youth  with  potential  to  finalize  their  business  plans;  the  social
72 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
mobilisers  will  also  have  the  role  of  connecting  the  youth  to  PFIs,  who  will  ultimately appraise  the 
business plan and decide on whether to approve the loan.
Once the youth business plan and credit has been approved, the support to youth will also be
23. 
complemented by  capacity building  support. A range  of  topics  such  as  financial  literacy,  know-your- 
numbers, and managerial training will be offered, and youth with approved business plans can choose 
their  priority  needs;  the  specific  technical  training  that  will  also  likely  be  required,  has  also  been 
for.
provisioned 
24. 
To  the  extent  possible,  the  programme  will  also  attempt  to  facilitate  or  broker  a  mentorship
programme  for  those  youth  demonstrating  strong  leadership  and  entrepreneurial  potential,  with 
established business experts.
Approach for the provision of matching grants (4P and youth). Under NADeP, the provision
25. 
of  matching  grants  under  the  4P  scheme,  adopts  the  following  model:  based  on  the  business/ 
investment plan, the the cost-sharing principle is agreed by the parties. Whilst matching grants can be 
provided, they are only used to finance part of the fixed asset investment not exceeding USD 500 per 
beneficiary; the remaining part of the fixed asset investment is financed through the PFIs (via the loan 
taken  by  the  farmer).  Once  the  farmer  has  been  appraised  and  cleared  by  the  PFI  to  borrow,  the 
project  (NADeP)  transfers  the  agreed  matching  grant  amount  into  the  borrowers  account;  in  the 
standard  case,  the  borrower  authorizes  the  bank  with  a  standing  order  to  transfer  the  loan  and 
matching  grant  amount  to  the  supplier’s  account  for  purchase  of  the  fixed  asset/  equipment.
Under SAP, a second alternative approach that requires further discussion and  agreement by
26. 
the parties, is  as follows: the matching grant,  upon approval of  the  loan by a  PFI,  could  be  paid out 
into a trust account of the PFI, and shall serve as a guarantee up to the moment that the borrower has 
repaid  60-80%  of  the  loan  capital;  once  the  agreed  level  of  repayment  has  been  reached,  the 
matching grant amount will then be debited from the trust account and credited to the loan account of 
the  borrower,  and  thereby  bringing  the  debt  to  zero.  In  this  approach,  should  a  borrower  default 
significantly,  the  matching  grants  would  be  cancelled  automatically.  The  main  disadvantage  of  this 
approach  is  that  the  borrower  would  need  to  pay  interest  on  the  whole  amount  until  the  matching 
account.
grant 
borrower’s 
credited 
into 
the 
is 
The  above  two  approaches  can  also  be  applied  to  the  provision  of  matching  grants  to
27. 
complement the appraised and approved (by PFI) youth business plans. For the youth especially, the 
matching  grant  element  (in  addition  to  its  provision  to  reduce  the  risk  of  uptake  of  new  innovative 
business)  should  ease  some  of  the  risk  perceptions  of  lending  institutions  who  in  general  have  a 
preference  to  lend  to  clients  with  experience  in  doing  business  as  a  key  lending  criterion. 
borrower.
Subsequently, 
the  matching 
collateral 
partial 
serve 
grant 
the 
for 
as 
Under sub-component 1.2, , the programme intends to support capacity building of producer/
28. 
farmer  organizations  (FOs),  with  the  rationale  that  strengthening  of  FOs  will  empower  the  group  to 
become an  effective partner under 4P schemes  as  well  as  their  capacity to  take  informed decisions 
about their  business. The  start-up funding at  group (FO)  level  will  be  complemented  with support in 
the  form  of  business  mentoring,  training,  exchange  visits  and  degressive  support  to  FOs  for  their 
management.
Producer/ farmer organizations eligible for support include those registered under the following:
29. 
(i)  Social  Services Act;  (ii)  Agrarian  Development Act  (this  includes  organizations registered by,  and 
operating  within  the  remit  of  the  Mahaweli  Authority);  (iii)  Co-operative  Socieities  Law  and  (iv) 
Company’s  Act.  For  those  groups  not  yet  registered,  whenever  appropriate,  the  programme  will 
facilitate their legal registering: awareness building and reflection process with the members to enable 
them  to  analyse  pros  and  cons  of  the  four  possible  registration  options  and  ultimately  choose  the 
plans.
option 
needs 
suits 
their 
best 
that 
and 
30. 
For the new 4P schemes explicitly working with producer/ farmer organizations as stakeholders
in  the  business  4P  schemes  (4,000  hhs),  SAP  will  promote  a  multi-pronged  approach  taking  into
73 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
account both the degree of FOs’ development and the means by which FOs and farmers groups will 
enter  as  stakeholders  into  the  4Ps.  Three  models  engaging  and  providing  support  to  70  FOs  are 
envisaged:
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Private-sector led  4Ps  with  20  FOs  (Type A FO  4P  partnership). Under  this  first model, 
SAP   will   encourage  private  sector   companies  to   present  business  proposals  for 
outgrower  schemes  that  foresee  partnerships  between  private  sector  companies  and 
farmers  groups,  either  legally  constituted  in  the  form  of  associations/farmer-led 
companies or as informal groups. Initial support will be for 20 FOs under these 4Ps type 
of  schemes, with an  average membership of  50 members each, for a total outreach of 
1000 households over the first three years of the programme (pilot phase). 
Mature  FOs  or  farmer  cooperatives (10)  already managing sizable  businesses  (Type  B 
FO  4P  partnership).  Under  this  second  model,  the  relatively  more  mature  FOs  will 
already  be  engaged  in  the  business  of  processing  and/or  value  addition,  and  the 
provision  of  seed  and  working  capital  financing  will  support  them  to  expand  their 
business to the benefit of  their members. The support will be very similar to the  one for 
private led 4Ps. Indeed these coops and FOs are already into business, processing and 
value adding activities and therefore the support won’t depart from  the one provided to 
4Ps private companies led schemes. In that sense, the SAP support will be through the 
provision  of  Lines  of  Credit  (LOC),  grant  financing  and  will  comprise  a  counterpart 
financing  from  the  coops  themselves  The  difference  with  the  4Ps  led  by  private 
companies is  that  LOC  and grant financing can  be  contracted directly to  the  coops and 
FOs rather than financing the farmers on an individual basis and lump together with the 
50 000 USD provision for the coops and FOs in the form of start up fund at group level 
(see subcomponent 1.1). The logic for such diverse approach is that the FOs and coops 
are belonging to farmers hence the support to coops will be benefiting directly farmers as 
members  while  strengthening FOs/coops  businesses.  Given  the  limited  number  of  FOs 
and coops in Sri Lanka already capable to manage sizeable business, the initial support 
will  be  for  10  FOs  and  coops  under  these  4Ps  type  of  schemes,  with  an  average 
membership of 100 members each, for a total outreach of 1000 smallholder farmers over 
the first three years of the programme (pilot phase). 
Incipient FOs (40), mainly under the Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka (MASL) areas (Type 
C  FO  4P  partnership).  Under  this  third  model,  specific  attention  will  be  given  towards 
supporting the FOs to evolve from initial ‘business ideas’ to bankable business plans and 
gradually  evolve  into  functional  business-oriented  entities.  Financial  support,  similar  to 
the Type B coops and FOs  will not be initially matched with counterpart financing, given 
low   capacity  of  these  FOs  to  mobilize  their  own  resources.  Financial  support  will  be 
provided on  a  gradual basis  to  ensure  solid  management and  absorption capacity. The 
FOs  supported  under  this  third  model  are  still  at  start  up  of  their  business  (only  with 
business  ideas  rather  than  business  plans)  thus  requiring  a  stronger  field  presence  to 
support  their  institutional  strengthening.  Henceforth,  the  FOs  under  this  model  will  be 
geographically  targeted  to  Mahaweli  areas  given  strong  field  presence  of  Mahaweli 
Authority  of  Sri  Lanka  (MASL)  that  will  provide  on  the  ground  institutional  support  and 
business  mentoring  to  FOs  (see  appendix  5  for  detailed  implementation  arrangements 
with MASL). Initial outreach will be for 40 FOs under these 4Ps type of schemes, with an 
average membership of 50 members each, for a total outreach of 2000 households over 
phase).
the 
programme 
years 
three 
(pilot 
first 
the 
of 
The   selection   of   business   ventures   (under   private-sector   and   FO-led   4Ps),   will   follow
31. 
competitive open selection processes. In  the particular case of  incipient FOs in  the  Mahaweli areas, 
the process of sensitization and competitive selection will be in turn, managed by MASL, who will also 
.
strengthening 
benefit 
institutional 
support 
from 
from 
SAP 
74 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
32.  Financial  support  will  then  be  matched  with  a  package  of  capacity  building  support  that  will
include,  interalia,  business  mentoring,  training,  exchange  visits  and  degressive  support  for  the  FOs 
management, given the hypothesis that these farmers groups initially won’t have a business capable 
management.
linked 
to 
recurrent 
cover 
costs 
their 
the 
to 
The package of capacity building support will be flexible depending on needs and audience (by
33. 
group,  organization,  individual),  though  primarily  relates  to  technical  assistance/  training;  the  areas 
which  can  be  covered  include:  organizational  structure;  governance  and  management;  market 
finance;  business  plan 
intelligence  and  marketing,  negotiation  skills;  basic  accounting  and 
development,  contract  development  with  other  chain  stakehodlers,  collective/bulk  marketing  and 
procurement  of  inputs,  management  of  common  storage  facilities  and  equipment,  technology 
development  for  agricultural  intensification  and  productivity  enhacement,  financial  literacy  and 
intelligence for linkages with banks. In the latter case, trainings will be promoting savings mobilization, 
approaches  to  implement  their  savings  schemes,  with  a  view  to  satisfy  social  needs,  business 
expansion and collateral requirements of the banks. Trainings will also promote sustainable adoption 
of climate resilient crop development that will be accompanied with approaches for sustainable use of 
natural  resources.  Training  programmes  will  be  delivered  through  a  number  of  conduits;  through 
specialised  service  providers,  as  well  as  through  social  mobilizers  who  will  be  trained  as  trainers 
programme.
through 
trainers 
training 
(TOT) 
of 
a 
Trainings programmes will  then be complemented by  exchange and learning visits, within the
34. 
country  and  in  the  Asian  region.  These  visits  will  be  providing  exposure  and  learing  for,  inter  alia, 
further expansion of coops and FOs business model, to develop environmental sustainable strategies, 
and  to  promote  market  compliance.The  capacity  building  package,  for  Type  A  and  Type  C  models 
characterized  by  less  mature  FOs  with  no  yet  a  net  margin  to  cover  their  recurrent  costs,  SAP 
programme  support  will  be  complemented  by  a  degressive  support  for  costs  related  to  FOs 
management.
35. 
In the case of Type C FOs abovementioned, a specific role will be played by MASL with a pool
of consultancy support for implementing the support to FOs (see appendix 5 for the specifics related 
to the role of MASL)..
36. 
Through the pilot phase, the attention to supporting the structure, governance and business of
FOs, should yield important lessons and allow for fine-tuning of comprehensive and replicable models 
to support FO development in the country and further expansion in the context of SAP. 
Figure 1: Support instruments for producer/ farmer organizations 
Support for 
production 
Product value 
addition 
FO’s Business Model 
Access to credit
Marketing 
support 
37.  The  services  rendered  by  an  effective  producer/  farmer  organization,  should  contribute  to
enabling  smallholder  members  to  increase  their  productivity,  mitigate  production  risk,  improve 
household  and  farming management and  subsequently increase  household  income. The  supporting 
instruments to develop this level of organization are as follows: 
(a)      Support for production basically covers regular input supplies like seeds and fertilizer, 
access to productive equipment and agricultural extension services; in complement, the
75 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
existing public services should be tapped into. As is now also a practice, input supplies 
could be arranged through the private sector (buyers), set out in such contracts as the 
forward sales agreements (FSAs). 
(b)      Support for product value addition relates to: access to processing equipment; sub- 
contracting arrangements with larger-scale processors; packaging; and post-harvest 
handling, including storage. 
(c)      Marketing support relates to the management of contracts with buyers; bulk marketing; 
transport management; market studies; and market information systems. SAP support in 
particular, would be required to strengthen FO knowledge on management of 'business' 
contracts, including legal instruments and formalities. 
(d)      Access to credit refers to facilitating the important linkage to the formal financial sector. In 
complement, FOs would likely require support and assistance to develop bankable 
business plans. 
(e)      Overall support. In general, FOs will need have continuous institutional capacity building 
support, in terms of the governance and management of the organization as an entity in 
itself. 
Component  2:  Access  to  rural  finance  (USD  47.1  million  –  includes  a  financing  gap  of 
approximately USD 15.8 million)
The  limited  lending  to  agricultural sector  activities  and  the  subsequent impact  on  agricultural
38. 
development as outlined in Section I, highlights the need to promote and make accessible, agricultural 
financial  products  for  the  smallholder  farmers  under  4Ps.  This  component  principally  follows  the 
strategies, modes of intervention and investment opportunities that emerge under Component 1, and 
aims at facilitating access to rural financial services in a sustainable manner and at affordable rates. It 
shall  have  two  sub-components:  (2.1)  Financing  of  4Ps;  and  (2.2)  Institutional  strengthening.  The 
component provides  the  products  and  liquidity  that  are  needed  to  serve  the  target  groups  and  help 
objectives.
achieve 
overall 
the 
Under  sub-component  2.1,  a  line  of  credit  (LOC)  shall  be  established  under  the  Regional
39. 
Development Department of  the  CBSL. This  LOC  shall  be  used  exclusively to  refinance PFIs  which 
have granted loans to eligible participants under a 4P business/investment plan through the following 
target groups: 
(a)      Farmers, engaged in a 4P scheme or activities under the FO; 
(b)      Youths in the age bracket of 18-30 years, as per the standard government definition.
40. 
For these two target groups, three different products shall be offered: 
(a)      Working  capital   loans   for   farmers  engaged   in   4P   arrangements  supported   under 
component 1; 
(b)      Term loans for investments in equipment and machinery up to a duration of five years for 
farmers engaged in 4P arrangements supported under component 1; 
(c)      Working capital and investment loans for a duration of up to two years for youths, which 
may be combined with start-up funds as approved under component 1. 
For all loans, PFIs will charge the rates agreed upon under the 4P plan and will bear the full risk
41. 
of default on repayment. Correspondingly, PFIs make their loan appraisal in conformity with their own 
standards  and  procedures, and  have  of  course  the  right  to  accept  or  reject  a  loan  application, or  to 
reduce the loan amount if they would not be convinced on the full merits of the proposal. W hile PFIs 
apply  their  standard  collateral  regime,  the  SAP  extends  a  small  guarantee  in  the  amount  of  and 
through a matching grant between the time of disbursement and the loan repayment up to the amount 
1.
of 
contribution.  Details 
component 
provided 
under 
been 
have 
PFI 
the 
76 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
42.  Working capital loans for farmers. Working capital requirements for the cultivation of  crops
supported under the 4P plans for one hectare mostly do not exceed the equivalent of USD 350, and 
are mostly for a duration of up to 9 months. All  short-term loans must be repaid within 11 months by 
the borrowers. 
43.     Term loans for  investments. The term  of  these loans shall be  a  maximum of  4  years, even 
where banks would in principle allow for longer terms. Grace periods shall depend on the cash flow, 
and  could  be  up  to  six  months.  The  average  borrowing  amount  per  individual  farmer  has  been 
500.
calculated 
USD 
at 
Working capital and term loans for youths. In most cases, a loan duration of 24 months will
44. 
apply, given the size of the loans and the programmeed cash flows. The maximum loan amount shall 
be  USD  2,000,  in  which  an  enventual matching  grant  may  be  included, depending  on  the  eligibility. 
Unlike  loans  to  farmers,  where  short  term  and  medium/long  term  loans  shall  fall  under  separate 
contracts, this  would  be  simplified in  the  case  of  youths,  where  term  loan,  working  capital  loan  and 
eventually  a  MG  would  be  lumped  together.  W here  a  grace  period  of  up  to  six  months  would  be 
included, the payments of interest due must always be monthly. This flexibility is needed as it the cash 
farmers.
flow  of 
investments  cannot  be  predicted  as 
the  case  of 
these 
loans 
to 
in 
45. 
The Programme Implementation Manual (PIM) shall  provide the  operating guidelines on  loan
purpose, target market, eligibility criteria, loan size, loan period, collateral requirements, interest rate 
and repayment terms and associated fees.
46. 
It is programmeed that 55,000 smallholders and 2,500 landless youths will get access to credit
through the SAP-financed line of credit for on-lending by the PFIs. Once the borrowers under the 4P 
schemes have liquidated their previous loan, they will also be eligible for term loans. 
Table 5: Incremental outreach under SAP 
Planned incremental 
outreach 
New 4Ps 
NADeP 4P + 
FO 4Ps 
NADeP existing 4Ps 
Youth 
Total 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year 5 
Year 6 
Total 
6,000 
4,000 
2,000 
20,000   
6,000 
4,000 
2,000   
6,000 
3,000 
2,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1,000 
1,000 
500   
21,000 
10,000 
4,000 
20,000 
2,500 
32,000 
13,000 
9,000 
3,500 
0 
0 
57,500 
47.  Contributions to for working capital purposes will vary over time. In the first year, each group of
farmers,  or  each  farmer,  will  have  to  pay  10%  of  the  expected  loan  amount  into  a  blocked  savings 
account at the respective PFI. This contribution  will gradually increase to  30%  of  the loan amount in 
year, after which it will be constant. This means that farmers are expected to continue savings, but are 
no longer required to keep these savings in their savings account that will be blocked by the PFI at the 
time of disbursement. PFI contributions will start with 20% in  year 1, and will then gradually increase 
to 70% in year 5. Consequently, the amount taken from the LOC will start with 70% in year 1, and will 
then  gradually decrease  to  zero  from  the  fifth  year  onwards.  This  model  will  apply  to  all  borrowers 
served under the LOC. The table below shows the changing contributions by all parties over time. 
Table 6: Contributions to short-term loans 
FO or individual farmer 
10% 
20% 
30% 
30% 
30% 
30% 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year 5 
Year 6 
77 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
PFI 
SAP 
Total 
20% 
70% 
25% 
55% 
35% 
35% 
45% 
25% 
70% 
70% 
0 
0 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
48.  Following  the  programmeions  for  the  number  of  farmers  and  youths  and  the  demand  and
absorption  capacity  of  the  target  groups  over  time,  the  programme  would  disburse  nearly  300,000 
loans over the six year period. 
Number of loans 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year 5 
Year 6 
New 4Ps 
NADeP 4P + 
FO 4Ps 
6000 
12000 
18000 
21000 
21000 
21000 
4000 
8000 
10000 
10000 
10000 
10000 
2000 
4000 
4000 
4000 
4000 
4000 
Total 
99000 
52000 
22000 
NADeP existing 4Ps 
20000 
20000 
20000 
20000 
20000 
20000 
120000 
Sub-Total 
Youth 
Grand Total 
32000 
44000 
52000 
55000 
55000 
55000 
293000 
0 
1000 
1000 
500 
0 
0 
2500 
32000 
45000 
53000 
55500 
55000 
55000 
295500 
The total amount of loans granted under the SAP exceeds USD 100 million, as shown in the
49. 
table below. 
Table 7: Value of loans disbursed under SAP 
Target group 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year 5 
Year 6 
Total 
New 4Ps 
2100000 
4200000 
6300000 
7350000 
7350000 
7350000 
34650000 
NADeP 4P + 
1400000 
2800000 
3500000 
3500000 
3500000 
3500000 
18200000 
FO 4Ps 
NADeP existing 
4Ps 
Total 
Youth 
700000 
1400000 
1400000 
1400000 
1400000 
1400000 
7700000 
7000000 
7000000 
7000000 
7000000 
7000000 
7000000 
42000000 
11200000  15400000  18200000  19250000  19250000  19250000  102550000 
0 
1500000 
1500000 
750000 
0 
0 
3750000 
Grand Total 
11200000  16900000  19700000  20000000  19250000  19250000  106300000 
50.  The net financing requirements for the LOC have ben calculated at USD 12.0 million, including
total contributions of PFIs to the tune of USD 9.7 million, of farmers amounting to USD 4.7 million, and 
of the GOSL of USD 17.4 million, the latter being the reflows of past lines of credit.
Pricing of the LOC facility. The interest rate of the facility should be cost-recovering. As the
51. 
Government  will  have  to  pay  back  the  loan  in  foreign  currency,  the  devaluation  of  the  Sri  Lankan 
Rupee  (LKR)  will  have  to  be  included  in  the  calculation of  the  costs. The  point  of  departure for  the 
pricing  of  LOC  will  be  done  as  the  cost  of  capital  for  the  Government  (including  the  anticipated 
devaluation  of  LKR)  +  administrative  cost  of  the  CBSL  +  interest  spread  for  PFIs  to  cover 
administrative/operating cost,  cost  of  funds,  loans  losses  and  profit  markup. The  interest  rate  would 
financial  market.
be 
reviewed  as  and  when  necessary 
the  current  national 
reflect 
to 
The  above  lending  rate  following  the  above  principles  would  turn  out  as  shown  in  the  table
52. 
below. 
Table 8: Cost of funds from IFAD to the final borrower 
IFAD charges to GOSL/MOF as per the financing agreement                                                             2,00%
78 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
MOF rate to CBSL incl. mark-up for devaluation risk60
Standard CBSL rate to PFIs to cover operating costs 
Proportionate cover suggested for SAP to cover inflation risk 
Mark-up for PFIs covering their op. costs and risks 
Tentative lending rate of PFIs to final borrowers with funds deriving from the LOC 
3,70% 
3,95% 
2,00% 
4,00% 
9,95% 
53.  This rate will influence the final loan amount charged by a PFI in  view of the average cost of
funds for loans. As shown in the table below, the average weighted lending rate in  year 1  would be 
9.87%. This tentative lending rate compares with 16-19% charged by commercial banks, and  about 
31% p.a. charged by MFIs in the case of smallholders. 
Table 9: Average weighted cost of lending 
Contribution to LOC 
Interest rate/average cost of funds 
Farmer 
PFI 
SAP 
Total 
10% 
20% 
70% 
100%   
3% 
13,00% 
9,95% 
Share 
0,30% 
2,60% 
6,97% 
9,87% 
54. 
Interest rate adjustment. Interest rates charged under the SAP shall be subject to an annual
review  conducted  during  the  supervision  mission.  Rates  will  then  be  adjusted  where  necessary  in 
mutual consent, and taking into consideration the maco-economic and financial environment.
Implementation  arrangements.  The  line  of  credit  shall  be  administered  by  the  Regional
55. 
Development Department  (RDD)  of  the  CBSL.  The  RDD  is  a  specialized  department managing  the 
lines  of  credit  of  various  donors  and  government-run  schemes.  The  subsidiary  loan  agreement 
between the GoSL and CBSL and CBSL and PFIs will specify the terms and conditions of the line of 
credit and sub loans. The SLAs for the existing line of credit will be amended, as will be the operating 
above.
guidelines 
purposes 
utilised 
ensure 
stated 
funds 
are 
the 
the 
for 
to 
Under the 4P scheme, it should be noted that PFIs will bear the full risk for their loans, and will
56. 
have autonomy to assess loan/ credit applications exclusively based on their technical/ financial merit. 
Therefore, whilst the programme is serving to facilitate funding for the targeted clients, the decision as 
to  whether to approve a loan (or not), and the amount of the loan will be the full responsibility of the 
PFIs.
Selection of PFIs. PFIs would be accredited based on at  least the fulfillment of the following
57. 
criteria: (i) minimum of two years of term-lending operations for which audited accounts are available; 
(ii)  NPL  below  5%;  (iii)  fulfillment  of  all  prudential  regulations  as  required  by  the  CBSL;  and  (iv) 
willingness  to  enter  into  a  tri-partite  agreement  with  smallholder  producers  and  the  private  sector 
company  under  the  4P  scheme.  Based  on  these  conditions,  the  Bank  of  Ceylon,  Regional 
Development  Bank,  Cargills  Bank,  Hatton  National  Bank,  and  some  MFIs  would  be  eligible  to 
participate  in  the  scheme.  All  above  four  banks  have  confirmed  their  commitment  to  the  SAP.
Exit   strategy   and   post-programme   arrangements  on   the   LOC.   By   the   end   of   the
58. 
programme, the exit strategy of the line of credit will be its transformation into a revolving fund, which 
may be called the Farming System Sustainability Fund. This fund will be endowed from the reflows of 
this and other LOC as per the mutual agreement of the GOSL and IFAD. The Fund will be dedicated 
to short, medium and long term loans for agriculture. The RDD of CBSL will continue to manage this 
Fund  for  the  duration  of  the  Financing  Agreement  between  the  GOSL  and  IFAD.  The  Fund  will 
60  Using the past 20 years as reference case, a mark-up of 4.8% would have been needed to protect the past LOC 
against devaluation of the LKR. In the model above, 3.6% are integrated, assuming that the GOSL will bear the 
remaining risks.
79 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
become  a  permanent  and  strategic  tool  to  stimulate  agricultural  development  through  smallholder- 
oriented farmer credit.
Under  sub-component  2.2,  the  programme  will  support  institutional  strengthening  of  CBSL
59. 
and the participating financial institutions (commercial banks and progressively MFIs).  First of all, the 
CBSL will be supported in  the elaboration and  dissemination of  new regulations for the microfinance 
sector,  thus  ensuring  adequate  participation  opportunities  for  rural  communities,  and  in-training  of 
licensed  MFIs  on  these  new  regulations.  Under  support  for  the  CBSL,  an  exposure  visit  will  be 
arranged to  upgrade knowledge of  the staff  working for  SAP. Technical training will also be  provided 
for  the  MF  Inspection department on  Monitoring Common Frauds and  prevention, System Audit  and 
tools.
Inspection, 
other 
MFI 
and 
60. 
Within the existing provisions in the AW PB, the CBSL shall submit requests for support to the
PMU. Procurement of services under the sub-component shall be made by the CBSL in accordance 
with its existing procurement guidelines.
Furthermore,  some  critical  support  to  PFIs,  including  commercial  banks  and  deposit-taking
61. 
MFIs,  will  be  provided  to  enable  these  provide  more  inclusive,  effective  (specific  and  targeted)  and 
efficient financial services and products to smallholder farmer/ producers and other target segments of 
the  population.  Most  of  this  support  is  geared  at  technical  assistance  for  issues  of  interest  and 
concern to the PFIs, including value chain financing, micro and small client‘s credit underwriting skills, 
and  reporting,  depending  on  the  expressed  needs.  PFIs  will  be  encouraged  to  recruit  additional 
lending  officers  with  backgrounds  in  agribusiness,  as  the  HNB  has  done  with  great  success.
Procurement  of  these  services  shall  be  made  by  the  PMU  in  close  collaboration  with  the
62. 
respective PFIs, to ensure that only that would be procured that what would represent the interest of 
the PFI. This provision is  made in order to simplify the operations, as it may be too time intensive to 
review the procurement guidelines of PFIs. In any case, the results of consultants’ and workshop and 
training reports shall be  regarded as  the  intellectual property of  the  respective PFI,  and  shall  not  be 
competitors.
disclosed 
to 
63. 
The eligibility criteria for the support to PFIs shall comprise: 
(a)      PFI branches are engaged in disbursing credit to smallholder farmers using the SAP 4P 
line of credit. Priority shall be given to the branches located in remote districts especially 
in  Auradhapura,  Monaragala,  Hmbanthota,  Nuweraeliya,  Kilinochchi,  Jaffna,  Baticaloa 
Matale, and Ampara districts; 
(b)      The branches can serve at least 500 smallholder farmers under the 4P line of credit; 
(c)      Regular reporting to the PMU. 
In case funds would not suffice in a year or towards the end of the programme, selection criteria
64. 
may  comprise  the  number  of  farmers  served  so  far,  the  volume  of  loans  to  the  target  groups,  the 
staffing  of  branches  with  lending  officers  that  have  agribusiness  backgrounds  or  have  received 
situation.
training 
programme, 
SAP 
NPL 
and 
the 
the 
via 
All PFIs that partner with SAP will have to adhere to specific reporting obligations as stipulated
65. 
in the programme implementation manual. 
Component 3: Programme management and policy dialogue (USD 5.8 million)
Component 3 will serve Components 1 and 2. It will comprise a series of activities to manage,
66. 
facilitate the implementation of, and monitor, report and draw lessons from, the operational  activities 
carried  out  under  the  other  two  components.  Component  3  comprises  two  sub-components:  (3.1) 
engagement.
Programme 
management; 
knowledge 
Policy 
(3.2) 
and 
and 
67. 
Under  sub-component  3.1,  programme  and  knowledge  management  (including  fiduciary
management), will  be  entrusted to  SAP  Programme Management Unit  (PMU),  which  is  an  evolved 
unit   comprising  the   experienced  staff   of   the   existing   NADeP  PMU   and   technical  assistance/
80 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
consultants.  Following  some  restructuring, the  PMU  will  be  strengthened  with  additional  capacity  to 
effectively carry  out  its  key  responsibilities  of  planning,  coordination, facilitation  and  brokerage,  and 
monitoring  and  evaluation.  The  programme  will  establish  management,  finance  and  administrative 
procedures  including  accounting, auditing  and  a  monitoring  and  evaluation system  in  line  with  IFAD 
guidelines,  and  which  will  feed  into  relevant  national  monitoring  systems.  Given  the  scope  of  the 
proposed  programme,  key  managerial  positions  within  the  PMU  include  a  Programme  Director, 
Deputy  Programme  Director,  Agribusiness  Manager,  Rural  Finance  Manager  and  Finance  (and 
Admin)  Manager,  heading  competent  staff  within  their  respective  units.  Technical  assistance  in  the 
form  of  consultants  will  also  continue to  bring  a  higher level  of  professionalism and  expertise to  the 
programme.  In  order  to  support  specific  interventions  (e.g.  as  relates  to  institutional  strengthening, 
capacity  building  or  4P  facilitation  where  required),  institutional  service  providers  will  be  contracted.
To support the policy agenda to promote pro-poor partnerships with the private sector (see sub-
68. 
component 3.2  below), and given the multitude of  SAP programme stakeholders comprising multiple 
ministries and public agencies, private sector companies, business associations, financial institutions, 
producers  and  their  organizations,  the  element  of  learning  and  knowledge  dissemination  and 
management  is  critical  to  sustainability  of  the  programme  interventions  and  future  uptake  and  up- 
scaling  of  the  model  and  approaches  tested  and  promoted  by  SAP.  To  facilitate  this  knowledge 
management, specialised studies, training manuals and information and communication materials will 
developed.
be 
As  well, the institutional housing of the SAP programme within the Presidential Secretariat as
69. 
the  lead  programme agency,  presents  a  very  strong  opportunity not  only  to  ensure  high-level policy 
engagement,  but  also  coordination  of  key  public  institutions,  and  it  will  allow  for  a  multi-sectoral 
approach  and  support  to  the  programme.  The  high-level  engagement  will  also  translate  to  the 
operational  level,  with  coordinated  partnership  amongst  the  key  public  institutions  (the  Mahaweli 
Authority especially). In  addition, priority cross-cutting issues such as  nutrition and natural resources 
management/  climate  change  adaptation  will  be  pursued  at  a  high-level,  to  inform  and  feed  into 
programme operations on the one hand, and to as well be informed by the findings and results arising 
interventions.
from 
programme 
Under  sub-component  3.2,  Policy  Dialogue,  the  activities  to  be  supported  will  aim  at
70. 
improving  the  policy  environment  for  equitable  and  sustainable  smallholder  farmer–sourced 
agribusiness  development.  To  achieve  this,  the  policy  dialogue  agenda  will  be  built  on  two  broad 
thrusts.  First,  the  programme  will  bring  together  the  key  stakeholders  –  government,  agribusiness, 
financial service  providers  and  smallholder farmers, to  enable  them  to  collectively identify the  policy 
constraints  they  face,  promote  consensus  as  to  the  need  for  policy  change  where  appropriate,  and 
support the process of bringing about that policy change. Second, it will draw out the key lessons and 
successes  emerging  from  the  implementation  experience,  and  feed  these  back  to  Government,  for 
reflection in  national policies, strategies and programmes as appropriate. The sub-component will be 
managed by the Programme Director, while the National Steering Committee will play a critical role in 
focus.
scope 
guiding 
and 
its 
Under  the  first  thrust,  the  programme  will  create  space  for  policy  dialogue  between  national
71. 
stakeholders and then support that dialogue. At the national level, 4P multistakeholder meetings will 
be  established,  with  participation  of  representatives  of  relevant  government  agencies,  of  producers 
and  their  organizations  involved  in  agricultural  value  chains,  of  private  sector  processors  and 
exporters, and  of  interested banks  and  MFIs. These  4P multi-stakeholder meetings,  which  the  PMU 
will  convene  twice  per  year,  will  be  professionally facilitated  by  a  partner  organization  such  as  the 
Institute of  Policy Studies of  Sri Lanka.61  The meetings will  serve as  an  opportunity for the different 
actors along the programme-supported agricultural value chains to interact, and specifically, to identify 
and  bring  to  the  attention  of  Government  critical  policy  and  regulatory  issues  affecting  the  sector 
(which  may  in  some  cases  have  been  already  pre-identified  by  the  PMU);  to  prioritise  these  and 
propose research, where needed, to better analyse the issues and identify solutions; and to validate 
61  http://www.ips.lk/
81 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
the findings and advocate for policy change. Commodity-specific or other follow-up meetings involving 
a  sub-set  of  the  participants may also  be  held,  where  there  is  demand  to  do  so.  A preliminary and 
partial  scoping  exercise  has  identified  the  following  possible  policy  issues  for  the  programme  to 
pursue,  though  these  would  be  validated  and  prioritised  –  or  replaced  by  other  issues  –  by  the  4P 
multi-stakeholder meetings before any subsequent work would be undertaken. 
(a)      Review of the incentive framework for agriculture – the taxation regime affecting the 
sector, both for production inputs: e.g. polythene tunnels, plastic piping etc, and for food 
and agricultural products 
(b)      Analysis of domestic non-tariff barriers to production – reviewing the restrictions on 
importation of seed and agro-chemicals and certification processes for these. 
(c)      Identification of approaches needed to promote agricultural R&D into: (a) alternative, 
organic-based technologies, supporting its policy of reducing agro-chemical use; and/or 
(b) climate resilient technmologies and practices. 
(d)      Identification and analysis of specific policy or regulatory issues / blockages along the 
value chains of the individual commodities supported by the programme. 
(e)      Identification of approaches for ensuring approaches for ensuring quality and traceability 
– rolling out Sri Lanka Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) and supporting farmers’ 
compliance with these, and reviewing costs of certifications at farmer levels and 
quarantine issues, and their impact on the incentive structure for export-oriented 
smallholder products. 
(f)       Assessment of the impact of the newly-revised policy framework for artificial 
insemination, remaining gaps and options for improvement. 
(g)      Identification of options for ensuring that public agriculture R&D and extension to go 
beyond a narrow focus on crop production to better respond to market requirements. (To 
this end, a specific budgetary provision has been made for activities promoting dialogue 
between researchers and private sector processors and exporters). 
(h)      Identification of policies, strategies and practices for both mobilizing rural savings and 
enabling smallholder farmers to more easily access agricultural credit. 
(i)       Assesment of alternative options currently available, and procedures, for registration of 
farmers’ organizations, and their implications for commercialisation of smallholder 
producers. 
(j)       Review of the impact of regulations preventing the use of land designated as being for 
paddy production for any alternative agricultural purpose; 
(k)      Identification of possible approaches to assisting smallholder farmers to manage produce 
price fluctuations.
The process of policy dialogue will be enhanced by strengthening the capacity of smallholder
72. 
farmer representatives to enable them to participate effectively in the meetings.  The capacity building 
activities under sub-component 1.2 will include support to farmer organizations to develop their policy 
skills.
dialogue 
advocacy 
and 
All policy issues prioritised for follow-up action by the 4P multi-stakeholder meetings will then
73. 
be presented to the National Steering Committee for its endorsement. While the approach to be taken 
relative to specific policy issues will vary case-by-case, further policy research/analysis is  likely to be 
required,  in  order  to  identify  detailed  policy  options.  The  programme  will  support  such  analysis  (a 
provision has  been made for two such studies per  year  –  total 10  –  to be carried out),  which  will be 
conducted  by  contracted  research  organizations  and/or  researchers.  The  research  will  be 
subsequently  reviewed  and  the  recommendations  of  that  research  endorsed  by  the  4P  multi- 
meetings.
stakeholder 
82 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
74.  Under  the  second  thrust,  the  lessons  of   programme  implementation  experience  will  be
analysed. The PMU will identify particularly successful approaches and models piloted or developed; 
analyse  these  (the  programme will  support   data  collection for  the  analysis,  where  necessary);  and 
where  appropriate  promote  their  adoption  /  scaling  up  by  government  under  a  national  strategy  or 
programme would be promoted. The need for, and scope of, such studies would be identified as a key 
part of the knowledge management function of the programme. They might include topics such as: 
   The  benefits  and  costs  of  the  4P  model,  as  compared  to  other  approaches  to  smallholder 
agricultural development 
   Different models  of  farmer  organization,  and  alternative  approaches  to  supporting  these  to 
become more commercially oriented and play a more active role in agricultural value chains. 
   Alternative approaches for supporting rural  youth employability, and creation of opportunities 
for employment and self-employment. 
   Approaches and technologies for promoting lower use of agro-chemicals and climate-resilient 
production.
A  provision  for  two  such  studies  per  year,  from  2020  onwards,  has  been  made  in  the
75. 
programme cost tables.
Under  both  thrusts,  the  programme  will  look  to  turn  relevant  policy  analysis  into  policy
76. 
change.This  will  require  the  development  of  specific  strategies  tailored  to  the  topic  or  issue  in 
question, which should be endorsed once again by the NSC, Depending on the needs of the specific 
policy  in  question,  the  PMU  may  prepare  policy  briefs,  video  films  etc.  It  may  conduct  advocacy 
activities,  including  with  parliamentarians  as  necessary;  and  offer  exposure  visits  to  senior  policy 
makers  and  other  stakeholders,  to  enable  them  to  visit  sites  both  within  Sri  Lanka  and  in  other 
countries in Asia and Africa, to  view cases  where  proposed policies have  been  successfully applies. 
The programme will also offer support: to the process of drafting policy documents or regulations; for 
public consultations around specific draft policy documents; or for kickstarting the operationalisation of 
effected.
new 
policies, 
change 
where 
policy 
been 
has 
In pursuing specific policy agendas, alliances with other advocacy groups and organizations will
77. 
be developed wherever this can strengthen the scope for achieving policy impact. Potential allies may 
include  the  various  Chambers  of  Commerce  (Ceylon  Chamber  of  Commerce,  National  Chamber  of 
Commerce,  Federation  of  Chambers  of  Commerce  and  Industries)  and  their  member  associations 
and  committtees;  the  Export  Development  Board  (EDB);  policy  think  tanks  (e.g.  Institute  of  Policy 
Studies); and established farmers’ organizations (e.g. the Movement for Land and Agricultural Reform 
–  MONLAR).
83 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
ANNEX I: the 4P appraisal and development process 
1.       Early sensitization, consultation and  provision of  guidance on  SAP principles, objectives, and 
specific  (targeted) interests  amongst all  the  potential  project  stakeholders (farmer/  producers,  youth, 
agribusiness companies, PFIs,  public  sector  agencies, social mobilisers) underlies the  evolution and 
implementation of the programme. 
2.       Subsequently,  the  SAP  programme  will  invite  expressions  of  interest  to  engage  in  4Ps  from 
reputable agribusiness companies, who  are then  short listed and  selected based on  a  set  of  criteria 
including: financial strength; business experience (at least 2 years in business with unqualified audited 
accounting statements); and commitment and interest in pro-poor development. These companies are 
subsequently  requested  to  submit  proposals  in  the  form  of  Business  Plans  (BP)  to  include  an 
investment plan  and  an  implementation plan.  In  this  early stage,  the  PMU  is  forefront in  promoting, 
sensitizing  and  brokering  first  contact  with  the  private  sector;  as  the  process  progresses,  the  PMU 
continues its brokerage role and facilitates the negotiations and fine-tuning of the proposals. 
3.       Within the PMU, the business development unit, staffed with specialists (i.e. those experienced 
in private-sector agribusiness, financial and legal sector), will be primarily responsible for networking, 
working with companies on development of BPs, negotiations, on site and off site appraisal. The unit 
will  also  be  responsible  for  regular  meetings  and  follow  up  with  companies,  FIs,  and  farmers  to 
identify any issues during implementation. 
4.       Upon  BP  submission,  the  PMU  conducts  a  preliminary  assessment  and  short-listing,  and 
undertakes site-visits to meet with farmer groups and the promoter/ originator company; after this, the 
PMU  facilitates  BP  development  sessions  with  the  company  in  order  to  finalize  a  feasible  BP  that 
benefits all parties (with emphasis on financial and economic benefits to the smallholder producer; at 
this  stage,  producers  are  also  pre-identified  by  the  company).  The  BP  then  undergoes  a  final 
appraisal by the PMU team, and is forwarded to the BP Evaluation Committee (comprised of external 
experts/ target sector specialists from public institutions, PFIs and the private sector) who undertakes 
further field visits to validate the appraisal and comments on/ proposes further adjustment and finally 
recommends the BP to the National Steering Committee (NSC) for approval. Simultaneously, District 
Secretariats are sensitized and informed on the BP. 
5.       In general, BP proposals will be evaluated against SAP objectives and using an economic and 
multi-criteria  analysis.  However,  due  diligence  on  the  company  is  carried  out  to  begin  with,  and  is 
based  on  their  previous  financials  and  audited  reports;  the  experience  of  the  company  in  working 
with farmers  in  an   out-grower  model  is also considered  during  the appraisal. Following  this  due 
diligence, the BP is assessed on the basis of the following criteria: 
   The increase to beneficiary incomes (at least 20%-50%) from participating in the 4P through a 
combination of  improved farmer  gate  prices,  improved on-farm  productivity and  participation 
in upstream value added processing; 
     Market prospects of the value chain, target markets (national/export); 
   Ownership  of  the  processing  company  (farmer  owned  or  the  ownership  is  shared  with  the 
promoting company) or contract purchase mechanism agreed; 
   Overall profitability of the investment proposal: internal rate of return, incremental benefit/cost 
ratio, payback period; 
   Poverty  reduction  potential:  proportion  of  poor  (small)  farmers  participating:  incremental  net 
margin,  incremental  benefit/cost  ratio  by  producer,  rate  of  return  at  farm  level  if  applicable, 
return per labour day, return per acre, incremental household income; 
   Gender  and  youth  aspects:  proportion  of  women  and  youth  involved,  impact  on  women's 
workloads, incremental earnings for women and youth; 
   Environmental   aspects:   improvement   of   sustainable   farming   practices,   use   of   organic 
fertilizers, plant protection methods; an analysis is also carried out on climate, price and other 
measures;
major 
mitigation 
along 
risks, 
with 
84 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
   Viability   of   the   production   base,   resources   availability,   technical   suitability   and   the 
characteristics of  the  target  group  where  the  producers should meet  the  stipulated targeting 
criteria; 
   Market potential and the efficiency of  the  pricing systems proposed in the  BP to  evaluate its 
overall financial viability. 
6.       At the end of  the evaluation, an appraisal report is  prepared for  National Steering Committee 
(NSC) approval with recommendations/ comments. 
Implementation of the 4P: 
7.       Following  NSC  approval,  the  BP  is  submitted  to  IFAD  for  No-Objection,  which  if  received, 
precipitates  preparation  of  the  necessary  legal  documents  and  signing  of  Agreements  between  the 
company  and  the  SAP  programme  (this  Agreement  also  defines  the  budget  and  financing 
arrangements: SAP matching grant, SAP line of credit, private company co-financing). 
8.       Subsequently,   a   baseline   survey   is   undertaken;   as   well,   the   company   undertakes   the 
mobilisation,  organization  and  sensitization  of  the  pre-identified  producers/  farmers.  In  general,  the 
company  provides  technical  assistance  and  extension  services  to  improve  farm  productivity, 
coordinates the input/ equipment supply, and agrees to procure smallholder produce or output through 
collection  or  processing  centres.  Training  on  agri-business,  including  business  ethics,  financial 
management,  quality  standards,  technical  know-how,  social  enterprise  principles  and  practice,  and 
GAP  are  part  of  the  overall  package.  However,  the  4P  business  plan  should  clearly  identify  if,  and 
where  there  is  need  for  additional  support  that  could  be  provided  by  national  or  district-level  public 
agencies (such as the Agrarian Services Department, etc.), and how this support could be mobilised; 
it  is  however expected that  the  PMU  will  play an  important mediator and coordination role, ensuring 
the  multiple  and  relevant  public  institutions  are  mobilised  and  connected  to  the  programme 
interventions, providing support where necessary. 
9.       Monitoring  and  evaluation  and  of  the  4P  implementation  is  a  shared  responsibility  with 
producers and the companies, with guidance and oversight provided by the PMU. 
Expected benefits arising from the 4Ps:
Strengthening producers and producer groups is an important consideration of the SAP model.
10. 
Where  feasible,  the  programme  would  promote  improved  beneficiary  ownership  in  partnership  with 
the private sector, of primary level processing. The key benefits to the producers leading to enhanced 
farmers’ income and livelihoods are the following: 
     Improved knowledge transfers along the value chain; 
  
  
Improved productivity and improved quality of the produce through extension services and 
training; 
Improvement in the net margin of producers through: a) improvements in quality; b) 
introduction of primary processing and other value addition before sales; and c) access to 
premium markets and corresponding premium farm gate prices; 
     Improved post-harvest practices and acquired higher technologies.
The  programme  will  also  establish  stronger  linkages  to  actors  along  the  value  chain  –  the
11. 
programme has the potential to generate high quality farmer produce for exporters and marketers to 
enter  high  standard  and  higher  price  markets. It  will  result  in  a  significant investment in  commercial 
primary  production  in  the  village  generating  significant  added  value  and  increase  the  skills  of 
producers.
The programme with  its  number of  target sectors will  contribute to  develop the  export.  Long-
12. 
term  results  will  be  the  development  of  a  professional  export  sector,  with  companies  equipped  and 
able  to  manage,  control  and  assure  product  quality  in  a  large  volume  export  trade,  and  having  the 
business  practices  and  process  standards  and  certifications  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  high 
international  market.
value  markets, 
competitive 
securing 
position 
their 
the 
in 
85 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
ANNEX II: Sample NADeP 4P tools to be fine-tuned for SAP 
(i) Framework for Business Proposal Submission and Business Proposal Format – Out Grower 
Model 
SAP  will  support  the  development  of  viable  4P  business  proposals  submitted  by  private  sector 
reputed / capable companies (Promoter Company) that are  willing to  operate out-grower networks of 
small holder farmers and purchase the output of farmers through buy back agreements. The proposed 
4P sub-projects should increase farmer income by 20 % - 30 % and the investment should be justified 
by the income generated. 
Eligibility criteria of the Proponent Company: 
     Should be a reputed company incorporated in Sri Lanka 
     Direct involvement in agribusiness for a minimum of 2 years 
   Objectives  should  be  to  specialize  in  agriculture,  processing  of  agricultural  materials  and 
agribusinesses and / or to deal in agricultural products or services-related, 
   Unqualified  auditors’  opinion  and  a  sound  financial  position  as  evidence  by  its  financial 
reports, 
     Reputation of fair dealing and empathy with smallholders and the law income farmers 
     Sound management and corporate governance systems 
     Comply with the relevant environmental regulations (on preventing waterand air pollution) 
   Capacity to provide significant co-financing (already invested or willing to invest) and technical 
expertise 
     Demonstrated long term marketing capability 
Eligibility criteria of the farmers: 
     Should be engaged in agriculture 
   Should  not  possess  land  extent  over  one  hectare  (At  least  80  %  of  the  farmers  of  the 
outgrower network should belong to this category) 
     More than 50 % of the income should be from agriculture 
     Women and youth participation should be encouraged 
Support to be provided: 
     Will be for “on farm” productivity improvements 
     Approximately Rs  130,000/- per  farmer could be  allocated (  of  which maximum up  to  50  % 
could be as grant and balance should be through credit from PFIs. 
   Grant component of the NADeP contribution should be utilized as much as possible for value 
chain  capital  assets,  on-farm  development  and  construction.  If  the  grant  component  is  not 
sufficient  for  the  purpose,  then  micro  credit  component  too  could  be  utilized;  the  grant 
component should be 50 % or less of the total programme contribution. 
Inputs  (seeds,  planting  materials,  fertilizer  etc),  machinery  maintenance  and  other  working 
capital  requirements  could  be  purchased  from  credit  component;  other  capital  assert 
requirements can however also be considered through microfinance. 
  
   Asset  ownership  should  be  with  the  individual  farmer.  Promoting  company  should  have  a 
signed  agreement  with  each  asset  owner.  In  that  agreement,  it  should  be  clearly  indicated 
that if the farmer stops using that asset, the Company should take the asset back and give it 
to  some other farmer who  is  willing to  do  the  same agriculture production and  be  in  the  out 
grower  network.  In  that  case,  net  amount  original  owner  paid  (total  amount  paid  less 
depreciation)  should  be  paid  to  the  original  owner  by  new  owner.  In  addition  to  the  grant 
component, if  there is  a micro credit component involvement for  the purchase of  asset, then 
capital payment (excluding interest paid) up to cessation of the asset has to be  paid back to 
the original owner. 
Expectations and responsibility of the private-sector company: 
   Promoter  company  should  ensure  that  the  maintenance  of  the  asset  is  looked  after  by  the 
asset owner. 
   Total expenses on  extension activities should be  carried out by the proponent company and 
service.
and 
extension 
effective 
efficient 
ensure 
should 
86 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
   Proponent  Company  in  association  with  farmer  network  should  ensure  establishment  of  a 
welfare fund; utilization of funds should be decided in agreement with both parties. 
Business Proposal Guidelines – out grower system 
1.0  Executive Summary 
2.0 Organizational Overview (about the company submitting the proposal) 
2.1 Vision / Mission of the organization/ company 
2.2 History 
2.3 Ownership 
2.4 Legal structure 
2.5 Type of business of the organization 
2.6 Products 
2.7 Type of marketing Channels 
2.8 Office, Factory, Branch Locations 
2.9 Quality Assurance Certificates 
2.10 Past two years’ sales of the end product that uses out-grower produce as a raw material 
2.11 Competition for the end product that uses farmer produce as a raw material. 
2.12 Market segments and distribution channels 
2.13 Total market volume data for past 3 years of the end product that uses farmer produce as a raw 
material. 
3.0  Description  of  the  sector  of  the  product  produced  by  the  outgrower  farmers  (i.e.  if  the  farmer 
produces vegetables, then this would be a description of the vegetable sector; if farmer produces milk, 
then it is milk sector; etc.) – this description should include the following information: 
     History / evolution 
     Present status of the sector 
     Approximate total number of farmers in the sector 
     Land extent / number of animals in the sector 
     Geographical coverage 
     Approximate total annual production for last 5 years 
     Competition for the product produced by farmers, among buyers 
     Contribution of the sector to agriculture sector and total economy 
     Threats / issues in the sector 
     Export / import data 
3.1 Proposed Programme 
3.2 Programme Goals 
3.2 Programme Objectives 
3.3 Problem Identification 
3.4 Programme Solution for the problem 
3.5 Programme outputs 
3.6 Programme Beneficiaries (both direct and indirect), target group in detail 
3.7 Programme geographical coverage 
3.8 Programme Benefits 
3.9 Programme Cost – Detailed cost item wise in LKR, excluding company contribution 
# of farmers 
Unit Cost 
receive this item 
Cost item 
# of Units 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Total 
3.10   Programmeed Cost table
Description 
1 
2 
3 
Total 
% of contribution 
Company 
Contribution 
Rs. 
NADeP 
Contribution 
Rs. 
Farmer Contribution 
Rs. 
Own 
Credit 
87 
Total Cost 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
3.11   Summary of Programmeed Cost table 
Description 
Per farmer Cost 
(Rs.) 
Total      Cost      for 
farmers (Rs.) 
NADeP Contribution 
Company Contribution 
Farmer Own Contribution (this includes 
microcredit component) 
3.12 Company contribution for the programme – item wise details 
Cost item 
Unit Cost 
# of Units 
# of farmers receive 
this item 
Total Cost 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Total 
3.13 Detailed income and cost for farmers and farmer profitability calculation 
Estimated quantity 
Unit price 
Total Income / Cost 
Total 
Monthly/ 
Seasonally 
Annually 
Income 
(1)Sales of item 1 @ 
buy back price 
(2)Sales of item 2 @ 
buy back price 
Total Income 
Expenses (up to buy 
back point) 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
Expense Total 
Net Income 
3.14 Crop /Animal insurance & Welfare fund contribution 
3.14.1 Crop / Animal insurance 
3.14.2 Welfare fund contribution in LKR 
From Farmer 
Monthly/ 
Seasonally 
From Promotor 
Monthly/ 
Seasonally 
Annually 
Annually 
3.15 Programme Monitoring and evaluation 
3.16 Fund Requirement Plan. 
3.17 Programme Activity Calendar 
3.18 Extension Service Calendar 
4.0 Social Impact of the programme 
5.0 Gender wise beneficiary categorization 
6.0 Youth participation in beneficiaries 
7.0 Past two year’s financial statements and unqualified audit reports 
8.0 GAP proposed to the programme.
88 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
(ii) NADeP Business Proposal Appraisal Report - template 
89 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
90 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
91 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
92 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
93 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
94 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
95 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
(iii) NADeP 4P Programme Implementation Log - template 
96 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
97 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
ANNEX III: Identification of Agribusiness Opportunities and Markets in Selected Value Chains 
A.   Preliminary Remarks 
1.       This annex focusses on identification of agribusiness opportunities and potential markets in 
selected agriculture sub sectors is prepared as a contribution to the SAP –Sri Lanka Small Holder 
Agri- Business Partnership Programme design Repot.  It is based on findings of the first design 
mission. This identification of opportunities targets also to provide the information to identify the 
potential and prospects to promote 4 Ps Model (Producer, private and public sector partnerships) to 
support small holder agri-businesses in Sri Lanka. In this context, initial investigations were carried 
out to identify potential product sectors based on value chains development approach, capturing 
information on markets and business opportunities for private sector and producers and potential 
partners of value chains identified during the Mission. In addition to the several collective meetings 
and visits held with some relevant public sector institutions, the mission met with private sector 
potential companies interested to work with contract farmers. A list of these contacts is provided. 
2.       In the context of the proposed SAP programme’s main objectives to support small holder 
agribusiness and 4P model application –the potential opportunities identified are agriculture product 
sectors at primary production level. The final list identified is 10 sub sectors with more than 20 
products. Added also a second list of products from 5 sub sectors that could also be retained as and 
when there are feasible proposals for 4Ps are submitted for assistance. Each product has the 
potential to become a full value chain by integrating the players of downstream of the chain to work in 
collaboration on a specific role that could be linked to a much broader value chain development 
approach. This is through integrating producers and other players of the chain to involve in different 
levels of value addition activities by taking the primary production through different stages of value 
addition to the end market. This  mean that , product sectors identified will not remain necessarily at 
primary production nature at farm level  as   eventually SAP could identify with the collaborating 
private sector partners ,to what extent of  value addition could be done at farm level  from  the 
production and harvesting  stage –to deliver  cleaned, sorted , graded , dried  , bulk -packed and 
certified product to next player of the value chain. This will increase, the additional income to farmers 
and reduction of costs to the players engaged in other levels of value addition of a selected product 
sector giving naissance to a gradual application of value chain process. 
B.   Identification of agribusiness opportunities 
3.       Identification process followed and selection criteria. The 4P (Producer, Private and Public 
Partnership) approach successfully tested under NADEP, confirms the extensive opportunities 
available under different agro -based value chains in Sri Lanka for the small holder farmers to produce 
and supply for increasing important high potential export and local markets through solid partnerships 
with private sector companies. These companies are essentially strong market partners who are able 
to connect with the farmers in different regions of the country. The mission identified several of these 
value chains where there are clear market opportunities connecting through partnerships with private 
companies linked to the local and export market. Further, the Mission identified that in several value 
chains/products , that there are clear market opportunities where the private sector lead companies 
are willing to engage with target smallholders to produce. In this context, a preliminary analysis has 
been carried out to pre-identify products and related value chains that as of today record higher 
potential for effective implementation of 4P model approach. 
4.       The main criteria of identifying these value chains covered three dimensions: (i) economic; (ii) 
social   and (iii) environmental. The economic criteria considered include: (i). Market potential (Local 
and export) for the products, (ii). Potential increase in income for target producers, (iii) National priority 
given to promote domestic production including promotion of import substitution through local 
production, (iv). Experience and lessons of NADEP in supporting selected value chains, (v). 
Availability of private sector partners (mainly lead companies) interested in partnering with small 
holder farmers, (vi). Potential linkages to growth of other value chains (i.e. Importance of maize 
production and soya bean production for animal feed industry and poultry industry, production of 
vegetable seeds for promotion of other vegetables crops, maize, Big Onions). In addition, the
98 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
selection of potential opportunities of product sectors considered social criteria such as: potential 
involvement of rural   women and youth 
5.       Key value chains for new opportunities identified. The pre-identification of potential value 
chains/ product  for SAP supported 4Ps was first established based on: a list of products that are 
included as value chains already  known to NADEP, some  other small holder farmer  linked product 
sectors known to  SLEDB, sub sectors listed under the agriculture crop production programme of the 
Ministry of Agriculture,  products identified through  data and information collected in the course of 
discussions with the private sector partners and through visits to the field and value chains identified 
through consultation and review of many documents on agriculture  sectors made accessible to the 
Mission. These sub sectors and products were short-listed based on assessments made through 
internal discussions with the NADEP staff and assessment of data on production and markets for 
each product. As a result of this process key sub sectors and products-that could be developed 
eventually to become operational value chains finally identified to be proposed for the SAP 
programme and are classified at two levels of priority; (i) high potential value chains and (ii) second 
level value chains that could be included depending on profitable opportunities emerging from the 
private sector companies and farmers. A list of these value chains with products identified are listed 
with details at the end of the annex, and a summary of it is as follows. 
6. 
The first priority level includes the 10 sub-sectors as listed below: 
(a)      Fruits - Passion fruits, mangoes , pineapples and Papaya 
(b)      Vegetables - Chillies, low country vegetables 
(c)      Protected agriculture crops - Bell pepper , gherkins , cucumber , tomatoes 
(d)      Vegetable Seeds - Approved & traditional vegetables seeds, big onions and maize 
(e)      Dairy - Small holder dairies 
(f)       Grains and pulses - Maize, soya bean 
(g)      Perennial Spices - Pepper, cloves, cinnamon, nutmeg 
(h)      Oil seeds - Sesame 
(i)       Treacle - Kitul and Palmyra 
(j)       Aquaculture - Seaweed 
7.       The second priority list identified contains the following sub sectors: 
(a)      Fisheries - Production of Sea bass for exports 
(b)      Grains and pulses - Green grams, black grams, finger millets ( Kurakkan ) 
(c)      Oil seeds - Ground nuts 
(d)      Organic agriculture products - Spices, red rice etc. 
(e)      Bees Honey - as an additional activity for small holder farmers 
8.       The above selection of value chains in the 1st and 2nd lists is indicative and by no means 
excludes other potential sectors and products which can be identified during programme 
implementation under the 4P model that could be considered as high profitable market opportunities 
that will generate income to small holder farmers and profitable opportunities to partnering companies. 
9.       Agribusiness opportunities identified – production data. The Mission collected preliminary 
data on some of the selected agriculture crops particularly on planned production acreages, expected 
production for 2015-2016. The main products of sub sectors identified have an increasing local 
production carried out by small farmers having high potential for export market or local market. Some 
of these will have potential to supply both the markets. As per the estimates of production for 2015-16, 
the sub sectors such as Mangoes  accounts for a production of more than 128,000 MT, papaya more 
than 64,000 MT, green chillies more than 62,000 MT.   Maize is cultivated on more than 99,000Ha with
99 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
3 to 4 tons per Ha producing more than 390,000 MT. The other products such as exportable low 
country vegetables, spices and sesame seed have a significant production available for exports while 
products that are targeting local markets such as grains, seeds and milk, produced by small farmers 
will be available in commercial quantities. In most of these product sectors access to quality plant 
materials –seeds and   productivity seems to be critical issues. However, with proper consistent 
guidance, state policy to improve local production of quality seeds, assistance and access to inputs 
and finance, potential of these sectors to produce in larger volumes is high in the future, so that 
buyers can focus more on downstream of the value chain activities through processing for local 
market and exports in some products sectors. Therefore, the key strategies of promoting 4P approach 
under the SAP programme will be increasing productivity of the sub sectors identified and integration 
of farmers with downstream partners. The increase of productivity will reduce unit cost and increase 
the volumes for trade and income to farmers while maintaining competitive prices of supplies. The 
summary of the details of area under cultivation production based on 2015-16 data for selected crops 
are given at the end of the annex.
Market potential of agribusiness opportunities identified. The products or value chains that
10. 
are proposed to be supported by the proposed SAP programme are identified considering two 
important market destinations: (a) Global export oriented products    and (b). Local market oriented 
products.  Some of the products identified are already connected to assistance under NADEP 
programme. These product sectors are most of primary production and have the potential to become 
full value chains with eventual value additions carried out by private sector targeting expanded export 
and local markets.
Export market-oriented value chains. In terms of exports, some of the key products and of
11. 
exports are captured as below: 
(a)          Fruits  are  the  highest  potential  produce  by  small  holder  farmers for  exports  identified 
during this Mission. These include mangoes, pineapples, passion fruits and papaya.   In 
2015/16 period, Sri Lanka recorded a production of more than 236,000 MT of these fruits 
from  which  a  part  of  it  was  exported  at  a  value  of  more  than  US$6  million.  Main 
destinations  of  exports  of  fruits  are  EU  and  Middle  East  countries  and  Maldives.  The 
pineapples  represent  the  largest  exportable  commodity  in  the  fruit  sector  followed  by 
mangoes  and  passion  fruits  while  large  companies  such  as  Hayleys,  HJS  Condiments, 
Cargills, and CBL Natural foods Alloy expo Ltd, and Nelna Co.   are among more than 2 
dozens of private companies involved in promoting fruits in the local and export markets. 
However, there  is  still much to  do to  develop the downstream of  the value chain in  fruit 
sector  (collection  in  bulk,  processing,  packing,  and  marketing  –export  and  local)  to 
channel  the  full  benefits  of  the  markets  to  producers.  This  is  one  of  the  aspects  that 
should be looked in to once the SAP programme is in operation. 
(b)      Vegetables produced by small  holders  from  Sri  Lanka  are  increasingly entering  export 
market of    several countries mainly to ethnic and some niche markets. These products 
include green chilies, Jalapeno pepper, low country vegetables- (bitter gourds and snake 
gourds),  protected  agriculture  vegetables  –  (gherkins,  bell  pepper,  cucumber  and 
tomatoes).   More  than  1  million  US$  worth  of  these  products  are  exported  annually  to 
EU, UK, Middle East and to Maldives. Sri Lanka vegetables have a high potential exports 
markets. 
(c)      Spices represent another specific existing and high potential export commodity produced 
by small farmers in  Sri Lanka. This sub sector includes black  pepper, cinnamon, cloves 
and  nutmeg.      In  2015,  perennial  spices  recorded  more  than  US$  630,000  worth  of 
exports in  addition to supplies to  local market. The main  destinations of  spices from  Sri 
Lanka are USA, Japan, and ME countries. 
(d)          The  other  export  oriented  products  produced  by  small  holder  farmers  identified  are 
seaweed,  sesame  seeds  and  organic  products  such  as  red  rice.  Although,  the  local 
production  of  these  products  is  small,  there  is  an  increasing  potential  market.  For 
instance  sea  weeds  have  a  high  potential market  specifically in  Japan.  The  companies
100 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
such  as  CBC,  HJS  condiments  are  market  partners  for  these  products  and  also  for 
organic products. 
Local market-oriented value chains. Several other value chains are recommended to be
12. 
promoted mainly due to its significant local market opportunities available. 
(a)      Dairy mainly milk is a large, small holder production sector responding to an expanding 
local  market  throughout the  country.  Several  established large  companies  are  engaged 
in  collecting  milk  for  processing  in  to  other  products.  About  350,000MT  are  produced 
annually  which  meets  only  a  fraction  of  the  local  market.  Due  to  this  inadequacy,  Sri 
Lanka  imports  more  than  71,000  MT  of  milk  products  at  a  cost  of  US$400  million 
annually.  Large  companies  such  as  CIC,  MILCO,  Cargills,  Nestle,  and  FONTERA  are 
some  of  the  private  sector  partners  already  operating  in  this  sector  with  small  holder 
producers. 
(b)      A  variety  of  local  fruits  are  in  demand  in  the  local  market  specifically  mangoes, 
pineapples  passion  fruits  and  papayas.  These  are  used  in  the  local  fruit  processing 
industry  and  in  the  fresh  fruits  markets.  Cargills,  Hayleys,  Lanka  Canneries,  HJS 
Condiments and  several  other  companies are  partnering  with  local  producers  to  supply 
fresh  fruits  and  processed  fruit  products  to  local  market.  The  fresh  fruit  market  is 
expanding and regular price fluctuations depending on seasons are recorded. 
(c)          Local  production  of  vegetable  seeds,  maize,  onions  and  potatoes  are  far  below  the 
requirements of  the  country. Not  even 75%  of  country requirements of  vegetable seeds 
and  onion  seeds  are  produced  locally.  Practically  total  requirements  of  maize  seeds  – 
more than 1,399 MT are imported.   There are more than 20 local companies involved in 
the seed products and some of them such as Hayleys, CIC, Cargills and Land Mark Pvt 
Ltd  are  already  in  contact  with  NADEP  programme  for  assistance.  Increased  local 
production  of  seeds  in  SriLanka  would  save  an  extensive  amount  of  foreign  exchange 
going  out  and  also  it  could  be  a  great  contributor  to  support  many  agriculture  value 
chains. The Department of  Agriculture have plans to  meet at least   50% of  the  demand 
for quality seeds in the vegetable sector through involvement of private and public sector 
with farmers in the next few years. 
(d)      Maize  is  an  input  to  a  large  value  chain  of  animal  feed  and  local  maize  production in 
2015 was estimated to be around 300,000Mt and for 2015-16 it is estimated to be around 
394,584  MT  for  the  local  market  mainly  for  animal  feed  industry.  The  gap  of  local 
demand is  covered through imports, the costs of  import in  2015  was recorded as  US$ 
24million. Maize is a key input for animal feed industry in Sri Lanka. Therefore, the local 
market    for maize produced   by small farmers is  enormous and many companies such 
as Prima ,  CIC, Plenty food, Nelna Ltd etc. are potential partners  in this sector for small 
farmers . 
(e)       Soya beans are produced locally about 8000 MT. The requirements of soya in form of 
soya meal are about 235,000MT and bulk of it is imported. The programmeed production 
in 2015/16 is 24,000MT cultivated on about 12,800 Ha. It is used as an input for  several 
other  processed  products.  CIC  Ltd,  Plenty  Foods,  Nelna  farm  are  some  of  the  key 
partners of this sector. Main issue of local production is inadequate seeds for planting. 
(f)        Treacle - Kitul and Palmyra offers high potential local market products and opportunities 
for  market  partnership  for  producers  and  private  companies.  In  addition,  Japan  is  a 
potential  destination  for  treacle  if  available  in  terms  of  quantity  and  quality.  Several 
established private companies are interested in this sector. 
(g)      Some varieties of  protected agriculture crops cultivated  such  as  bell  pepper, cherry 
tomatoes  and  cucumber  are  supplied  to  local  up-market  .Sri  Lankan  Air  Lines  is 
significant buyer of these products in addition to the super market chain. An Association - 
Protected  Agriculture  Entrepreneurs  Association  based  in  Kandy  district  has  500  famer 
members  operating  in  production  of  these  products  .It  is  a  sustainable  organization 
generating its own income. 
(h)       Grains  and  pulses  such  as  black  and  green  grams, finger millets have  stable  market 
locally. The local demand for  these products is  not  yet satisfied by the  local production.
101 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
Therefore  some  significant  amounts  of  these  are  imported  to  the  country.  There  are 
private partner companies available to support local farmers in this sector. 
(i)       Bees honey sector is  a  potential income generating activity as  an  additional income to 
farmers  and  this  sector  is  encouraged by  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture.  Sri  Lanka  imports 
bees  honey  at  present  and  it  is  a  sector  that  can  contribute  to  import  substitution 
effectively. Present production of bee honey is about 60 MT and country imports about 
110MT (2015). The Ministry of Agriculture has set up 6 training centers in deferent parts 
of  the  country  ,  and  have  trained  about  200  bee  hives  breeders  and  also  small 
entrepreneurs making bee  boxes  etc.   A  bee  honey  producers  association is  formed in 
Wayamba  Province.    The  local  trade  outlets  mainly  super  market  chains  and  could  be 
potential partners to promote this value chain provided that products are introduced with 
high quality controls, proper packaging and under brand names. 
Geographic distribution and population engaged. The pre-identified product sectors are
13. 
produced in a very wide geographic area covering several provinces of the country. Fruits and 
vegetables have a wide National coverage while some provinces such as Western, North central, 
North Western, Eastern provinces are more prominent. Spices are mainly grown in the Central and 
Uva provinces, Kurunagala and Hambantota districts.  The dairy sector is widely distributed across 
many provinces with large numbers of farms in W P, EP, UVA and NP. The Mission did not have 
access to more details on the population involved in each value chains, but all the sectors account for 
large numbers of target farmer families with significant participation of women and youth. The Annex 2 
provides details of geographic distribution of the products sectors identified for promotion. It may be 
interesting to do a detail investigation to demarcate regional specialities of the products and select 
farmers to support accordingly.
14. 
With regard to population involved, precise data is not available. This can be estimated based
on the extent of the area cultivated in some products .The average farmer has a less than 1 acre of 
land, on this basis, acreage under cultivation can be an indicator to estimate the farmer population 
involved in each product sector. Discussions held with product officers at the Department of 
Agriculture suggested  some figures such as in the maize sector there is about 130,000 farmers , 
vegetable sector accounts for about 600,000 farmers , ground nuts sector could involve about 47,000 
to 50 ,000 farmers etc. These figures are subject for confirmation. Many farmers in Sri Lanka have 
small plots of several products; therefore there can be double counting of the same farmer in several 
products. 
C.   Potential commercial partnerships of the opportunities identified
All the product sectors identified, whether export oriented or local market oriented have the
15. 
potential to attract exporters, processors or traders to ensure markets for small farmer level 
production. There is already number of companies working in some sectors with the facilitation of 
NADEP. The Annex 3, to this report presents an indicative list of existing processors, exporters or 
local marketing companies that could be potential partners in promoting the 10 product sectors or in 
more than 25 value chains linked. The Mission identified, largest numbers of companies operating- 21 
in fruit sector,  16 in seeds  production sector, 9 in Spices sector , 11 in grains and pulses sector,8 in 
organic products ,  6 in oil seeds, 5 each in vegetables, Soya bean, grains and pulses, sesame seeds 
, and treacle sub sectors. Several companies such as CIC, Cargills, Harleys, H.J.S Condiments, CR 
Exports, Plenty Foods, Bio Foods, Expo Lanka, etc. operate in several sectors.
The NADEP programme is currently supporting 17 out-grower programmes in 13 sub sectors,
16. 
all operating with private sector partner enterprises. A list of these 17 out grower programmes is given 
below in the Table 1.  These commercial out grower systems include 13 value chains operating with 6 
commercial marketing companies and work with 14469 farmers directly and 2,426 farmers indirectly 
The Mission noticed that there are several companies contacted NADEP to express interest to start 
new ventures under 4Ps model. Some of these include seed production for local market, fruits 
(mangoes and passion fruits) production, vegetable production for local and export markets, and 
Sesame seeds production. This confirms the interest of private sector to work with small farmer
102 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
producers, promote local products in high potential markets with appropriate assistance and support 
from the public sector. 
Table 1: Outgrower programme progress summary – NADeP 
No.  Programmes started / mobilized 
Partner company 
Beneficiary farmers 
Fruits and Mixed Vegetable – 
Cargills 
Backyard Beekeeping- 
CBL 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Seaweed Cultivation- 
Dairy Development – 
Dairy Development – 
Gherkin Cultivation 
Beekeeping 
Seed onion – 
Jalapeno pepper - 
10 
11 
Passion Fruit - 
Hybrid seeds – 
12  maize production – 
13 
14 
Dairy development – 
Dairy development- 
Hayleys Aqua Agri 
Cargills Dairy 
CIC Dairy 
Sunfrost Pvt. Ltd 
HJS Condiments 
Hayleys Agro Farms 
Sunfrost Pvt. Ltd 
HJS Condiments 
Landmark Agro 
Nelna farms 
Fonterra Brands Ltd 
cello Dairies Ltd 
15  Maize cultivation 
CIC 
Poultry development 
SL Poultry Ltd 
Kitul products 
Lanka eco prod. Ltd 
16 
17 
Total 
Actual 
(direct) 
Indirect 
37 
15 
1564 
262 
158 
254 
10 
10 
10 
8 
15 
15 
50 
20 
241 
600 
879 
2,400 
1,118 
1,600 
255 
150 
152 
94 
400 
2000 
200 
100 
4080   
100   
100   
14,469 
2,426 
D.   Prospects for value chain development approach of agribusiness opportunities 
identified: selected examples 
Vegetable seeds. The availability of high quality vegetable seeds in a country is a critical need
17. 
not only for food production and food security; it is a value chain that leads to supply of inputs to a 
large number of primary produce vegetable markets and for several other value chains that add value 
through processing. In the vegetable seeds sector, there should (i) breeder seed (produced by the 
Department of agriculture exclusively), (ii). basic seeds /registered seeds and (iii) certified seeds or 
Commercial seeds. The commercial or certified seeds are produced by the Department, private 
companies directly or the public and private sector get these produced by farmers.   At present, Sri 
Lanka is depends on imports of a large variety of vegetable hybrid seeds and prospects for local 
production of seeds is yet to be fully harnessed. The trend in the vegetable seeds market is to demand 
hybrid seeds as against OP (Open Pollinated seeds).The access to high quality basic seeds for 
normal crops and for seeds crops at affordable prices and at appropriate time appears to be a key 
issue raised by small holder farmers. To address this situation, the Ministry of agriculture through its 
departments encourages the local production of a variety of vegetable seeds by the private sector and 
directly by farmers in SriLanka.  At present, Sri Lanka produces a little over 20 % of the countries 
vegetable seeds requirements through formal and informal systems.
18. 
The other key crops that need quality seeds   include   big - onions, potatoes, maize. The seeds
for oilseeds varieties (sesame seeds, ground nuts, soya beans) are also important in the small holder 
agriculture activities and major part of it is imported. In case of soya bean only soya bean meal (cake) 
can be imported and seeds have to be found locally.   The Vegetable seeds requirements in the 
country comprise mainly of approved varieties by the Department of Agriculture, and traditional 
vegetable varieties, in addition to big onions, maize, and seed potatoes. There are 18 crops   with 65 
approved varieties of vegetable seeds by the Department of Agriculture. In addition, there are many
103 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
traditional vegetables seeds high in demand by farmers and some companies in the private sector 
produce these with contract growers on their own certifications. 
(i)   Value chain process and players
19. 
The vegetable seeds sector comprise of 3 types of seeds – breeder seeds, basic or registered
seeds, certified /standard /commercial seeds. The value chain of the vegetable   production include: 
use of   basic/ hybrid seeds, or traditional seeds, and other inputs, to produce commercial or certified 
seeds through  contract growing or direct cultivation by private sector dealers or in public sector farms 
and  directly by small farmers, quality inspection, post controls, harvesting and post-harvest 
operations (drying, cleaning sorting, grading  lab testing initial bulk packing) any treatment for 
preservation whenever necessary, quality control, storage, retail and bulk packing and marketing 
related activities are carried out by these stakeholders themselves.
The Department of Agriculture and other public sector farms, private sector basic seed
20. 
suppliers or importers, seed farmers, transporters, traders (specialized agri- inputs dealers or general 
dealers) vegetable farmers is the main players of the chain.  In addition, Extension officers, 
Department of Agriculture, Technical Assistance programmes, banks and MFI s are basically 
facilitators of the vegetable value chain .There are different production models practiced for seed 
production. Out grower contract farming system with private seed dealers, direct state and private 
sector cultivation of seeds, (a proposal to establish a seed production village in Matale district is 
planned where farmers will grow seeds under contract farming),protected net house seed production, 
informal local seed production are some of them. NADEP Programme already supports a private 
sector contract farming model under its ongoing programme. 
(ii)   Markets – for Vegetable seeds
21. 
Vegetable seeds are essentially for the local market though there are small quantities is
exported informally by individuals. As per different data sources consulted,(often unpublished data) 
SriLanka production and imports of vegetables seeds may be around  2,000 to 2,500 MT of seeds 
without counting domestic production of uncertified seeds by farmers for own use.  This amount does 
not include imports and local production of seed potatoes more than 2,500MT annually, 75MT of 
maize and several other oil seeds – sesame, ground nuts etc. It is estimated that from the total 
requirements of vegetable seeds only about 20% (less than 450MT) under formal system offering 
certified products. As per the data established of the year 2013 by the Department of Agriculture, the 
total area went under vegetables in SriLanka was 89,980 Ha and produced an average yield of 
10.5MT/Ha. This production is increasing and demand for seeds will an increasing market.
Some of the certified vegetables seeds: hot pepper, beans, egg plants  cucumber, Okra, big
22. 
onions, long beans, bitter gourd, sectors which accounts for more than 50% of country requirements 
are produced locally. The upcountry vegetables seeds such as carrots, cabbage, cauliflower Knol 
Khol, leeks, lettuce are practically imported to meet country needs and it is unlikely these seeds can 
be produced locally by the small holder farmers . The data available and discussions with private 
sector and farmers confirm that there is a high potential market available in SriLanka for vegetable 
seeds and it is growing and there are opportunities for large numbers of seed farmers to involve and 
generate a better income from  this activity. 
(iii)   Constraints
Several constraints to promote local production of vegetable seeds were detected. Tendency to
23. 
demand hybrid seeds against OP seeds compels to promote increasing quantities of high quality 
hybrids.  Inadequate availability of high quality  basic seeds for production of multiplication/ standard 
seeds, costs of inputs, high costs of imported seeds and high costs of local production, absence of 
buffer stock of basic seeds, imports of seeds, absence of storage facilities, informal production and 
marketing of seeds by small farmers and problems related to water availability and climatic changes 
are more frequently referred as constraints in the seeds production value chain.
104 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
(iv)   Prospects for local production 
24. 
The demand for vegetable seeds including onions, potatoes is far beyond the local production
of seeds. Therefore, there is a large market if local seed production of a variety of seeds encouraged 
accompanied with  necessary technical assistance , favorable policy environment and producer – 
market linkages. The advantages of supporting local seed production through small holder farmers 
include: 
  
  
Meeting of high demand for quality hybrid seeds in a variety of products that now 
depends on costly imported seeds through local produce 
Respond to growing demand in the regions for traditional vegetable seeds that have 
advantages in the context of SriLanka such as demand in specific  geographic  locations 
,and climatic conditions ,  production of high nutritional value vegetables , 
          An additional source of high income for small holder farmers as seed growers  , 
          Access to good seeds to farmers  in time at affordable prices. 
  
Incentive to several seed marketing companies –operating in the country in seed 
production  and to connect with  small farmers
Fruits value chain – mangoes, pineapples, passion fruit and papaya. The major types of
25. 
fruits considered as potential value chains for promotion under 4P programme within the framework of 
SAP identified are mangoes, pineapples, passion fruits and papayas. These are the most prominent 
varieties of fruits that have high potential for exports and local market. All four crops are primarily 
small holder crops except a few large scale commercial plantations. Mangoes and papaya are the 
most potential high value fruit crops in terms of production and pineapple is most potential at in terms 
of export earnings.
Most of the fruits production such as mangoes and papaya are often seen as a house hold
26. 
garden crop without much maintenance and organization except a few plantations in some locations 
the country. Mango production is located mainly in Western, North western, Central, North Eastern 
and Southern Provinces. In Mahaweli areas, mangoes and papaya are produced in all almost all the 
districts and pineapples and passion fruits are grown in some districts. Based on 2015-2016 planed 
production data by the Ministry of Agriculture, production of mangoes expected to be around 128,800 
MT in an area of 33,016Ha, Pineapple production expected to be 39,481 MT in 5,845Ha, passion fruit 
production should be around 3,591MT planted in 1,351Ha and papaya production is expected to be 
around 64,205 MT grown in some 7,299Ha.  Based on the data collected for 2015-2016 , the 
productivity in all these crops appears to be an issue compared with that of best managed plantations 
in some countries.  Mango production is 3 to 4 MT, pineapples 6 to 7 MT, passion fruits 2 to3 MT, and 
papaya about 8 to9 MT per Ha. 
(i)   Value chain process and players
27. 
Generally, the 4 fruits value chains follows a similar pattern from production to market. This
include: supply of plant materials and seeds and other inputs , plant nurseries , producers (small , 
medium and few large holdings), harvesting , collection , delivery to processors , exporters , local 
market dealers wholesale centers and retailers to consumers .The input supplies are generally plant 
materials or seeds  - grafted plants for mangoes, and planting  bags or seeds  for papaya  and 
passion fruit and plant material for pineapples. The  out- grower system works with mango farmers 
basically for maintenance and harvesting  since the mangoes is a long term crop and it take few years 
for the first crop. While papaya, passion fruits and pineapples are crops that are considered as crops 
that can be practiced under out -grower system. The integration of small farmers of fruit crops in the 
value chain is still limited to primary production. There is not much value addition done at primary 
production by fruit farmers except in the cases of farms directly linked to exporters and processors. 
Post-harvest activities from harvesting and integration of farmers in downstream of the chain by fruit 
farmers is practically absent at present in fruit sector.
105 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
28.  The players of the fruits sector include –plant nurseries or plant materials suppliers , producers
of different scales , collectors , harvesters in some cases such as mangoes and pineapples , 
transporters processors mainly large companies (such as Hayleys , Cargills ), whole sale dealers , 
retail dealers and super markets.  hotels and restaurants. In addition, Extension officers, Department 
of Agriculture, TA programmes, banks and MFI s are basically facilitators of the fruit value chain. The 
different production models practiced for fruits sector are generally sub-contracting of harvesting, and 
out grower contract farming system with private companies in passion fruit, papaya and pineapple 
sector.  Some of the companies such as Hayleys, Cargills have approached   NADEP programme 
already work under 4P model in the fruit sector. 
(ii)   Markets for Fruits
Fruit value chain, mainly mangoes, and pineapples and some quantities of papayas are
29. 
marketed as fresh fruits in the local market and some companies use these fruits mainly for 
production of juices and other processed products such as jams, chutneys and pickles. Limited 
quantities of fresh fruits are exported to EU countries , Singapore, Middle east and Maldives .The 
exports values in 2015 was recorded as for Mangoes US $ 379,520, for pineapples US$ 5million, for 
passion fruits US$ 391,160 and for papaya US4 189,300. More than 20 established companies are 
engaged in marketing of these fruits including local super market chains. A list of these companies 
identified is included in the annex 3 of this report. Generally, a larger portion of these fruits produced 
in Sri Lanka finds itself a large market locally. 
(iii)   Constraints
Several constraints to promote local production of fruits were identified. In the mango sector
30. 
lack of proper maintenance , inadequate control on fruit flies and phytosanitary regulations for exports 
, large post-harvest losses,  inadequate local value addition,  access to export markets , poor 
harvesting and post harvesting practices , inadequate flow of information and training  to producers on 
new technologies and value addition are prominent constraints in the mango sector . In case of 
passion fruits and pineapples absence of planting materials and familiarization of best agriculture 
practices are stated. In case of papaya: its vulnerability to different diseases,   difficult  adaptability to 
climatic changes, and marketing issues are noted during the discussions. In terms of exports, all 
these fruits as fresh are subject to serious phytosanitary controls , standards and certification, and 
traceability issues. 
(iv)   Prospects for small producer – 4P market linkages
Prospects for Small holder producer in the fruit sector to generate increasing incomes and
31. 
sustain are in several areas: 
  
  
  
Fruit  sector  is  a  high  potential  local  and  export  market  oriented  product  as  even  fresh 
fruits  if  the  proper  conditions and  requirements are  maintained. This  is  a  stable  income 
opportunity  for  small  farmers  through  guaranteed  market  though  companies  in  the 
downstream of the chain. 
The market for value added products in the country is not yet fully harnessed. In addition 
to fresh exports and  value addition to fresh products through processing, products such 
as mangoes and pineapples have large exports markets as dried products. 
The  fruits  varieties  discussed  in  this  report  are  available  throughout  the  country  and 
market is  extensive. Therefore ,  if   facilities are made available and  including access to 
training ,  information and other BDS services including financial access , the fruit sector 
offers an attractive 4P model for private sector to engage in a much sustainable manner 
interested.
of 
for 
established 
companies 
number 
which 
there 
are 
32. 
Perennial spices value chain. The spices sector business opportunities recommended for
SAP programme includes mainly pepper, cloves, cinnamon and nutmeg. These represent the high 
value market oriented products linked to small holders.
106 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
33.  Cinnamon value chain. Cinnamon of Sri Lanka is traditionally known as one of the world best
spice products in the spices market. It is cultivated in Southern, Western provinces, Ratnapura district 
in Sri Lanka and few other places in the Central Province. As per the data available from the 
Department of Minor Exports Crops and   the Ministry of Agriculture, there is around 33,000 Ha under 
cinnamon cultivation producing around 18,000 MT annually. Cinnamon is an ingredient regularly used 
in food preparations in many countries and it is considered as a major non-traditional export crop in 
Sri Lanka.
34. 
Cinnamon is commercialized in several forms. These include  the products such as bark of
different grades, cut cinnamon, cinnamon leaf oil, cinnamon bark oil,  leaves, cinnamon powder, and a 
few value added products – cinnamon paste, etc. It is an organic produce used in food and beverage 
industry, cosmetics, and pharmaceutical industry.  The export market for cinnamon is in the increase. 
The advantages of cinnamon are that Sri Lankan cinnamon is known for its specific qualities, 
especially for its low coumarin content, and for its medicinal values. It can be grown in different zones, 
and it can be introduced to gravelly soil. The country has developed the technical knowhow to 
promote this industry over the years and there is considerable research and extension work carried 
out and it is also an important income source to small holders in the growing regions. More than 90% 
of the plantations are less than 1 Ha.
Cinnamon production is estimated to be around 20,000 MT, and exports is around 14,000 MT
35. 
annually and the value of exports in 2015 reported to be around US $15million. The exports are 
mainly to Mexico, USA, Peru, Colombia, and Ecuador.
36. 
The key value chain players in the cinnamon industry are producers, processors (peelers),
village level collectors, whole sale dealers, processors, traders, exporters. The facilitators in this 
product sector include Export Agriculture Department, Export Development Board –EDB, Commerce 
Department   and some private sector organizations.
Some of the main constraints of the sector are reported as low production, low productivity, and
37. 
low investments by small holders and slow progress on quality improvement and value addition. 
Therefore, the key areas of interventions to support this value chain is to encourage small holders to 
improve productivity and make a better income, promote private sector to invest in processing value 
added products and establishment of central processing centers so that small holders can be 
connected, and linked with exporters, and assist in quality improvement, value addition, certification 
through linking small holder farmer market to export or local buyer.
Nutmeg, clove and pepper value chains. Nutmeg is a tropical spice tree crop ( My r is t ic a 
38. 
 fr agr ans  ), originally from Indonesia and grown in many Asian countries. It is a home garden tree 
crop of small holder grown mainly by the rural population in Central province, in Kurunegala and 
Kegalle districts in Sri Lanka. It has two main spice products – the nutmeg seed and the mace which 
is the dried "lacy" reddish covering of the seed marketed separately.  Nutmeg is used as a spice in 
many countries in different food preparations and has a demand in the local and export markets.  
Nutmeg is usually used in powdered form in culinary and also several other commercial products 
including essential oils and extracted oleoresins. The local production is estimated around 1500 MT 
scattered cultivation in about 1020Ha in the few provinces this crop is grown.
39. 
Cloves is also another spice tree crop (Syzygium aromaticum) grown virtually in the same
areas where Nutmeg is grown as home garden crop in the rural areas. Cloves are the unopened pink 
flower buds of the clove tree. The buds are picked by hand when they are dried until they turn brown. . 
This product is also used as a spice in deferent food preparations in different countries .In addition, 
cloves is used to produce essential oils. Cloves is important  in Sri Lanka specifically as a non- 
traditional export tree crop .The production is estimated to be around 8,000 to 9,000MT grown over an 
area of about 7,000Ha.
The key issues in both products are recorded as low production, low productivity, and small size
40. 
of production by each small holder, and absence of organized producer groups. However, these 
product sectors have a growing market and demand for exports with stable prices for the producers.
107 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
41.  Pepper, commonly known as black paper (Piper Nigrum) cultivated for its fruit and dried to be
used as a spice and seasoning. It is a high value small holder spice crop in almost similar regions 
where nutmeg and cloves are grown in Central, Sabaragamuwa and Wayamba Provinces. The 
pepper products comprise of  – black pepper, white pepper, pepper oil, pepper in brine , pepper 
oleoresin, crushed pepper, pepper powder, pepper sauce, etc. . Pepper can start production in a 
shorter period less than 3 years than those of nutmeg and cloves. It is a high value crop grown in 
many countries in Asia for local consumption and exports. Vietnam is the world largest producer and 
exporter of black pepper.
Pepper  could be cultivated in the wet and intermediate zones of the country, elevation up to
42. 
900 meters and cropping system is carried out differently to those of Nutmeg and cloves. Generally 
harvesting is done manually mainly by men and post -harvest drying and other operations are carried 
out by women.  Sri Lankan pepper quality is considered high in piper energy, and oil content. Sri 
Lanka produces more than 44,000 MT of pepper and exports a larger portion, more than 35,000MT. 
World demand for pepper is about 350,000 MT. From Sri Lanka, pepper is exported to India, USA EU 
countries and to Pakistan .The value of exports in 2015 is estimated to be around US$144 million. 
Pepper is also considered as a potential high income crop to small holders and it is recommended as 
a crop that can, earn an average gross income / acre more than Rs. 2,250,000 per season if 
managed properly. 
(i)   Key players
All three products are considered as a small holder organic crops and the players of the value
43. 
chain are almost the same. This includes producers, village level collectors, traders, wholesale 
dealers, processors, local markets and exporters.  The product sectors fall in to minor export crop 
products and are promoted also by the same facilitators of other spices, the Department of Minor 
Exports,   EDB and traders associations. The main advantages of promoting these crops are basically 
a smallholder crops. grown as an additional income to farmers, considered as an environmentally 
friendly crop, organic by default , and less input costs. It is considered as an additional income crop 
for small holder farmers. In addition, these crops could be promoted for further value addition locally 
and also a source of income for women who get involved mainly in post-harvest operations. 
(ii)   Prospects for local production and 4Ps
44. 
The perennial spice sector is a high potential export oriented product which can easily be
qualified as organic products. These sectors are subject for less price fluctuations and could be 
considered as stable income opportunity for small farmers. In addition, the market for value added 
products in the country is not yet fully developed. Therefore, focus on organic value added products of 
spices and integration of producers and their associations in the upstream of the value chain – could 
generate more income to producers. There are some small holders in the Central Province who have 
organized in to an association and have started some post-harvest operations such as drying using 
electric dryers, sorting and grading etc. 
E.   Risks
Some of the risks identified that will adverse impact the successful implementation of this 4P
45. 
model in supporting small holder operations in the product sectors selected are of several fold: 
(a)      High cost of production at farm level and decreasing profits margins to farmers and drop 
of competitiveness to buying firms which will affect also overall market of the country for 
the products. 
(b)          Overall  production  and  price  fluctuations  due  to  climate  changes,  non-availability  of 
planting materials and  appropriate extension support 
(c)       Non  -compliance  of  supply  agreements   entered  in  to  by  farmers  with   private  sector 
market partners 
(d)      Non-Conformity on issues of export conditions by  small farmers
108 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
46.  Many farmers complained that, the prices of inputs including seeds in these products are
continuously increasing and their profit margins were not increasing proportionately. This creates a 
situation of frustration of participating farmers and organisations to continue to work under this model. 
Moreover, the inputs are generally supplied by the buying company and costs are deducted on sales. 
Under this situation, farmers have no knowledge or information on real prices of inputs and have no 
control over it.
Under the programme, it is expected that the farmers to have an understanding of primary
47. 
production supplies to companies with whom they entered in to contract. This agreement could be 
formal or a simple understanding informally which the case often is.  It is not always guaranteed, 
whether the contracts are formal or informal, the farmers will honour the agreements to sell their 
products to agreed buying partner. It may depend also on the prospects for profits for participating 
farmers. The farmers may sell the production where they can get better prices.
Under this type programmes such as 4P model based SAP programme; the understanding is
48. 
that some of the products are identified as supplies for exports. The producers’ role does not go 
beyond the production in supplying to exporters.  Importing countries EU and Middle East, and Asian 
countries, USA are increasingly request high quality standards, certifications, traceability of the 
products supplied from the producer level-particularly from fresh products exported. Complying with 
these norms becomes increasingly costly and many farmers are not familiar of these. This situation 
could impact negatively on application of 4P model and prices of products.
Their vulnerability of small farmers to climatic changes, sustainability of farmer organisations ,
49. 
capacity of farmers to adapt to new market conditions,  access to finance etc., are also some of other 
risks that could have negative impact in applying 4P model with small holder farmers. These issues 
are expected to look into by other technical sections of the programme report.
The above mentioned risks of economic nature can be mitigated by way of organising farmers
50. 
for bulk buying of inputs at reduced prices with the assistance of the private sector buyer, and 
supporting the farmers to increase productivity and to focus on increasing supplies in terms of 
volumes in order to reduce unit cost and increase profits on volumes rather than depending on unit 
sales prices. Access to good quality inputs at reasonable costs should be vital aspect arranged by the 
collaborating partner enterprises.
51. 
With regard to possible non- compliance of contracts could happen when the farmers have
better prices in the market or with other competitors. This risk to buyers is observed in many countries 
on which the buyers have not much of control. Generally, there are no signed contracts between 
farmers and buying companies, and activities carried out on trust and mutual agreements. This is a 
serious challenge to buyers and that should be managed by private sector partners by way of 
establishing confidence with producers through establishing competitive market prices and facilitating 
farmers to access services more aggressively than other players in the field.  Encouraging private 
partners to promote engagement of participating farmers, integrating them in the activities connected 
to downstream of the value chain to play an increasing role in the value chain by way of involving 
them in post-harvest value addition –such as cleaning, grading, and primary packaging of products at 
farm level and offering them an incentive remuneration are options to consider to enhance buyer – 
producer trust and commitments. These types of incentives are practiced in other countries to build 
farmer buyer trust.
Regarding the conformity of export conditions by farmers, whenever necessary, specific
52. 
assistance programme should be clearly included in the package and agreements, on facilitating 
training, quality improvements and certifications required.  This assistance should be channelled 
through the participating companies or in collaboration with other private sector facilitating institutions. 
F.   Sustainability
The sustainability of the promotional mechanisms that will be put in place to promote 4P
53. 
models by the programme with farmers and private sector partners will largely depend on the
109 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
consistent income to participating farmers and consistent supplies to participating companies in 
required quantities at quality and competitive prices and the sustainability of the institutional 
mechanisms put in place. Two main producers – buyer models are operating at present within the 4P 
models: (i) Buying companies work directly with individual farmers (dairy sector with Cargills) and (ii) 
buying companies work with collective groups or with farmer organisations.
54. 
The first model is widely applied with more than 2,000 farmers under the Cargills programme.
Extension systems, collecting centres are established in many regions of the country and individual 
agreements are signed with the company by farmers. Both parties receive a competitive price and 
system, established collecting centres and extension services to farmers seems to continue. There is 
also strict competition with 3 - 4 other buying companies in dairy sector and all companies try to 
maintain attractive services and prices to farmers. In addition, these companies are promoting 
downstream linkages of the value chain – collecting, processing, marketing branded products through 
the super market chains or through retail shops .Hence, sustainability of this model seems to be 
promising.
55. 
The second model working with farmer groups and organisations seems to be the model
operating with many companies in other product sectors. This is because; the companies need large 
quantities of supplies at competitive prices. This can work with economies of scale if supplied 
collectively. Therefore the sustainability of this system works as long as sustainability of FOs or 
groups are maintained and able to ensure consistent supplies to buyers and buyers are able to 
provide services. To achieve this objective, the participating farmer organisations should be assisted 
and supported to increase their capacity to provide member services delivery and their ability to 
manage and operate the FOs as business or entrepreneurial ventures starting from the first year. The 
FOs with the assistance of private sector companies and other facilitators (TA Programmes, Public 
Sector)  should be able establish a road map outlining a clear sustainability interventions action plan 
from the inception accompanied with appropriate training programs to famer leaders. 
G.   Recommendations for follow-up
56. 
The present analysis of identifying market driven opportunities in selected product sectors
operating or potential for small holder farmers and possible application of 4Ps model is a preliminary 
analysis. In this context, the following recommendations are suggested: 
(a)          Deepen  the  analysis  of  each  product  sector  using  value  chain  approach  and  identify 
options  where  the  small  holder  producers  could  go  beyond  the  primary  production 
and  integrate  themselves  further  in  to  downstream  activities  of  the  value  chain 
where links between producer and buying companies could be strengthened and make it 
more  sustainable.  As  an  example,  the  producers  could  work  with  the  collaborating 
companies  to  carry  out  certain  post-  harvest  operations  –  such  as  cleaning,  grading, 
drying, sorting and bulk packing in the field or at the collecting centres established. 
(b)      Using the above analysis , in case of export oriented crops producing farmers with links 
to  exporters  and  processors,  identify      strategic  interventions  through  which  the 
collaborating private sector partner could assist  small holders to integrate in to export 
production  system  –  accessing  appropriate    certifications  (Global  Gap  ,  Organic  ) 
where ever required, for cultivation of exportable varieties, use of improved know- how in 
cultivation ,   training in   proper record keeping systems   and   maintaining  phytosanitary 
standards  .  This  would  have  a  positive  impact  on  improving  collaborative  relationship 
under  4P  model  to  strengthen  FOS,  increase  income  to  farmers,  quality  of  supplies, 
competitiveness  at  farmer  level  and  formalizing  small  holder  businesses  to  progress 
towards sustainability. 
(c)      Identify the  best  4Ps models already in  in  operation –Out grower systems to   replicate 
or promote sustainable  models, based on a comprehensive  analysis of   those – Ex. 
4P model of  a  private   company   collaborating with  individual farmers directly   (case of 
Cargills  working  with  individual  dairy  farmers  )  vs  collaboration  with  groups  or    FOs  to 
supply the produce using    out- grower contact system , models of    sustainable farmers
110 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
organisations   linked   to   end   market   companies   –   case   of   Protected   Agricultural 
Entrepreneurs Association (PAEA) operating from Central Province. 
Table 2: Persons and institutions contacted during the mission: 
Contact details 
Remarks 
addiselsecagritec@agrimin.gov.lk 
+ 0714455690 
-rnandasiri@yahoo.com 
Tel. 077512013 
Tel. 0715347267 
Email ,weerasekaradoa@gmail.com 
Product contact – 
vegetables seeds 
Product officer Maize 
Tel. 0775104040 
Email. dlathanet@gmail.com 
Nishantha.weerakoon.doasl@gmail.co  Product officer Ground nuts 
Product officer bee keeping 
jeevani@edb.lk 
Tel. 011 2300675 
Keerthi.jayakodyarachchi@gmail.com 
Tel. 0714055019 
- 
- 
Person contacted 
-designation 
Dr H.M.S.Heenkenda 
Additional Secretary 
R.M.Nandasiri –Additional 
Director General 
Indika Weerasekara 
Deputy Director 
Buddhika Abeysinghe 
_Assistant Director 
Mrs A.M.D.  Atapattu 
W.R.E.M.S. Weerakone 
Assistant director 
Jeevani Siriwardana  DG 
Keerthi Jayakodyarachchi 
GM 
Programme director and 
programmes officers 
Members of Cargills 
Supported by Nelna Co Ltd 
Supported by Land mark co 
Kandy 
- 
- 
# 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
Institution 
Contacted 
Ministry Of 
Agriculture 
Department of 
Agriculture 
SriLanka Export 
development Board 
SriLanka Cashew 
Corporation 
Staff of NADEP 
PMU 
Visit to Dairy 
farmers – 
Galgamuwa 
Maize farmers – 
Anuradhapura 
Chillies farmers 
Anuradhapura 
Protected 
agriculture 
entrepreneurs 
society -PAES 
Land Mark Agro 
Seeds 
Krushi Sewa 
Piyasa –Agrolinks 
Co 
Hayleys PVT Ltd 
Eden Fresh Pro- 
Pac 
Vegiland Exporters 
Pvt.Ltd 
Nelna Farms 
Chandana j.Premaratnne 
Managing partner 
Jayasiri Premaratne 
agrolinks@sltnet.lk 
Tel.0776998440 
agrolinks@sltnet.lk 
Tel.0777849121 
Rizvi Zaheed  Executive 
Director 
Channa Madawela  Chief 
Operating Officer 
K.T. Ainkaran-MD 
W.E.G.E. Nanayakkara –MD 
16 
TJC Mango 
-Suresh Ellawela 
Director 
Dairy farm operating  with 
Cargills 
- 
Chilli seeds producers 
500 member farmer group 
Seed company 
Seed Co-Land Mark 
Exporter , Agribusiness Co. 
Agribusiness Co 
Exporters agro Products 
Mango producing Co 
Mango producer –exporter 
Rizvi.zaheed@halyeys.com 
Tel,0777355459 
channa@nidro-lanka.lk 
Tel. 077815657 
a_ainkaran@yahoo.com 
Tel.0773405974 
md@nelna.lk 
Tel. 0777687535 
sales@tjcmango.com 
111 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
Table 3: Value chains identified linked to smallholder farmers - List 162
# 
Product    Sector/Value 
Chain 
Supply 
Chain 
links      to 
other 
markets 
Local 
production 
areas/ 
Provinces/ 
Districts 
1. 
Fruits 
Mango – Fresh & dried 
(Estimates 2015/16) 
Processed 
& fresh 
WP/NWP/SP/ 
CP/NEP/NCP 
Estimated     Local 
Production 2015 
Market Potential 
Export Destinations 
Imports if any 
Women/ 
Youth 
involvement 
Ha. 
MT.s 
Local 
market 
Exports 
(US$) 
VOL. 
(MT.s) 
Value 
(US$) 
33,016 
128,749 
High 
379,520  Germany/Switzerland/ 
NO 
NO 
UAE/Singapore/ 
Netherlands 
Pineapple 
(Estimates 2015/16) 
Processed 
& fresh 
WP/NWP/SP/ 
NEP/NCP 
5,849 
39,481 
High 
5,060,320  Germany/UAE/France/ 
Australia 
NO 
NO 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Passion fruits (Estimates 
2015/16) 
Processed 
& fresh 
WP/NWP/SP/ 
NEP/NCP 
Papaya 
(Estimates 2015/16) 
Vegetables 
Green Chili 
Bitter Gourd 
Snake Gourd 
Fresh 
Processed 
& fresh 
Potential 
exports 
WP/NWP/SP/ 
CP/NEP/NCP 
WP/NWP/SP/ 
NEP/NCP 
CP/NEP/NCP 
Protected Agriculture Vegetables 
Bell Pepper 
Gherkins 
Cucumber 
Tomato 
Increasing 
local 
market- 
Potential 
export 
Vegetable seeds63
Vegetable            seeds 
excluding potatoes 
Big Onion seeds 
Maize 
Several 
vegetable 
sectors 
Big     Onion 
production 
Local Maize 
production 
1,351 
3,591 
high 
396,160  UAE 
NO 
NO 
High   demand   for   local 
fruit juice industry 
7,299 
64,205 
High 
189,300  Germany/UAE/ 
Qatar 
NO 
NO 
13,029 
62,866 
High 
946,565  Spain/Kuwait/UAE/Maldiv 
NO 
4,259 
43,508 
High 
CP/NEP/NCP 
2,718 
44,053 
High 
192,959 
es 
UAE/Kuwait/UK/German 
y/France/Maldives 
UAE/Kuwait/UK/German 
y/France/Maldives 
WP/CP/NCP 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1,976 
- 
- 
- 
High 
Limited 
High 
High 
Limited 
High 
-- 
Limited 
UAE/Kuwait/UK/German 
y/France/Maldives 
CP/NEP/NCP 
- 
430.2 
High 
CP/NCP 
- 
30 
High 
Some   small 
scale 
exports 
20 
CP/NEP/NCP 
75 
- 
High 
- 
-+Local  informal  exports 
in small quantities 
1666 
Local only 
Local    for    other    value 
chains-Feed industry 
17.8 
1,399.5 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
- 
= 
62  Source: - Different sources – EDB, Ministry of Agriculture, NADEP etc.  Some figures are estimated and approximated. 
63  Data taken from Note by Land Mark Company
113 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10 
Dairy 
Dairy 
Perennial Spices 
Pepper 
Cloves 
Cinnamon 
Nutmeg 
Grains/Pulses 
Maize 
(Estimates 2015/16) 
Soya Bean 
Oil Seeds 
Sesame Seeds 
(Estimates 2015/16) 
Treacle 
Kitul/Palmyra 
Aquaculture 
Sea weed 
Processing 
for       value 
addition 
CP/UP/ 
Kurunegala/ 
Ratanapura/ 
Hambantota 
CP/Kurunegala 
/Kegalle 
WP/CP/NWP/ 
Ratnapura 
CP/Kurunegala 
/Kegalle 
Animal  feed 
VC 
Processed 
products 
WP/UP/EP/ 
NCP 
NEP/NCP/ 
Sabaragamuw 
a 
All regions 
- 
High 
- 
Local 
350,000 
44,450 
Limited 
35,458 
144,000,000 
India/Germany/Pakistan/ 
USA 
71,000 
400 
Million 
NO 
NO 
7,178 
32,340 
8,100 
18,000 
Limited 
Limited 
48,000 
1,31,000,00 
0 
India/Germany/Pakistan/ 
USA/Saudi Arabia 
Mexico/USA/Peru/ 
Colombia/Ecuador 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
1,020 
Limited 
India/Vietnam/UAE 
NO 
NO 
1,500 
15,000,000 
XX 
Maldives/ Norway 
232,000  NA 
99,841 
12,810   
392.259 
(400,000) 
24,275 
High 
NA 
143,783 
78 
Million 
- 
- 
- 
NCP/CP/EP/ 
20,553 
19,393 
Limited  NA 
Sweets 
industry 
Sweets 
industry 
WP/CP/SP/N 
P 
NP/EP 
NA 
NA 
high 
245 
Exports 
Japan 
X 
114 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
Table 4: Identification of value chains and private sector partners 
Private companies – marketing partners 
Type of partner Private companies 
 G
r
o
w
e
r
M
a
r
k
e
t
 R
e
t
a
i
l
/
S
u
p
e
r
 P
r
o
c
e
s
s
o
r
 E
x
p
o
r
t
e
r
 S
m
a
l
l
C
o
.
i
 M
e
d
u
m
C
o
.
Product 
Sector/   Value 
Chain 
# 
# 
01 
Fruits 
Mangoes 
Pineapple 
Passion fruits 
Papaya 
T JC Mango 
H J S CONDIMENTS LTD 
GLOBAL TRADING & MARKETING PVT 
NELNA 
LANKA CANNERIES LTD 
AGRI BIO TECH PVT LTD 
SMAK 
FOODCITY Supper Market, Cargills 
ARPICO SUPER MARKET 
LAUGF SUPER MARKET 
DOLE LANKA PVT LTD 
C R EXPORTS PVT LTD 
MUBARAK TRADING CO 
EXPOLANKA PVT LTD 
X 
X 
X 
C B L NATURAL FOODS PVT LTD 
EASTERN & ALLIED AGENCIES LTD 
NIDRO SUPPLY PVT LTD 
PULSES SPLITTING & PROCE INDUST P L 
TARGET AGRICULTURE PVT LTD 
VEGILAND EXPORTERS PVT LTD 
X 
ISHANA EXPORTS PVT LTD 
CONSOLIDATED BUSINESS SYSTEMS PT 
ALOY EXPO PVT LTD 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 L
a
r
g
e
C
o
.
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
L
a
r
g
e
C
o
.
X 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
i
 M
e
d
u
m
C
o
.
X 
x 
X 
x 
x 
x 
x 
X 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
X( 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
X 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
02. 
Vegetables 
 G
r
o
w
e
r
 S
u
p
e
r
M
a
r
k
e
t
Green Chili 
C R EXPORTS PVT LTD 
Bitter Gourd 
Snake Gourd 
EXPOLANKA PVT LTD 
EASTERN & ALLIED AGENCIES LTD 
INTERNATIONAL FOODSTUFF COMPANY 
x 
AGRI BIO TECH PVT LTD 
P
r
o
c
e
s
s
o
r
 E
x
p
o
r
t
e
r
 S
m
a
l
l
C
o
.
X 
x 
x 
x 
x 
03 
Protected Agriculture vegetables  (Potential for  small farmers with higher income groups) 
Bell Pepper 
H J S CONDIMENTS LTD 
x 
x 
X 
115 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
G
r
o
w
e
r
P
r
o
c
e
s
s
o
r
S
u
p
e
r
M
a
r
k
e
t
e
r
E
x
p
o
r
t
e
r
/
i
m
p
o
r
t
S
m
a
l
l
C
o
i
M
e
d
u
m
C
o
L
a
r
g
e
C
o
116 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
07. 
OIL SEEDS 
Sesame 
Seeds 
(2015/16 
E1stimates) 
PRIMA CEYLON LTD, 
CEYLON GRAIN ELEVATORS 
GOLD COIN FEEDS 
PUSESELLA FARM PVT LTD 
CIC FEEDS, , 
NELNA FARM PVT LTD 
PLENTY FOODS PVT LTD, 
PRIMA CEYLON LTD, 
CEYLON GRAIN ELEVATORS 
GOLD COIN FEEDS 
PUSESELLA FARM PVT LTD 
08 
Perennial Spices 
Pepper 
Clove 
Cinnamon 
Nutmeg 
EXPOLANKA PVT LTD 
BIO EXTRACTS 
C B L NATURAL FOODS PVT LTD 
BIO FOODS 
ADAMEXPO 
RENUKA AGRO EXPORTS LTD 
Eos Organic 
HDDES Pvt 
09 
09 
Treacle 
Kitul/Palmyra 
EXPOLANKA PVT LTD 
INTERNATIONAL FOODSTUFF COMPANY 
AGRI BIO TECH PVT LTD 
LAUGF SUPER MARKET 
ARPICO SUPER MARKET/ 
FOODCITY/ 
10 
Aquaculture/ fisheries 
Sea Weeds 
H J S CONDIMENTS LTD / 
VELANE FISHERIES CORPORATION- JAFFNA 
X 
X 
X 
x 
X 
X 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
X   
X   
X   
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
x 
x 
117 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
Table 5: Estimates of productivity of selected crops and dairy 
Production Areas /districts 
# 
Product Sector/ 
Value Chain 
1  Fruits 
Mangoes 
National 
Pineapples 
21 districts excluding Mannar, Vauniya, Kilinochchi, 
Baticaloa, Trinco. 
Passion fruits 
20 Districts excluding Anuradhapura, Trinco, Baticaloa, 
Kilinochchi, Mannar, Jaffna 
Papaya 
National 
2  Vegetables 
Green Chilies 
National 
Bitter Gourd, 
Snake gourd 
National 
National 
3  Protected  agriculture vegetables Range 
Estimated production for 
2015-2016 Ministry od agri 
Production 
Est.Ha 
Ha 
MT 
MT 
33,016 
5,845 
1351 
7299 
13,029 
4,259 
2,718 
128,749 
3 to 4 
39481 
6 to 7 
3591 
2 to 3 
64205 
8 to 9 
62,866 
4 to 5 
43,508 
10 to11 
44,053 
16 to 17 
Matale, Nuwaraeliya, Ampara, Trinco, Kurunagala, 
Puttlam, Anuradhapura, Monaragala, Ratnapura, 
Mahaweli H area 
194 
1,976 
Bell Pepper 
Gherkins 
Cucumber / 
cherry tomatoes 
4  Seeds 
Vegetable seeds 
Nuwera eliya , Kandy , Matele WP , Anuradhapura, 
Vauniya ,WP 
Potatoes 
Nuwera Eliya 
Big onion Seeds 
CP , NCP 
5  Grains, Pulses 
418 
500 
30 
Maize 
23 Districts, Excluding Colombo, Kaluthara, Galle, 
99,841 
394,584 
3 to 4 
Green grams 
23 Districts, Excluding Colombo, Gampaha, Kaluthara, 
11,346 
15,055 
1 to 2 
Black Gramm 
14 districts 
Kurakkan – 
Finger millets 
19 Districts 
Soya Bean 
14 Districts 
6  Oil Seeds 
Sesame seeds 
NCP.NPEP, Hambantota District 
Ground nuts 
CP, Wayamba , NCP 
7  Perennial spices 
Pepper 
Cloves 
Nutmeg 
CP, Ratnapura , Hambantota , Kurunagala 
Central province CP, Kegalla 
CP Central province CP, Kegalla ,Kurunagala 
Cinnamon 
SP.WP, Ratnapura 
8  Bee-keeping 
National 
118 
12,305 
5,557 
12,810 
20,553 
18,623 
44,450 
7,178 
33,340 
32,340 
NA 
11,900 
6,063 
< 1 
1 
24,275 
1 to 2 
19,393 
< 1 
233,016 
12 to 13 
35,458 
< 1 
8,100 
1 to 2 
18,000 
18,000 
NA 
< 1 
<1 
NA 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
9  Treacle (Kitul) 
CP, SP 
10 
Dairy 
National - mainly SP, NCP, Wayamba and CP 
NA 
29,5481 
Registered 
cattle farms 
NA 
350,000 
NA 
NA 
119 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
Table 6: Seed Production and Requirement - Estimates 
Products 
Crop 
Beans 
Beet 
Cucumber 
Egg plant 
hot pepper 
LUFA 
OKRA 
BIG ONION 
Red onion 
Pumpkin 
Imports 
Local production 
quantity kg  1kg price USD  total amount USD  quantity 
1kg price USD  total  Value 
US$ 
Total needs 
Imports +local Prod 
KG 
% Local 
production 
381,500.00 
275,000.00 
5.40 
1,485,000.00 
384,000.00 
71.61% 
109,000.00 
25,486.00 
2,417.00 
378.00 
2,381.00 
4,691.00 
10,411.00 
17,800.00 
4,000.00 
9,107.00 
3.50 
8.00 
100.00 
100.00 
270.00 
100.00 
15.00 
12.00 
20.00 
90.00 
7.00 
20.00 
203,888.00 
241,700.00 
1,500.00 
37,800.00 
1,500.00 
642,870.00 
12,000.00 
469,100.00 
2,500.00 
156,165.00 
18,000.00 
213,600.00 
30,000.00 
80,000.00 
819,630.00 
600.00 
74,424.00 
2,000.00 
67,240.00 
- 
12.00 
12.00 
5.50 
16.00 
3.00 
67.00 
30.00 
6.50 
- 
18,000.00 
18,000.00 
66,000.00 
40,000.00 
54,000.00 
201,000.00 
18,000.00 
13,000.00 
- 
3,917.00 
1,878.00 
14,381.00 
35,411.00 
47,800.00 
9,707.00 
12,632.00 
- 
Raddish( Chinese) 
10,632.00 
Squash(winter Squash) 
3,362.00 
Tomato 
1,210.00 
540.00 
653,400.00 
200.00 
67.00 
1,340.00 
1,410.00 
water Convoles 
yard long beans 
Watermelon 
904.00 
7,384.00 
10,416.00 
5.00 
10.00 
90.00 
4,520.00 
- 
73,840.00 
25,000.00 
937,440.00 
200.00 
- 
4.70 
13.00 
- 
117,500.00 
2,660.00 
maize (hybrid corn) 
1,399,552.00 
3.00 
4,198,656.00 
75,000.00   
better gourd 
2,925.00 
90.00 
263,250.00 
4,500.00 
16.00 
72,000.00 
Papaya 
Carrot 
42.00 
2,030.00 
85,260.00 
50.00 
40,782.00 
13.00 
530,166.00 
- 
- 
32,384.00 
10,616.00 
1,474,552.00 
7,425.00 
92.00 
40,782.00 
120 
38.29% 
79.87% 
83.44% 
50.83% 
62.76% 
6.18% 
15.83% 
0.00% 
14.18% 
0.00% 
77.20% 
1.88% 
5.09% 
60.61% 
54.35% 
0.00% 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:    Detailed programme description 
Cabbage 
cauliflower 
Chinese kale 
KNOL KHOL 
LEEKS 
Lettuce 
3,907.00 
237.00 
148.00 
2,947.00 
12,358.00 
803.00 
240.00 
240.00 
10.00 
10.00 
20.00 
15.00 
937,680.00 
56,880.00 
1,480.00 
29,470.00 
247,160.00 
12,045.00 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
3,907.00 
237.00 
148.00 
2,947.00 
12,358.00 
803.00 
0.00% 
0.00% 
0.00% 
0.00% 
0.00% 
0.00% 
Sub Total Vegetables  1,683,280.00  
11,419,164.00 
448,050.00   
2,131,330.00 
21.02% 
121 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Appendix 5:   Institutional aspects and implementation 
arrangements 
A.   Organizational framework 
1.       In general, SAP will largely replicate the institutional and implementation structure of NADeP. 
2.       Executing  and  key  agencies.  The  executing  agency  or  lead  programme  agency  (LPA)  for 
SAP  is  the  Presidential Secretariat, which  by  virtue  of  its  high-level status,  is  best  placed  to  ensure 
effective  mobilisation  and  coordination  amongst  the  various  public  agencies  (including  the  Central 
Bank) and  with  private sector partners (including financial institutions, companies, associations, etc.) 
who  either  directly have  implementation responsibilities, or  a  supporting role  (e.g.  research, training, 
mobilisation  of  farmer  organizations,  complementary  extension  services,  etc.).  In  support  of  farmer 
organizations and 4Ps covering a range of  value chains/ sub-sectors, the key agencies implicated in 
the  programme  include: 
the  Mahaweli  Authority  (especially  its  well-developed  network  and 
organizational  structure);  Ministry  of  Agriculture;  Department  of  Export  Agriculture;  Department  of 
Agriculture; and Exports Development Board. 
3.       A  National  Steering  Committee  (NSC)  will  provide  programme  oversight  and  direction, 
chaired by  the  Secretary to  the  President or  his  representative. The  SAP NSC  will  be  based on  the 
NSC for  NALeP,  with  minor adjustments made on  one hand to  allow for  adequate representation by 
non-government programme stakeholders, while on the other to ensure that the committee remains of 
a size that is manageable. It will be chaired by the Secretary to the President, and will comprise 11 of 
the  current  members  representing  government or  government agencies,  plus  representatives  of  the 
Mahaweli Authority and  the  Department of  Export Agriculture of  the  Ministry of  Primary Industries. It 
will  additionally include  representation from  the  Ceylon  Chamber of  Commerce (in  turn  representing 
the  interests  of  agribusiness)  plus  a  representative  of  the  participating  financial  institutions.  Its  full 
membership will therefore be as shown below: 
(a)      Secretary to the President, Presidential Secretariat (Chair) 
(b)      Senior Addl. Secretary to the President, Presidential Secretariat 
(c)      Director General, Dept. of Programme Management and Monitoring, Ministry of National 
Policies and Economic Affairs 
(d)      Director, Dept. of External Resources, Ministry of National Policies and Economic Affairs 
(e)      Director, Foreign Aid Management, Department of Treasury Operations, Ministry of 
Finance 
(f)       Addl. Director General, Dept. of National Planning, Ministry of National Policies and 
Economic Affairs 
(g)      Addl. Secretary (Agric. Development), Ministry of Agriculture 
(h)      Director (Finance), Export Development Board 
(i)       Addl. Ssecretary, Livestock Development, Ministry of Economic Affairs 
(j)       Director, Dept. of Agrarian Services, Ministry of Agriculture 
(k)      Director (Development and Special Programmes), Presidential Secretariat 
(l)       Director, Regional Development Dept., Central Bank of Sri Lanka 
(m)     Representative of participating financial institutions 
(n)      Representative of Ceylon Chamber of Commerce 
(o)      Representative of Mahaweli Authority
123
123 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
(p)      Representative of Department of Export Agriculture, Ministry of Primary Industries. 
4.        This  Committee will meet  at  least  twice-yearly to  review and  approve  the  SAP Annual Work 
Plan  and  Budgets  prior  to  its  submission  to  IFAD  for  no  objection;  and  to  review  programme 
implementation and financial progress. It will appoint the 4P evaluation committee and endorse the 4P 
schemes to be submitted to IFAD for no objection; and it will also  endorse the policy issues prioritised 
for  follow-up  action  by  the  4P  multi-stakeholder meetings  and  the  advocacy  strategy  developed  for 
each issue policy analysed. 
Figure 1: Proposed SAP PMU organigramme 
5.       Management  structure.  Through  the  LPA,  responsibility  for  programme  management  is 
delegated to the Programme Management Unit (PMU) based in Colombo, which will evolve from, and 
leverage the  experience and  strong  human  resources of  the  current  NADeP  PMU;  the  PMU  will  be 
further  augmented  by  technical  assistance/  consultants  who  will  bring  a  higher  level  of  business 
orientation and  professionalism to  the  programme (in  respect  of  the  business-oriented nature  of  the 
programme). In  terms  of  overall  responsibilities, the  PMU  is  tasked  with  delivery  of  the  programme 
and its performance; as well, key functions of the PMU relate to planning, coordination, facilitation and 
brokerage  (amongst  4P  stakeholders),  and  monitoring  and  evaluation.  Given  the  scope  of  the 
proposed  programme,  key  managerial  positions  within  the  PMU  include  a   Programme  Director, 
Deputy  Programme  Director,  Agribusiness  Manager,  Rural  Finance  Manager  and  Finance  (and 
Admin)  Manager,  heading  competent  staff  within  their  respective  units;  specialists  in  areas  of  M&E 
and gender and youth will also form part of the PMU. 
6.       In  order  to  support  specific  interventions  (e.g.  as  relates  to  institutional  strengthening  or 
capacity building or 4P facilitation where required), institutional service providers will be contracted by 
the PMU.
124
124 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
B.   Summary overview of implementation arrangements and responsibilities by 
Component and/ or specific interventions 
Component 1 
7.       Implementation  responsibilities  under  Component  1  (4Ps,  private  sector  and  FO-led). 
The  bulk  of  interventions  and  activities  under  Component  1  relate  to:  (i)  the  implementation  of  4P 
schemes; and (ii) capacity building/ institutional strengthening of producer/ farmer organizations. With 
respect to the 4P schemes, the  SAP Programme Management Unit (PMU) will have the first level of 
responsibility for facilitating and brokering the 4Ps, through sensitization and awareness raising in the 
lead  up  to  SAP  effectiveness  and  within  the  first  six  months  of  implementation.  Today,  through 
NADeP, the private sector is cognizant of the 4P model being promoted, but could benefit from further 
knowledge of the specificities, principles, expectations, responsibilities, limitations and opportunities of 
the  4P  model,  and  can  be  encouraged  to  expand  and  deepen  their  participation.  In  addition  to 
sensitization, the  PMU  will  be  responsible for  inviting expressions of  interest  and  will  conduct  a  first 
and  independent assessment of  the proposals received. Further to  this,  in  terms of  4P development 
and  appraisal,  the  PMU  will  take  the  lead  through  its  in-house  specialists,  though  will  mobilise 
additional resources or facilitators to broker and cement the 4Ps as required. 
8.       Once  the  4P  has  been  approved,  it  is  expected  that  in  the  majority of  cases,  the  implicated 
private  sector  company  will  take  the  lead  in  brokering  the  partnership  and  support  of  financial 
institutions leading to tripartite agreements among smallholder producers, PFIs and the private sector 
company under a viable 4P scheme, and will implement the 4P sub-project at the field-level. 
9.       With  regard  to  FO  involvement  in  the  4P  arrangements,  SAP  will  promote  a  three  pronged 
approach;  a)  4P  BPs  led  by  private  sector  companies  with  FOs  that  forsee  partnerships  between 
promoter companies and FOs (Type A FO 4P partnerships), b) farmer associations and co-operatives 
progressively engaged in agribusiness activities (Type A FO 4P partnerships), and   c) FOs operating 
in the Mahawely catchment area (existing or  new groups arising from existing FOs for new business 
partnerships).
ventures 
Type 
FO 
4P 
A 
/ 
The  selection  of  business  ventures  will  always  follow  competitive  open  selection  process
10. 
accrose  the  board.  For  the  Type  A  and  Type  B  of  4P  partnerships,  the  sensitization  and  selection 
process will be mirroring the one already identified for private sector led 4Ps. For Type C, the process 
of sensitization and competitive selection will be, in turn, managed by MASL. The details elements of 
the selection process is outlined below: 
(a)      (Type  A  FO  4P  partnerships):  the  selection  of  FOs  will  be  at  the  discretion  of  the 
promoter  company  and  the  selection  will  be  done  by  the  PMU  following  the  standard 
procedures set for companies under 4P arragements; 
(b)      (Type  B  FO  4P  partnerships): the  selection  will  be  the  responsibility of  the  Component 
Leader  of  PMU  through  a  competitive  bidding  process.  It  would  be  required  that  these 
organizations  should  be  formally  registered  business  entitities  involving  in  agribusiness 
activities  for  a  minimum  of  2  years.  The  objectives  of  BPs  should  be  to  specialize  in 
agriculture,  processing  of  agricultural  materials  and  agribusinesses  and  /  or  to  deal  in 
agricultural  products  or  services-related.  Also  they  should  carry  unqualified  auditors’ 
opinion for  most  recent financial statements and  a  sound financial position as  evidence 
by  its  financial  reports.  More  importantly,  they  should  have  the  capacity  to  provide 
significant co-financing and technical expertise to members farmers. PMU will develop a 
set of criteria based on these parameters; 
(c)      (Type C of FO 4P partnerships): the selection process for this type of partnerships will be 
preceded,  for  each  system  in  the  Mahaweli  area,  a  large  process  of  sensitization  of 
farmer  groups  to  identify new  business  ventures  and  expansion  of  existing  businesses. 
These  business  ventures  can  be  undertaken  by  existing  FOs  or  by  farmer  groups 
representing one or more farmer groups that intend to present a business plan together.
125
125 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
MASL  head  quarters  and  9  systems  (only  9  out  of  10  have  FOs  currently)  will  be  in 
charge  of  the  implementation of  the  key  SAP  outreach  for  Type  C  of  4Ps  partnerships 
with FOs with the support of SAP PMU. These FOs will evolve, as need basis, from initial 
business  ideas  to  business  ventures  throughout  the  period  of  implementation  of  SAP 
programme. As such, it is necessary that MASL will enter into  MoU with SAP PMU. 
The elements of the MoU will comprise the a) provision of a consultant pool of 8 professionals
11. 
in  support  of  sensitization  and  FO  selection,  b)  FOs  institutional  development  –  development 
programme  tailor  made  to  identified  FOs  and  groups,  c)  FOs  business  advisory  services  and 
management of the start-up funds, d) deployment of MASL staff at the headquarters and field level for 
programme implementation, e) BP progress reporting and monitoring, and f) MASL to represent in the 
SAP NSC. The MoU  will  specify the responsibilities of  both parties on sharing basis. The consultant 
pool  will be  stationed at  the  MASL headquarters attached to  its  “Business Development” unit  whose 
manadate is  the promotion of  new businesses, market linkages, investment promotion in  agricultural 
value-addition  programmes  for  Mahaweli  FOs.  Consultant  pool  work  in  close  collaboration  with 
MASL’s  Institutional  Development  unit  too  whose  mandate  is  the  registration  and  the  capacity 
development  of  FOs.  The  consultants  will  report  to  the  Componant  Head  at  the  PMU  and 
administratively  to  the  Director,  Business  Development  or  any  higher  officer  designated  by  the 
MASL.
Director 
General 
of 
Consultants’  will  support  the  staff  of  MASL  in  the  different  systems,  under  the  guidance  of
12. 
Business  Development  Unit,  for  the  identification  of  potential  FOs  or  group  of  farmers  for  BPs  and 
market  opportunities  with  potential  private  sector  partners.  Specifically, the  responsibilities  will  be  a) 
together with MASL staff identify FOs and farmer groups already engaged in agribusiness with growth 
potential,  b)  identify  FOs  and  farmer  groups  with  new  business  ideas,  c)  identify  opportunities 
available under different agro-based value chains in Sri Lanka for the small holder farmers to produce 
and  supply  for  increasingly important  high  potential  export  and  local  markets, and  d)  negotiate  and 
develop solid partnerships with private sector companies. The main criteria of identifying these value 
chains covered three dimensions; a) economic, b) social  and c) environmental. The economic criteria 
considered  include,  a)  Market  potential  (local  and  export)  for  the  products,  b)  Potential  increase  in 
income  for  target  producers,  c)  National  priority  given  to  promote  domestic  production  including 
promotion  of  import  substitution  through  local  production,  d)  Availability  of  private  sector  partners 
(mainly lead companies) interested in partnering with  small holder farmers, and  e) Potential linkages 
to growth of other value chains. In addition, the selection of potential opportunities of product sectors 
rural  women  and  youth.
considered  social  criteria  such  as  potential 
involvement  of 
Annex 1 provides details of the selection strategy and the process of each type and the Annex
13. 
2 provides the template for business concepts/ideas.
Finally,  there  are  several  public  agencies  at  the  national,  provincial  and  district  level  that
14. 
associate with farmers and their organizations for the provision of extension services, technology and 
support  services.  In  particular,  the  district  level  institutions  and  key  responsible  officials,  have 
instructions to support FO operations. 
Table 1: District institutions that associate with FOs 
Title of the District level Institute 
Responsible Officials 
No. 
01 
District Secretariat / Government Agent’s Office 
(DS/GA) 
    District Secretary / Government Agent 
    Divisional Secretaries / Assistant Government Agents 
    Director / Planning / District Planning Secretariat 
    Assistant Superintendent of Surveyor 
    Fisheries Inspector 
    Samurdhi Niladhari 
    Development Officers 
    Agricultural extension officers work at the DS division level 
    Deputy Director of Agriculture - Extension 
    Deputy Director of Agriculture – Seed Production & Farms 
126
126 
02 
Department of Agriculture 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
03 
Department of Agrarian Services 
04 
Department of Animal Production & Health 
05 
Department of Forest Conservation 
06 
07 
08 
Department of Cooperative Development 
Department of Health & Nutrition 
Local Authorities Municipal, urban & Pradeshiya 
Shaba (Local Councils) 
    Assistant Director Agriculture - Extension 
    Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services 
    Divisional Officers 
    Extension officers 
    District Veterinary Officer 
    Veterinary Surgeon 
    Field Officers 
    Range Forest officer 
    District Forest Officer 
    Assistant Commissioner of Cooperatives 
    Regional Director of Health Services (RDHS) 
    Medical Officer of Health (MOH 
    Mayor/Chairman 
15.  All these institutions and officials, who are functioning at the district level, will play implementing
roles in accordance with the degree of their responsibility to different aspects of FO activities.
With regards to  youth, a  youth strategy will be commissioned as a first starting point to better
16. 
understand diversity amongst the  rural  youth,  and  subsequently their  challenges, aspirations, critical 
needs and the opportunities where SAP can intervene in supporting the youth. This strategy will draw 
from  the  consultations  with  youth  in  rural  communities,  the  experience  and  sensitization  activities 
undertaken  by  the  social  mobilisers,  and  via  the  dialogue  with  private  sector  companies.
In order to more effectively draw out the demand for products/ services around the 4P, SAP will
17. 
through its consultation and sensitization activities, encourage the private sector companies to identify 
the  critical  product  or  services  gaps  along  the  value  chain,  and/  or  the  gaps  in  human  resources 
capacities. These gaps will be communicated to the youth, to establish their interest and commitment 
to  engage  in  these  particular  activities.  Social  mobilisers,  by  virtue  of  their  close  community-level 
knowledge and training in the SAP principles and  approaches, will communicate SAP’s open call for 
interest for  youth to take part in the initiative. To facilitate youth in stepping forward, social mobilisers 
will provide support to the youth with some initial and basic training on how to develop basic business 
plans  and  will  work  with  those  youth  with  potential  to  finalize  their  business  plans;  the  social 
mobilisers  will  also  have  the  role  of  connecting  the  youth  to  PFIs,  who  will  ultimately  appraise  the 
loan.
business 
approve 
whether 
decide 
plan 
and 
the 
on 
to 
Once the youth business plan and credit has been approved, the support to youth will also be
18. 
complemented by  capacity building  support. A range  of  topics  such  as  financial  literacy,  know-your- 
numbers, and managerial training will be offered, and youth with approved business plans can choose 
their  priority  needs;  the  specific  technical  training  that  will  also  likely  be  required,  has  also  been 
for.
provisioned 
19. 
To  the  extent  possible,  the  programme  will  also  attempt  to  facilitate  or  broker  a  mentorship
programme  for  those  youth  demonstrating  strong  leadership  and  entrepreneurial  potential,  with 
established business experts. 
Component 2
Implementation responsibilities under Component 2. The line of credit shall be set up at the
20. 
Regional  Development  Department  (RDD)  of  the  CBSL.  The  RDD  is  a  specialized  department 
managing  lines  of  credit  of  various  donors  and  government-run schemes. The  representative of  the 
Government of  Sri  Lanka, i.e.  Ministry of  Finance, and  the  Monetary  Board  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Sri  Lanka,  shall  enter  into  a  Subsidiary Loan Agreement  (SLA)  on  the  line  of  credit.  In  turn,  the 
Monetary Board  of  the  CBSL will  enter  into  SLAs  with  PFIs  to  specify the  terms  and  condition of 
sub-loans.
the 
21. 
Operating Guidelines shall be developed which will outline the eligibility criteria and procedures,
type of loan products, collateral requirement, repayment terms etc. which will be used to govern PFIs’
127
127 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
access to the facility, following the details laid down in Appendix 4. W hilst existing operating guidelines 
are available through NADeP, these will be simply fine-tuned for SAP.
22. 
The key responsibilities of the GoSL include: 
  
To make available to the CBSL the loan proceeds/ loan amount on an agreed interest rate, 
for  disbursement  of  loans  to  PFIs  for  onward  lending  to  smallholder  farmers  and  youths 
under the programme; 
       To bear the foreign exchange risk, if any. 
23. 
The key responsibilities of the RDD of the CBSL include: 
       To  manage  the  line  of  credit  and  pay  interest  as  agreed  upon  to  the  Department  of 
Treasury Operations on the loan outstanding from time to time; 
  
To  conduct  due  diligence  assessments  on  the  FIs  desirous  to  participate  under  the 
scheme based on the following criteria: 
o  Minimum  of  two  years  of  term  lending  operations  for  which  audited  accounts  are 
available, 
o   NPLs below 5%, 
o   Compliance with all prudential regulations as required by the CBSL, and 
o  Willingness  to  enter  into  a  tri-partite  agreement  with  the  producer  and  private 
company. 
  
  
PFIs continued participation in the scheme shall depend upon continuous compliance with 
the above conditions. 
The RDD shall maintain a revolving account and accumulate the funds generated through 
the  repayment  of  PFIs,  and  re-lend  these  to  PFIs  on  the  same  objective,  terms  and 
conditions. 
24. 
The PFI responsibilities include: 
  
  
To undertake lending under the  SAP under a tripartite agreement with a private company 
or producer for lending to 4Ps beneficiaries; 
To lend to the  youths and smallholder farmers on individual lending basis  as facilitated by 
social mobilisers; 
       To actively support the savings mobilization drives of the social mobilizers; 
       Where PFIs shall employ adequately trained and dedicated social mobilisers (field officers) 
who undertake the full gamut of activities attendant on credit delivery; 
       To  charge  a  rate  of  interest  on  sub-loans  that  conforms  with  the  rate  specified  in  the 
Operating Instructions, with a loan maturity varying between 12-60 months; 
       To bear the full default risk of the end-borrower. 
25. 
The proponent companies’ responsibility includes: 
  
  
To  facilitate  the  opening  of  accounts  following  KYC  requirements  of  smallholder  farmers 
under  the  4Ps  and  enter  into  tripartite  agreement  with  the  PFI  and  farmer,  agreeing  the 
pre-agreed  price  based  on  the  quality  of  produce  and  commitment  to  pay  the  sales 
proceeds into the famers’ bank account; 
To  facilitate  the  deduction  at  source  of  loan  capital  and  interest  due  by  farmers  prior  to 
paying out of the proceeds to them. 
26. 
The responsibilities of farmers and the youth include:
128
128 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
       To repay the loans to PFIs based on the agreed terms and conditions; 
  
To honor the commitment under tripartite agreements with respect to quality and quantity 
of the produce, timeliness of delivery and other points agreed upon. 
27. 
Institutional strengthening and policy support for access to rural finance will be implemented by
the PMU through its Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB). The PMU will enter into a result-based 
MoU with the PFIs/CBSL for technical and other support.
Details  on  the  financial  reporting  and  monitoring  arrangements  for  the  SAP  line  of  credit  is
28. 
provided for under Annex V. 
Figure 2: Institutional and implementation arrangement under Component 2 
IFAD 
GoSL (MoF) 
CBSL 
PFIs 
i
L
n
e
o
f
c
r
e
d
i
t
-
f
l
o
w
o
f
f
u
n
d
PMU
Result based MoU 
Tripartite agreement 
Private Companies
Smallholder 
Component 3
Implementation responsibilities for policy engagement under sub-component 3.2. Overall
29. 
responsibility  for  sub-component  3.2  will  lie  with  the  PMU  –  specifically,  the  Programme  Director, 
supported by DPM, M&E and KM, as well as the relevant technical specialists within the PMU. His/her 
main responsibilities will be for: 
    Planning and managing the biannual 4P Business Forum, and ensuring that decisions made 
there are followed up;
129
129 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
    Managing  and  supervising  the  processes  of  conducting  policy  research  and  analysis: 
drawing up terms of reference, identifying potential service providers to conduct the analysis 
(universities,  policy  research  institutes,  consultants),  and  reviewing  drafts  of  all  studies  to 
ensure responsiveness to the TOR and the quality of output; 
      Facilitating  discussion  within  the  PMU,  in  order  to  identify  approaches  and  models  to  be 
assessed,  with  a  view  to  drawing  out  policy  lessons,  and  managing  the  process  of 
conducting these assessments; 
    Managing the development of issue-specific policy advocacy plans; and 
    Presenting prioritised policy issues and advocacy plans to the National Steering Committee 
endorsement.
for 
its 
Others   with   responsibilities   would   include   the   National   Steering   Committee,   which   will
30. 
contribute  to  the  process  of  identifying  policy  and  regulatory  issues  to  be  taken  up,  validating  the 
findings  and  recommendations of  studies,  and  offering  guidance  as  to  next  steps  in  contributing  to 
policy outputs. Specifically it will endorse: (a) as being appropriate for further work by the programme 
those policy  issues  prioritised for  follow-up action by the  4P  multi-stakeholder meetings, and  (b)  the 
analysed.
proposed 
developed 
advocacy 
strategy 
policy 
issue 
each 
for 
31. 
The following would also be involved as partners in the implementation of the sub-component:
      Relevant  government  agencies;  organizations  of  smallholder  farmers;  representatives  of 
agribusiness –  aggregators, processors and exporters etc; academia/policy researchers, as 
participants in the 4P Multistakeholder Meetings; 
    The  Institute  of  Policy  Studies,  which  may  be  invited  to  facilitate  the  4P  Stakeholder 
Meetings; and 
      Universities,  policy  research  institutes  and  consultants,  as  contracted  service  providers  to 
conduct policy analysis. 
C.   Implementation arrangements via the Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka (MASL) 
Background  on  the  Mahaweli  Authority  of  Sri  Lanka.  The  Mahaweli  River  Development
32. 
Programme,  the  largest  integrated  rural  development  multi-purpose  programme  ever  undertaken  in 
Sri Lanka was implemented to tap water resources of Mahaweli and allied six river basins. The main 
objectives  were 
increase  agricultural  production,  hydro-power  generation,  employment 
opportunities, settlement of landless poor and flood control. The programme was originally planned for 
the implementation over a  35-year period, managed by the Mahaweli Authority of  Sri Lanka (MASL).
to 
Besides  hydropower,  the  objective  of  the  Mahaweli  River  Development  Programme  which
33. 
covers  almost  1/3  of  the  country,  is  mainly  related  with  the  regional  development  perspective. 
Increased  agricultural  production  through  opening  up  of  new  lands  and  providing  assured  irrigation 
facilities  and  opening  up  of  new  employment opportunities in  agricultural  sector  by  settling  landless 
farmers  with  the  assurance  of  high  standards  of  living  conditions  are  the  main  objectives  of  the 
programme.
MASL  organizational  structure.  The  MASL  organizational  structure  is  shown  in  Figure  2.
34. 
Mahaweli  Areas  have  been  divided  into  10  systems  for  management  purposes.  Each  System  is 
managed by a Resident Programme Manager with 3 to 4 Irrigation Blocks of approximately 3000 Ha. 
A Block Manager & Irrigation Engineer (IE), Agriculture Officer and Community Development Officers 
manage  each  block.  Each  Block  consists  of  Units  of  about  500  Ha  and  is  managed  by  a  Unit 
Manager. The  IE  at  Block  Level  is  assisted  by  Engineering Assistants  (EAs)  and Works  (WSs)  and 
Attendants.
Turnout 
130
130 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Figure 3: Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka Organizational Structure 
35.  MASL services vis-à-vis Farmer Organizations (FOs). Farmer Organizations (FOs) formed
and  initiated  by  Block  Manages  are  responsible  for  O&M  of  the  tertiary  system,  which  includes 
Distributary Canals (DCs) and Field Canals (FCs) of an irrigation system. The farmers under each FC 
are  required  to  select  a  leader  for  the  canal  to  represent  them  at  DC  level.  DC  level  committee 
comprises  of  leaders  selected  from  each  FC  by  the  farmers  concerned.  Water  management  and 
maintenance  of  the  irrigation  system  are  the  primary  responsibilities  of  FCs  in  line  with  MASL 
technical services. At  present,  MASL is  responsible for  managing  irrigation  water  for  175,000  ha.  of 
zone.
Irrigable 
land 
dry 
the 
In 
As  seen  in  the  Figure  3,  MASL  development  services  are  dedicated  to  the  economic  and
36. 
capacity development of FOs in the system, as follows: 
(a)      Agriculture which include livestock development – development of main crop paddy and 
field crops, dairy, poultry, goat farming etc. 
(b)      Business  development  –  promotion  of  new  businesses,  market  linkages,  investment 
promotion in agricultural value-added programmes, 
(c)      Land, and 
(d)      Institutional Development – FO registration and capacity development
MASL is an autonomous institution vested with powers for FO registration and land distribution
37. 
in  the  Mahaweli  areas.  The Agrarian  Development Act  No.  46  in  2000  and  the  Irrigation  Ordinance 
have  been  revised  and  the  Director  General  of  the  MASL  has  been  devolved  with  such  powers. 
Similarly,  powers  for  the  distribution  of  Mahaweli  lands  has  been  devolved  with  the  revisions  to  the 
Land  Development  Ordinance  No.  19  of  1935.  Effectively,  the  MASL  Director  General  holds  the 
powers  for  the  distribution  of  lands  on  long-term  leases  for  residential,  agricultural,  industrial  and 
purposes.
commercial 
Today, there are 1,007 FOs registered and operational in the Mahaweli system. The distribution
38. 
is shown in Table 2.
131
131 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Table 2: Mahaweli Systems and Farmer Organizations 
Mahaweli System 
No. of FOs 
01 
02 
03 
04 
05 
06 
07 
08 
09 
10 
Total 
System B 
System C 
Walawa 
System H 
Moragahakanda 
Huruluwewa 
Rambakenoya 
Medirigiya 
System L 
Victoria 
133 
196 
287 
225 
44 
82 
08 
10 
22 
- 
1,007 
39.  Structure  and  functions  of  Farmer  Organizations. Altogether,  some  120,000  farmers  are
grouped into FOs  (20  or  above is  the  lower ceiling to  establish a  FO  and there  is  no  upper ceiling), 
with  a  mandate  of  primarily  bulk  water  management and  maintenance of  the  irrigation system.  FOs 
are  also  involved  in  various  economic  activities,  running  revolving  funds  for  crop  loans  and  welfare 
activities. 
Figure 4: Structure of a Farmer Organization 
Chairman                     Secretary                    Treasurer 
Auditor 
Finance Committee 
Vice Chairman              Vice Secretary 
Committee Members
40.  The audit of FO books of accounts is carried out by MASL-trained and accredited auditors on
an annual basis. The number of the committee representatives depends on the number of field canals 
maintained by the FO. In all FOs, financial decisions are taken by a Finance sub-committee and some 
FOs  have sub-committees for  credit functions. Office bearers are  elected through a  general meeting 
term.
for 
one-year 
a 
Agribusiness activities of FOs. It is mandatory that all Mahaweli FOs are required to maintain
41. 
two  bank  accounts,  one  for  member  development  and  general  activities  and  the  other  for  FO 
economic transactions. Economic activities generally include: a) undertaking state contracts like road 
development  and  canal  rehabilitation;  b)  sale  of  fertilizer  and  insecticides;  c)  crop  loans  through 
revolving  funds;  and  d)  business  linkages  with  Forward  Sales  Agreements  (FSA).  Current  FSAs 
include cultivation and supply of seasonal crops like soya beans (Sri Lanka Thriposha Ltd. and Pleny 
Foods  (Pvt)  Ltd.),  maize  (Prima  Ltd),  and  vegetable  (Cargills  Inc.).  In  addition,  Mahaweli  FOs  and 
farmers are linked to a few established supply chains like dairy, poultry and goat farming. Overall, the 
Mahaweli  system’s  dairy  contribution  to  the  national  economy  in  2015  was  28  MN  liters  which 
accounts  for  7  percent  of  the  country’s  production.  Similarly,  animal  husbandry  and  inland  fisheries 
have  been  very  popular  in  the  system  with  sizeable  contribution  to  the  economy.  In  2015  the 
production of poultry (4 percent contribution with 6 MT), goat (6 percent contribution with 102 MT) and 
inland  fishery  production (15  percent  with  11  percent  contribution) have  been  recorded.  Several  FO
132
132 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
members reported to have run agribusiness enterprises like yoghurt, sweetmeats etc successfully and 
few of them are linked to the national market as popular brands.
42. 
Maturity Assessment of Mahaweli System Farmer Organizations. As per MASL records, 36
FOs have reached a  level of business enterprise, having assets built-up with processing machinery, 
warehousing, goods transport vehicles, etc. There are  150 FOs  categorised as  'enterprising FOs'.64
MASL  recognizes  that  FOs  in  Systems  B,  C,  H  and  Walawa  are  ahead  of  others  in  business 
enterprise.
As relates to SAP, these FOs would be further assessed by MASL and the SAP PMU, as FOs
43. 
with  the  potential  to  engage/  lead  in  development  of  4P  schemes.  The  current  MASL  maturity 
assessment tool (template) will be reviewed and  adapted to  include SAP specificities. Subsequently, 
the  FOs  with  the  highest  potential,  will  undergo  further  sensitization  to  determine  their  interest  in 
becoming more entrepreneurial organizations, and a capacity building plan for their development will 
be  elaborated  for  SAP  support.  The  MASL  official  network  will  take  the  lead  in  mobilisation  of  the 
farmers  and  FOs,  and  these  same  FOs  will  continue  to  benefit  from  the  services  rendered  by  the 
MASL during implmenetation of the capacity building plan and subsequent 4P programmes; SAP will 
provide the complementary support where it is identified and required. 
64  MASL document ‘Mahaweli Farmer Organizations’ Summary’
133
133 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Annex I: Selection Process of Farmer Organizations for 4Ps 
For the Type A and Type B of 4P partnerships, selection process will be different. For Type A, the 
selection of FOs will be at the discretion of the promoter company. For Type B, it is the responsibility 
of the Component Leader of PMU to select appropriate BPs through a competitive bidding process. 
Selection strategy and process relevant to each Type is illustrated below: 
Type A – SAP, Promoter Company and Farmer Organizations 
As in the case of company-led 4Ps, the SAP will invite expressions of interest from reputable 
agribusiness companies, in this case the companies that are willing to partner with FOs instead of 
individual farmers, who are then short listed and selected based on a set of criteria including: financial 
strength; business experience (at least 2 years in business with unqualified audited accounting 
statements); and commitment and interest in pro-poor development. These companies are 
subsequently requested to submit proposals in the form of Business Plans (BP) to include an 
investment plan and an implementation plan. In this early stage, the PMU is forefront in promoting, 
sensitizing and brokering first contact with the private sector; as the process progresses, the PMU 
continues its brokerage role and facilitates the negotiations and fine-tuning of the proposals. 
Within the PMU, the business development unit, staffed with specialists (i.e. those experienced in 
private-sector agribusiness, financial and legal sector), and the component head of FO development 
unit will share responsibility in networking, working with companies on development of BPs, 
negotiations, on site and off site appraisal. The component head will liaise with PFIs for facilitating 
credit financing. 
Evaluation and appraisal of BPs do not differ from company-led 4Ps which is illustrated in Annex 1 of 
the Appendix 4. Upon BP submission, the PMU conducts a preliminary assessment and short-listing, 
and undertakes site-visits to meet with farmer groups and the promoter/ originator company; after this, 
the PMU facilitates BP development sessions with the company in order to finalize a feasible BP that 
benefits all parties (with emphasis on financial and economic benefits to the smallholder producer; at 
this stage, producers are also pre-identified by the company). The BP then undergoes a final 
appraisal by the PMU team, and is forwarded to the BP Evaluation Committee (comprised of external 
experts/ target sector specialists from public institutions, PFIs and the private sector) who undertakes 
further field visits to validate the appraisal and comments on/ proposes further adjustment and finally 
recommends the BP to the National Steering Committee (NSC) for approval. Simultaneously, District 
Secretariats are sensitized and informed on the BP. 
Type B – SAP with Farmer companies / co-operatives 
4P promoter in this Type is the farmers’ company or co-operative. The selection process remain the 
same but the sole responsibility of preliminary assessment, shortlisting and facilitation lays on the 
Component Leader of FO Development. It is important that promoter companies / co-operatives 
demonstrate sound marketing arrangement with documentary evidence. 
Type C – SAP with Farmer Organizations in the Mahaweli catchment area 
The selection process of Type C will be different given the fact that the existing FOs that are engaged 
in agribusinesses and new groups of farmers with good business ideas are expected to partner with 
SAP and such new groups are expected to develop their business ideas with the support of the 
consultants pool over a period of time. 
01 
Action/Activity 
Formulate    selection 
strategy,  criteria  and 
the process 
02  Constitute a 
Lead responsibility 
MASL  lead  by  Director 
(Business 
Development) 
MASL  DG/Directors  of  Consultants pool 
Support 
Consultants   pool   and 
MASL System heads 
Results/outcome 
Selection strategy and process for SAP 
approval 
A selection committee comprising 
134
134 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
selection committee 
03  Develop a 
sensitization  strategy 
to  be  unfolded  in  the 
Mahawheli Systems 
Business  Development 
&                  Institutional 
Development 
MASL  lead  by  Director 
(Business 
Development) 
Mahaweli HQ, Block and Unit level 
representation 
Consultant pool 
Sensitization    strategy    developed    and 
process ofr its implementation prepared 
04  Sensitization   of   4P 
Selection Committee 
Consultants pool 
BPs 
Farmers     at     block     level     have     an 
understanding  of  the  call  for  proposals  for 
the  criteria  and 
supppritng 
coverage  of  the  selectnion  process,  the 
elements to be provided in the template for 
business ideas 
their  BPs, 
03  Call for expression of 
interests/concept 
notes for 4Ps 
Director          (Business 
Development),     MASL 
HQ 
MASL  Block  and  Unit 
Managers to circulate 
Concept  notes  received  at  MASL  System- 
level 
04  Support  to  the  FOs 
selected    to    have 
their  business  ideas 
into BPs 
Implemenation       of 
BPs by FOs 
05 
Mahaweli    HQ,    Block 
and         Unit         level 
representation 
FOs 
A  list  of  BPs  to  be  supported  under  the 
following categories of 4P FOs/groups; 
-  FOs  with  capacity  for  4P  partnerships 
immediately, 
- FOs/groups need capacity enhancement, 
-FOs/groups  with  solid  business  ideas  but 
need  extensive  support  to  convert  them  to 
credible BPs. 
Consultants pool 
Business  ideas  of  FOs  are  organized  ats 
standard BPs 
Mahaweli    HQ,    Block 
level 
and 
Unit 
& 
representation 
Consultants pool 
FOs   will   be   supported   throughout   the 
implemenaton   of   their   BPs   with   the 
outcome  that  these  FOs  will  be  effectively 
managing  their  business,  will  be  equipped 
with  solid  governance  mechanisms  and 
procedures, 
established 
contractual  relationships  with  other  chain 
stakeholders  and  will  reach  break   even 
point   for  their   business   withing   a   time 
frame of 3 to 4 years. 
have 
will 
The   support   will   comprise   a   mix   of 
financing  of  BPs  (under  C1)    and  capacity 
building support (under C2) 
The objectives of BPs in all types should be to specialize in agriculture, processing of agricultural 
materials and agribusinesses and / or to deal in agricultural products or services-related. More 
importantly, they should have the capacity to provide significant co-financing and technical expertise 
to member farmers. Annex II provides a template for the concept note.
135
135 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Annex II: Business Concept Template 
Details 
- Mahaweli System/Block and Unit details 
- FO Registration details, number, date etc. 
- Membership details, number (male/female) 
-  In  case  of  new  groups  arising  from  a  single  FO  or  more  than  one  FO, 
details of mother FOs 
List of activities with dated of implementation and progress 
- Proposed value chain and intended activities – contract farming, primary 
processing, storage, transport etc. 
- Current production in the area 
- Market and marketing 
- Types of production machinery required and cost indicators 
- Technology gaps 
- capacity building support needed 
- Accountability and the responsibility 
- Accumulated savings 
- Details of bank financing in the past 
- Approximate cost of the BP 
- Means of financing proposed 
Heading 
FO Details 
FO current economic activities 
Details of business idea/concept 
Market situation 
Machinery,         technology         and 
knowhow 
Management arrangements 
Financial standing of FO 
4P financial plan 
If    available;    FO    understanding 
about - 
- Implementation plan 
- Benefits of the programme 
- Benefits of the programme. 
- Environmental and risk aspects 
136
136 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Annex III – How to develop a business plan (from IFAD toolkit on Engaging with farmers’ 
organizations for more effective smallholder development 
https://www.ifad.org/topic/fo_resources) 
How to support FOs in the design of 
their business plans 
Introduction 
The business plan of an FO is a document providing information on how the FO intends to organize and 
implement activities so that it is profitable and can succeed. It is an essential tool for the planning, 
managing and running of a business. It clarifies the operational and financial objectives of a business and 
contains the detailed plans and budgets showing how the objectives are to be achieved. It may also contain 
background information about the organization that is attempting to reach those goals. 
Why should FOs design business plans? Farming is a business, and farmers and their organizations 
need to develop their activities following a sound business plan that outlines the economic and financial 
forecasts of these activities. The business plan is the operational tool that directs each and every step in 
the business of an FO. 
The business plan serves several important purposes: 
      It helps determine the viability of the FO's enterprise in a designated market. 
      It provides guidance to the FO in organizing planning activities. 
      It serves as an important tool to obtain financing/funding. 
When should a business plan be designed? A business plan is not developed each time a given 
strategy is modified. It should be developed when an FO launches a new major initiative, and should cover 
a period of 3 to 5 years. 
Contents of a business plan 
The necessary elements to be included in a business plan are presented below. 
1.    Executive summary 
A typical business plan begins with an executive summary that is prepared after the plan is written. Its 
purpose is to communicate the plan in a convincing way to important audiences (e.g. financial institutions 
or possible partners/investors). 
2.    Introduction/background 
A summary of the business activities of the FO, its history and its position in the marketplace should be 
provided here. This part gives an overview of the FO, its vision and objectives, including the following 
elements: 
a)  Presentation of the FO 
Creation date, geographic area, number of members (database of farmer members attached), types of 
commodities/products, plot size operated by each farmer member, number of staff, ongoing services 
provided by the FO, property, equipment and infrastructure. 
b)  Focus of the business the FO wants to develop 
Overview of the business the FO is aiming to develop within its business plan.
137
137 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
c)  Vision and mission 
The vision is what the FO aspires to and what it will concentrate its energies and resources on to make 
the business profitable. The mission is to be achieved through the objectives of the FO's business plan. 
d)  Objectives/goals 
This section includes production and/or financial-related objectives specific to the plan. There should 
not be more than five objectives for the business. Objectives should be SMART: 
S – Specific. Objectives should be specific and not vague. They should clearly state exactly what 
the FO wants to achieve. 
M – Measurable. Objectives should be measurable or it will not be possible to assess their 
achievement accurately. 
A – Achievable. Available or potential resources needed to achieve the objectives should be taken 
into account. 
R – Realistic. Unrealistic objectives that are impossible to achieve should be avoided. 
T – Time frame. Objectives need to be reachable over a specific period of time so that they can be 
measured and an estimate made of how long it will take to achieve them. 
Tips for writing a business plan 
N.B.
Contents. The text of a business plan must be concise and yet must contain as much information as 
possible. This sounds like a contradiction, but it can be resolved by using the keyword approach: 
1.     Write the following keywords on a card and keep it in front of you while writing: 
Who/What/Where/When/Why/How/How Much 
2.  Answer all the questions in one paragraph at the beginning of each section of the business 
plan. 
3.     Expand the contents by adding more about each item in the text that follows. 
Length. There is no set length for the development of a business plan. Nonetheless, an average of 
30 to 40 pages, including the supporting documents section, should be respected. 
Approach. Writing an effective business plan requires discipline, time and privacy. 
Tip: You will save time by compiling your list of supporting documents while writing the text. 
Objectives should be linked to expected outcomes and need to be thought through thoroughly. Are they in 
line with expected achievements as outlined in the business plan? Do they have an outcome that will 
contribute to reaching the outlined vision? 
Example of an objective: Grow production volumes to 600 metric tons by 2017. 
3.    Market and supply analysis 
a)    Market overview 
-  Brief introduction on the current market for the product that the FO is focusing on in the 
country/region/subregion: current marketing and pricing systems, potential buyers of produce. 
-  Brief introduction on the type of product targeted by the FO/cooperative (conventional sector, 
organic, fair trade, raw, processed, etc.). 
-  Areas to improve efficiency of marketing system: what are the potential areas where the FO 
could improve efficiency and reduce the costs of the current marketing system (transport, 
processing, etc.)? 
-  Possibility of market development: what is the potential for the development of new markets? Is 
there potential for the FO to directly market produce nationally, internationally, etc.? If there is, 
would this be a more profitable option? 
b)    How is the FO currently dealing with the running of its economic services?
138
138 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
-  Current produce volumes and prices from potential membership: what prices are members 
receiving for produce, who do they sell produce to, what are transport arrangements, etc. 
-       Current buyers of crops produced by potential members: who are the key buyers of members’ 
produce, what are the ‘links in the chain’ after the initial purchase is made. 
-  Current volume of input purchase, current suppliers of inputs, prices of inputs, input supply 
marketing channels. 
-       Current assets and equipment (warehouses, production and/or processing equipment). 
-  Characterization of the FO/cooperative business partnerships with buyers, types of contracts, 
price, quantity, etc. 
-  Differences between sales through the FO and sales without involvement of the FO (prices, 
Guiding questions to help design a 
strategy 
its
  Given the potential marketing and 
supply volumes, is the membership 
of the FO large enough to sustain 
itself? Is it too large? 
  Given  the  crops  produced,  supplies 
required  and  other  indicated  needs 
and problems, what services should 
the FO develop? 
  Given farmer locations, volumes, 
sizes, etc., what structure and 
facilities will the FO need to develop 
its strategic plan? 
terms and conditions, etc.). 
c)  SWOT analysis of the ongoing capacities of the 
FO/cooperative (diagnostic elements) to manage 
economic services in relation to the planned 
business: 
-       Production 
-       Processing of products 
-       Marketing 
-       Export 
-       Certification 
-       Financial management 
-       Administration 
-       Management 
-       Managing the strategy of the FO/cooperative 
4.    Plan for the development of the FO/cooperative 
-       Strategy to increase production 
-       Strategy to increase product quality 
-       Business strategy 
-       Managerial strategy 
- 
Financial  resources  plan:  finances  required,  fixed  investments  and  working  capital  requirements, 
sources, terms of  loans, members’ own funds + proposed solutions to address issues in terms of  pre- 
financing (loans, private investors, etc.) 
-       Communication strategy and support to farmer-based organizations 
-       Benefits for farmer members: level of benefits and programmeions 
5.    Business plan in Excel file 
See Annex IV for an example in an Excel file.
139
139 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Reviewing FO incomes/expenditures to identify the break-even point 
What is needed? 
      Forecasts of programmeed volumes of products to market and prices expected 
      Cash flow statement65 and financing of activities 
      Membership fees and share capital requirements 
      Programmeed assets, liabilities and member equity 
  General activity workplan with considerations of time frame, party responsible, monitoring and 
indicators 
      Budget 
Once stock is taken of fixed costs and variable costs (see below), the break-even point is 
determined (economic equilibrium). 
Investments 
This includes warehouses, vehicles, computer equipment, office furniture, equipment to support the 
production/processing of products, and small equipment (scales, etc.). 
A given programme can provide funding for initial investments to enable an FO to quick-start its activities. 
The total amount of these investments will not be covered by the FO benefits but will be taken into account 
in its five-year amortization plan. 
Determination of variable costs 
This section details all the costs that vary with the volumes produced and sold. These are: 
  Working capital for economic services: inputs, processing, marketing, etc. The amount of working 
capital depends on: (i) the plot size planted by members (for inputs funds); and (ii) the volume of 
products sold (for marketing funds) 
      Packaging and/or packaging material products (bags, etc.): unit price 
      Cost of loading the goods onto trucks (price per bag usually) 
  Premium for collection: sometimes within local groups of farmer members of the FO, one person is 
empowered to collect the products and is rewarded with a premium incentive to collect more bags 
(cost per bag delivered to the cooperative) 
Determination of fixed costs 
Fixed costs are independent of the volumes produced and sold (they are often operating costs). They 
include: 
      Salaries of the cooperative (manager, accounting, warehouse keeper, driver, guard, etc.) 
      Expenses for meetings of board of directors and general assembly 
      Repairs and maintenance (vehicles, equipment, buildings) 
  Current operating costs: office rent, office supplies, fuel for vehicles and/or generators, electricity 
costs, communication costs (telephone, internet, radio, media) 
65 A cash flow statement (budget) is a programmeion of your business plan in terms of USD (or any currency used  in your country). It shows cash inflow and 
outflow over a period of time and is used for internal planning. Cash flow statements show both how much and when cash must flow in and out of your 
business.
140
140 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Determination of FO incomes 
FO incomes vary with the production/marketing plan of the various products marketed and the membership 
of the FO. Revenue is calculated using the following: 
  Revenues from sales of products (to be differentiated by product based on acreages and planned 
annual returns) 
      Revenues from any services provided 
      Sampling of the FO for management and operation (e.g. 5 FCFA per kilo of rice sold) 
      Administrative income (membership fees) 
Determination of the break-even point 
      Calculation of gross and net margins 
      Gross margin ( + or -) = revenue - variable costs - fixed costs 
      Net margin ( + or -) = gross margin - depreciation 
Methodology for supporting an FO in developing its business plan 
Step 1                   Collecting data 
By-laws and internal rules of the cooperative, action plan, list of employees, contracts 
with buyers, database of producer members, other documents available 
Step 2                   Working with the manager on the financial situation of the FO/cooperative 
Determination of fixed and variable costs and revenues of the FO/cooperative 
Step 3                   Meeting with the board of directors of the FO/cooperative for a simulation of the 
cooperative equilibrium (½ day) 
Step 4                   Meeting with the board of directors of the FO/cooperative to discuss the list of 
responsibilities and skills in terms of FO/cooperative management (between ½ and 
1 working day) 
Step 5                   Meeting with the board of directors of the FO/cooperative to discuss strategies to 
develop cooperatives (between ½  and 1 working day) 
Step 6                   Presentation and finalization of the business plan 
Supporting documents to be collected 
      Legal documents 
      List of members, location, acreages, productions 
      Contracts with suppliers, clients, processors 
      Profiles and resumes of managers and/or other human resources
141
141 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Annex IV: Example of Excel file for business plan 
Activities                                                                                               2013                   2014                      2015                      2016                      2017                                    Total 
a) Investments costs 
Investments costs are not taken into account in this example of a business plan – they may be covered by an IFAD-funded programme on the basis of FO 
performance over the five-year duration of the programme. However, amortization costs (see line "Amortization") are included in order to anticipate their 
replacement. 
Vehicles                                                                                             50 000                          -                             -                             -                   55 000                                105 000 
Motorbike                                                                                                    -                           -                             -                            -                              -                                            - 
Generator                                                                                            4 500                          -                             -                     4 800                             -                                    9 300 
Scales                                                                                                  7 400                          -                     1 850                           -                              -                                     9 250 
Production equipment                                                                          2 000                          -                             -                     2 500                             -                                    4 500 
Processing equipment                                                                       26 200                          -                             -                             -                             -                                  26 200 
Warehouses                                                                                         9 000                  6 000                             -                             -                             -                                  15 000 
Office furniture and IT equipment                                                           400                          -                             -                             -                             -                                       400 
Total investment costs 
b) Variable costs (capital expenditure) 
Working capital inputs                                                                         7 200                  3 600                     3 600                     3 600                     3 600                                  21 600 
Working capital marketing                                                                      500                     750                        900                     1 000                     1 000                                    4 150 
Packaging material                                                                                      -                          -                             -                   37 451                   56 176                                  93 626 
Costs for truck loading                                                                                 -                          -                             -                     4 028                     4 028                                    8 056 
Premium for collectors                                                                         2 700                  5 400                   11 340                   17 010                   25 515                                  61 965 
Total variable costs                                                                          10 400                  9 750                   15 840                   63 089                   90 319                                189 398 
143 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Activities                                                                                               2013                   2014                      2015                      2016                      2017                                    Total 
c) Fixed costs (operational expenditure) 
Salaries                                                                                              33 900                33 900                   33 900                   33 900                   33 900                                169 500 
Board of directors and general assembly costs                                      840                     890                        940                        990                     1 040                                    4 700 
Office rent                                                                                            1 000                  1 000                     1 000                     1 000                     1 000                                    5 000 
Maintenance and repair of vehicles                                                            -                          -                              -                            -                             -                                            - 
Warehouse maintenance                                                                     4 200                  5 400                     6 000                     6 600                   10 800                                  33 000 
Bike maintenance                                                                                4 200                  4 620                     5 040                     5 460                     5 880                                  25 200 
Office maintenance                                                                                 250                     250                        250                        250                        250                                    1 250 
Solar dryer maintenance                                                                             -                     100                        100                        100                        100                                       400 
Office supplies                                                                                     1 500                  1 800                     2 100                     2 400                     2 700                                  10 500 
Communication costs (phone, internet, radio, media)                         4 680                  5 280                     5 880                     7 200                     9 000                                  32 040 
Electricity costs                                                                                       700                          -                        800                             -                     1 100                                    2 600 
Fuel for transportation and generator                                                  9 600                10 800                   12 000                   14 400                   18 000                                  64 800 
Total fixed costs                                                                               60 870                64 040                   68 010                   72 300                   83 770                                348 990 
Fixed costs + variable costs                                                            71 270                73 790                   83 850                 135 389                 174 089                                538 388 
d) Income of FO 
Quantities of product X to market                                                            210                     420                        882                     1 323                     1 985                                    4 820 
Quantities of product Y to market                                                              70                     140                        187                        249                        249                                       894 
Total quantities to market                                                                     280                     560                      1069                      1572                     2 233                                    5 714 
Price (X)                                                                                                $1.04                  $1.15                     $1.32                     $1.52                     $1.52 
Price (Y)                                                                                                $1.04                  $1.15                     $1.32                     $1.52                     $1.52 
Income out of sales 
144 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Activities                                                                                               2013                   2014                      2015                      2016                      2017                                    Total 
Product X                                                                                            21 000                42 000                   88 200                 132 300                 198 450                                481 950 
Product Y                                                                                              7 000                14 000                   18 667                   24 889                   24 889                                  89 444 
Total income from sales                                                                  28 000                56 000                 106 867                 157 189                 223 339                                571 394 
Administrative income 
Shares of members (a/member)                                                           4 167                  5 556                     6 944                   10 667                   12 987                                  40 320 
Membership fees (b/member)                                                              2 083                  3 472                     5 000                     6 667                     8 117                                  25 339 
Total administrative income                                                              6 250                  9 028                   11 944                   17 333                   21 104                                  65 659 
Other income 
Payback of equipment                                                                          2 160                  3 240                     5 040                     3 600                     3 600                                  17 640 
Total other income                                                                             2 160                  3 240                     5 040                     3 600                     3 600                                  17 640 
Total income of FO                                                                           36 410                68 268                 123 851                 178 122                 248 043                                654 694 
SUMMARY BUSINESS PLAN 
Total variable costs 
Total fixed costs 
Fixed costs + variable costs 
Total income from sales 
Product X 
Product Y 
Total administrative income 
Total other income 
Total income of FO 
10 400 
60 870 
71 270 
28 000 
21 000 
7 000 
6 250 
2 160 
36 410 
9 750 
64 040 
73 790 
56 000 
42 000 
14 000 
9 028 
3 240 
68 268 
15 840 
68 010 
83 850 
106 867 
88 200 
18 667 
11 944 
5 040 
63 089 
72 300 
135 389 
157 189 
132 300 
24 889 
17 333 
3 600 
123 851 
178 122 
90 319 
83 770 
174 089 
223 339 
198 450 
24 889 
21 104 
3 600 
248 043 
GROSS MARGIN (+) / (-) 
-34 860 
-5 522 
40 001 
42 734 
73 954 
Amortization 
NET MARGIN  (+) / (-) 
21 206 
-56 066 
21 206 
-26 728 
21 206 
18 795 
21 206 
21 527 
21 206 
52 748 
189 398 
348 990 
538 388 
571 394 
481 950 
89 444 
65 659 
17 640 
654 694 
116 306 
106 031 
10 275 
145 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Annex V: Supervision, management and oversight (finanical reporting and monitoring) of the 
SAP Line of Credit (LOC) 
The SAP line of credit, administered by the Regional Development Department (RDD) of the Central 
Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL), represents three loan products: 
1)   Working capital loans for farmers engaged in 4P arrangements; 
2)   Term  loans  for  investments  in  equipment  and  machinery up  to  a  duration  of  five  years  for 
farmers engaged in 4P arrangements; 
3)   Working capital and investment loans for a duration of up to two years for youths, which may 
be combined with start-up funds. 
The mechanism for disbursing these credit facilities to beneficiaries will be in  line with the terms and 
conditions  of  the  subsidiary  loan  agreements  (SLAs)  signed  between  GOSL  and  CBSL.  CBSL  will 
subsequently sign separate SLAs with the participating financial institutions (PFIs) and RDD/CBSL will 
provide  the  operational  guidelines  for  each  category  of  loans  mentioned  above.  All  SLAs  will  be 
transmitted to IFAD. 
Financial  reporting  and  monitoring  arrangements.  There  are  several  institutions  involved  in  the 
process to maintain a better control (financial reporting and monitoring) over the LOC and the transfer 
of funds. Each institution has a separate role to play in this respect, as indicated below. 
1.    Participatory Financial Institutions (PFIs) 
   For youth and 4P borrowers, the Social Mobilisers and Agro-business companies send the list 
of potential borrowers to the PFIs for appraisal and onward registration with CBSL 
     Conduct the pre-supervision and post-supervision of the loan 
   Use PFI’s own funds to disburse loans (pre-finance) to the registered beneficiaries as per the 
operating instructions issued by Regional Development Department of CBSL (RDD) 
     Submits claims for re-financing to the RDD 
   Report  physical  and  financial  progress  of  fund  disbursement  and  refinance  to  PMU  on  a 
monthly basis 
2.    The Regional Development Department of CBSL 
     Act as the Fund Manager of the SAP LOC 
  
Issue Operating Instructions to  PFIs  on  each  credit  (loan  product)  line  and  regularize fund 
disbursement 
     Register beneficiary applications for loans submitted by PFIs 
     Make sure sufficient funds are available for refinance 
     Request adequate funds from PMU for re-finance 
     Release re-finance to the PFIs as and when PFIs submits re-finance applications 
   Maintenance  of  the  financial  documents  within  the  CBSL  for  the  purpose  of  releasing  re- 
finance to PFIs 
     Maintain separate General Ledgers (GL) for each loan product 
     Maintain two accounts 
o  Account for disbursement to the PFIs 
o  Revolving Account in which PFIs pay the repayment 
     Submit monthly statements of Bank Accounts to PMU 
     Submit comprehensive disbursement list quarterly to the PMU for each loan product 
   RDD will automate their operations, thus improving the processing time to register the clients 
as well as produce timely reports 
3.    Programme Management Unit (PMU) 
     Acts as the implementing agency of micro credits
146 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
     Verifies the fund requests submit by RDD with PFIs 
     Maintains a fund register to record and control the funds 
     Maintains a data base for micro finance under NADeP 
   Monitor the re-finance account balances held with RDD through the monthly bank statements 
and through the statements pertaining to release of re-finance by RDD 
     Prepare the withdrawal application as per the request of RDD 
     Processes  the  fund  requirement  applications  submitted  by  RDD  and  submit  it   to   the 
Presidential Secretariat for the recommendation 
   Programme  Manager  and  Finance  Manager  are  the  two  authorized  signatories  for  the 
withdrawal application 
   Coordinate  and  conduct  monthly  review  meetings  with  PFIs  and  CBSL  to  evaluate  the 
progress  of  the  credit  disbursements  by  the  PFIs,  ascertain  the  re-finance  position,  identify 
the challenges and issues and address them to find solutions 
     Conduct of sample based verification at the grassroots level to verify the performance of  the 
client’s projects 
     Conduct baseline studies 
     Conduct appropriate skill training programmes to beneficiaries and to PFI officials 
   Social  mobilizers  appointed  by  PMU  act  as  a  catalyzing  agent  at  the  grass  root  level 
facilitating linkage between youth/ 4Ps and Borrowers 
   Report  fund  utilization  and  performance  based  results  to  NSC  and  the  LPA  on  a  monthly 
basis 
4.    Presidential Secretariat Division (PSD) 
     Act as the Lead Agency of SAP 
   Verify  and  recommends  to  the  Department  of  Treasury  Operations,  the  fund  withdrawal 
requests forwarded by PMU 
5.    Department of Treasury Operations 
     Act as the authority of the fund on behalf of the Government of Sri Lanka (GOSL) 
   Verify  and  authorize  the  withdrawal  application  and  instruct  the  Chief  Accountant  of  the 
Finance  Department of  CBSL  to  effect  the  withdrawal  and  transfer  the  requested  funds  to 
the RDD of the CBSL 
Audit arrangements. The CBSL has an internal audit department, reporting to the Monetary Board of 
CBSL. CBSL is also externally audited by a private audit firm on an annual basis. Each PFI has 
internal audit arrangements, and are externally audited on an annual basis; PFIs as deposit-taking 
institutions, are as well regularly monitored by the CBSL banking supervision (inspection) department. 
Under SAP, the SLA between CBSL and GOSL will specify the need for a separate audit of the CBSL 
SAP LOC account, and the CBSL annual audit should be submitted to the PMU. The SLA between 
CBSL and PFIs, will also make provision for the need for PFIs to submit annual audited statements. 
Leveraging the existing Lines of Credit 
The SAP line of credit will include reflows from existing/ previous IFAD-financed lines of credit – 
notably funds provided under the NADeP, SPEnDP and Dry Zone projects. At present, RDD/CBSL 
maintains a separate revolving account for each of these sources of funds, into which the PFIs make 
repayments. W hilst repayments have been (and continue to be) made into these revolving accounts, 
the funds are not currently being revolved,  pending the operationalization of SAP. For the purposes 
of SAP, the SLAs between the GOSL and CBSL governing these existing funds (NADeP, SPEnDP 
and Dry Zone) will be amended to consolidate the three sources of funds into one revolving account 
for SAP. Once SAP becomes operational and the (existing) funds are leveraged and consolidated in 
one revolving account, the funds will be revolved.
147 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
The recovered amount and projected inflows into the revolving accounts held by the RDD/CBSL of the 
existing lines of credit (NADeP, SPEnDP and Dry Zone projects) is as follows: 
Existing line of 
credit LKR in 
Million 
NADeP 
SPENdP 
Dry Zone 
Total in LKR in 
million 
Total in USD in 
Million (1 USD= 
150 LKR) 
Loan 
Out. 
Yet to 
disburse 
836 
Nill 
200 
1036 
887 
Nill 
Nill 
887 
Projected Inflows 
Year  1 
(JAN 
2018) 
168 
473 
40 
Year  2 
(2019) 
210 
- 
40 
Year  3 
(2020) 
263 
- 
40 
year   4 
(2021) 
328 
- 
40 
Year  5 
(2022) 
410 
- 
40 
Year  6 
(2023) 
513 
- 
40 
Total 
1,891 
473 
240 
681 
250 
303 
368 
450 
553 
2,605 
6,9 
6 
4,5 
1,6 
2,0 
2,5 
3,0 
3,7 
17.3 
Snapshot of the NADeP Line of Credit (as at end 2016) 
148 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5:    Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
149 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:    Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Appendix 6:   Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge 
management 
Log-frame and Annual Work Plan and Budgets (AWPB): 
1.       The programme log-frame shows the main expected activities for the life of the programme and 
will be the basis for the definition of the AWPB. The programme log-frame is sufficiently detailed; but it 
will need to be periodically reviewed and, as necessary, refined to reflect the current situation during 
the programme life. The AWPB would represent the key planning document of the SAP. It would serve 
as the instrument for identifying the specific targets relative to the  agreed programme outcomes and 
outputs  and  the  activities  to  be  carried  out  in  order  to  achieve  them;  as  well  as  integrating 
management  priorities  for  implementation, forecasting  procurement  requirements  and  facilitating  the 
mobilization of staff and financial resources SAP is a national scope hence the AWPB will not need to 
include  a  geographical  classification  of  targets.  Immediate  responsibility  for  the  preparation  of  the 
AW PB  process  would  be  assumed  by  the  two  component  heads  (agribusiness  and  rural  finance), 
under the  guidance of  the  Programme Director and  with  the  assistance of  the  heads of  finance and 
M&E.  Following  Year  1  however,  the  process  of  developing  the  AW PB  is  expected  to  be  an 
increasingly participatory process, and to involve the broader staff of the PMU. 
2.       The Programme Director (PD)  will coordinate the  preparation of  a consolidated AW PB, which 
would be finalized with the approval of the Programme Steering Committee (PSC). The AW PB would 
be submitted to IFAD for its concurrence. If required, the PMU may propose adjustments in the AWPB 
during  the  relevant  programme  year. Although  annual  in  scope,  the AW PB  would  be  disaggregated 
into  quarterly  segments  for  ease  of  implementation.  It  is  also  the  foundation  for  monitoring  the 
progress at the activity level and regarding resource use/allocation. IFAD guidelines would be used for 
the preparation of the AW PB. 
Monitoring & Evaluation: 
3.       Introduction and Scope. The main purpose of an M&E system is to provide comprehensive, 
frequent and reliable data and information for sound result-based management and decision-making. 
M&E  lies  at  the  heart  of  ‘managing for  impact’, by  which  is  meant  the  need  to  respond to  changing 
circumstances and increased understanding, and managing adaptively so that the programme is more 
likely  to  achieve  its  intended  impacts.  It  is  thus  intended  to  be  management  tool  that  can  inform 
programme  management  of  whether  implementation  is  going  as  planned  or  corrective  action  is 
needed.  Beyond  that  however,  it  should  also  contribute to  the  programme’s learning  agenda  as  to 
what  works,  what  doesn’t  and  why;  and  it  should  promote  accountability  –  enabling  the  PMU  to 
report  to  Government and  IFAD  on  its  performance and  impact. Ultimately, it  should serve  to  satisfy 
the five standard evaluation questions at the end of the programme: 
(a)      Relevance - Does the programme deals with target group priorities; 
(b)      Effectiveness  -  Have  the  planned  purpose  and  component  objectives,  outputs  and 
activities been achieved; 
(c)      Efficiency - W ere inputs (resources and time) used in  the  best  possible way to  achieve 
out-comes?  What  could  do  differently  to  improve  implementation,  there-by  maximizing 
impact, at an acceptable and sustainable cost; 
(d)      Impact - To what extent has the programme contributed towards its longer-term goals? 
What  unanticipated  positive  or  negative  consequences  did  the  programme  have?  To 
what  extent  has 
towards  poverty  reduction?  W hat 
unanticipated positive or negative consequences did the programme have; 
the  programme  contributed 
(e)      Sustainability  -  W ill  there  be  continued  positive  impacts  as  a  result  of  the  programme 
completed.
once 
has 
it 
151 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:    Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
4.       The M&E system should generate comprehensive and reliable information to improve planning 
and decision making for results-based management during the programme life. The system would be 
expected to provide data on the following: 
(a)      Output monitoring; focusing on physical and financial inputs, activities and outputs; 
(b)      Outcome monitoring; assessing the use of outputs and measuring benefits; and 
(c)      Impact assessment; assessing impact for target groups in comparison with objectives. 
5.       The performance indicators at each of these levels identified in the programme log-frame would 
be  further  refined  during  implementation.  Progress  monitoring  would  focus  on  the  financial  and 
physical  performance  of  the  programme.  Quarterly  and  annual  reports  would  be  produced  which 
would contain data relevant to programme inputs, outputs and emerging outcome/impact. 
6.       The  output  indicators  would  include  the  number  of  private  sector-led  and  FO-led  4P  BPs 
developed  and  financed,  number  of  FOs  formed  and  strengthened,  number  of  men  and  women 
members, number trained, and number provided financial services, number and types of employment 
generated  by  4P  BPs,  number  of  people  trained  in  technical  skills  and  sustainable  resource 
management, etc.  The  service  provider/(s)  recruited  to  undertake  capacity  building  programmes for 
FOs would be required to provide regular reports on FO registration data, achievement of FOs, etc. 
7.       The main impact indicators that  would be used to monitor and assess  programme impact are 
the  two  anchor  indicators  used  by  IFAD  to  assess  programme  impact  namely;  a)  the  number  of 
households with improvement in household asset ownership index; and b) percentage reduction in the 
prevalence  of  child  malnutrition.  The  former  is  an  indicator  of  increased  income  and  the  latter,  an 
indicator  of  reduction  in  hunger. A few  2nd  level  RIMS  indicators  relevant  for  the  programme  have 
been identified and are given in the programme log-frame.66 
8.       All M&E activities would be based on the IFAD Guidelines for programme M&E, as well as the 
IFAD  RIMS  Handbooks  for  first  and  second  level  Indicators.  IFAD  would  provide  M&E  and  RIMS 
training  to  those  involved  in  the  implementation  of  the  programme.  All  indicators  would  be 
disaggregated according to  gender and socio-economic status so as to enable a proper assessment 
as to  whether the programme is reaching its intended target beneficiaries, poor households, women, 
youth  and  vulnerable  households. To  ensure  gender  and  youth-sensitive M&E,  the  programme staff 
responsible  for  data  collection  and  monitoring  would  be  trained  in  understanding  and  using  gender 
indicators, and detailed gender-sensitive indicators for the programme M&E system will be developed 
with  the  support  of  the  gender  and  youth  specialist.  Among  other  indicators,  the  M&E  system  will 
report in a sex and age disaggregated manner on the performance of loans and organizations/groups. 
9.       Implementation Responsibilities. M&E tasks will  not be  the sole responsibility of  M&E staff 
only. Rather, they should be seen as functions of all the staff and the responsibility needs to be shared 
with  component  heads.  Making  the  M&E  system  and  processes  more  participatory  means  sharing 
these  functions,  and  it  makes  shared  learning  through  M&E  possible.  A  distribution  of  such  tasks 
among  the  PMU  staff,  and  individual  staff  objectives  and  responsibilities  in  M&E,  need  to  be 
functions.
of 
articulated 
key  M&E 
delivery 
ensure 
PMU's 
the 
the 
to 
Having said that, overall responsibility for the programme M&E activities will lie with the Deputy
10. 
Programme Manager, M&E in the PMU, assisted by two other development assistants, M&E. In broad 
terms, some of the key and priority tasks to be undertaken by the PMU in terms of M&E would be as 
follows: 
66  Since 2004, IFAD has promoted the Results and Impact Measurement System (RIMS) as a standardized system of reporting 
programme results and impact which all IFAD-funded programmes must provide to the Fund. RIMS currently attempts to 
measure results at the three levels of the logical framework concerned with outputs (level one), effects (level 2) and impact 
(level 3). It relies on specific indicators as instruments to measure results at each level. Each AWPB and annual report would 
be supplemented with selected RIMS indicators which have been specially identified in the programme log-frame to enable the 
programme to report on these indicators of special importance to IFAD. However, a new set of RIMS guidelines are expected to 
be released in 2017; and these new indicators will be reflected in the programme M&E frame.
152 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:    Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
(a)      Define clear  and  easily measurable indicators (disaggregated according to  gender,  age 
and socio-economic status) as well as their baseline measurement requirements – Year 
1; 
(b)      Launch  the  baseline  data  collection,  including  a  baseline  survey  for  3rd  level  (impact) 
indicators – Year 1; 
(c)          Develop  a  detailed  M&E  plan  which  articulates,  inter  alia,  methods  and  resources  for 
collecting  data,  responsibility  for  data  collection  or  for  analysis,  frequency  of  data 
collection,  resources  needed  for  collection  and  analysis,  reporting  and  use  of  analyzed 
data. Responsibilities specified under the plan should be discussed with key partners that 
will  be  involved  in  data  collection  and  analysis  –   Year  1  onwards  with  changes 
applicable; 
(d)      Develop a programme MIS to store and collate data and facilitate data analysis; 
(e)      Train the Social Mobilisers in data collection and inputting; 
(f)       Enable  the  programme  partners,  companies,  FOs  and  PFIs,  to  become  effective 
participants in the programme M&E system; 
(g)      Co-ordinate with IFAD to arrange M&E and RIMS training; 
(h)      Integrate lessons learned from presently on-going IFAD-funded NADeP in particular; 
(i)       Develop a  learning  agenda  around  key models  and  approaches being  promoted under 
the programme; and 
(j)       Timely fine-tune  log-frame to  ensure  clear  outcome  statements that  define  the  change 
required for the target group and the scale of that change. 
In consideration of  SAP's  operational modalities, in  particular its reliance on business models
11. 
(4P) and related partnership agreements with the private sector and FOs for delivering benefits to the 
target  group  and  fulfilling  the  programme's  objectives,  responsibilities  for  monitoring  programme 
inputs,  outputs  and  outcomes  will  involve  a  range  of  programme  stakeholders.  Responsibility  for 
collection and inputing of data would thus be decentralised and diffused, lying with: (a) the 40 Social 
Mobilisers employed under the programme (who will all be provided with tablets for data entry); (b) the 
private  sector  agribusiness companies;  (c)  the  participating financial  institutions;  and  (d)  the  service 
providers responsible for strengthening the capacity of farmer organizations; all of whom would follow 
agreed  reporting  formats  and  schedules.  In  building  this  multi-partner  M&E  system  (which  will  be 
based on that already been established under NADeP) key roles for the DPM M&E will thus be to: 
(a)      communicate to programme partners the information requirements of the programme; 
(b)      advise/assist  programme  partners  in  establishing  their  results  measurement  systems 
and,  jointly  with  such  partners,  select  the  most  appropriate  methods  to  meet  the 
information needs of the PMU and of different partners; 
(c)      collect  information  at  the  central  level,  and  validate  the  reliability  and  accuracy  of 
collected data; 
(d)      collate, analyse and share submitted data, as well as relevant secondary data, to assess 
the efficacy of the programme in meeting its objectives (including targeting and outreach 
to women / youth); 
(e)      track whether the pace of implementation progress and the quality of partners' execution 
of  agreements are  adequate  (including,  inter  alia,  determine farm  gate  prices,  accurate 
reporting on post-harvest operating costs, adequate cash flow, etc.); and 
(f)          produce  written  reports  or  other  knowledge  products  that  disseminate  programme 
achievements  /  experience  to  different  stakeholders  -  ranging  from  participating  rural
153 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:    Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
youth,  women and  men,  to  FOs  and  private company partners, PFIs,  policy makers in 
Government, and IFAD. 
The M&E system will be web-based – the system has already been developed under NADeP;
12. 
and this  will make it  possible for the various  programme stakeholders responsible for data collection 
to  input  data  simply  and  in  real  time  using  smart  phones  or  tablets,  and  for  that  key  data  to  be 
stakeholders.
immediately  analysed,  presented  and 
shared  among 
programme 
the 
Impact  assessment.  To  capture  baseline  information  relevant  for  the  programme,  several
13. 
baseline  questionnaires  would  be  developed  and  administered to  participating  households  and  FOs 
under  each  approved  4P  scheme  (i.e.  sub-project),  in  order  to  capture  the  impact  of  scheme/  sub- 
project  activities.  These  questionnaires  would  capture  the  socio-economic  status  of  the  households 
and  FOs  before  the  implementation  of  the  sub-project  activities.  The  multiple  4P  baseline  survey 
(BLS) would be contracted to a third party service provider, if the combination of the PMU and private 
sector are unable to conduct the survey; in any case, the baseline survey should be undertaken within 
six  months  of  the  sub-project  being  approved.  Comparison  with  a  control  group  may  also  be 
undertaken to  identify and  isolate  programme specific impact. The sample size for  the  survey would 
be  based  on  a  95%  level  of  confidence.  At  the  end  of  the  programme  implementation  period,  a 
completion evaluation would be  conducted through a  formal survey to  assess impact, and the same 
households and societies would be tracked. This evaluation will serve to assess the contribution of the 
programme towards  achieving the  development objective, relying  heavily,  though  not  exclusively, on 
the rigorous monitoring and evaluation of  the financed 4P schemes (sub-project) and their results; a 
final survey will be conducted, which will collect data and information related to the RIMS impact-level 
indicators  (household  assets,  child  malnutrition,  etc.).  IFAD  itself  may  also  undertake  a  formal 
(IOE).
evaluation  of 
Independent  Office  of  Evaluation 
the  programme 
through 
its 
Impact  monitoring  would  focus  on  the  outcome  and  impact  level  indicators  specified  in  the
14. 
programme  log-frame.  Surveys  would  be  undertaken  at  critical  times  during  the  programme  to 
measure changes  in  these  indicators. The  impact  surveys  would  be  outsourced to  a  third  party  firm 
skilled  in  such  surveys.  Various  methods  of  impact  monitoring  and  evaluation  would  be  used 
including:  participatory  impact  assessment  as  an  annual  exercise  to  review  activities  and  plans  by 
beneficiaries / FOs and record any change achieved, whether positive or negative, in the lives of the 
beneficiaries / FOs due to programme interventions. Special studies would be undertaken from time to 
implementation.
aspects 
time 
programme 
examine 
certain 
of 
to 
Mid-Term Review  (MTR).   A Mid-term  review  would  be  conducted at  the  end  of  programme
15. 
year  three,  Its  purpose  will  be  to:  (i) review  and  evaluate  the  scope,  design,  and  implementation 
arrangements  of  the  Programme;  (ii)  evaluate  the  progress  of  the  institutional  development  and 
capacity  of  the  implementing agencies;  (iii)  identify  changes  needed  in  any  of  the  areas  mentioned 
above;  (iv)  assess  the  implementation  performance  against  agreed   Programme  indicators  and 
targets; (v)  review and  establish compliance with the  loan covenants; and (vi)  identify critical issues, 
problems,  and  constraints,  and,  as  necessary,  recommend  adjustments  in  Programme  design  or 
implementation strategy and arrangements – and associated financial allocations – in order to ensure 
the  full  achievement  of  the  programme  impact.  The  MTR  would  be  carried  out  jointly  by  the 
Presidential  Secretariat,  as  the  lead  implementing  agency,  and  assess  the  role  of  the  participating 
etc.
FOs, 
government, 
private 
sector 
PFIs, 
and 
role 
the 
the 
of 
A  Programme  Completion  Report  (PCR)  will  be  conducted  within  6  months  of  physical
16. 
completion of the Programme, according to standard IFAD requirements. 
Learning and knowledge management:
Learning and knowledge management would be a key underlining theme of the SAP. The main
17. 
purpose of KM processes within SAP would be to ensure that knowledge generated is systematically 
identified, analyzed, documented, used to improve programme performance; communicated to policy 
makers to inform Government’s policy making process; and shared with key stakeholders. SAP would
154 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:    Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
be expected to provide opportunities for considerable learning at the policy and operational level given 
that it would include certain novel features to pro-poor business partnering and rural financing.
Business  models  like  4P  currently  being  practiced  by  NADeP  are  expected  to  broaden  to
18. 
include  a  FO-led  4P  model,  and  understanding  the  benefits  and  costs  of  the  4P  model  and  its 
variants, as  compared to  other approaches to  smallholder agricultural development, will  be  valuable. 
So  too   will   be  to   understand  better   different  models  of   farmer  organization,  and   alternative 
approaches to supporting these to become more commercially oriented and play a more active role in 
agricultural value chains; alternative approaches for supporting rural youth employability, and creation 
of  opportunities  for  employment  and  self-employment;  approaches  and  technologies  for  promoting 
lower  use  of  agro-chemicals  and  climate-resilient  production;  and  the  responses  of  participating 
dfinancial institutions to the incentives and institutional strengthening provided udner the  programme. 
Success with any of these elements would have a significant impact on the strategies currently used 
in  the  business  modeling  and  rural  finance  sector;  and  it  would  be  important  to  document  the 
experience  and  disseminate  the  results  for  wider  policy  impact.  The  programme  would  provide  the 
opportunity  to  compile  and  disseminate  and  share  the  lessons  in  a  systematic  manner.  Provision 
would be made in the budget for preparation of case studies of success and failure and for technical 
programme.
and 
learning 
aspects 
notes 
key 
the 
on 
of 
155 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:    Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Appendix 7:   Financial management and disbursement 
arrangements 
Financial Management (FM) Assessment 
1.       The Borrower and the lead project agency are required to maintain acceptable financial 
management systems including accounting, financial reporting, and auditing systems. A financial 
management assessment of the Smallholder Agribusiness Partnership project (herein referred to as 
“SAP” or the “Project”) was carried out in accordance with IFAD’s Guidance Note on Undertaking 
Financial Management Assessment at Design, issued in 2012. The objective of the FM assessment 
was to determine whether the Presidential Secretariat, as the lead project agency of the Project, has 
acceptable FM systems to provide IFAD reasonable assurance that funds will be used for the 
intended purpose and enable project development objectives to be met. On the understanding that 
SAP will be implemented by the PMU currently managing NADeP, the assessment has found the 
proposed arrangements to be acceptable. 
2.       The assessed FM risk of the project is considered medium as summarized in Table 1. 
Programme Financial Profile 
3.       Total IFAD financing available for the project is US$ 105 million, of which US$ 54.5 million is in 
the form of a loan from IFAD. Additional contributions are expected to be provided by both public and 
private partners as follows: 
     GoSL – US$ 19.6 million 
     Private sector – US$ 17 million 
     Participating Financial Institutions – US$ 9.5 million 
     Beneficiaries – US$ 4.5 million 
4.       The proposed project will have the following components with their respective cost allocation: 
     Component 1 – Access to commercial partnerships (US$ 53.5 million) 
     Component 2 –  Access to rural finance (US$ 45.4 million) 
     Component 3 – Project management and policy dialogue (US$ 6.1 million) 
5.       SAP involves 4P approaches governed by multi-partite agreements between LPA, participating 
financial   institutions,   private   sector   companies   and   project   beneficiaries,   including   farmers' 
organisations, through provision of grants, loans and services to farmers. 
Lead Programme Agency (LPA) 
6.       The  Presidential  Secretariat,  headed  by  the  Secretary,  is  the  office  of  the  President  of  Sri 
Lanka.  It  provides  the  administrative  and  institutional  framework  for  the  exercise  of  the  duties, 
responsibilities and powers vested in the President by the Constitution. 
7.       The Presidential Secretariat has ongoing experience in the implementation of an IFAD-funded 
project, NADEP, whose Project Management Unit will manage SAP.  The Project will be implemented 
using  GOSL  financial  regulations,  complemented  by  project-specific  guidelines,  as  the  basis  for 
budgeting, accounting and internal controls, and auditing. 
PFM and Governance 
8.       Sri  Lanka  is  a  lower  middle-income  country  with  a  total  population  of  21  million  people. 
Following a 30  year civil war that  ended in  2009, Sri Lanka’s economy has grown at an average 6.4 
percent  between  2010-2015,  transitioning  from  a  previously  predominantly  rural-based  agriculture 
economy towards a more urbanized economy driven by services. 
9.       In terms of governance, IFAD classifies Sri Lanka as a medium risk environment. With a rating 
of  37,  Transparency  International  ranked  Sri  Lanka  83rd  out  of  175  in  2015  in  the  Corruption
157 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:    Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Perceptions Index, a slight deterioration compared to 38 in 2014. Corruption remains a problem in the 
country.   Institutional reforms  are  hampered by  party  politics,  as  illustrated  by  the  resignation of  the 
head  of  the  anti-corruption  body  in  October  2016.  Poor  whistle-blower  protection  has  a  negative 
impact  on  citizen's  willingness to  stand  up  against  corruption.   In  terms  of  Ease  of  Doing  Business 
(World Bank), there has  been an  improving trend  which ranked Sri  Lanka 107th out  of  189  in  2016, 
2015.
compared 
113 
to 
in 
The findings of  a  Public  Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) report conducted  in
10. 
2013 were not made publicly available. According to a study conducted by USAID in 2015, PFM in Sri 
Lanka is fragmented and unable to ensure adequate and efficient use of public resources.  The study 
reports that the PFM administration is rather obsolete, that mismanaged organizational changes have 
worsened  the  situation  as  new  civil  servants  and  political  appointees  take  time  to  learn  the  system 
they operate in or initiate changes without taking into account the limitations and opportunities of the 
operations.
current 
system 
and 
PFM is highly discretionary as line ministries and agencies can make separate decisions and
11. 
work  under  their  own  operational  rules,  deciding  on  projects,  surpassing  budget  ceilings,  and 
controlling  allocations  and  flow  of  funds.  On  the  surface,  the  decentralized  approach  allows  for 
flexibility at line ministry level. However, planning resources, spending funds unaligned with a national 
strategy, and disregarding budget constraints, all introduce financial risks that initially appear as fiscal 
imbalances  but  in  fact,  can  be  interpreted  as  mismanagement  and  misappropriation  of  public 
entities.
resources 
officials 
ranking 
charge 
those 
high 
by 
of 
in 
The  USAID  report  assesses  the  present  capacity  of  MOF  as  insufficient  and  inadequate  to
12. 
manage  the  expansion,  implementation,  and  oversight  of  the  national  budget,  which  has  grown 
dramatically in size and complexity in recent years. The regulatory framework, information technology 
(IT) capacity, and human resources to elaborate and execute the budget have seen few updates over 
the  past  twenty  years, however some efforts to modernize management and  operations at  the  MOF 
are  ongoing,  including  a  project  (ADB  funded)  to  introduce  and  roll  out  a  Financial  Management 
Information System  (FMIS).   The  number  of  employees  within  MOF  has  more  than  doubled  in  past 
years, but this has not contributed to significantly increasing the ministry’s efficiency given the lack of 
knowledge,  experience,  and  training  of  the  new  employees.  Manual,  paper-based  processes  still 
agencies.
prevail 
line-ministries 
government 
across 
and 
IFAD  projects  are  partially  aligned  to  Sri  Lanka  PFM  systems.    Projects  are  managed  by
13. 
coordination units embedded within executing agencies and are staffed by a mix of civil servants and 
contracted  staff.    Funds  flow  through  Treasury  systems,  with  USD  ledger  accounts.  Executing 
agencies  may  hold  Rupee  accounts  at  State  commercial  banks,  which  are  part  of  the  Treasury 
system.  Projects’ annual accounts are audited by the supreme audit institution, the Auditor General of 
Lanka.
Sri 
Government reporting systems are  partially used  for  IFAD  and  other  donors’ projects, but  do
14. 
not allow sufficient detail to meet donor requirements for reporting expenditure.  In terms of oversight, 
donors  do  not  generally rely  on  internal  audit  systems  due  to  insufficient capacities,  the  services  of 
private  audit  firms  are  sometimes  used  to  complement  the  internal  audit  function.  Sri  Lanka  has  a 
five  professional  accountancy 
vibrant  accountancy  profession 
organizations, however the public sector fails to draw good capacity given low salary scales.   CASL, 
the  promulgator  of  accounting  and  auditing  standards  in  the  country,  has  launched  a  series  of 
initiatives  to  enhance  public  sector  accounting  and  reporting  practices.  Sri  Lanka  is  in  transition  to 
IPSAS. Accrual accounting has not yet been adopted in the public sector. 
the  corporate  sector  with 
in 
Risk Assessment and Mitigation
15. 
The summary risk analysis provided in this section has been developed on the assumption that
SAP  will  be  implemented  by  the  PMU  currently managing  NADeP.  Table  1  identifies  the  key  risks 
related to the Project’s financial management and suggests how such risks can be mitigated.
158 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:    Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Table 1: Key Financial Management Risks and Mitigation Measures 
Type of risk 
Risk rating 
Risk mitigating measures 
Inherent Risks 
Project Control Risks 
Medium 
Residual 
risk rating 
Medium 
Organization and Staffing 
Insufficient capacity of finance 
function; high turnover 
Budgeting 
Inadequate budget planning (national 
budget) resulting in insufficient 
appropriation of IFAD and Government 
funds 
Delays in preparation of AWPBs weaken 
project implementation 
Weak budget monitoring capacity 
Funds Flow 
The project has insufficient liquidity and 
cannot pay suppliers timely 
Delays in certification processes by 
promoter companies cause grants to 
take longer than intended to reach 
beneficiaries, resulting in goods and 
works having to be pre-financed by 
participating companies 
Delays in availability of counterpart 
funding 
Internal Controls 
Weak internal control framework leads 
to diluted accountabilities and potential 
misuse of resources or/and ineligible 
expenditure 
Accounting 
Failure to maintain accurate and timely 
accounting information due to manual 
accounting systems 
Financial Reporting 
Manual accounting systems limit the 
reliability and usefulness of financial 
reporting 
Medium  SAP is expected to be implemented by the PMU managing 
Low 
NADEP, which will ensure continuity. NADEP's finance unit is 
adequately staffed in terms of numbers and capacity, and may 
be complemented on a needs basis for SAP 
Medium  Additional appropriations can be obtained through 
Low 
supplemental processes 
AWPB planning will begin three months prior to year end to 
ensure timely approvals by NSC and IFAD 
The automated accounting and financial reporting system which 
is currently under procurement will enhance the capacity to 
monitor budget execution 
Medium  The designated account will carry a six-month advance that 
should be sufficient to ensure adequate liquidity but may be 
adjusted based on requirements. Automated financial reporting 
on accruals basis will facilitate efficient treasury forecasting 
Medium 
Dedicated PMU staff and contracted social mobilisers will 
monitor the execution of 4P contracts, to ensure timely 
certification processes 
Government counterpart will consist of taxes and some 
salaries, in addition to LOC refinance resources.  NADEP PMU 
has successfully mobilized counterpart funding to date through 
monthly requests 
Low 
High 
High 
NADEP has strong, documented, internal controls based on 
Government Financial Regulations, with clearly segregated 
roles and responsibilities. NADEP's finance manual will be 
finalised and approved by March 2017 and will form the basis 
for SAP manual, which will be a disbursement condition for SAP 
financing 
An multi-project off-the-shelf accounting software is under 
procurement to record NADEP expenditure up until closure in 
2018. The contract will foresee a provision for customisation to 
meet IFAD reporting requirements and after-sales services. It 
has been agreed with the Auditor General that AG staff will be 
involved in the training to be provided. 
Low 
Medium 
Procedures for using the software will be documented in the 
project's finance manual. 
By the time SAP has been launched, the finance unit will be 
fully trained with the use of the automated system currently 
under procurement and familiar with its capabilities. The 
continued use of an automated system will be foreseen as a 
legal covenant for SAP. 
Medium 
Quarterly Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) will be prepared by 
the PMU and submitted to IFAD within 30 days after the end of 
each calendar quarter.  The format of these IFRs will be agreed 
in advance and specified in the LTB and finance manual 
159 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:    Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Internal Audit 
Lack of adequate manpower to provide 
internal audit services 
Medium  An internal auditor hired by NADEP at the end of 2016 is 
Medium 
currently providing related services, reporting to the project 
manager. This arrangement will be re-assessed in 2017, as 
best practice would dictate segregation of project management 
and internal audit functions. The LPA's internal audit unit will be 
requested to include SAP (and NADEP, up until closure) in its 
annual work planning. 
Separate internal audit arrangements are in place for the line of 
credit managed by CBSL RDD for NADEP and other LOCs, will 
continue to be foreseen for the … merged LOC Fund under 
SAP. 
In line with its constitutional mandate, external audit is 
conducted by the Auditor General of Sri Lanka, the supreme 
audit institution.  To mitigate the risk of late submission, SAP 
will be required to submit its unaudited financial statements 
to AG within two months of year end. 
NADEP audit arrangements foresee a supplemental opinion 
on the usage of resources under the 4P contracts. A similar 
arrangement will be put in place for SAP, which will also 
foresee additional audit requirements for MoUs with farmers 
organisations and the Mahaweli authority. 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
External audit 
Audits are received late and do not meet 
IFAD's requirements 
High 
Annual audits do not provide useful 
information on compliance with 
contracts under the 4P scheme and 
refinance components 
CONTROL RISK 
OVERALL RISK 
Medium 
Medium 
Organization and Staffing
16. 
A Project Management Unit, headed by a Project Director, was created by the LPA in 2015 to
implement the NADEP project, under the oversight of a steering committee chaired by the Presidential 
Secretary. The scope of the PMU will be extended to cover SAP project.
The  Finance  Unit  is  composed  of  four  full-time  staff.   The  Finance  Manager  is  a  chartered
17. 
accountant with 24  years' experience in GoSL and a Master in Public Management.    She is assisted 
by  a  Deputy  Finance  Manager  with  a  Master  in  Public  Management  and  ongoing  qualification  as 
chartered  accountant  and  by  two  accounts  assistants,  both  University  graduates.      The  Finance 
Manager  and  Deputy  Finance  Manager  are  seconded  GoSL  staff,  whereas  the  accounts  assistants 
performance.
have 
contracts 
renewed 
annual 
on 
18. 
The  Finance  Manager  has  attended  two  IFAD  FM  events  in  2014  and  2016,  and  is  certified
under IFAD's FM e-learning programme. The remaining staff are recent recruits and are scheduled to 
take the e-learning certificate by March 2017.
The  duties,  responsibilities,  lines  of  supervision,  and  limits  of  authority  of  finance  staff  are
19. 
defined in their TOR and will be documented in the SAP finance manual.
20. 
The finance and accounting function under NADEP is staffed adequately, in terms of numbers
and qualifications.  Although there may be a brief overlapping period between SAP and NADEP, which 
completes in December 2017, the current staff complement is expected to be sufficient. 
Budgeting
In terms of Government systems, budgetary appropriation processes initiate in the summer and
21. 
conclude  with  parliamentary  authorisation  in  November.  Projects  are  required  to  submit  separate 
allocations under donor and Government funding.  Supplementary budget requests may be submitted 
under-estimation.
case 
to 
short-falls 
budget 
meet 
of 
in 
22. 
The  detailed  AW PB  for  the  project  is  prepared  under  the  PM's  leadership  with  the  full
involvement of the PMU. The AW PB is approved by the National Steering committee (NSC) prior to
160 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:    Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
IFAD  no  objection.      The  submission  of  NADEP's  2016  budget  was  delayed  due  to  a  category 
reallocation and irregular NSC sessions. To allow sufficient lead-time for approvals, the AWPB should 
be finalised in October. NADEP's AW PBs are broken down by component and expenditure category. 
The  finance  unit  has  a  manual  system  in  place  to  track  budget  usage  at  Government  budget  and 
AW PB level.  Monthly and  annual progress reports are  prepared showing both physical and financial 
progress against targets. 
Funds Flow and Disbursements
Funds  for  SAP  will  flow  to  a  designated account  (DA)  in  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka  (CBSL),
23. 
managed  by  the  Treasury.  Based  on  the  system  in  place  for  NADEP,  on  request  from  the  PMU, 
cleared by the  LPA, the Treasury transfers funds on  an  imprest basis from  the  DA to  an  operational 
account  with  the  Bank  of  Ceylon,  operated  under  dual  signature  by  the  Project  Manager  (PM)  and 
Finance  Manager  (FM).      Following  the  same  mechanism,  the  Treasury  transfers  funds  to  the 
counterpart  fund  held  in  Bank  of  Ceylon,  also  operated  by  the  PM  and  FM.  Transfers  under  the 
NADEP  credit  component  follow  the  same  procedures,  but  are  transferred  to  an  account  held  by 
in  Annex  1.
CBSL 
the  refinancing 
facility.  The 
is  detailed 
for  SAP 
flow  of 
funds 
for 
24. 
Transfers of grants to beneficiaries will be made directly to beneficiaries' bank accounts, on the
basis  of  certification  by  the  Promoter  companies  that  goods  or  works  have  been  duly  received  or 
completed.
Transfers  to  entities  implementing  SAP  activities,  including  farmers'  organisations,  will  be
25. 
governed  by  legal  agreements  (MoUs  or  contracts).     Transfers  will  be  treated  as  advances,  with 
monthly reporting on the use of funds, and these accounts will appear as reconciling items on the DA 
liquidated.
reconciliation 
accounted 
statement 
been 
have 
they 
until 
and 
for 
The NADEP PMU has sufficient experience in submitting applications for IFAD disbursement,
26. 
meeting  IFAD's  quality  standards.  SOE-based  disbursement  is  to  be  used  for  reimbursement  of 
eligible  expenditures  and  liquidation  of  advances  to  the  DA.  The  SOE  ceiling  will  initially  be  set  as 
US$50,000 equivalent, the threshold applying to the value of the contract. SOE records including the 
full  set  of  documentation,  will  be  filed  to  facilitate  ready  review  by  supervision  and  audit  missions.
27. 
Disbursement methods will  involve advances and  direct payments. Reimbursements will  also
be  available. Direct  payments are  documented by  records and  may  be  used  for  payments  of  USD 
100,000 equivalent, or as specified in the Letter to the Borrower (LTB).
A start-up  advance may be  provided once  the  financing agreement has  become effective, to
28. 
facilitate  implementation  readiness  activity  pending  satisfaction  of  the  disbursement  conditions 
specified  in  the  financing  agreement.  The  ceiling  of  the  start-up  advance  will  not  normally  exceed 
negotiations.
USD 
300,000 
agreed 
and 
will 
be 
at 
Disbursement procedures and other instructions will be detailed in the LTB which will be issued
29. 
when the financing becomes effective. 
Internal Controls
NADEP  operates  under  a  strong  regulatory  framework.  The  Government  Established  code,
30. 
Financial Regulations and Administrative Circulars  are  followed,  in  addition  to  which  project-specific 
procedures are  documented and being integrated in  the finance section of  NADEP's PIM,  which  will 
form  the  basis  of  SAP's  finance  manual.  Disbursement conditions for  SAP  financing  will  include  the 
manual.
approval 
finance 
the 
of 
Roles  and  duties  for  processing,  reviewing,  recording,  custody  and  authorization  of  financial
31. 
transactions  under  NADEP  are  appropriately  segregated.  GOSL  funding  is  subject  to  Government 
controls, which are adequate.  Appropriate controls are in place for the liquidation of advances to staff 
and petty cash, and the finance unit's filing system is adequate. Documentary evidence is available to 
confirm  delivery  and  acceptance  of  contracted  goods,  works  or  services,  a  contract  register  and 
contract monitoring forms are maintained. Suppliers are paid on a timely basis. Proper and up to date
161 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:    Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
records are  maintained for  fixed assets  following Government requirements.  A "Board  of  Survey" is 
conducted  on  an  annual  basis  whereby  all  fixed  assets  and  inventories  are  physically  verified. 
Logbooks are  maintained for  vehicles  while  consumption of  fuel  of  vehicles  is  maintained through  a 
"Running  Chart".    Bank  accounts  are  reconciled  on  a  monthly  basis.  Travel  authorisation, including 
expense approvals and supporting documents are appropriately maintained and filed. 
Accounting
32. 
NADEP  accounts  are  kept  on  a  dual  entry,  accrual  basis,  following  Sri  Lanka  accounting
standards.  Treasury  chart  of   accounts  is   used.  Records  are  maintained  timely  and  regularly. 
Counterpart funds are appropriately recorded and reported.
33. 
Accounting records are maintained manually in physical books with detailed analysis performed
using  Excel.  Books  maintained  include  the  Cash  register,  Inventory  register,  Contract  register, 
Advance register, Ledgers and other subsidiary registers meet with this requirement.
34. 
In  addition,  aggregate  monthly  summaries  of  IFAD  and  Government  funded  expenditure,
reconciled to  the relevant Treasury printout, are  recorded in  the Government CIGAS system  by the 
Treasury Operations Department and the LPA respectively for IFAD and GoSL funding.
The  prevalence  of  manual  financial  reporting  systems  has  been  a  shortcoming  of  NADEP
35. 
financial management to  date.   However the  procurement of  a multi-project, off-the-shelf software is 
ongoing  to  cover  NADEP  until  closure  and  to  be  support  SAP  from  start-up.  The  software  will  be 
customised to  provide information useful to  PMU management and meeting IFAD's requirements for 
financial reporting.  The contract with the software vendor will also envisage after-sales support for a 
minimum period of one  year, including a training package for finance staff.   The Auditor General has 
agreed to the automation of  the project's accounts, subject to AG staff involvement in the installation 
and training of the software. 
Financial  Reporting
36. 
The PMU  under  NADEP has  established financial management reporting responsibilities that
specify what reports are  to  be  prepared, what  they are to  contain, and the frequency of  production 
(monthly, quarterly, annually [audited]).
37. 
The  procurement  of  an  automated  accounting  system,  as  described  above,  is  expected  to
significantly enhance the reliability of financial reports and the PMU's reporting capabilities, which for 
SAP will include submission of interim financial reports to IFAD.
The PMU's capacity to record in-kind contributions of private companies, beneficiaries and PFIs
38. 
will need to be enhanced. In this connection, NADEP has recently created an MIS system with direct 
inputs  of  grant  transfers to  beneficiaries by  the  finance unit. The  system  will  need  to  be  adapted to 
SAP  purposes  at  start-up  and  will  need  to  be  improved  as  regards  transfers  under  the  credit  line.
39. 
To avoid delays with the submission of audit reports, unaudited annual financial statements will
be required to be submitted to IFAD and to the Auditor General within two months after the close of 
the calendar year. 
Internal Audit
Internal  audit  is  foreseen  for  donor-funded  projects  in  Sri  Lanka,  under  a  circular  issued  by
40. 
Ministry of Finance Department of Management Audit dated July 2010.
NADEP  has  recently  appointed  an  internal  auditor,  reporting  to  the  Project  Manager.  This
41. 
arrangement  will  be  re-assessed  in  2017,  as  best  practice  would  suggest  segregation  of  project 
management and internal audit functions. For SAP it is foreseen that the LPA's Internal Audit unit will 
be  requested  to  include  the  project  in  its  annual  work-plan,  following  risk-based  approaches.    The 
frequency and scope will be determined based on the IA methodology, with modalities to be agreed at 
IFAD.
negotiations. 
submitted 
Internal 
reports 
audit 
will 
be 
to 
162 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:    Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
42.  As for the line of credit, CBSL has an internal audit department which reports to the Monetary
Board of CBSL. 
External Audit
The  supreme  audit  institution,  the  Auditor  General  of  Sri  Lanka  (AG),  performs  the  external
43. 
audit of  NADEP’s financial reports. AG is  an  independent office which was given the mandate under 
the  Sri  Lanka  Constitution  to  audit  all  accounts  pertaining  to  government  revenues  and  the  use  of 
public  resources.  The  AG  is  progressively  converging  to  international  auditing  standards  as 
INTOSAI.
promulgated 
by 
44. 
In  line  with  IFAD's  guidelines,  the  scope  of  annual  audits  includes  a  review  of  the  financial
statements, designated account and expenditure reported in statements of expenditure. Audit reports 
should be submitted to IFAD six months after the end of each calendar year.
45. 
Audit  reports  for  IFAD-funded projects  in  Sri  Lanka  are  generally submitted  with  some  delay
(two  to  four  months)  and  do  not  always  fully  meet  IFAD's  standards  and  guidelines.  However, 
communication between IFAD and AG has recently been strengthened and improvements are noted.
46. 
NADEP audit arrangements foresee a supplemental opinion on the usage of resources under
the 4P contracts. A similar arrangement will be put in place for SAP, which will also foresee additional 
audit requirements for MoUs with farmers' organisations and the Mahaweli authority.
47. 
The lines of credit managed by CBSL's RDD for NADEP are subject to annual audit. The SLA
for  the  management  of  the  line  of  credit  under  SAP  will  require  an  audit  opinion  pertaining  to  the 
operation of the SAP LOC. 
Supervision
FM  implementation  review  shall  be  undertaken  at  least  annually,  with  additional  support
48. 
missions as  necessary, during project implementation to  ensure that the  loan  proceeds are  used for 
the purpose it  was granted, which may take at the most two weeks. The scope of  the supervision is 
left to the professional judgment of the FM specialist. It may cover any of the following: (1) review of 
the  continuous  maintenance  of  adequate  FM  system  by  DTI;  (2)  review  of  IFRs;  (3)  follow  up  of 
timeliness of  FM reporting and actions taken on  issues raised by external auditors; (4)  review of  the 
project’s  financial  reports;  (5)  follow  up  of  the  status  of  the  any  agreed  action;  and  (6)  review  of 
compliance  with  the  financial  covenants.  In  addition,  the  FM  implementation  review  should  include 
desk review of the quarterly IFRs and audited financial statements and management letter submitted 
IFAD.
to 
the 
163 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:    Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Annex 1: Fund Flows 
164 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:    Procurement 
Appendix 8:   Procurement 
This appendix will be revised and updated prior to finalization of the PIM with input from the APR 
senior procurement specialist 
A.     Country-level procurement framework 
1.       Despite that no Act of Parliament has been passed for public procurement, the Government of 
Sri  Lanka  (GoSL)  does  have  a  functional  public  procurement  system  in  place.  The  'National 
Procurement Guidelines' and  'Guidelines on  Selection and  Employment of  Consultants' were  issued 
in  2006  and  2007  respectively,  with  the  approval  of  the  Cabinet  of  Ministers  under  a  presidential 
directive. In the absence of a codified public procurement statue, these guidelines have the force and 
effect  of   law.   In   supplement  to   the   guidelines,   detailed  manuals  on   procedural  aspects  for 
procurement of  goods  and  works  and  recruitment of  consultants  have  also  been  issued,  as  well  as 
standard    bidding    documents    (SBDs)    issued    by    the    Institute    for    Construction    Training    and 
Development (ICTAD) for procurement of civil  works. Together, these guidelines, manuals and SBDs 
are  applicable  to  all  government (ministries, departments) and  semi-government institutions,  as  well 
as  provincial councils  without  any  exception. Furthermore, the  national guidelines have  provision for 
International Competitive Bidding procedures, and it is also stated within the guidelines, that in case of 
conflict in the applicability of national provisions with that of development partners, the procedures of 
the development partners will be applicable depending on the financing. 
2.       The  mission  is  of  the  view  that  the  National  Procurement  Guidelines  that  were  drafted  in 
association  with  major  funding  agencies  are  largely  consistent  with  IFAD  guidelines  and  robust 
enough  to  meet  the  procurement  requirements  of  the  Programme.  However,  in  case  of  any 
inconsistency,  IFAD  guidelines  would  supersede  National  Procurement  Guidelines.  It  is  also  noted 
that all IFAD funded programmes in Sri Lanka have and continue to adopt the National Procurement 
Guidelines. 
3.       As  part  of  the  reform  agenda  the  Government  of  Sri  Lanka  (GoSL)  recently  enacted  19th 
Amendment  to  the  Constitution,  establishing  National  Procurement  Commission, Audit  Commission 
and  widening  the  scope  of  the  “Commission to  Investigate Allegations  of  Briary  or  Corruption”. The 
law  provides  for  measures  to  implement  the  UN  Convention  against  Corruption  and  any  other 
international   conventions   relating   to   the    prevention   of   corruption.  Whilst   the   National  Audit 
Commission ensures  independency of  the Auditor  General Department to  conduct government audit 
which includes all public procurements, the National Procurement Commission to be appointed by the 
President,  will  be  entrusted  with  the  function  of  formulating  fair,  equitable,  transparent,  competitive 
and  cost  effective  procedures  and  guidelines  for  the  procurement  of  goods  and  services,  works, 
consultancy services  and  information  systems  by  the  government  institutions.  The  Commission  has 
legal  power  to  summon  any  public  officer  before  the  Commission  and  investigate  any  complaint 
relating to public procurement and file legal action for any fraud or malpractices. In addition, the newly 
set-up Financial Crime Investigation Division (FCID) under the Police Department has been provided 
with specially trained officers to investigate financial crimes. 
4.       The Transparency International (TI) corruption perception index for Sri Lanka is 37. 
B.     Procurement arrangements under SAP 
5.       Procurement of  goods,  works  and  services financed from  resources provided or  administered 
by IFAD will be undertaken in accordance with the National Procurement Guidelines to the extent that 
there  is  no  contradiction  between  the  National  Guidelines  and  IFAD  Guidelines.  In  the  case  of  any 
inconsistency, IFAD Guidelines will supersede the National Guidelines. 
6.       The SAP programme will be managed the SAP Programme Management Unit (PMU), based in 
Colombo, and tasked with delivery of the programme and its performance; the PMU is therefore also 
responsible  for  fiduciary  performance,  including  procurement.  In  order  to  augment  capacity  and 
facilitate  timely  procurement  activities,  a  procurement  manager  will  be  recruited  within  the  PMU.
165 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:    Procurement 
7.       Procurement  plan.  The  PMU  will  be  responsible  for  preparing  and  submitting  the  SAP 
procurement plans to IFAD for its review and No Objection on an annual basis, and 60 days prior to 
the commencement of the relevant financial year.  Subsequently, procurement will be done according 
to  the  approved  procurement  plan  and  AW PB  of  the  programme.  As  a  minimum,  the  procurement 
plan to be submitted by the PMU would include as a minimum, the following: 
    A  brief  description  of  each  procurement  activity  to  be  undertaken  during  the  period  and 
name of the implementing agency responsible for the procurement; 
    The estimated value of each procurement activity; 
    The method of procurement to be adopted for each procurement activity; and 
    The  method  of  review  IFAD  will  undertake  for  each  procurement  activity  indicating  either 
post review or prior review. 
8.       Any  changes  and  amendments  to  the  procurement  plan  shall  be  subject  to  IFAD’s  No 
Objection. However, it should be noted that procurement plan should always be in line with the Annual 
Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) of the programme. 
C.     Procurement method and thresholds 
9.       In  the  case  where  the  programme  through  its  PMU  (and  the  Programme  Procurement 
Committee  (PPC))  will  be  directly  responsible  for  procurement,  International  Competitive  Bidding 
(ICB) shall be the mandatory method of procurement for contracts above the following values: 
(a)   Goods: above USD 200,000 equivalent 
(b)   Civil works: above USD 1,000,000 equivalent; and 
(c)    Services: above USD 100,000 equivalent. 
10.     Apart from ICB, the following methods for procurement per thresholds is provided below. 
11.     Procurement of Goods and Works. 
(a)   Goods 
i.   National  Competitive  Bidding  (NCB),  for  contract  values  greater  than  USD  20,000 
equivalent; 
ii.   National shopping for contracts less than USD 20,000 up to USD 2,000 equivalent; 
iii.  Direct contracting for contracts below USD 2,000 equivalent. 
iv.  N.B. Procurement involving community participation below a threshold of USD 10,000 
equivalent through direct contract or local shopping. 
(b)   Works 
i.   National  Competitive  Bidding  (NCB),  for  contract  values  greater  than  USD  50,000 
equivalent; 
ii.   National shopping for contracts less than USD 50,000 up to USD 2,000 equivalent; 
iii.  Direct contracting for contracts below USD 2,000 equivalent. 
iv.  N.B. Procurement involving community participation below a threshold of USD 10,000 
equivalent through direct contract or local shopping. 
15.     Consultancy  and   Services.   Consulting   services   may   include   programme  management 
technical  assistance,  4P  brokerage,  implementation  support  technical  assistance  for  different 
components,  conducting  studies,  mobilisation/establishment  of  farmer/  producer  groups,  technical 
training;  capacity  building  and  strengthening  of  farmer/  producer  groups  and  organizations,  and 
monitoring  and  evaluation.  Services  could  be  provided  by  both  consulting  firms  and  individual 
consultants. 
16.     Each  contract  for   the  selection  of   consultancy  services  estimated  to   cost  USD  50,000 
equivalent  or  above,  shall  be  selected  in  accordance  with  the  National  Procurement  Guidelines 
following any one of the selection methods listed below: 
    Quality and Cost Based Selection
166 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:    Procurement 
    Fixed Budget Selection 
    Least Cost Selection 
17.     Each  contract  for  the  selection  of  consultancy services  estimated  to  cost  below  USD  50,000 
equivalent,  shall  be  selected  in  accordance  with  the  National  Procurement Guidelines  following  any 
one of the selection methods listed below: 
    Quality and Cost Based Selection 
    Fixed Budget Selection 
    Least Cost Selection 
    Selection Based on Consultants Qualification 
    Single Source Selection 
18.     Selection of individual consultants. Individual consultants are selected on the basis of  their 
qualifications for  the  assignment. They shall  be  selected through  comparison of  qualifications   of  at 
least  three  candidates  among  those  who  have  expressed  interest  in  the  assignment  or  have  been 
approached  directly  by  the  PMU.  Individuals  employed  by  the  programme  shall  meet  all  relevant 
qualifications  and  shall  be  fully  capable  of  carrying  out  the  assignment.  Capability  is  judged  on  the 
basis  of  academic  background,  experience  and,  as  appropriate,  knowledge  of  the  local  conditions, 
such as local language, culture, administrative system, and government organization. 
19.     Consultancy services and individuals consultants may be selected on a sole-source basis with 
due justification in exceptional cases such as: (a)  tasks that are a  continuation of previous work that 
the  consultant  has  carried  out  and  for  which  the  consultant  was  selected  competitively;  (b) 
assignments lasting  less  than  six  months;  (c)  emergency situations  resulting  from  natural  disasters; 
and  (d)  when  the  individual  consultant  or  consulting  firm  is  the  only  consultant  qualified  for  the 
assignment.  All  proposals  for  contracts  on  Sole  Source  basis  will  require  IFAD’s  prior  review.  For 
facilitating IFAD’s prior review, justification for resorting to SSS, the detailed proposal including budget 
from  the  sole  source  agency/institution  or  individual,  and  recommendation  and  approval  following 
internal approval procedures are to be submitted to IFAD. 
D.     Review of procurement decisions by IFAD 
20.     IFAD will undertake to review the provisions for the procurement of good, works and services to 
ensure that the procurement process is carried out in conformity with its Procurement Guidelines. For 
the purposes of IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines, the following procurement decisions shall be subject 
to  prior  review  by  IFAD  for  the  award  of  any  contract  for  goods,  equipment,  materials,  works, 
consultancy and services under SAP. 
(c)    Procurement of goods, materials and works: 
i.   Prequalification documents and shortlist (when applicable); 
ii.   Bid documents for goods, materials and works; 
iii.  Evaluation report and recommendation for award; and 
iv.  Draft contract and amendments. 
(d)   Procurement of consultancy services and services: 
i.   Prequalification documents and shortlist (when applicable); 
ii.   Request for Proposal; 
iii.  Technical evaluation report; 
iv.  Combined  (technical  and  financial)  evaluation  report  and  the  recommendation  for 
award; and 
v.  Draft contract and amendments. 
21.     Prior  or  Post  Review.  Except  as  IFAD  may  otherwise agree,  the  prior  or  post  review  which 
applies  to  various  procurement  of  good,  works  and  consultant  recruitments  shall  be  defined  as 
follows: 
Procurement Method                                             Type of
Review 
Prior or Post 
Procurement of Goods and Works 
Comments
167 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:    Procurement 
ICB Works and Goods 
NCB Works and Goods 
Shopping for works (quotations) 
Shopping for goods (quotations) 
Direct Works 
Direct Goods 
Recruitment of Consulting Firms 
Quality and Cost-Based Selection (QCBS) 
Fixed Budged Selection (FBS) 
Least Cost Selection (LCS) 
Selection Based of Consultants 
Qualification 
Sole Source Selection (SSS) 
Recruitment of Individual Consultants 
Individual Consultants 
Prior 
Prior 
Post 
Post 
Prior 
Prior 
Prior 
Prior 
Prior 
Prior 
Prior 
All Contracts 
Except procurement valued below USD 
100,000 
Except procurement valued below USD 2,000 
Except procurement valued below USD 2,000 
Except procurement valued below USD 50,000 
Except procurement valued below USD 50,000 
Except procurement valued below USD 50,000 
Except procurement valued below USD 50,000 
All contracts 
Prior 
Except procurement valued below USD 20,000 
168 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:    Programme cost and financing 
Appendix 9:   Programme cost and financing 
Programme costs 
1.       The total investment and recurrent costs, including physical and price contingencies, is 
estimated at USD 105 million (LKR 17.1 billion). Table 1 below presents the programme costs by 
components; Table 2 shows the programme costs with contingencies, by component and by year. All 
tables are in thousands of USD or Sri Lankan Rupee. 
2.       Of the total forecast programme total base costs, USD 51.2 million (or 51% of the total) will go 
to finance Component 1, USD 43.6 million (or 43% of the total) to finance Component 2 and USD 5.8 
million (or 6%) for Component 3, with a remaining USD 4.4 million (or 4% of the total) for 
contingencies. Please see table 1. 
Table 1: Programme Costs by Component 
1. C1: Access to Commercial  Partnerships 
2. C2: Access to Rural Finance 
3. C3: Project Management,  KM, M&E, Croscutting  Issues 
Total BASELINE  COSTS 
Physical  Contingencies 
Price Contingencies 
Total PROJECT  COSTS 
(LKR '000) 
Foreign 
Total 
Local 
(US$ '000) 
Foreign 
Total 
% 
Foreign 
% Total 
Base 
Exchange  Costs 
51,170.5 
7,573,226.8 
- 
43,621.4 
6,455,967.3 
- 
51,504.0 
5,430.6 
855,234.0 
51,504.0  14,884,428.1  100,222.5 
7.9 
2,337.6 
4,435.8 
2,284,073.7 
58,345.3  17,170,839.4  104,666.1 
1,172.2 
5,669.2 
51,170.5 
- 
43,621.4 
- 
348.0 
5,778.6 
348.0  100,570.5 
15.8 
4,444.2 
364.4  105,030.5 
7.9 
8.4 
- 
- 
6 
- 
50 
- 
- 
51 
43 
6 
100 
- 
4 
104 
Local 
7,573,226.8 
6,455,967.3 
803,730.0 
14,832,924.1 
1,165.4 
2,278,404.5 
17,112,494.0 
Table 2: Programme Components by Year – Including Contingencies 
1. C1: Access to Commercial  Partnerships 
2. C2: Access to Rural Finance 
3. C3: Project Management,  KM, M&E, Croscutting  Issues 
Total BASELINE  COSTS 
Physical  Contingencies 
Price Contingencies 
Total PROJECT  COSTS 
(LKR '000) 
Foreign 
Total 
Local 
(US$ '000) 
Foreign 
Total 
% 
Foreign 
% Total 
Base 
Exchange  Costs 
51,170.5 
7,573,226.8 
- 
43,621.4 
6,455,967.3 
- 
5,430.6 
855,234.0 
51,504.0 
51,504.0  14,884,428.1  100,222.5 
7.9 
2,337.6 
4,435.8 
2,284,073.7 
58,345.3  17,170,839.4  104,666.1 
1,172.2 
5,669.2 
51,170.5 
- 
43,621.4 
- 
5,778.6 
348.0 
348.0  100,570.5 
15.8 
4,444.2 
364.4  105,030.5 
7.9 
8.4 
- 
- 
6 
- 
50 
- 
- 
51 
43 
6 
100 
- 
4 
104 
Local 
7,573,226.8 
6,455,967.3 
803,730.0 
14,832,924.1 
1,165.4 
2,278,404.5 
17,112,494.0 
Programme financing 
3.       The IFAD loan of USD 54.4 million will fund 52% of total programme costs, of which 68%, 28% 
and 89% will go to fund components 1, 2 and 3, respectively, as in Table 3 below. Of the IFAD loan, 
67%, 23% and 10% will go to fund components 1, 2 and 3, respectively. 
4.       The Government will forgo on USD 0.64 million of taxes and duties as part of a total 
contribution of USD 19.3 million or 18.4% of total programme value.67 Government contributions 
include 0.3% of Component 1, 41% of Component 2 and 12% of Component 3. The biggest ticket 
item under finance by Government is the financing of credit for primary beneficiaries through repaid 
loans of revolving funds - a total of USD 18.5 million. This is equal to 40.7% of component 2, as in 
table 3 below. 
5.       Private financial institutions will participate in the provisioning of investment (term) and working 
capital loans to farmers, farmer organizations and agribusinesses on a degressive basis, as well as 
youth loans to a lesser extent. The total contribution to programme financing is USD 9.8 million over 
the lifetime of the programme. Private sector contributions, as a part of the one-third financing rule for 
the 4Ps, are just under a total of USD 17 million. Beneficiary contributions are based on an increasing 
level of contribution, during the lifespan of the programme, with a total estimated contribution of USD 
4.5 million. Please see table 3 below. 
67  Taxes foregone by the government are limited since credit and grant budget items carry no VAT liability.
169 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:    Programme cost and financing 
Table 3: Components by Financiers 
1. C1:  Access  to Commercial  Partnerships                                                       36,312.0            67.9                      -                 -          16,967.0            31.7               184.5             0.3 
2. C2:  Access  to Rural  Finance                                                                               12,641.3            27.8          9,820.7           21.6                        -                 -          18,469.7            40.7 
3. C3:  Project  Management, KM,  M&E,  Croscutting  Issues                                   5,436.0           88.5                      -                 -                       -                 -               705.1           11.5 
Total  PROJECT  COSTS                                                                                              54,389.3            51.8          9,820.7              9.4          16,967.0            16.2          19,359.3            18.4 
IFAD  Loan                     Institutions                          Partners                              taxes) 
Amount             %            Amount            %             Amount             %             Amount             % 
Private  Financial               Private  Sector              Government (incl. 
Beneficiary 
Contribution                            Total                   For.         Local (Excl.      Duties & 
Amount           %             Amount             %           Exch.            Taxes)             Taxes 
1. C1: Access to Commercial  Partnerships                                                                    -                -           53,463.4           50.9                 -             53,279.0           184.5 
2. C2: Access to Rural Finance                                                                            4,494.3             9.9            45,425.9           43.3                 -             45,328.5             97.4 
3. C3: Project Management,  KM, M&E, Croscutting  Issues                                          -                -             6,141.1             5.8         364.4                5,416.5           360.2 
Total PROJECT  COSTS                                                                                           4,494.3             4.3         105,030.5         100.0         364.4            104,024.0           642.1 
6.       The main expenditure items under the programme are grants and credit, forming 43.5% and 
42.4% of planned expenditure. Contributions to the line of credit are as follows: Government 41.3%, 
IFAD 27.3% and PFIs 21.3%. An additional 10.1% from beneficiaries will contribute to the 
programme’s line of credit. Grants are mainly financed by the IFAD loan, contributing 63% of the total 
amount, with private sector partners making up the remaining 37%. Please see table 4, below. 
Detailed tables are in annex 1, below. 
Table 4: Expenditure Accounts by Financiers 
I. Investment Costs 
IFAD  Loan 
Private  Financial 
Institutions 
Private  Sector 
Partners 
Government (incl. 
taxes) 
Beneficiary 
Contribution 
Amount            % 
Amount           % 
Amount            % 
Amount            % 
Amount           % 
Total 
For. 
Local  (Excl.       Duties  & 
Amount  
% 
Exch. 
Taxes)               Taxes 
A.  Consultancies /a                                                 6,352.2            96.9                99.9              1.5                        -                 -                106.2              1.6                      -                 -              6,558.3              6.2           17.8                 6,434.4            106.2 
B.  Equipment and  Materials /b 
C.  Credit 
D.  Grants  and  Subsidies 
E.  Workshops 
F.  Training 
G.  Vehicles 
Total  Investment Costs 
II.  Recurrent Costs 
711.1 
12,156.4 
28,748.9 
700.5 
2,898.8 
246.1 
51,814.0 
87.0 
27.3 
62.9 
92.5 
86.1 
87.0 
50.8 
- 
9,504.8 
- 
7.7 
208.3 
- 
9,820.7 
- 
21.3 
- 
1.0 
6.2 
- 
9.6 
- 
- 
16,967.0 
- 
- 
- 
16,967.0 
- 
- 
37.1 
- 
- 
- 
16.6 
106.6 
18,372.3 
- 
48.9 
260.3 
36.9 
18,931.2 
13.0 
41.3 
- 
6.5 
7.7 
13.0 
18.6 
- 
4,494.3 
- 
- 
- 
- 
4,494.3 
- 
10.1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
4.4 
817.8 
44,527.8 
45,715.8 
757.0 
3,367.4 
283.0 
102,027.2 
0.8 
42.4 
43.5 
0.7 
3.2 
0.3 
97.1 
49.2 
- 
- 
- 
155.3 
142.0 
364.4 
661.9 
44,527.8 
45,715.8 
708.1 
2,951.8 
104.1 
101,103.9 
106.6 
- 
- 
48.9 
260.3 
36.9 
558.9 
A.  Salaries   and  Allowances                                2,020.7            85.4                      -                 -                        -                 -                344.9            14.6                      -                 -              2,365.5              2.3                  -                 2,365.5                     - 
B.  Operating Costs 
Total  Recurrent Costs 
Total  PROJECT COSTS 
554.6 
2,575.3 
54,389.3 
87.0 
85.7 
51.8 
- 
- 
9,820.7 
- 
- 
9.4 
- 
- 
16,967.0 
- 
- 
16.2 
83.2 
428.0 
19,359.3 
13.0 
14.3 
18.4 
- 
- 
4,494.3 
- 
- 
4.3 
637.8 
3,003.3 
105,030.5 
0.6 
2.9 
100.0 
- 
- 
364.4 
554.6 
2,920.2 
104,024.0 
83.2 
83.2 
642.1 
\a Including technical assistance 
\b Including goods,  services   and  inputs.
170 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:    Programme cost and financing 
ANNEX I: Detailed Cost Tables 
List of Tables 
Table 1: Detailed Cost Table – Component 1: Access to Commercial Partnerships 
Table 2: Detailed Cost Table – Component 2: Access to Rural Finance 
Table 3: Detailed Cost Table – Component 3: Programme Management and Policy Dialogue
171 
2.  Youth  Start  Up  Fund  and  Expansion 
 a.  Youth  Start  Up  Fund 
Table 1: Detailed Cost Table – Component 1: Access to Commercial Partnerships 
Unit           2018        2019         2020          2021          2022          2023           Total            (US$)            2018           2019           2020           2021          2022         2023          Total
Quantities                                                     Unit  Cost                                                  Base  Cost  (US$  '000) 
I.  Investment Costs 
A.  C1.1.  Matching Grants  and  Start-Up Funds 
1.  Individual Farmer-led 4Ps 
a.  New  4Ps 
-                -    10,500.0 
New  4Ps  - Individual financed private  sector-led (project) 
Scaled  up  Individual Nadep  4Ps  (project)                                                                                    lump  sum       4,000       4,000         2,000                 -                 -                 -        10,000                 500       2,000.0       2,000.0       1,000.0                  -                -                -      5,000.0 
Start  Up  funds  involving FOs                                                                                                         lump  sum       2,000       2,000                  -                 -                 -                 -           4,000                500       1,000.0       1,000.0                   -                 -                -                -      2,000.0 
5,500.0       5,500.0       4,000.0      1,500.0                 -                -    16,500.0 
Private  sector  contribution to  individual 4Ps 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            11,500.0   11,500.0      8,000.0      3,000.0                 -                -    34,000.0 
lump  sum  11,000  11,000 
-                 -        21,000 
-                 -        33,000 
3,000.0  1,500.0 
lump  sum 
3,000.0 
3,000.0 
3,000 
3,000 
6,000 
6,000 
6,000 
8,000 
500 
500   
b.  Youth  Start  Up  Expansion phase  /a 
-         500.0 
-                -      1,250.0 
-         400.0          400.0         400.0                 -                -      1,200.0 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -         900.0          900.0         650.0                 -                -      2,450.0 
3.  Farmer  Organzition-led 4Ps:  FO  Start-Up Funds 
-                 -           2,500 
-                 -                  3 
-      1,000 
-              1 
lump  sum 
lump  sum 
500 
400,000 
1,000 
1 
500 
1 
500.0 
250.0 
a.  New  4Ps  private  sector  led  with  FOs 
New  4Ps  private  sector  led  with  FOs                                                                                           lump  sum             10            10                 -                 -                 -                 -                20          50,000          500.0          500.0                   -                 -                -                -      1,000.0 
Provision for  New  4Ps  private  sector  led  with  FOs  /b                                                                lump  sum                -               -                 -                1                1                1                  3        500,000                   -                  -                  -         500.0        500.0        500.0       1,500.0 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  500.0          500.0                   -         500.0        500.0        500.0       2,500.0 
b.  FO  led  4Ps  - Coops  in  business 
FOs  led  4Ps  - Coops  in  business                                                                                          lump  sum               5              5                 -                 -                 -                 -                10          50,000          250.0          250.0                   -                 -                -                -         500.0 
Provision for  FO  led  4Ps  - Coops  in  business /c                                                                        lump  sum                -               -                 -                1                1                1                  3        250,000                   -                  -                  -         250.0        250.0        250.0          750.0 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  250.0          250.0                   -         250.0        250.0        250.0       1,250.0 
c.  FO  led  4Ps  - new  FOs  (Mahaweli) 
FO  led  4Ps  - new  FOs  (Mahaweli)                                                                                        lump  sum             12            16                8                4                 -                 -                40          50,000          600.0          800.0          400.0         200.0                 -                -      2,000.0 
Provision for  FO  led  4Ps  /d                                                                                                           lump  sum                -               -                 -          0.75                 1           0.75               2.5        800,000                   -                  -                  -         600.0        800.0        600.0       2,000.0 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  600.0          800.0          400.0         800.0        800.0        600.0       4,000.0 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1,350.0       1,550.0          400.0      1,550.0     1,550.0     1,350.0       7,750.0 
4.  4P  Sensitization / Consultation 
a.  General 4P  Sensitization / Consultation 
Sensitization workshop/training on  4P  principles and  cross-cutting (e.g.  CC,  youth) 
20.0 
4P  advertisement                                                                                                                   lump  sum               1              1                1                 -                 -                 -                  3            6,000               6.0              6.0              6.0                  -                -                -            18.0 
4P  consultation workshop process  (one  national; four  field  level)                                           lump  sum               1              1                1                1                 -                 -                  4            5,000               5.0              5.0              5.0             5.0                -                -            20.0 
4P  development process                                                                                                                lump  sum               1              1                1                1                 -                 -                  4            2,000               2.0              2.0              2.0             2.0                -                -              8.0 
4P  Biannual review  workshop                                                                                               lump  sum               1              1                1                1                1                1                  6            2,000               2.0              2.0              2.0             2.0            2.0            2.0            12.0 
5.0              5.0              5.0             5.0                -                -            20.0 
Farmer  training  (VC  awareness) 
1 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    30.0            30.0            20.0           14.0            2.0            2.0            98.0 
30.0            30.0            30.0           20.0          20.0          20.0          150.0 
b.  Senstitization process   for  FO  /e 
3 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        60.0            60.0            50.0           34.0          22.0          22.0          248.0 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12,910.0   14,010.0      9,350.0      5,234.0     1,572.0     1,372.0     44,448.0 
B.  C1.2.  Institutional Strenghthening of  Farmer   Organizations 
5,000   
10,000   
lump  sum 
lump  sum 
lump  sum 
10,000 
10.0 
10.0 
15 
1 
2 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
3 
4 
3 
2 
2 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1.  For  Coops  in  business 
a.  Technical Assistance /f                                                                                                                  lump  sum               5            10              10              10              10              10                55             5,000            25.0            50.0            50.0           50.0          50.0          50.0          275.0 
2.  New  4Ps  private  sector  led  with  FOs 
a.  Technical Assistance /g                                                                                                                 lump  sum             10            20    16.6778     35.3333     28.6667     16.8889     127.5666           9,000            90.0          180.0          150.1         318.0        258.0        152.0       1,148.1 
3.  For  new  FOs  (Mahaweli) 
a.  Technical Assistance /h                                                                                                                 lump  sum             20            40    33.3333               60    34.6667               16              204             9,000          180.0          360.0          300.0         540.0        312.0        144.0       1,836.0 
b.  Mahaweli Authority consultant pool  /i                                                                                           pers-year 
595.2 
8 
12,400 
99.2 
99.2 
99.2 
99.2 
99.2 
99.2 
48 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
Subtotal 
4.  Training and  exchange visits  for  all  FOs  (under  all  categories) 
279.2 
459.2 
399.2 
639.2 
411.2 
243.2 
2,431.2 
a.  Exchange visit  at  domestic level 
90.0 
1 
b.  Exchange visit  in  the  Asia  region                                                                                                        unit                    1           1.5             1.5                 -                 -                 -                  4        100,000           100.0          150.0          150.0                  -                -                -         400.0 
c.  Trainings                                                                                                                                     unit                    1              2                2                 -                 -                 -                  5        100,000           100.0          200.0          200.0                  -                -                -         500.0 
d.  Business advisory services   (TA  for  all  FOs)                                                                                     unit                    2              4                4                 -                 -                 -                10          12,000            24.0            48.0            48.0                  -                -                -         120.0 
-                  -                  -         254.0        428.0        428.0       1,110.0 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      254.0          428.0          428.0         254.0        428.0        428.0       2,220.0 
e.  Lump  sum  provisioning for  Yrs  4-6  /j 
0.5935 
30,000 
2.5935 
30.0 
30.0 
30.0 
unit 
unit 
1 
1 
3 
1 
1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
428,000   
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          648.2       1,117.2       1,027.3      1,261.2     1,147.2        873.2       6,074.3 
C.  Social  mobilizers and  equipment 
1.  Tablets  for  data  entry  by  social  mobilizers /k                                                                                       unit                  40              5                5                5                5                5                65                250            10.0              1.3              1.3             1.3            1.3            1.3            16.3 
2.  Training  of  social  mobilizers                                                                                                      lump  sum               1              1                1                1                 -                 -                  4            4,000               4.0              4.0              4.0             4.0                -                -            16.0 
3.  Social  mobilizers                                                                                                                           Person               40            40              40              40              40              40              240             3,600          144.0          144.0          144.0          144.0        144.0        144.0          864.0 
4.  Record  keeping  books                                                                                                                              unit          15,000     15,000       15,000         5,000                  -                 -        50,000                     2            30.0            30.0            30.0           10.0                -                -         100.0 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          188.0          179.3          179.3         159.3        145.3        145.3          996.3 
Total                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13,746.2   15,306.5   10,556.5     6,654.4     2,864.5     2,390.5     51,518.5 
\a  To  improve  employability, work  placements, etc. 
\b  Years  4-6 
\c  Years  4-6 
\d  Years  4-6 
\e  Specifically targeting FOs.  Lump  sum  figures  do  not  connote  the  number  of  workshops per  year. 
\f  Includes full-time  manager and  accountant, with  lump  sum  provision for  Yrs  4-6 
\g  Includes full-time  manager and  accountant on  a degressive basis,  with  lump  sum  provision for  Yrs  4-6 
\h  Includes full-time  manager and  accountant on  a degressive basis,  with  lump  sum  provision for  Yrs  4-6  on  a 70%  and  40%  declining level  of  support  basis 
\i Eight  consultants (2  on  institutional development and  3 on  business mentoring and  3 on  start  up  fund  management 
\j Provisioned for  training  and  exchange visits 
\k  USD  250  per  tablet  plus  additional for  breakage
173 
Detailed Cost Table – Component 1: Access to Commercial Partnerships… continued 
Totals  Including  Contingencies (US$  '000) 
2018           2019           2020           2021          2022        2023         Total
Parameters  (in  %)
Phy.   
Cont. 
For.           Gross 
Summary  Divisions 
Rate 
Exch.       Tax  Rate 
Expenditure Account 
I. Investment  Costs 
A. C1.1.  Matching  Grants  and  Start-Up  Funds 
1. Individual  Farmer-led  4Ps 
a. New  4Ps 
New  4Ps  - Individual  financed  private  sector-led  (project)                                                          3,019.3       3,071.8       3,147.2       1,603.7                -               -    10,842.0              0.0             0.0               0.0            GRANTS_SUBSIDIES 
Scaled  up Individual  Nadep  4Ps  (project)                                                                                     2,012.9       2,047.9       1,049.1                  -               -               -      5,109.8              0.0             0.0               0.0            GRANTS_SUBSIDIES 
Start  Up funds  involving  FOs                                                                                                         1,006.4       1,023.9                  -                  -               -               -      2,030.4              0.0             0.0               0.0            GRANTS_SUBSIDIES 
Private  sector  contribution  to individual  4Ps                                                                                5,535.4       5,631.6       4,196.3       1,603.7                -               -    16,967.0              0.0             0.0               0.0            GRANTS_SUBSIDIES 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                             11,574.0     11,775.3       8,392.5       3,207.4                -               -    34,949.1 
2. Youth  Start  Up  Fund  and  Expansion 
a.  Youth  Start  Up Fund                                                                                                                                  -         512.0          524.5          267.3                -               -      1,303.8              0.0             0.0               0.0            GRANTS_SUBSIDIES 
b.  Youth  Start  Up Expansion  phase  /a                                                                                                         -         409.6         419.6          427.6                -               -      1,256.9              0.0             0.0               0.0            GRANTS_SUBSIDIES 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                               -         921.5         944.2          694.9                -               -      2,560.6 
3. Farmer  Organzition-led 4Ps:  FO  Start-Up  Funds 
a. New  4Ps  private  sector  led  with  FOs 
New  4Ps  private  sector  led  with  FOs                                                                                               503.2          512.0                  -                  -               -               -      1,015.2              0.0             0.0               0.0            GRANTS_SUBSIDIES 
Provision  for New  4Ps  private  sector  led  with  FOs  /b                                                                            -                 -                 -          534.6       542.2       556.6      1,633.3              0.0             0.0               0.0            GRANTS_SUBSIDIES 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                  503.2          512.0                  -         534.6       542.2       556.6      2,648.5 
b. FO  led  4Ps  - Coops  in  business 
FOs  led  4Ps  - Coops  in business                                                                                                     251.6          256.0                  -                  -               -               -         507.6             0.0             0.0               0.0            GRANTS_SUBSIDIES 
Provision  for FO  led 4Ps  - Coops  in  business  /c                                                                                    -                 -                 -         267.3       271.1       278.3          816.7             0.0             0.0               0.0            GRANTS_SUBSIDIES 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                  251.6          256.0                  -         267.3       271.1       278.3      1,324.3 
c. FO  led  4Ps  - new  FOs  (Mahaweli) 
FO  led  4Ps  - new  FOs  (Mahaweli)                                                                                                    603.9          819.1         419.6          213.8                -               -      2,056.5              0.0             0.0               0.0            GRANTS_SUBSIDIES 
Provision  for FO  led 4Ps  /d                                                                                                                       -                 -                 -         641.5       867.4        667.9      2,176.9              0.0             0.0               0.0            GRANTS_SUBSIDIES 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                  603.9          819.1          419.6          855.3       867.4       667.9      4,233.3 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                   1,358.7       1,587.1          419.6       1,657.1    1,680.7    1,502.9       8,206.1 
4. 4P  Sensitization / Consultation 
a.  General  4P  Sensitization  /  Consultation
0.0             13.0                   W ORKSHOPS 
Sensitization workshop/training on 4P  principles  and  cross-cutting (e.g.  CC,  youth) 
4P  advertisement 
0.0             13.0   EQUIPMENT_AND_MAT 
4P consultation  workshop  process  (one  national;  four  field  level)                                                     5.0              5.1              5.2              5.3               -               -           20.7             0.0             0.0             13.0                   W ORKSHOPS 
10.1 
6.0 
20.3 
18.5 
10.2 
6.1 
- 
6.3 
0.0 
0.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
ERIALS
4P  development process 
4P  Biannual  review  workshop 
Farmer  training  (VC  awareness) 
Subtotal 
b.  Senstitization process  for  FO  /e 
2.0 
2.0 
5.0 
30.2 
30.2 
2.0 
2.0 
5.1 
30.7 
30.7 
2.1 
2.1 
5.2 
21.0 
31.5 
2.1 
2.1 
5.3 
15.0 
21.4 
- 
2.2 
- 
2.2 
21.7 
- 
2.2 
- 
2.2 
22.3 
8.3 
12.7 
20.7 
101.3 
157.7 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                         60.4 
259.0 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                      12,993.0    14,345.3       9,808.8       5,595.8    1,704.5    1,527.3    45,974.8 
B. C1.2.  Institutional  Strenghthening  of Farmer  Organizations 
52.5 
61.4 
23.9 
24.5 
36.4 
1. For  Coops  in  business 
a. Technical  Assistance  /f 
2. New  4Ps  private  sector  led  with  FOs 
a. Technical  Assistance  /g 
3. For  new  FOs  (Mahaweli) 
a. Technical  Assistance  /h 
b. Mahaweli  Authority  consultant  pool  /i 
25.2 
51.2 
52.5 
53.5 
54.2 
55.7 
292.1 
90.6 
184.3 
157.5 
340.0 
279.8 
169.2 
1,221.3 
181.2 
99.8 
368.6 
101.6 
314.7 
104.1 
577.3 
106.1 
338.3 
107.6 
160.3 
110.4 
1,940.4 
629.5 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
13.0 
13.0 
13.0 
13.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
W ORKSHOPS 
W ORKSHOPS 
W ORKSHOPS 
W ORKSHOPS 
CONSULTANCIES 
CONSULTANCIES 
CONSULTANCIES 
CONSULTANCIES 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                       281.0          470.2          418.8          683.4       445.9       270.7      2,570.0 
4. Training  and  exchange  visits  for  all FOs  (under  all  categories) 
a. Exchange  visit  at domestic  level                                                                                                         30.2            30.7            31.5                  -               -               -           92.4             0.0             0.0             13.0                      TRAINING 
b. Exchange  visit  in the  Asia  region 
c. Trainings 
d. Business  advisory  services  (TA  for  all  FOs) 
e. Lump  sum  provisioning  for  Yrs  4-6  /j 
100.6 
100.6 
24.2 
- 
153.6 
204.8 
49.1 
- 
157.4 
209.8 
50.4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
271.6 
- 
- 
- 
464.1 
- 
- 
- 
476.5 
411.6 
515.2 
123.7 
1,212.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
13.0 
13.0 
0.0 
0.0 
TRAINING 
TRAINING 
TRAINING 
TRAINING 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                       255.6 
2,355.0 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                           652.4      1,143.9       1,077.7       1,348.4    1,243.9        972.1      6,438.4 
C. Social  mobilizers  and  equipment 
271.6 
464.1 
449.0 
476.5 
438.2 
1. Tablets  for data  entry  by social  mobilizers  /k                                                                                        10.1              1.3              1.3              1.3           1.4           1.4           16.7             0.0             0.0             13.0   EQUIPMENT_AND_MATERIALS 
2. Training  of social  mobilizers 
16.6 
3. Social  mobilizers 
913.8 
4. Record  keeping  books                                                                                                                             30.2            30.7            31.5            10.7                -               -         103.1 
TRAINING 
CONSULTANCIES 
- 
156.1 
- 
160.3 
4.0 
144.9 
4.1 
147.4 
4.3 
154.0 
4.2 
151.1 
13.0 
0.0 
13.0   EQUIPMENT_AND_MATERIALS 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                           189.2 
1,050.2 
Total                                                                                                                                                                 13,834.6     15,672.8     11,074.5       7,114.4    3,106.0    2,661.1    53,463.4
170.3 
157.5 
188.0 
183.5 
161.7 
174 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:    Programme cost and financing 
Detailed Cost Table – Component 1: Access to Commercial Partnerships… continued 
2018         2019         2020            2021            2022         2023         Total         2018         2019         2020         2021       2022    2023       Total       2018    2019    2020     2021     2022    2023     Total
IFAD  Loan                                                                                          Private  Sector  Partners                                                    Government (incl.  taxes) 
Expenditures by Financiers (US$  '000)
I. Investment Costs 
A. C1.1.  Matching  Grants  and  Start-Up  Funds 
1. Individual  Farmer-led 4Ps 
a. New  4Ps 
New  4Ps  - Individual  financed  private  sector-led  (project) 
Scaled  up  Individual  Nadep  4Ps  (project) 
Start  Up  funds  involving  FOs 
Private  sector  contribution to individual  4Ps 
-           -           -             -           -           -            - 
-           -           -             -           -           -            - 
-           -           -             -           -           -            - 
-           -           -             -           -           -            - 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                             6,038.6     6,143.6     4,196.3           1,603.7                -               -    17,982.2     5,535.4    5,631.6     4,196.3     1,603.7            -           -    16,967.0            -           -           -             -           -           -            - 
- 
- 
-               -    10,842.0 
- 
- 
-               -      5,109.8 
-               -      2,030.4 
- 
- 
-               -                 -  5,535.4  5,631.6  4,196.3  1,603.7 
3,019.3  3,071.8  3,147.2 
2,012.9  2,047.9  1,049.1 
- 
1,006.4  1,023.9 
- 
- 
-           -                 - 
-           -                 - 
-           -                 - 
-           -    16,967.0 
1,603.7 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2. Youth  Start  Up  Fund  and  Expansion 
a. Youth  Start  Up  Fund                                                                                                                                 -       512.0        524.5              267.3                -               -      1,303.8                -               -               -                -           -           -                 -           -           -           -             -           -           -            - 
b. Youth  Start  Up  Expansion  phase  /a                                                                                                       -       409.6        419.6              427.6                -               -      1,256.9                -               -               -                -           -           -                 -           -           -           -             -           -           -            - 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                             -       921.5        944.2              694.9                -               -      2,560.6                -               -               -                -           -           -                  -           -           -           -             -           -           -            
- 
3. Farmer  Organzition-led 4Ps:  FO  Start-Up  Funds 
a. New  4Ps  private  sector  led  with  FOs 
New  4Ps  private  sector  led  with  FOs                                                                                             503.2        512.0                -                      -               -               -      1,015.2                -               -               -                -           -           -                 -           -           -           -             -           -           -            - 
Provision  for  New  4Ps  private  sector  led  with  FOs  /b                                                                          -               -               -             534.6        542.2        556.6      1,633.3                -               -               -                -           -           -                 -           -           -           -             -           -           -            - 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                503.2       512.0                -             534.6        542.2        556.6      2,648.5                -               -               -                -           -           -                 -           -           -           -             -           -           -            
- 
b.  FO  led  4Ps  - Coops  in  business 
FOs  led  4Ps  - Coops  in business                                                                                                   251.6       256.0                -                      -               -               -         507.6                -               -               -                -           -           -                 -           -           -           -             -           -           -            
- Provision  for  FO  led  4Ps  - Coops  in business  /c                                                                                  -               -               -             267.3        271.1        278.3          816.7                -               -               -                -           -           -                 -           -           -           -             -           -           -            - 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                251.6       256.0                -             267.3        271.1        278.3      1,324.3                -               -               -                -           -           -                 -           -           -           -             -           -           -            
c. FO  led  4Ps  - new  FOs  (Mahaweli) 
FO  led  4Ps  - new  FOs  (Mahaweli)                                                                                          603.9        819.1        419.6              213.8                -               -      2,056.5                -               -               -                -           -           -                  -           -           -           -             -           -           -            - 
Provision  for  FO  led  4Ps  /d                                                                                                                     -               -               -             641.5        867.4        667.9      2,176.9                -               -               -                -           -           -                 -           -           -           -             -           -           -            - 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                603.9       819.1       419.6              855.3        867.4        667.9      4,233.3                -               -               -                -           -           -                 -           -           -           -             -           -           -            - 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                 1,358.7     1,587.1        419.6           1,657.1     1,680.7     1,502.9       8,206.1                -               -               -                -           -           -                  -           -           -           -             -           -           -            - 
4. 4P  Sensitization / Consultation 
a. General  4P  Sensitization / Consultation 
Sensitization workshop/training on  4P  principles  and  cross-cutting (e.g.  CC,  youth)                   8.8            8.9                -                      -               -               -           17.7                -               -               -                -           -           -                 -       1.3       1.3           -             -           -           -        2.6 
4P  advertisement                                                                                                                          5.3            5.3            5.5                      -               -               -           16.1                -               -               -                -           -           -                  -       0.8       0.8       0.8             -           -           -        2.4 
4P  consultation workshop  process  (one  national;  four  field  level)                                                  4.4            4.5            4.6                  4.6                -               -           18.0                -               -               -                -           -           -                  -       0.7       0.7       0.7         0.7           -           -        2.7 
4P  development process                                                                                                                     1.8            1.8           1.8                  1.9                -               -             7.2                -               -               -                -           -           -                  -       0.3       0.3       0.3         0.3           -           -        1.1 
4P  Biannual  review  workshop                                                                                                             1.8            1.8            1.8                  1.9            1.9           1.9            11.0                -               -               -                -           -           -                  -       0.3       0.3       0.3         0.3       0.3       0.3        1.7 
Farmer  training  (VC  awareness)                                                                                                 4.4            4.5            4.6                  4.6                -               -           18.0                -               -               -                -           -           -                  -       0.7       0.7       0.7         0.7           -           -        2.7 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                  26.3          26.7         18.2                13.0            1.9            1.9           88.1                -               -               -                -           -           -                 -       3.9       4.0       2.7         2.0       0.3       0.3      13.2 
b. Senstitization process  for  FO  /e                                                                                                       26.3          26.7          27.4                18.6          18.9         19.4         137.2                -               -               -                -           -           -                 -       3.9       4.0       4.1         2.8       2.8       2.9      20.6 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                       52.5          53.4          45.6                31.6         20.7          21.3          225.2                -               -               -                -           -           -                 -       7.9       8.0       6.8         4.7       3.1       3.2      33.8 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                      7,449.8     8,705.7     5,605.7           3,987.4     1,701.4     1,524.2     28,974.1     5,535.4     5,631.6     4,196.3     1,603.7            -           -    16,967.0        7.9       8.0       6.8         4.7       3.1       3.2      33.8 
B.  C1.2.  Institutional Strenghthening of Farmer  Organizations 
1. For  Coops  in  business 
a. Technical  Assistance /f                                                                                                                     25.2          51.2          52.5                53.5          54.2         55.7         292.1                -               -               -                -           -           -                 -           -           -           -             -           -           -            - 
- 
2. New  4Ps  private  sector  led  with  FOs 
a. Technical  Assistance /g 
3. For  new  FOs  (Mahaweli) 
a. Technical  Assistance /h 
b. Mahaweli  Authority  consultant  pool  /i 
Subtotal 
4. Training  and  exchange  visits  for  all  FOs  (under  all categories) 
a. Exchange  visit  at domestic  level 
b. Exchange  visit  in the  Asia  region 
c. Trainings 
d. Business  advisory  services  (TA  for  all  FOs) 
e. Lump  sum  provisioning for  Yrs  4-6  /j 
Subtotal 
Subtotal 
C.  Social  mobilizers and  equipment 
1. Tablets  for  data  entry  by  social  mobilizers  /k 
2. Training  of social  mobilizers 
3. Social  mobilizers 
4. Record  keeping  books 
90.6 
184.3 
157.5 
340.0 
279.8 
169.2 
1,221.3 
-               -               -                -           -           -                 -           -           -           -             -           -           -            - 
181.2 
99.8 
281.0 
368.6 
101.6 
470.2 
314.7 
104.1 
418.8 
577.3 
106.1 
683.4 
338.3 
107.6 
445.9 
27.4 
26.7 
26.3 
136.8 
133.6 
87.5 
182.5 
178.1 
87.5 
50.4 
49.1 
24.2 
- 
- 
- 
225.4 
397.0 
387.5 
622.2  1,093.2  1,025.7 
- 
- 
- 
- 
271.6 
271.6 
- 
- 
- 
- 
464.1 
464.1 
1,348.4  1,243.9 
160.3 
110.4 
270.7 
- 
- 
- 
- 
476.5 
476.5 
972.1 
8.8 
3.5 
144.9 
26.3 
183.4 
1.1 
3.6 
147.4 
26.7 
178.8 
1.1 
3.6 
151.1 
27.4 
183.2 
1.2 
3.7 
154.0 
9.3 
168.1 
1.2 
- 
156.1 
- 
157.3 
1.2 
- 
160.3 
- 
161.5 
1,940.4 
629.5 
2,570.0 
80.3 
357.9 
448.1 
123.7 
1,212.1 
2,222.1 
6,305.5 
14.6 
14.4 
913.8 
89.6 
-               -               -                -           -           -                 -           -           -           -             -           -           -            - 
-               -               -                -           -           -                 -           -           -           -             -           -           -            - 
-               -               -                -           -           -                 -           -           -           -             -           -           -            - 
-               -               -                -           -           -                 -       3.9       4.0       4.1             -           -           -      12.0 
-               -               -                -           -           -                 -     13.1     20.0     20.5              -           -           -      53.7 
-               -               -                -           -           -                 -     13.1     26.7     27.4              -           -           -      67.2 
-               -               -                -           -           -                 -           -           -           -             -           -           -            - 
-               -               -                -           -           -                 -           -           -           -             -           -           -            - 
-               -               -                -           -           -                 -     30.2     50.7     52.0              -           -           -    132.9 
-               -               -                -           -           -                 -     30.2     50.7     52.0              -           -           -    132.9 
-               -               -                -           -           -                 -       1.3       0.2       0.2         0.2       0.2       0.2        2.2 
-               -               -                -           -           -                 -       0.5       0.5       0.5         0.6           -           -        2.2 
-               -               -                -           -           -                 -           -           -           -             -           -           -            - 
-               -               -                -           -           -                 -       3.9       4.0       4.1         1.4           -           -      13.4 
Subtotal 
-               -               -                -           -           -                 -       5.8       4.7       4.8         2.1       0.2       0.2      17.8 
Total                                                                                                                                                                  8,255.4     9,977.7     6,814.6           5,503.9     3,102.7     2,657.7    36,312.0     5,535.4    5,631.6     4,196.3     1,603.7            -           -    16,967.0      43.8     63.5     63.6          6.9       3.3       3.4    184.5
1,032.5 
175 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:    Programme cost and financing 
Table 2: Detailed Cost Table – Component 2: Access to Rural Finance 
Unit 
2018 
2019 
2020 
Quantities                                              Unit  Cost                                             Base  Cost (US$  '000)                                                                 Totals  Including  Contingencies  (US$  '000) 
2023 
(US$) 
Total 
Total 
2019 
2021 
2021 
2023 
2020 
2018 
2022 
2021 
2018 
2022 
2020 
2019 
2023 
2022 
Total 
I. Investment  Costs 
A. Credit  Lines 
1. Line  of Credit 
2. Revolving  Fund  (GoSL) 
3. Private  Financial  Institutions  (PFIs) 
4. Farmer  Organization  Contribution 
Subtotal 
B. Institutional  Strengthening  to CBSL  and  PFI /a 
1. Central  Bank  of Sri Lanka 
lump  sum 
lump  sum 
lump  sum 
lump  sum 
- 
7.4988  4.5017 
-  12.0005  1,000,000 
4.5412  1.6667  2.0167  2.4542  3.001  3.6846  17.3644  1,000,000 
9.2908  1,000,000 
4.3917  1,000,000 
3.44  3.7917  2.0592 
1.72  1.5733  1.0983 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
7,498.8 
4,541.2 
3,440.0 
1,720.0 
4,501.7 
- 
1,666.7  2,016.7 
3,791.7  2,059.2 
1,573.3  1,098.3 
17,200.0  11,533.3  5,174.2 
- 
- 
4,609.4 
- 
-  12,000.5 
1,706.6  2,115.6 
2,454.2  3,001.0  3,684.6  17,364.4 
3,882.4  2,160.2 
9,290.8 
1,611.0  1,152.2 
4,391.7 
2,454.2  3,001.0  3,684.6  43,047.3  17,310.6  11,809.4  5,428.1 
7,547.0 
4,570.4 
3,462.1 
1,731.1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-  12,156.4 
2,623.8  3,254.1  4,101.8  18,372.3 
9,504.8 
4,494.3 
2,623.8  3,254.1  4,101.8  44,527.8 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Technical  assistance   in formulating  the MF guidelines  /b 
Technical  assistance  in formulating  the MF guidelines 
Workshops  with  stakeholders 
Conferences  for stakeholders 
Training  of MFIs  on new policies 
pers-month 
pers-month 
workshop 
number 
lump  sum 
2 
2 
5 
- 
- 
- 
2 
4 
1 
2 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2 
-            -              -               2 
-            -              -               4 
-            -              -               9 
-            -              -               1 
-            -              -               4 
27,920 
12,450 
1,000 
20,000 
8,500 
Subtotal 
2. Technical  assistance  to PFIs 
55.8 
24.9 
5.0 
- 
- 
85.7 
- 
24.9 
4.0 
20.0 
17.0 
65.9 
- 
- 
- 
- 
17.0 
17.0 
-               -               -           55.8 
-               -               -           49.8 
-               -               -             9.0 
-               -               -           20.0 
-               -               -           34.0 
-               -               -         168.6 
56.2 
25.1 
5.0 
- 
- 
86.3 
- 
25.5 
4.1 
20.5 
17.4 
67.5 
- 
- 
- 
- 
17.8 
17.8 
-               -               -           56.2 
-               -               -           50.6 
-               -               -             9.1 
-               -               -           20.5 
-               -               -           35.2 
-               -               -         171.6 
32.1               -               -         165.9 
-               -               -           43.5 
53.5               -               -         269.6 
-               -               -         229.8 
-               -               -             2.4 
2.6           2.6           2.7           15.2 
88.1           2.6           2.7         726.6 
898.2 
88.1 
2,711.9  3,256.7  4,104.5  45,425.9 
2.7 
2.6 
30.0               -               -         160.0 
-               -               -           42.0 
50.0               -               -         260.0 
-               -               -         223.4 
-               -               -             2.4 
2.4           2.4           2.4           14.4 
52.5 
22.0 
83.9 
87.9 
- 
2.5 
248.8 
82.4           2.4           2.4         702.2 
266.6 
870.8 
82.4 
2,536.6  3,003.4  3,687.0  43,918.1  17,537.3  12,120.9  5,694.7 
51.2 
21.5 
81.9 
85.8 
1.2 
2.5 
244.1 
311.5 
30.2 
- 
50.3 
56.2 
1.2 
2.4 
140.3 
226.6 
2.4 
2.4 
Training  of PFIs  on agriculture/micro-/group finance  /c 
Training  on systems  development  for MFIs  /d 
PFI training  on technical  issues,  incl.  appraisal  /e 
ITA on systems  development  and training  of staff 
Sensitization  workshops  with PFIs 
PMU-CBSL-PFI  reviews  of procedures  /f 
30.0 
- 
50.0 
55.8 
1.2 
2.4 
139.4 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         225.2 
50.0 
21.0 
80.0 
83.8 
- 
2.4 
237.2 
254.2 
Total                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17,425.2  11,837.6  5,428.3 
3            -              -             16 
-            -              -               6 
5            -              -             26 
-            -              -               8 
-            -              -               4 
4           4             4             24 
number 
number 
number 
pers-month 
workshop 
workshop 
50.0 
21.0 
80.0 
83.8 
1.2 
2.4 
238.4 
304.3 
10,000 
7,000 
10,000 
27,920 
600 
600 
5 
3 
8 
3 
- 
4 
3 
- 
5 
2 
2 
4 
5 
3 
8 
3 
2 
4 
Subtotal 
\a For all training  and meetings  it is assumed  that  the PFIs  cover  the costs  of their  own  staff,  incl.  transport,  board  and lodging. 
\b International  TA. 
\c Two-day  training  event. 
\d Three-day  event. 
\e Two-day  event. 
\f Half  a day meeting
176 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:    Programme cost and financing 
Table 2: Detailed Cost Table – Component 2: Access to Rural Finance...continued 
Parameters  (in  %) 
Phy.                                            Summary  Divisions 
Cont.          For.           Gross            Expenditure                                                                 IFAD  Loan 
Rate         Exch.       Tax  Rate             Account                  2018              2019            2020          2021          2022          2023             Total 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
CREDIT 
CREDIT 
CREDIT 
CREDIT 
7,547.0 
- 
- 
- 
7,547.0 
4,609.4 
- 
- 
- 
4,609.4 
-                 -                 -                 -          12,156.4 
-                 -                 -                 -                       - 
-                 -                 -                 -                       - 
-                 -                 -                 -                       - 
-                 -                 -                 -          12,156.4 
0.0  CONSULTANCIES 
0.0  CONSULTANCIES 
0.0  WORKSHOPS 
13.0  WORKSHOPS 
0.0 
TRAINING 
56.2 
25.1 
5.0 
- 
- 
86.3 
- 
25.5 
4.1 
17.8 
17.4 
64.8 
22.3 
9.3 
35.6 
37.3 
0.5 
1.1 
106.1 
170.9 
4,780.3 
- 
- 
- 
- 
17.8 
17.8 
22.8 
9.6 
36.5 
38.2 
- 
1.1 
108.2 
126.0 
126.0 
-                 -                 -                 56.2 
-                 -                 -                 50.6 
-                 -                 -                   9.1 
-                 -                 -                 17.8 
-                 -                 -                 35.2 
-                 -                 -               168.9 
13.9                 -                 -                 72.1 
-                 -                 -                 18.9 
23.2                 -                 -               117.2 
-                 -                 -                 99.9 
-                 -                 -                   1.1 
1.1             1.1             1.2                   6.6 
38.3             1.1             1.2               315.9 
484.8 
38.3 
12,641.3 
38.3 
1.2 
1.2 
1.1 
1.1 
I. Investment  Costs 
A. Credit  Lines 
1. Line  of Credit 
2. Revolving  Fund  (GoSL) 
3. Private  Financial  Institutions  (PFIs) 
4. Farmer  Organization Contribution 
Subtotal 
B. Institutional Strengthening to CBSL  and  PFI  /a 
1. Central  Bank  of Sri  Lanka 
Technical  assistance   in formulating  the  MF  guidelines  /b 
Technical  assistance  in formulating  the  MF  guidelines 
Workshops  with  stakeholders 
Conferences for  stakeholders 
Training  of MFIs  on new  policies 
Subtotal 
2. Technical  assistance  to PFIs 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
Training  of PFIs  on  agriculture/micro-/group finance  /c 
Training  on systems  development for MFIs  /d 
PFI  training  on technical  issues,  incl.  appraisal  /e 
ITA  on systems  development and  training  of staff 
Sensitization workshops  with  PFIs 
PMU-CBSL-PFI reviews  of procedures  /f 
13.1 
- 
21.9 
24.4 
0.5 
1.1 
61.0 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                                                                     147.3 
tal                                                                                                                                                                                                             7,694.3 
13.0 
13.0 
13.0 
13.0  CONSULTANCIES 
13.0  WORKSHOPS 
13.0  WORKSHOPS 
TRAINING 
TRAINING 
TRAINING 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
Subtotal 
To
177 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:    Programme cost and financing 
Table 2: Detailed Cost Table – Component 2: Access to Rural Finance...continued 
Expenditures by Financiers  (US$  '000) 
2018 
2019 
Private  Financial  Institutions                                                                                                  Government (incl.  taxes)                                                                                                                Beneficiary  Contribution 
2020 
2021          2022          2023            Total 
Total 
2020 
2022 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2018 
2021 
2019 
2023 
2021          2022          2023            Total 
I. Investment  Costs 
A. Credit  Lines 
1. Line  of Credit 
2. Revolving  Fund  (GoSL) 
3. Private  Financial  Institutions  (PFIs) 
4. Farmer  Organization Contribution 
Subtotal 
B. Institutional Strengthening to CBSL  and  PFI  /a 
1. Central  Bank  of Sri  Lanka 
Technical  assistance   in formulating  the  MF guidelines  /b 
Technical  assistance  in formulating  the  MF guidelines 
Workshops  with  stakeholders 
Conferences for stakeholders 
Training  of MFIs  on new policies 
Subtotal 
2. Technical  assistance  to PFIs 
Training  of PFIs  on agriculture/micro-/group  finance  /c 
Training  on systems  development for MFIs  /d 
PFI  training  on technical  issues,  incl.  appraisal  /e 
ITA  on systems  development and  training  of staff 
Sensitization workshops  with  PFIs 
PMU-CBSL-PFI reviews  of procedures  /f 
Subtotal 
Subtotal 
Total
- 
- 
3,462.1 
- 
3,462.1 
- 
- 
3,882.4 
- 
3,882.4 
- 
- 
2,160.2 
- 
2,160.2 
-                 -                 -                     - 
-                 -                 -                     - 
-                 -                 -          9,504.8 
-                 -                 -                     - 
-                 -                 -          9,504.8 
- 
4,570.4 
- 
- 
4,570.4 
- 
1,706.6 
- 
- 
1,706.6 
- 
2,115.6 
- 
- 
2,115.6 
- 
2,623.8 
- 
- 
2,623.8 
- 
3,254.1 
- 
- 
3,254.1 
- 
4,101.8 
- 
- 
4,101.8 
- 
18,372.3 
- 
- 
18,372.3 
- 
- 
- 
1,731.1 
1,731.1 
- 
- 
- 
1,611.0 
1,611.0 
- 
- 
- 
1,152.2 
1,152.2 
-                 -                 -                     - 
-                 -                 -                     - 
-                 -                 -                     - 
-                 -                 -          4,494.3 
-                 -                 -          4,494.3 
-                     -                     -                 -                 -                 -                     -                     -                     - 
-                     -                     -                 -                 -                 -                     -                     -                     - 
-                     -                     -                 -                 -                 -                     -                     -                     - 
-                     -                     -                 -                 -                 -                     -                     -                 2.7 
-                     -                     -                 -                 -                 -                     -                     -                     - 
-                     -                     -                 -                 -                 -                     -                     -                 2.7 
-                     -                     -                     -                       - 
-                     -                     -                     -                       - 
-                     -                     -                     -                       - 
-                     -                     -                     -                   2.7 
-                     -                     -                     -                       - 
-                     -                     -                     -                   2.7 
-                     -                     -                 -                 -                 -                     - 
-                     -                     -                 -                 -                 -                     - 
-                     -                     -                 -                 -                 -                     - 
-                     -                     -                 -                 -                 -                     - 
-                     -                     -                 -                 -                 -                     - 
-                     -                     -                 -                 -                 -                     - 
13.1               22.3               22.8           13.9                 -                 -               72.1                  3.9                 6.7 
-                 9.3                 9.6                 -                 -                 -               18.9                     -                 2.8 
21.9               35.6               36.5           23.2                 -                 -             117.2                  6.6               10.7 
24.4               37.3               38.2                 -                 -                 -               99.9                  7.3               11.2 
0.5                 0.5                     -                 -                 -                 -                 1.1                 0.2                 0.2 
1.1                 1.1                 1.1             1.1             1.1             1.2                 6.6                 0.3                 0.3 
61.0             106.1             108.2           38.3             1.1             1.2             315.9                18.3               31.8 
61.0 
34.5 
1.1 
1,741.1 
3,523.1 
1.1 
315.9 
9,820.7 
18.3 
4,588.7 
106.1 
3,988.5 
108.2 
2,268.4 
38.3 
38.3 
1.2 
1.2 
6.8                 4.2                     -                     -                 21.6 
2.9                     -                     -                     -                   5.7 
10.9                 7.0                     -                     -                 35.2 
11.5                     -                     -                     -                 30.0 
-                     -                     -                     -                   0.3 
0.3                 0.3                 0.3                 0.3                   2.0 
32.4               11.5                  0.3                 0.3                 94.7 
32.4 
97.4 
0.3 
18,469.7 
3,254.4 
2,148.1 
0.3 
4,102.2 
11.5 
2,635.3 
-                     -                     -                 -                 -                 -                     - 
-                     -                     -                 -                 -                 -                     - 
-                     -                     -                 -                 -                 -                     - 
-                     -                     -                 -                 -                 -                     - 
-                     -                     -                 -                 -                 -                     - 
-                     -                     -                 -                 -                 -                     - 
-                     -                     -                 -                 -                 -                     - 
-                     -                     -                 -                 -                 -                     - 
1,731.1          1,611.0          1,152.2                  -                 -                 -          4,494.3 
178 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:    Programme cost and financing 
Table 3: Detailed Cost Table – Component 3: Programme Management and Policy Dialogue 
Unit        2018    2019    2020  2021  2022   2023    Total       (US$)         2018      2019    2020    2021     2022    2023      Total       2018      2019    2020     2021     2022     2023      Total
Quantities                                Unit Cost                              Base Cost (US$ '000)                                       Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000) 
I. Investment Costs 
A. Project Management Unit 
1. PMU Equipment 
a. Computer and Peripherals 
b. Laptops 
c. Other office equipment 
d. Accounting software 
e. MIS/M&E system upgrade 
Subtotal 
2. Vehicles 
3. PMU Training /a 
4. PIM Manual /b 
Subtotal 
B. M&E and Knowledge Management 
1. Workshops/Forums 
set 
set 
lump sum 
unit 
lump sum 
unit 
lump sum 
lump sum 
Start-Up W orkshop /c 
Sensitization and Education W orkshops /d 
Annual Stakeholders Planning/Review W orkshop 
Annual Business Forums 
workshop 
lump sum 
workshop 
number 
Subtotal 
2. Studies and Surveys 
Baseline/Annual Outcome/Impact Survey/PCR /e 
Technical studies 
External audit /f 
survey 
number 
number 
Subtotal 
3. Knowledge Management and Training 
Information and Communication Materials /g 
Training Manuals 
Development of environmental/climate change manual 
Gender strategy 
lump sum 
set 
unit 
unit 
Subtotal 
4. Youth 
10 
10 
1 
1 
1 
-           -       -          -          -         10 
-           -       -          -          -         10 
-           -       -          -          -          1 
-           -       -          -          -          1 
-           -       -          -          -          1 
3 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
5 
2 
1 
1 
- 
1 
1 
-           -       -          -          -          3 
1           1      1         1          -           5 
-           -       -          -          -          1 
- 
- 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
2 
2 
1 
1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
5 
2 
1 
1 
- 
- 
- 
1 
1 
6 
6 
15 
12 
6 
6 
2 
1 
1 
1,200 
1,500 
20,000 
30,000 
20,000 
88,000 
60,000 
35,000 
10,000 
10,000 
2,000 
5,000 
20,000 
10,000 
25,000 
50,000 
50,000 
10,000 
15,000 
12.0 
15.0 
20.0 
30.0 
20.0 
97.0 
264.0 
60.0 
35.0 
456.0 
-           -           -           -           -        12.0 
-           -           -           -           -        15.0 
-           -           -           -           -        20.0 
-           -           -           -           -        30.0 
-           -           -           -           -        20.0 
-           -           -           -           -        97.0 
-           -           -           -           -      264.0 
60.0     60.0     60.0      60.0           -      300.0 
-           -           -           -           -        35.0 
60.0     60.0     60.0      60.0           -      696.0 
12.1 
15.2 
20.2 
30.3 
20.2 
98.1 
283.0 
60.7 
35.4 
477.2 
-           -            -           -           -         12.1 
-           -            -           -           -         15.2 
-           -            -           -           -         20.2 
-           -            -           -           -         30.3 
-           -            -           -           -         20.2 
-           -            -           -           -         98.1 
-           -            -           -           -      283.0 
61.5     62.5      63.3     64.1           -      312.1 
-           -            -           -           -         35.4 
61.5     62.5      63.3     64.1           -      728.6 
10.0 
10.0 
2.0 
5.0 
27.0 
- 
- 
2.0 
5.0 
7.0 
100.0 
20.0 
25.0 
145.0 
20.0 
20.0 
25.0 
65.0 
50.0 
50.0 
50.0 
- 
- 
10.0 
15.0 
- 
75.0  100.0 
- 
- 
2.0 
5.0 
7.0 
40.0 
20.0 
25.0 
85.0 
50.0 
- 
- 
- 
50.0 
- 
- 
2.0 
5.0 
7.0 
- 
- 
2.0 
5.0 
7.0 
- 
- 
2.0 
5.0 
7.0 
20.0 
20.0 
25.0 
65.0 
20.0 
20.0 
25.0 
65.0 
100.0 
20.0 
25.0 
145.0 
50.0 
- 
- 
- 
50.0 
50.0 
- 
- 
50.0  100.0 
50.0 
- 
- 
- 
50.0 
10.0 
10.0 
12.0 
30.0 
62.0 
300.0 
120.0 
150.0 
570.0 
300.0 
100.0 
10.0 
15.0 
425.0 
10.1 
10.1 
2.0 
5.0 
27.2 
- 
- 
2.0 
5.1 
7.2 
100.6 
20.1 
25.2 
145.9 
20.5 
20.5 
25.6 
66.6 
51.2 
50.3 
51.2 
- 
- 
10.1 
15.1 
- 
75.5  102.4 
- 
- 
2.1 
5.2 
7.3 
42.0 
21.0 
26.2 
89.2 
52.5 
- 
- 
- 
52.5 
- 
- 
2.1 
5.3 
7.5 
- 
- 
2.2 
5.4 
7.6 
- 
- 
2.2 
5.6 
7.8 
21.4 
21.4 
26.7 
69.5 
21.7 
21.7 
27.1 
70.5 
111.3 
22.3 
27.8 
161.4 
53.5 
- 
- 
- 
54.2 
54.2 
- 
- 
53.5  108.4 
55.7 
- 
- 
- 
55.7 
10.1 
10.1 
12.7 
31.7 
64.6 
317.5 
126.9 
158.7 
603.0 
317.3 
105.4 
10.1 
15.1 
447.9 
Youth strategy                                                                     lump sum          1           -           -       -          -          -           1         15,000        15.0           -           -           -           -           -         15.0        15.1           -           -            -           -           -         15.1 
Subtotal 
Training package - financial literacy and KYN /h 
Technical training /i 
-           -        39.1 
-           -       130.4 
-           -       184.6 
63.7     65.4      373.0 
26.6     27.3      155.4 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                                                                               345.3   320.3   290.3   237.8   255.3   285.3   1,734.1      347.5   327.9   304.5    254.2   276.8   317.6   1,828.5 
C. Policy Dialogue /k 
-           -        37.5 
-           -       125.0 
-           -       177.5 
58.8     58.8      352.7 
24.5     24.5      146.9 
-      15.4      15.7 
-      51.2      52.5 
15.1     66.6     68.2 
59.2     60.2     61.7 
24.6     25.1     25.7 
-      15.0      15.0 
-      50.0      50.0 
15.0     65.0     65.0 
58.8     58.8     58.8 
24.5     24.5     24.5 
5. Consultancies /j 
6. Other consultancies 
4           4           4      4 
2           2           2      2 
-   1,000   1,000    ## 
-   1,000   1,000    ## 
4         4        24 
2         2        12 
-          -    2,500 
-          -    2,500 
8.0 
26.7 
34.7 
62.8 
26.2 
7.5 
25.0 
32.5 
58.8 
24.5 
lump sum 
lump sum 
pers-year 
pers-year 
14,694 
12,245 
15 
50 
Stakeholder meetings /l 
Reserach studies, policy issues 
Scaling up studies, data collection 
Communication /m 
Publications 
Policy advocacy /n 
Exposure visits /o 
Support for policy design and implementation /p 
Dialogue, R&D/private sector /q 
number 
number 
number 
number 
lump sum 
lump sum 
Person 
lump sum 
lump sum 
1 
2 
- 
- 
0.5 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Subtotal 
Total Investment Costs 
II. Recurrent Costs 
A. Salaries 
Project Director 
Deputy Project Director (Admin/Legal) 
Agribusiness Manager 
Rural Finance Manager 
Finance Manager 
Procurement Specialist 
Internal Auditor 
ICT Auditor 
Secretary 
Management Assistant (Finance) 
Drivers 
Office Assistant 
Deputy Manager (Agribusiness) 
Deputy Manager (Institutions) 
Deputy Manager (Rural Finance) 
Deputy Manager (Accountant) 
Deputy Manager (Admin) 
Deputy Manager (M&E) 
Development Assistant (admin) 
Development Assistant (M&E) 
Development Assistant (agribusiness) 
Development Assistant (institutions) 
Development Assistant (rural finance) 
Subtotal 
B. Allowances 
Travel and Allowances 
Honorarium to NSC participants 
Subtotal 
C. Operation and Maintenance 
pers-year 
pers-year 
pers-year 
pers-year 
pers-year 
pers-year 
pers-year 
pers-year 
pers-year 
pers-year 
pers-year 
pers-year 
pers-year 
pers-year 
pers-year 
pers-year 
pers-year 
pers-year 
pers-year 
pers-year 
pers-year 
pers-year 
pers-year 
lump sum 
lump sum 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
6 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
- 
- 
1 
1 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
6 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
- 
1 
- 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
6 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
6 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
- 
1 
- 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
6 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
- 
1 
1 
5 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
6 
- 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
10 
12 
8 
3 
5.5 
5 
15 
5 
3 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
12 
36 
10 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
12 
12 
6 
6 
3,000 
10,000 
5,000 
20,000 
10,000 
5,000 
10,000 
10,000 
5,000 
18,286 
16,898 
16,408 
16,408 
13,200 
16,408 
14,122 
9,224 
6,449 
6,449 
6,449 
5,388 
14,122 
14,122 
14,122 
14,122 
14,122 
14,122 
6,449 
6,449 
6,449 
6,449 
6,449 
6.0 
20.0 
10.0 
20.0 
10.0 
5.0 
- 
10.0 
- 
3.0 
20.0 
- 
- 
5.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
6.0 
20.0 
- 
- 
10.0 
5.0 
50.0 
10.0 
5.0 
30.0 
6.0 
120.0 
20.0 
40.0 
10.0 
60.0 
20.0 
55.0 
10.0 
25.0 
5.0 
150.0 
50.0 
50.0 
10.0 
15.0 
5.0 
28.0    106.0     81.0    136.0     81.0    113.0      545.0 
829.3   486.3   431.3   433.8   396.3   398.3   2,975.1 
3.0 
20.0 
10.0 
- 
10.0 
5.0 
50.0 
10.0 
5.0 
6.0 
20.0 
10.0 
20.0 
10.0 
5.0 
- 
10.0 
- 
6.3 
21.0 
10.5 
21.0 
10.5 
5.2 
- 
10.5 
- 
6.1 
20.5 
- 
- 
10.2 
5.1 
51.2 
10.2 
5.1 
3.0 
20.1 
- 
- 
5.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
31.7 
6.4 
126.9 
21.4 
43.2 
10.7 
64.1 
21.4 
58.4 
10.7 
26.7 
5.3 
160.3 
53.5 
53.4 
10.7 
16.0 
5.3 
28.2    108.5     85.0  145.4     87.8    125.8      580.7 
852.9   497.9   452.0  462.9   428.7   443.4   3,137.8 
3.3 
22.3 
11.1 
- 
11.1 
5.6 
55.7 
11.1 
5.6 
6.5 
21.7 
10.8 
21.7 
10.8 
5.4 
- 
10.8 
- 
18.3 
16.9 
16.4 
16.4 
13.2 
16.4 
14.1 
9.2 
6.4 
12.9 
38.7 
10.8 
14.1 
14.1 
14.1 
14.1 
14.1 
14.1 
6.4 
12.9 
12.9 
6.4 
6.4 
18.3 
16.9 
16.4 
16.4 
13.2 
16.4 
14.1 
9.2 
6.4 
12.9 
38.7 
10.8 
14.1 
14.1 
14.1 
14.1 
14.1 
14.1 
6.4 
12.9 
12.9 
6.4 
6.4 
109.7 
18.3 
101.4 
16.9 
98.4 
16.4 
98.4 
16.4 
79.2 
13.2 
98.4 
16.4 
84.7 
14.1 
55.3 
9.2 
38.7 
6.4 
77.4 
12.9 
232.2 
38.7 
53.9 
10.8 
84.7 
14.1 
84.7 
14.1 
84.7 
14.1 
84.7 
14.1 
84.7 
14.1 
84.7 
14.1 
38.7 
6.4 
77.4 
12.9 
77.4 
12.9 
38.7 
6.4 
38.7 
6.4 
319.6   319.6   319.6   319.6   319.6   308.9   1,907.1 
18.3 
16.9 
16.4 
16.4 
13.2 
16.4 
14.1 
9.2 
6.4 
12.9 
38.7 
10.8 
14.1 
14.1 
14.1 
14.1 
14.1 
14.1 
6.4 
12.9 
12.9 
6.4 
6.4 
18.3 
16.9 
16.4 
16.4 
13.2 
16.4 
14.1 
9.2 
6.4 
12.9 
38.7 
- 
14.1 
14.1 
14.1 
14.1 
14.1 
14.1 
6.4 
12.9 
12.9 
6.4 
6.4 
18.3 
16.9 
16.4 
16.4 
13.2 
16.4 
14.1 
9.2 
6.4 
12.9 
38.7 
10.8 
14.1 
14.1 
14.1 
14.1 
14.1 
14.1 
6.4 
12.9 
12.9 
6.4 
6.4 
18.7 
17.3 
16.8 
16.8 
13.5 
16.8 
14.5 
9.4 
6.6 
13.2 
39.6 
11.0 
14.5 
14.5 
14.5 
14.5 
14.5 
14.5 
6.6 
13.2 
13.2 
6.6 
6.6 
18.4 
17.0 
16.5 
16.5 
13.3 
16.5 
14.2 
9.3 
6.5 
13.0 
38.9 
10.8 
14.2 
14.2 
14.2 
14.2 
14.2 
14.2 
6.5 
13.0 
13.0 
6.5 
6.5 
19.2 
17.7 
17.2 
17.2 
13.8 
17.2 
14.8 
9.7 
6.8 
13.5 
40.6 
11.3 
14.8 
14.8 
14.8 
14.8 
14.8 
14.8 
6.8 
13.5 
13.5 
6.8 
6.8 
321.7   327.3   335.3 
19.8 
18.3 
17.8 
17.8 
14.3 
17.8 
15.3 
10.0 
7.0 
14.0 
42.0 
11.7 
15.3 
15.3 
15.3 
15.3 
15.3 
15.3 
7.0 
14.0 
14.0 
7.0 
7.0 
19.5 
18.1 
17.5 
17.5 
14.1 
17.5 
15.1 
9.9 
6.9 
13.8 
41.4 
11.5 
15.1 
15.1 
15.1 
15.1 
15.1 
15.1 
6.9 
13.8 
13.8 
6.9 
6.9 
116.0 
107.2 
104.1 
104.1 
83.8 
104.1 
89.6 
58.5 
40.9 
81.9 
245.6 
56.4 
89.6 
89.6 
89.6 
89.6 
89.6 
89.6 
40.9 
81.9 
81.9 
40.9 
40.9 
341.7   346.6   343.8   2,016.5 
20.4 
18.8 
18.3 
18.3 
14.7 
18.3 
15.7 
10.3 
7.2 
14.4 
43.1 
- 
15.7 
15.7 
15.7 
15.7 
15.7 
15.7 
7.2 
14.4 
14.4 
7.2 
7.2 
6 
6 
50,000 
5,000 
50.0     50.0     50.0      50.0     50.0     50.0      300.0 
5.0       5.0       5.0        5.0       5.0       5.0        30.0 
55.0     55.0     55.0      55.0     55.0     55.0      330.0 
50.3     51.2     52.5 
5.0       5.1       5.2 
55.4     56.3     57.7 
53.5     54.2     55.7      317.3 
5.3       5.4       5.6        31.7 
58.8     59.6     61.2      349.0 
Vehicles 
Other equipment 
Office 
Other Operating Costs 
64.1     65.1     66.8      380.8 
12.8     13.0     13.4        76.2 
17.6     17.9     18.4      104.7 
12.8     13.0     13.4        76.2 
101.1   102.9   105.4  107.4   109.0   111.9      637.8 
Total Recurrent Costs                                                                                                                                                                                            475.1   475.1   475.1   475.1   475.1   464.4   2,840.1      478.2   486.5   498.5    508.0   515.2   516.9   3,003.3 
Total                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1,304.4   961.4   906.4   908.9   871.4   862.6   5,815.2   1,331.1    984.5   950.4    970.9   943.9   960.3   6,141.1 
60.0     60.0     60.0      60.0     60.0     60.0      360.0 
12.0     12.0     12.0      12.0     12.0     12.0        72.0 
16.5     16.5     16.5      16.5     16.5     16.5        99.0 
12.0     12.0     12.0      12.0     12.0     12.0        72.0 
100.5   100.5   100.5   100.5   100.5   100.5      603.0 
60.4     61.4     62.9 
12.1     12.3     12.6 
16.6     16.9     17.3 
12.1     12.3     12.6 
vehicle 
lump sum 
lump sum 
lump sum 
10,000 
12,000 
16,500 
12,000 
36 
6 
6 
6 
Subtotal 
6 
1 
1 
1 
6 
1 
1 
1 
6 
1 
1 
1 
6 
1 
1 
1 
6 
1 
1 
1 
6 
1 
1 
1 
\a Covers APR retreats and international study tours. 
\b Includes Operations Manual, Financial and Administration Manual, M&E Manual and systems design. 
\c To cover one in Colombo and (others) in the field 
\d Crosscutting themes. 
\e Survey may be grouped together to provide one comprehensive survey or study. Includes MTR. 
\f Including partners 
\g Includes production of material for broadcast (on TV and radio). 
\h KYN (know your numbers) and basic entreprenurial training. USD 15/youth, three sessions per year. Total of 7,500 youth trained. 
\i USD 50/youth. Five session per year. Total of 2,500 youth trained. 
\j C1/C2/M&E specialists 
\k Includes possibly privatisation of articifical insemmination institute, smallholder farmer registration, fertilizer poilcy, seed policy, etc. 
\l Multi-stakeholder meetings and sector specific follow-up meetings 
\m Assumes three video films to be made 
\n Activities dependent on specific policy issues in question and requirements 
\o For senior policy makers and other stakeholders, to view successful policy application, both within Sri Lanka and other countries in Asia or Africa. 
\p May include support to the process of drafting policy or regulations, public consultations around draft policy, or kickstarting operationalisation where policy change has been effected 
\q To support focusing of R&D efforts on priorities of agribusiness
179 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:    Programme cost and financing 
Table 3: Detailed Cost Table – Component 3: Programme Management and Policy 
Dialogue....continued 
Parameters  (in  %) 
Phy.                                                                                                                                                                  Expenditures  by Financiers  (US$ '000) 
Cont.          For.          Gross                Summary  Divisions                                                  IFAD  Loan                                                               Government  (incl.  taxes) 
Rate         Exch.       Tax Rate            Expenditure  Account             2018       2019     2020      2021      2022     2023      Total      2018     2019     2020     2021     2022     2023     Total
I. Investment  Costs 
A. Project  Management  Unit 
1. PMU  Equipment 
a. Computer  and  Peripherals 
b. Laptops 
c. Other  office  equipment 
d. Accounting  software 
e. MIS/M&E  system  upgrade 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
50.1 
50.1 
50.1 
50.1 
50.1 
13.0   EQUIPMENT_AND_MATERIALS 
13.0   EQUIPMENT_AND_MATERIALS 
13.0   EQUIPMENT_AND_MATERIALS 
13.0   EQUIPMENT_AND_MATERIALS 
13.0   EQUIPMENT_AND_MATERIALS 
10.6 
13.2 
17.6 
26.4 
17.6 
85.3 
246.1 
52.8 
30.8 
-            -             -            -            -         10.6 
-            -             -            -            -         13.2 
-            -             -            -            -         17.6 
-            -             -            -            -         26.4 
-            -             -            -            -         17.6 
-            -            -            -            -        1.6 
-            -            -            -            -        2.0 
-            -            -            -            -        2.6 
-            -            -            -            -        4.0 
-            -            -            -            -        2.6 
1.6 
2.0 
2.6 
4.0 
2.6 
12.8 
36.9 
7.9 
4.6 
Subtotal 
2. Vehicles 
3. PMU Training  /a 
4. PIM  Manual  /b 
-            -            -            -            -      12.8 
-            -            -            -            -      36.9 
8.0        8.1        8.3        8.4            -      40.7 
-            -            -            -            -        4.6 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                                                                             415.0      53.5      54.3       55.1      55.7            -       633.6      62.2        8.0        8.1        8.3        8.4            -      95.0 
B. M&E  and Knowledge  Management 
-            -             -            -            -         85.3 
-            -             -            -            -       246.1 
53.5      54.3       55.1      55.7            -       271.4 
-            -             -            -            -         30.8 
13.0                     VEHICLES 
13.0                      TRAINING 
13.0               CONSULTANCIES 
50.1 
50.1 
50.1 
6.0 
0.0 
0.0 
1. Workshops/Forums 
Start-Up  W orkshop  /c 
Sensitization  and Education  W orkshops  /d 
Annual  Stakeholders  Planning/Review  W orkshop 
Annual  Business  Forums 
1.3 
1.3 
1.7 
4.1 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                                                                           23.6        6.2        6.4         6.5        6.6        6.8         56.1        3.5        0.9        1.0        1.0        1.0        1.0        8.4 
2. Studies  and  Surveys 
W ORKSHOPS 
W ORKSHOPS 
W ORKSHOPS 
W ORKSHOPS 
8.8 
8.8 
11.0 
27.6 
13.0 
13.0 
13.0 
13.0 
- 
- 
0.3 
0.7 
- 
- 
1.9 
4.8 
- 
- 
1.8 
4.6 
- 
- 
1.9 
4.6 
- 
- 
1.9 
4.7 
- 
- 
0.3 
0.7 
- 
- 
0.3 
0.7 
- 
- 
0.3 
0.7 
- 
- 
0.3 
0.7 
- 
- 
1.8 
4.5 
1.3 
1.3 
0.3 
0.7 
8.8 
8.8 
1.8 
4.4 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
-            -            -            -            -            -            - 
Baseline/Annual  Outcome/Impact  Survey/PCR  /e 
Technical  studies 
-            -            -            -            -            -            - 
External  audit  /f                                                                               0.0             0.0             13.0   EQUIPMENT_AND_MATERIALS       21.9      22.3      22.8       23.2      23.6      24.2       138.0        3.3        3.3        3.4        3.5        3.5        3.6      20.7 
CONSULTANCIES 
CONSULTANCIES 
21.7    111.3 
21.7      22.3 
100.6 
20.1 
317.5 
126.9 
21.4 
21.4 
42.0 
21.0 
20.5 
20.5 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
Subtotal 
3. Knowledge  Management  and Training 
142.7 
63.2 
85.8 
66.0 
66.9    157.8 
582.4 
3.3 
3.3 
3.4 
3.5 
3.5 
3.6 
20.7 
Information  and Communication  Materials  /g 
Training  Manuals 
Development  of environmental/climate change  manual 
Gender  strategy 
6.6        6.7        6.8        7.0        7.1        7.3      41.4 
-        6.7            -            -        7.1            -      13.7 
-            -            -            -            -            -            - 
-            -            -            -            -            -            - 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                                                                           68.9      89.0      45.6       46.5      94.3      48.4       392.8        6.6      13.4        6.8        7.0      14.1        7.3      55.1 
4. Youth 
44.5      45.6       46.5      47.1      48.4       275.9 
44.5            -             -      47.1            -         91.7 
-            -             -            -            -         10.1 
-            -             -            -            -         15.1 
Youth  strategy                                                                                 0.0             0.0               0.0               CONSULTANCIES                  15.1            -            -             -            -            -         15.1            -            -            -            -            -            -            - 
13.0   EQUIPMENT_AND_MATERIALS 
13.0   EQUIPMENT_AND_MATERIALS 
0.0               CONSULTANCIES 
0.0               CONSULTANCIES 
43.8 
- 
10.1 
15.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
13.0 
13.0 
TRAINING 
TRAINING 
Training  package  - financial  literacy  and KYN  /h 
Technical  training  /i 
-            -         34.0 
-            -       113.4 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                                                                             334.1    301.6    284.4     238.2    258.1    305.7    1,722.2 
Subtotal 
-            -       162.5 
C. Policy Dialogue  /k 
5. Consultancies  /j 
63.7      65.4       373.0 
27.6 
2.9 
5.7 
Stakeholder  meetings  /l 
26.6      27.3       155.4 
6. Other  consultancies 
110.4 
19.4 
18.9 
Reserach  studies,  policy  issues 
37.5 
9.7 
9.4 
Scaling  up studies,  data  collection 
55.7 
18.9 
- 
Communication  /m 
50.8 
9.7 
9.4 
Publications 
23.2 
4.8 
4.7 
Policy  advocacy  /n 
139.4 
48.4 
- 
Exposure  visits  /o 
46.4 
9.7 
9.4 
Support  for policy  design  and implementation  /p 
13.9 
4.8 
- 
Dialogue,  R&D/private  sector  /q 
-            -        5.1 
-            -      17.0 
11.9    106.3
-            -      22.1 
-            -            - 
4.1 
-            -            - 
16.6 
5.6 
8.4 
7.6 
3.5 
20.9 
7.0 
2.1 
75.7 
Total  Investment  Costs                                                                                                                                                                                      773.6    449.5    412.6     419.8    390.2    415.1    2,860.7      79.3      48.5      39.3      43.2      38.5      28.3    277.1 
II. Recurrent  Costs 
W ORKSHOPS 
W ORKSHOPS 
CONSULTANCIES 
CONSULTANCIES 
CONSULTANCIES 
CONSULTANCIES 
CONSULTANCIES 
CONSULTANCIES 
CONSULTANCIES 
CONSULTANCIES 
CONSULTANCIES 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                                                                               24.5      94.4      73.9     126.4      76.4    109.4       505.0 
-        2.0 
-        6.7 
26.3 
-        8.7 
-            - 
0.8 
-            - 
2.7 
- 
- 
1.3 
0.7 
6.7 
1.3 
0.7 
14.2 
2.1 
6.8 
20.1 
8.9 
- 
0.8 
- 
2.7 
1.4 
2.7 
1.4 
0.7 
- 
1.4 
- 
11.1 
1.0 
3.5 
16.0 
4.5 
- 
0.8 
- 
2.8 
1.4 
2.8 
1.4 
0.7 
7.0 
1.4 
0.7 
19.0 
13.7 
45.6 
59.3 
61.7 
5.5 
25.7 
18.2 
9.1 
18.2 
9.1 
4.6 
- 
9.1 
- 
7.0 
23.2 
30.2 
62.8 
5.6 
26.2 
18.6 
9.3 
18.6 
9.3 
4.6 
46.5 
9.3 
4.6 
- 
- 
15.1 
59.2 
2.6 
24.6 
17.5 
- 
- 
4.4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
13.4 
44.5 
57.9 
60.2 
5.3 
25.1 
17.8 
- 
- 
8.9 
4.5 
44.5 
8.9 
4.5 
0.4 
2.9 
1.5 
- 
1.5 
0.7 
7.3 
1.5 
0.7 
16.4 
0.8 
2.8 
1.4 
2.8 
1.4 
0.7 
- 
1.4 
- 
11.5 
0.0 
13.0 
0.0 
13.0 
13.0 
13.0 
13.0 
13.0 
13.0 
13.0 
13.0 
0.4 
2.6 
- 
- 
0.7 
- 
- 
- 
- 
3.7 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
18.7 
13.4 
A. Salaries 
Project  Director 
Deputy  Project  Director  (Admin/Legal) 
Agribusiness  Manager 
Rural  Finance  Manager 
Finance  Manager 
Procurement  Specialist 
Internal  Auditor 
ICT Auditor 
Secretary 
Management  Assistant  (Finance) 
Drivers 
Office  Assistant 
Deputy  Manager  (Agribusiness) 
Deputy  Manager  (Institutions) 
Deputy  Manager  (Rural  Finance) 
Deputy  Manager  (Accountant) 
Deputy  Manager  (Admin) 
Deputy  Manager  (M&E) 
Development  Assistant  (admin) 
Development  Assistant  (M&E) 
Development  Assistant  (agribusiness) 
Development  Assistant  (institutions) 
Development  Assistant  (rural  finance) 
Travel  and  Allowances 
Honorarium  to NSC  participants 
116.0 
107.2 
104.1 
104.1 
- 
104.1 
89.6 
58.5 
40.9 
81.9 
245.6 
56.4 
89.6 
89.6 
89.6 
- 
89.6 
- 
- 
81.9 
81.9 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                                                                             267.0    271.7    278.3     283.6    287.7    283.3    1,671.6 
- 
B.  Allowances 
40.9 
317.3 
31.7 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
83.8 
14.1 
13.3 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
89.6 
15.1 
14.2 
- 
- 
- 
89.6 
15.1 
14.2 
40.9 
6.9 
6.5 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
60.5    344.9
58.1 
54.7 
40.9 
6.9 
6.5 
- 
- 
- 
-            -            -            -            -            -            - 
-            -            -            -            -            -            - 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                                                                               55.4      56.3      57.7       58.8      59.6      61.2       349.0            -            -            -            -            -            -            - 
C. Operation  and Maintenance 
0.0  SALARIES_AND_ALLOW ANCES 
0.0  SALARIES_AND_ALLOW ANCES 
0.0  SALARIES_AND_ALLOW ANCES 
0.0  SALARIES_AND_ALLOW ANCES 
0.0  SALARIES_AND_ALLOW ANCES 
0.0  SALARIES_AND_ALLOW ANCES 
0.0  SALARIES_AND_ALLOW ANCES 
0.0  SALARIES_AND_ALLOW ANCES 
0.0  SALARIES_AND_ALLOW ANCES 
0.0  SALARIES_AND_ALLOW ANCES 
0.0  SALARIES_AND_ALLOW ANCES 
0.0  SALARIES_AND_ALLOW ANCES 
0.0  SALARIES_AND_ALLOW ANCES 
0.0  SALARIES_AND_ALLOW ANCES 
0.0  SALARIES_AND_ALLOW ANCES 
0.0  SALARIES_AND_ALLOW ANCES 
0.0  SALARIES_AND_ALLOW ANCES 
0.0  SALARIES_AND_ALLOW ANCES 
0.0  SALARIES_AND_ALLOW ANCES 
0.0  SALARIES_AND_ALLOW ANCES 
0.0  SALARIES_AND_ALLOW ANCES 
0.0  SALARIES_AND_ALLOW ANCES 
0.0  SALARIES_AND_ALLOW ANCES 
0.0  SALARIES_AND_ALLOW ANCES 
0.0  SALARIES_AND_ALLOW ANCES 
20.4 
18.8 
18.3 
18.3 
- 
18.3 
15.7 
10.3 
7.2 
14.4 
43.1 
- 
15.7 
15.7 
15.7 
- 
15.7 
- 
- 
14.4 
14.4 
- 
7.2 
55.7 
5.6 
19.2 
17.7 
17.2 
17.2 
- 
17.2 
14.8 
9.7 
6.8 
13.5 
40.6 
11.3 
14.8 
14.8 
14.8 
- 
14.8 
- 
- 
13.5 
13.5 
- 
6.8 
52.5 
5.2 
18.4 
17.0 
16.5 
16.5 
- 
16.5 
14.2 
9.3 
6.5 
13.0 
38.9 
10.8 
14.2 
14.2 
14.2 
- 
14.2 
- 
- 
13.0 
13.0 
- 
6.5 
50.3 
5.0 
19.5 
18.1 
17.5 
17.5 
- 
17.5 
15.1 
9.9 
6.9 
13.8 
41.4 
11.5 
15.1 
15.1 
15.1 
- 
15.1 
- 
- 
13.8 
13.8 
- 
6.9 
53.5 
5.3 
19.8 
18.3 
17.8 
17.8 
- 
17.8 
15.3 
10.0 
7.0 
14.0 
42.0 
11.7 
15.3 
15.3 
15.3 
- 
15.3 
- 
- 
14.0 
14.0 
- 
7.0 
54.2 
5.4 
18.7 
17.3 
16.8 
16.8 
- 
16.8 
14.5 
9.4 
6.6 
13.2 
39.6 
11.0 
14.5 
14.5 
14.5 
- 
14.5 
- 
- 
13.2 
13.2 
- 
6.6 
51.2 
5.1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
14.3 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
15.3 
- 
15.3 
7.0 
- 
- 
58.9 
7.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
13.5 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
14.5 
- 
14.5 
6.6 
- 
- 
55.6 
6.6 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
13.8 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
14.8 
- 
14.8 
6.8 
- 
- 
57.0 
6.8 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
14.7 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
15.7 
- 
15.7 
7.2 
- 
- 
7.2 
- 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
Vehicles 
Other  equipment 
Office 
Other  Operating  Costs 
49.7 
9.9 
13.7 
9.9 
Subtotal                                                                                                                                                                                                               88.0      89.5      91.7       93.4      94.8      97.3       554.6      13.2      13.4      13.7      14.0      14.2      14.6      83.2 
Total  Recurrent  Costs                                                                                                                                                                                         410.3    417.5    427.7     435.9    442.1    441.9    2,575.3      67.9      69.1      70.8      72.1      73.1      75.1    428.0 
Total                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1,183.9    866.9    840.3     855.6    832.3    856.9    5,436.0    147.2    117.5    110.1    115.3    111.6    103.4    705.1
OPERATING_COSTS_1 
OPERATING_COSTS_1 
OPERATING_COSTS_1 
OPERATING_COSTS_1 
331.1 
66.2 
91.1 
66.2 
54.7 
10.9 
15.1 
10.9 
58.1 
11.6 
16.0 
11.6 
56.6 
11.3 
15.6 
11.3 
55.8 
11.2 
15.3 
11.2 
52.5 
10.5 
14.4 
10.5 
13.0 
13.0 
13.0 
13.0 
53.4 
10.7 
14.7 
10.7 
8.0 
1.6 
2.2 
1.6 
7.9 
1.6 
2.2 
1.6 
8.2 
1.6 
2.3 
1.6 
8.4 
1.7 
2.3 
1.7 
8.5 
1.7 
2.3 
1.7 
8.7 
1.7 
2.4 
1.7 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
180 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:    Programme cost and financing 
181
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:     Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 10: Economic and Financial Analysis 
1.       This  Annex  presents  the  financial  and  economic  analysis.  The  financial  analysis  aims  at 
demonstrating that on-farm and off-farm income generating activities, as proposed in the  programme 
(referred to hereafter as SAP), are profitable and therefore sustainable. On the flip side, the economic 
analysis  aims  to  demonstrate  that,  from  an  economic  perspective,  the  programme  as  a  whole  is 
viable,  taking  into  account,  as  much  as  possible,  all  quantitative  and  non-quantitative  benefits  in 
situations with (W P) and without programme (WOP). 
Data Sources and General Assumptions 
2.       Data used in this analysis includes prevailing wages, yields, farm gate and market prices, input 
and  farm-to-market  transport  costs.  The  data  was  collected  from  various  sources,  including  and  in 
particular the NADEP PMU team, stakeholder meetings with producer organisations, lead farmers and 
private company representatives in  north central and  central Sri Lanka, during an  in-country mission 
and  field  trip  in  November  2016  and  January  2017.  In  addition  information gathered  from  meetings 
with  authorised  government  institutions,  including  the  Ministry  of  Minor  Export  Crops  Promotion, 
Department  of  Agriculture  and  Export Agriculture  Information,  contributed  to  the  preparation  of  farm 
budgets. 
3.       Prices:  Input  and  output  prices  are  in  constant  figures,  as  of  2016.  Financial  prices  were 
collected by the PMU team and crosschecked during the field visit of  November 2016 and economic 
values  for  tradable  goods  were  calculated using  a  Standard  Conversion Factor  of  1.34  for  imported 
goods, 0.9 for exported goods and 0.95 for labour, based on the IFAD STAR (2015) project and World 
Bank  trade  figures.  A  Shadow  Conversion  Factor  of  1.49  was  calculated  using  the  World  Bank 
import/export index figures  to reflect the  balance of  trade  on  products in the  Sri  Lankan economy to 
determine the economic price of goods. Conversion factors are linked to each good in relation to the 
type,  whether  locally  traded,  locally  trade  with  export  potential,  import  substitution,  tradable  or  non- 
tradable. 
Quantifiable Benefits 
4.       The   two   main   areas   of   investment   by   the   programme   are:   (i)  Access   to   Commercial 
Partnerships; and (ii) Access to Rural Finance. 
5.       The main quantifiable benefits expected from  improved market access measures comprise of 
the following elements: 
(a)      Increased agricultural and off-farm production, resulting in higher incomes; 
(b)      Production guided by value chain priorities with respect to farmer and producer 
organisations; 
(c)      Greater variety of income and higher value-added products sold at consumer markets by 
producer organisations; 
(d)      Increased income from short-term employment and self-employment for local villagers; 
(e)      Greater value chain integration, with backward and forward market linkages, by target 
beneficiaries. 
Financial Analysis 
6.       Six combination crop and activity models illustrate the mix of crops at the household level and 
community level. Combination models over an area of one acre of arable land were used to illustrate 
the benefits of the programme for activities related to crop production, reflecting also the average plot- 
size of farms in the programme area, and to better reflect the reality in the field, where mixed farming 
occurs. The illustrative models were selected using participatory methods among the design and PMU
183 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:     Economic and Financial Analysis 
teams, using weighted ranking on noted economic, social and environmental concerns. Consultations 
with farmers and villagers in the field during the field visit confirmed the relevance of the selection. 
7.       While  efforts  were  made  to  select  models  illustrative  of  the  field  reality,  like  all  participatory 
projects,  the  project,  at  the  time  of  design,  was  limited  by  the  possibility  of  identifying  actual  sub- 
sectors  selected  by  local  farmers  during  implementation,  given  the  demand-driven  nature  of  the 
project. For this reason, all efforts are necessary to provide menu-driven options to farmers, to aid in 
the selection of activities that offer the potential for positive net returns. 
Primary Production Models at Farm and Community Level 
8.       Given the low starting base of farmers and the extensive support available to the farmers by the 
programme and private sector promoters, the models predict an increase in yields of 38% to 67% for 
existing  activities,  while  no  such  data  is  available  for  new  activities  such  as  passion  fruit  or  chilli 
production. 
9.       Passion  Fruit  and  Ash  Pumpkin.  While  perennial  crops  are  not  favoured  by  time  bound 
programmes in search of quick returns, the upside of relatively low labour requirements and short time 
to full development by passion fruit of eight months, combined with opportunities to intercrop, and still 
unmet  market  demand  for  passion  fruit,  means  there  is  potential  for  expanding  production.
The model is based on a household couple operating on a one acre plot for the production of
10. 
passion  fruit  in  former  war  torn  areas  of  the  north.  Lack  of  awareness  of  fruit  production  and  poor 
market  linkages  have  prevented  the  development  of  passion  fruit  production  in  the  past.  A  local 
promoter company in  Kilinochchi had invested in  a factory but in absence of a functioning outgrower 
system  it  experienced  irregular  supply  of  raw  materials.  Through  the  introduction  of  an  outgrower 
system  the  project  assumes  farmers  will  engage  with  viable  businesses  and  enhance  their  current 
income by on average 98% per acre (please see summary table below). Financial assistance for land 
preparation, lining and deepening of wells, better partnerships with value chain operators that provide 
guidance  to  beneficiaries  in  the  form  of  extension  support  and  special  training  are  part  of  the 
investment plan.  Yields  peak  in  the  second  year  towards  eight  tons  per  acre  and  decline  thereafter 
reintroduced.
until 
saplings 
when 
year, 
sixth 
new 
are 
the 
The net incremental benefit of the project intervention equates to LKR 376,103 (or USD 2,354)
11. 
and NPV is LKR 1,673,140 (or USD 11,382 equivalent) per acre.
Gherkin, Maize and Jalapeno peppers. Production of small cucumbers among local farmers
12. 
is  already  a  widespread  activity,  pre-processed  and  pickled  into  gherkins,  with  multi-cropping  of 
jalapeno  peppers  to  supplement  incomes.  Farmers  do  not  currently  use  trellising  and  prefer  to  run 
vines  along  the  ground,  to  avoid  the  higher  invest  costs  associated  with  the  trellising  method.  The 
model  suggests  three  key  interventions:  (i)  optimising  the  usage  of  water  to  avoid  water  borne 
diseases,  (ii)  the  introduction  of  productive  melon  fly  control  mechanism  and  (iii)  soil  enhancers 
(compost). While outflows increase,  yields are forecast to  increase by two tons per acre init ially and 
year.
in 
by 
three 
third 
tons 
the 
The  net  incremental benefit of  the  project intervention equates to  LKR  136,191 (or  USD  926
13. 
equivalent) and NPV is LKR 896,641 (or USD 5,916) per acre.
Milk  Cooling/Collection Centre.  The  low  returns  of  the  collection  centre  reflect  the  service
14. 
orientation of this particular service to the community. The centre(s) form an important part of market 
infrastructure needed to sustain market linkages between producers and buyers, and the introduction 
of milking twice daily with prerequisite cooling tanks and quality control checks. It is assumed that the 
centres  will  provide  youth  employment  opportunities  to  conduct  the  quality  control  checks.
The  net  incremental benefit of  the  project intervention equates to  LKR  107,327  (or  USD  730
15. 
equivalent) and NPV is LKR 107,327 (or USD 730) per unit.
16. 
Vegetable Seeds - poly tunnel. Seed production is  an important part of value addition in Sri
Lankan agriculture, given that a majority of vegetable seeds are imported and an important part of the
184 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:     Economic and Financial Analysis 
move  away from  traditional commodity-based cash  crops  such  as  rice,  and  the  drive  towards  high 
value vegetable crops.
The net incremental benefit of the project intervention equates to LKR 151,400 (or USD 1,030
17. 
equivalent) and NPV is LKR 844,727 (or USD 5,746) per acre.
Dairy Milk and Improved Feeding.  Improved backward-and-forward market linkages of  milk
18. 
producers is  an important aspect of  the  programme, one that  will require high nitrogen content feed, 
improved animal husbandry and healthcare, better market infrastructure and functioning networks that 
operate  cooling  tanks  and  screening  facilities  at  collection  centres  for  quality  control.  These 
contributing  factors  can  allow  milking  twice  a  day  by  farmers  to  increase  productivity  and  raise 
incomes through greater collaboration when the quality of produce and access to market is assured.
19. 
The  model  assumes  an  increase  in  milk  yields  by  an  average  of  67%  as  a  result  of  project
interventions. The net incremental benefit of the project intervention equates to LKR 240,161 (or USD 
1,634 equivalent) and NPV is LKR 1,752,055 (or USD 11,919) per farm holding.
Chilli, maize and sesame. A low starting base and multi-cropping means that the combination
20. 
of crops in the particular model offers the possibility of high-value cash crop family farming by unmet 
market demand for Sri Lankan chilli and sesame seeds, with maize as an important staple crop. The 
net incremental benefit of the project intervention equates to LKR 295,160 (or USD 2,008 equivalent) 
and NPV is LKR 2,250,511 (or USD 15,310) per farm holding. 
Table 1: Summary of Combination Farm- and Community-Level Models (in LKR)
FINANCIAL ANALYSIS 
Passion, 
Pumpkin                    Gherkin 
Milk Collection 
Center 
Vegetable 
Seeds, 
Poly tunnel 
Dairy Improved 
Feeding 
Chilli-Maize- 
Sessami              FO / Aggregator
Return to family labour 
Discount rate 
NPV @ 0.0916 
NPV (USD Equivalent) 
Incr. Net Benefit per acre 
Incr. Net Benefit per acre (USD) 
IRR 
NPVb 
NPVc 
B/C ratio 
Switching values Benefits 
Switching values Costs 
Operating margin 
Yields 
WOP 
WP 
Incremental 
Gross Revenue 
WOP 
WP 
Incremental 
Total outflows 
WOP 
WP 
Incremental 
Cash flow before labour (return per acre) 
WOP 
WP 
Incremental 
Return on family labour 
WOP 
WP 
Incremental 
Cash flow after financing 
WOP 
WP 
Incremental 
29,562 
9.16% 
1,333,985 
9,075 
161,371 
1,098 
100% 
4,076,479 
1,217,200 
3.35 
-0.70 
2.35 
91% 
15,018 
9.16% 
869,641 
5,916 
107,891 
734 
177% 
8,896,537 
3,656,774 
2.43 
-59% 
143% 
93% 
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 
1,841 
9.16% 
712,799 
4,849 
93,063 
633 
72% 
7,013,385 
4,796,539 
1.46 
-32% 
46% 
34% 
0.00 
6,000.00 
#DIV/0! 
8,000.00 
11,000.00 
38% 
6,570.00 
10,950.00 
67% 
170,000 
590,000 
247% 
1,000 
46,583 
4558% 
170,000 
337,071 
98% 
1,000 
47,819 
4682% 
260,000 
549,917 
112% 
725,000 
996,000 
37% 
240,798 
375,607 
56% 
524,202 
597,193 
14% 
13,105 
18,726 
43% 
618,358 
655,393 
6% 
472,050 
801,750 
70% 
305,404 
527,777 
73% 
302,396 
551,859 
82% 
2,228 
1,940 
-13% 
317,355 
565,473 
78% 
2,717 
9.16% 
844,727 
5,746 
103,735 
706 
136% 
6,173,381 
2,707,490 
2.28 
-0.56 
1.28 
65% 
1,120.00 
1,520.00 
36% 
504,000 
684,000 
36% 
213,580 
242,180 
13% 
496,420 
616,155 
24% 
2,410 
2,990 
24% 
598,420 
663,820 
11% 
-4671625 
9.16% 
15,755,524 
107,180 
22% 
134,317,014 
91,485,259 
1.47 
-32% 
47% 
44% 
2,619 
9.16% 
1,752,055 
11,919 
217,184 
1,477 
135% 
7,045,987 
4,170,095 
1.69 
-0.41 
0.69 
45% 
8,857 
9.16% 
2,250,511 
15,310 
268,190 
1,824 
#DIV/0! 
3,856,767 
1,190,185 
3.24 
-0.69 
2.24 
77% 
6,570.00 
10,950.00 
67% 
0.00 
2,100.00 
#DIV/0! 
472,050 
801,750 
70% 
347,531 
437,070 
26% 
274,832 
552,704 
101% 
1,828 
2,728 
49% 
418,232 
575,680 
38% 
80,000 
444,000 
455% 
33,900 
102,740 
203% 
76,100 
354,290 
366% 
2,537 
9,532 
276% 
154,100 
393,200 
155% 
21.  FO  /  Aggregator. A farmer  organization  model  engaged  in  aggregation  of  farmer  produce  -
mainly for fruit and vegetable - for sorting, machinery hire, and collective marketing and transportation 
services was developed to evaluate the potential within the scope of the project. The project was able
185 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:     Economic and Financial Analysis 
to define a positive net incremental benefit of LKR 10,683,325 (or USD 72,675 equivalent) and NPV is 
LKR 15,755,524 (or USD 107,180) per operation.
Operating margins in general show that while there is value addition in service type operations -
22. 
like  milk  collection  centers,  improved  feed  provision  and  aggregation  of  produce  -  the  bulk  of  the 
margin goes to the farmer, through individual operations like pumpkin and chilli seed production. This 
is  an important distinction within the  value chain given the  purpose of  the  project to further integrate 
above.
farmers 
market. 
table 
See 
with 
the 
1, 
In summary, on average, the project is projected to increase household incomes by 63%, when
23. 
all activities are taken into consideration. 
Table 2: Impact on Household Income (financial budget, average) 
Household Income Analysis 
LKR                                   USD 
WOP             WP             WOP             WP              Incr.
Net Agricultural Incomes - Inflows 
Farm Level Production 
TOTAL NET 
Economic Analysis
307,325 
307,325 
501,545 
501,545 
2,091 
2,091 
3,412 
3,412 
63% 
63% 
Benefit Stream. The analysis identifies possible quantifiable incremental benefits generated by
24. 
SAP’s  implementation. The  benefits  stream  corresponds to:  (i)  the  farmers’ benefits  analysed  in  the 
financial  analysis,  i.e.  increase  and  diversification  of  agricultural  production.  The  financial  models 
previously described are used as the basis of the calculation for the overall (economic) benefit stream, 
values.
after 
conversion 
economic 
financial 
prices 
into 
the 
of 
For  the  purpose  of  this  analysis,  the  benefits  derived  from  66,000  households  have  been
25. 
aggregated and treated as  a  whole. The  number of  physical activities (properly phased in  time) was 
multiplied  by  their  respective  net  economic  returns  per  unit  as  calculated  in  the  farm  level  model 
budgets.
Cost Stream. In  order to  estimate the  programme’s economic viability, in  terms of  Economic
26. 
Internal  Rate  of  Return,  the  cash  flow  calculated  includes  the  programme base  costs  (as  extracted 
from  the  COSTAB  tables)  with  their  physical  contingencies. These  costs  include  all  investment  and 
recurrent  costs  for  components  1  and  2,  and  3.  All  investment,  replacement  and  recurrent  costs 
related  to  the  farm  models  are  already  taken  into  account  in  the  calculation  of  the  models’  profit 
model.
margins 
each 
level 
farm 
for 
Programme  Level  Analysis.  For  the  purpose  of  the  analysis,  the  social  discount  rate  or
27. 
opportunity cost of capital used for calculation of EIRR and NPV was 9.16%, based on: (i) Average 10 
year  Sri  Lankan  Government  bond  yield  of  6.8%  (Cbonds,  January  2016);  (ii)  four  year  average 
Rupee  deposit  rate  of  9.16%  (CBSL,  2016  and  W B);  (iii)  Interest  rate  spread  in  Sri  Lanka  of  5% 
(CBSL,  2016)  and  (iv)  three-year  average GDP  growth  rate  of  4.2%  per  annum.  Using  the  Ramsey 
formula and  the  elasticity  of  marginal utility of  consumption at  an  estimated figure of  two,  the  social 
discount rate  was  determined as  eight  percent. To  remain  conservative the  higher  value  of  average 
i,e,  9.16%.
deposit 
four  years  was  used 
the  calculations, 
the  past 
rates 
for 
for 
The burn rate of funds was taken from the Costab tables, based on disbursements per annum,
28. 
while a conservative rate of adoption of 75% was used, to account for a dropout rate of 25%.
29. 
Overall project analysis suggests an  EIRR  of  52% and  an  NPV of  USD   349,708,192 over a
twenty year period. Gross value of production increases approximately 56% from the without situation, 
while outflows increase 65%, including labour.
186 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:     Economic and Financial Analysis 
30.  Sensitivity  Analysis.  The  sensitivity  analysis  assessed  the  effect  of  a  number  of  adverse
scenarios that might occur during the lifetime of the project and their possible impact on the project, in 
terms of benefits and cost, a time lag of two  years, two crop failures and a  decline in market prices. 
The  sensitivity  analysis  was  conducted  for  a  number  of  negative  scenarios  and  found  the  EIRR  to 
remain robust with no negative returns in all 11 scenarios.  The impact of such scenarios on the EIRR 
and NPV were recorded and are presented in the summary table below: 
Table 3: Summary of Sensitivity Analysis 
Scenario 
Discount rate = 9.16% 
1. Base case 
2. Cost overrun by 10% 
3. Cost overrun by 20% 
4. Prices decline by 10% 
5. Prices decline by 20% 
6. Decrease in benefits by 10% 
7. Decrease in benefits by 20% 
8. Benefits delayed by two years 
9. Crop loss to natural disaster (1st occurrence) 
10. Crop loss to natural disaster (1st & 2nd occurrence) 
11. Events 3, 7 and 10 occur 
EIRR (%) 
NPV (USD) 
52 
48 
44 
45 
39 
48 
43 
32 
32 
31 
12 
349,708,192 
341,010,698 
332,313,203 
298,205,422 
246,702,653 
306,039,878 
262,371,565 
257,672,131 
258,674,721 
220,680,656 
38,532,519 
The  lowest  recorded  EIRR  occurs  during  a  highly  unlikely  scenario  where  costs  overrun  by
31. 
20%,  benefits  decrease  by  20%  and  two  natural  disasters  occur  during  the  lifetime  of  the  project. 
Despite  this  the  EIRR  remains  above  the  OCC  of  9.16%  at  12%. While  the  model  suggests  failure 
across  the  board,  it  is  more  likely  that  crop  failure  will  remain  specific  to  a  particular  crop  or  area 
rather than all over the project area. Given that prices used in the analysis are in constant terms, one 
can also assume that further cushioning from price changes is inevitable given the project’s position to 
improve  prices  based  on  collective  and  collaborative  action  for  joint  purchase  of  inputs  and 
organisation of transport and sales. These were not factored into the analysis. 
Non-Quantifiable  Benefits
In  addition  to  the  quantified  benefits  described  above,  the  SAP  is  expected  to  generate  a
32. 
number  of  benefits  that  would  be  extremely difficult  to  evaluate  in  monetary terms. The  loss  of  soil, 
soil erosion, water usage and health and nutrition benefits were not quantified by the field team during 
the  mission.  Reliable  data  and  the  issue  of  negative  accounting  were  major  issues  in  trying  to 
measurement.
establish 
method 
their 
of 
a 
187 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Design completion report 
Appendix 11:     Draft programme implementation manual 
Appendix 11: Draft programme implementation manual 
1.       The SAP draft Programme Implementation Manual (PIM), will draw heavily on the existing PIM 
of NADeP. Amongst other things, the SAP PIM will include the refined selection and eligibility criteria, 
4P evaluation processes and procedures, and the refined tools specific to the programme's 
conceptualisation and specificities. 
2.       The draft PIM will be prepared ahead of the loan negotiations, although an outline of the draft 
PIM table of contents is provided below. 
SAP Programme Implementation Manual – Table of Contents 
Section I – Introductory Section 
I. Background, Goal and Objectives 
II. Programme Components 
III. Guiding Principles of SAP 
IV. Target Group and Targeting (incl. Gender Strategy) 
V. Programme Organization and Management 
Section II - Component 1 – Access to commercial partnerships 
I. Objective and Methodology 
II. Implementation – (i) 4Ps; (ii) institutional strengthening/ capacity building of FOs and youth; 
and (iii) policy engagement – Selection criteria; processes and procedures (incl. appraisal, 4P 
development, etc.); implementation responsibilities 
III. Monitoring and Evaluation 
IV. Audits 
Section III - Component 2 – Access to rural finance 
I. Objective and Methodology 
II. Underlying Principles 
III. Credit Facility / Line of Credit (incl. pricing of the facility) 
IV. Loan Products and Eligible Activities – Terms and conditions 
V. Selection of PFIs 
VI. Role and Responsibilities of CBSL and Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) 
VII. Capacity Building and Training – CBSL; PFIs and  end-beneficiaries 
VIII. Accounts and Financial Statements 
IX. Refinance Procedure 
X. Repayment of Sub-Loans 
XI. Action for Defaulters 
XII. Disbursement of Programme Funds – Subsidiary Loan Agreements 
XIII. Auditing of Accounts 
XIV. CBSL Capacity Building and Training XV. 
PFI/ MFI Capacity Building and Training XVI. 
Operationalisation of the Microfinance Act XVII. 
CRIB Credit Scoring System 
XVIII. Other 
Section IV – Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) 
I. Objectives, Type of Monitoring and Programme Indicators
189 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft [project/programme] implementation manual 
II. Logical Framework and the AW PB 
III. Data Collection and Monitoring Tools – Baseline/ outcome/ impact surveys; environmental 
impact assessment; special studies; field-level M&E tools; programme completion report; 
geographic and management information system 
IV. Organizational Arrangements – Collection and reporting responsibilities 
V. Support to the M&E system – Capacity building, technical assistance 
Section V – Financial and Adminstratiave Procedures Manual 
I. Organizational Basics 
II. Administration – PMU; office administration; correspondence; information/ communication 
systems; documents archiving and storage; official travel 
III. Personnel – Type of ocntracts; recruitment procedures; admin of personnel; consultants; 
remuneration 
IV. Assets Management 
V. Procurement 
VI. Financial Management 
VII. Accounting Procedures 
ANNEXTURES 
Annex I: ToRs for SAP Staff 
Annex II: Guidelines for Business Plans - Component 1 
Annex III: Sample Agreement between SAP and respective private sector partners/ companies 
Annex IV: Sample Subsidiary Loan Agreement
190 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:     Compliance with IFAD policies 
Appendix 12: Compliance with IFAD policies 
A.   Overview of complicance with IFAD policies and guidelines 
Policy 
Compliance 
IFAD Strategic 
Framework 
2016-2025 
Sri Lanka 2015- 
2020 COSOP 
Environmental 
Natural 
Resource 
Management 
(ENRM) Policy 
IFAD’s Climate 
Change 
Strategy 
IFAD’s Policy for 
Gender equality 
and Women's 
empowerment 
IFAD’s Rural 
Finance 
Strategy 
The SAP programme is fully aligned with IFAD's Strategic Framework 
2016-2025, in pursuit of the mutually reinforcing strategic objectives, 
especially by way of promoting investment in productive capacities and 
encouraging better and deeper market participation (and benefits) through 
the vehicle of 4Ps. The principles of engagement (targeting; 
empowerment; gender equality; innovation, learning and scaling up; and 
partnerships) are furthermore, fully embedded in the programme, through 
the programme 4P and institutional strengthening approach, and operating 
modalities. 
IFAD’s particular comparative advantage in support of national 
(Government of Sri Lanka) priorities are reflected in the current 2015-2020 
COSOP and its two development objectives, namely: (i) smallholders 
benefit from sustainable productivity enhancement in a more resilient 
livelihood system; and (ii) poor rural women and men are effectively 
connected to markets. 
The SAP programme responds to both COSOP development objectives 
through the promotion of 4Ps. Viable 4P arrangements/ models are aimed 
at improving marketing and (quality) product enhancement to meet current 
market demands, and overall contributes to national agricultural 
competitiveness; the process of appraising 4Ps for environmental and 
climate change aspects also builds resilience considerations into the 4P 
arrangement. 
Finally, the underlying principle of partnering with the private sector, 
ensures that the core target group has a ready market for their produce; 
forward sales agreements are a basic element of the 4P arrangement. 
Compliant. See SECAP review note below. 
Compliant. See SECAP revie note below. 
SAP is fully aligned with IFAD's policy for gender equality and women's 
empowerment. Refer to Appendix 2 for detaile regarding the gender 
checklist. 
SAP is heavily focused on strengthening financial inclusion. Support for an 
enabling and regulatory framework (including operationalization of the new 
Microfinance Act), capacity building of financial institutions and target 
group clients, and new services and products are just some examples of 
how SAP intends to pursue the inclusive rural finance agenda. The 
191 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:     Compliance with IFAD policies 
Policy 
Compliance 
IFAD’s Strategy 
for Private 
Sector and 4Ps 
mobilization of savings also features strongly in the design. 
With regards to the SAP LOC, see below for the specific section on SAP’s 
compliance with the IFAD guidelines on lines of credit. 
SAP fully encompasses the principles behind IFAD's strategy as relates to 
private sector engagement and 4Ps, and operationalises these principles 
through the promotion of 4Ps. Notably, SAP also introduces a 
strengthened focus on capacity building and inclusion of producer/ farmer 
organizations in the 4P scheme as true partners, moving beyond 
outgrower models, and to take on progressive responsibility for primary 
processing. 
IFAD’s 
Knowledge 
Management 
Strategy 
Within and across components, learning,  knowledge sharing and 
management are fully embedded in the SAP programme, especially with 
regards to knowledge management as a fundamental element for policy 
engagement and strengthened partnership across stakeholders. 
Overview of compliance with IFAD guidelines on Lines of Credit - according to the IFAD Rural 
Finance Policy and IFAD: “How to do lines of credit” (2014), credit lines for on-lending are subject to 
the following conditions: 
Condition 
Compliance under SAP 
The market demonstrates a 
clear lack of liquidity; 
Private professional fund 
managers and not the recipient 
government, manage the line 
of credit; 
Loans to retail financial 
institutions are priced at 
commercial or near- 
commercial rates to avoid 
undermining their incentive to 
mobilize deposits or access 
other sources of capital; 
Partner retail financial 
institutions are financially 
sound, independent from 
political interference and free 
to charge interest rates that 
allow cost recovery; 
As  Appendix  2  has  demonstrated,  commercial  banks  and  MFIs 
are not long of liquidities, but have tied up their loanable funds to 
the extent possible; 
While this is an ideal situation, or to be applied where a LOC has 
not  been  operated  before,  this  guidance  should  be  overruled  if 
there  is  a  well-functioning  system  within  the  country,  which  is 
mandated  to  handle  all  lines  of  credit.  This  is  the  case  in  Sri 
Lanka,  where  all  past  lines  of  credit  funded  by  IFAD  and  other 
donors has been handled very satisfactorily by the CBSL. Vesting 
the function with a commercial bank and much higher costs would 
simply not be acceptable to GOSL. 
   This  has  been  complied  with,  as  loans  granted  by  PFIs  under 
the  LOC  shall  cover  cost  of  funds,  operating  costs  and  risks, 
and a profit margin as well. 
   Furthermore, most of the devaluation risk has been included in 
the mode of calculation. 
   In case funds under the LOC would be passed on by the PFIs 
at  their  standard  rates,  the  difference  resulting  from  different 
cost    of    funds,    the    PFIs    would    increase    their    margin 
unnecessarily. 
One of the eligibility criteria for PFIs is financial soundness. PFIs, 
including  MFIs,  are  shareholding  companies,  and  decisions  are 
made   by    their   management  and   boards.   Interest   rates   for 
standard business are calculated on a weekly basis by the bigger 
commercial  banks,  and  determined  in  accordance  with  market 
trends.  This  would  not  exclude  that  many  banks  do  provide 
concessional rates  out  of  a  CSR  to  disadvantaged groups,  such 
as the  youths, women and farmers. The latter should be seen as 
sign  of  commitment  to  do  whatever  is  possible  without  incurring 
losses.  So  far,  the  banks  collaborating  with  IFAD  had  very  low 
non-performing loan  rates,  as  low  as  0.2%  in  the  case  of  HNB, 
192 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:     Compliance with IFAD policies 
Partner financial institutions 
have the capacity to efficiently 
and transparently absorb and 
manage the financial 
resources; 
Opportunities exist to create 
linkages with other sources of 
refinancing that will continue 
after the project ends; 
Accountable reporting and 
supervision arrangements can 
be put in place until the line of 
credit is repaid. 
and  are  willing  to  continue  serving  smallholders  as  long  as  this 
remains the case, as they can almost cover their operating costs 
from the margins permitted. 
   This is a condition for screening, and all PFIs that served under 
IFAD  projects  before,  are  willing  to  continue  providing  their 
services. 
    While  cost  of  funds,  operating  costs  and  provisions  for  loan 
losses  are  available  from  the  published  annual  statements, 
banks to not reveal these data regularly to outsiders, in view of 
the  competition  in  the  market.  It  can  be  safely  assumed  that 
this condition is fully met. 
Most of the funds used for refinancing PFIs are coming from the 
GOSL, in fact reflows of past LOC. Provisions have been made to 
merge all LOC funded by IFAD into one facility. 
This  has  been  the  case  in  the  past.  The  SAP  emulates most  of 
the arrangements under previous IFAD-funded projects with LOC. 
There is no reason why this condition will not be met. 
B.   Social Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
I. Major landscape characteristics and Issues (social, natural resources, and climate) 
1.       SAP  (Sri  Lanka)  is  designed  with  a  country-wide  focus.  The  exact  locations  and  types  of 
agricultural  ventures  for  the  Public-Private-Producer-Partnerships  (4P)  programmes  are  to  be 
determined  based  on  the  private  sector  proposals.  However,  IFAD’s  focus  lies  in  rural  poor  in 
agricultural  areas  of  North  Central  province,  Uva  Province,  Northern  Province  (resettled  areas)  and 
parts  of  Central  Province,  where  the  concentration  of  poverty  is  higher.  The  identification  of  issues 
and  the  discussion of  adaptation measures in  this  review  note  will  be  with  reference to  this  general 
context. 
1.1.        Socio-cultural context 
2.       Demographics: Sri  Lanka’s population is  approximately 20.3  million occupying a  land  area  of 
65610  square  kilometres. It  is  one  of  the  countries  with  high  population density (309/km 2) by global 
standards.   The  rural urban division is  75:25  in  terms of  percentage of  the  population. The median 
household size is 4 members (average is 3.9). This is distinctly lesser than the average in the South 
Asian region. Nearly 30 percent of the labour force is directly or indirectly involved in the agricultural 
sector. The society is multi-ethnic and multi-religious with a majority (74.8%) of Sinhalese identity. 
3.       Health:  The  public  health  infrastructure  in  Sri  Lanka  is  strong  and  public-funded.  The  life 
expectancy is  72  years for males and 78  years for females. Sri Lanka leads the region in  almost all 
public  health  indicators  with  low  infant    and  maternal mortality.  Due  to  low  birth  rate  and  increased 
longevity,  Sri  Lanka  is  programmeed  to  have  an  aged  population  compared  to  other  South  Asian 
countries. However, child and maternal malnutrition remains an issue with 18 percent of  babies born 
with low birth  weight and  high prevalence of  wasting. Non-communicable diseases such as diabetes 
and  hypertension are  increasingly becoming significant. There  is  a  high  incidence of  chronic  kidney 
disease in the recent past, reported mainly in rural areas. Agricultural related pollution is a significant 
threat to farmer and consumer heath due to misuse of agrochemicals. 
4.       Gender:  Gender  disparities  are  lesser  than  other  South  Asian  countries  in  terms  access  to 
opportunity  and  social  recognition.  However,  gender  wage  gaps  still  persist  in  the  informal  sector. 
Agricultural  land  tenure  remains  an  issue  with  gender  implications  due  to  male  line  inheritance  of
193 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:     Compliance with IFAD policies 
property. Female participation in the labour force is lower than 40 percent.  Traditionally, females take 
on the household responsibilities including child care. These responsibilities lead most women to drop 
out  from  the  labour  force, at  least  temporarily, often  for  long  term.  Significant numbers of  poor  rural 
women migrate as domestic aides to Middle-eastern and several European countries. 
5.       Poverty: The poverty levels of  Sri Lanka have come down from  a head count ratio of  15% in 
2005 to 7% based on the national poverty line in 2015. While these rates are encouraging the income 
poverty is prevalent in pockets. According to the Human Development Index (HDI), Sri Lanka records 
a value of   0.757 compared to the South Asian average of  0.607 and  world average of 0.711. There 
are  disparities  of  economic  well-being  across  different  parts  of  country  with  wealth  and  opportunity 
concentrated in the urban areas. Income inequality is  ‘moderate’ with a Gini index of  0.4. Pockets of 
poverty  persist  in  the  Uva  province,  North  central  province,  Northern  Province  (resettled areas)  and 
the estate sector in the Central province. 
1.2.        Natural resources and NRM 
6.       Sri Lanka is rich in fertile land and forest resources, with a forest cover of 30% by land area. 
The  country  has  year-round  access  to  natural  and  human-made  water  resources  and  a  climate 
conducive  to  agriculture.  Four  major  rivers  and  a  number  of  small  rivers  flow  radially  through  the 
country,  providing  the  basis  for  irrigation  and  hydropower  generation.  Sri  Lanka’s  water  resources 
support  agriculture  island-wide  but  the  water  use  efficiencies  are  low.  Water  availability  is  largely 
seasonal  with  80%  of  rainfall  occurring  during  the  two  main  monsoons  and  nearly  two  thirds  of  the 
country experiencing drought during the dry season for up to six months. 
7.       Biodiversity:  Sri  Lanka  is  high  in  habitat  and  species  diversity  and  is  one  of  25  biodiversity 
hotspots  in  the  world.  It  has  the  highest  biodiversity  density  in  Asia.      An  estimated  27%  of  the 
flowering plants and 22% of the mammals are endemic. Forestry resources are the primary habitat for 
the  wealth  of  biodiversity  (flora  and  fauna).  The  country  is  also  rich  in  agricultural  biodiversity 
(agrobiodiversity). 
8.       Forests:   Sri   Lanka   has   a   forest   cover   of   30%   (including   secondary  forests)   and   has 
experienced  a  large  deforestation  rate  historically,  propelled  by  agricultural  and  urban  expansions. 
Agricultural  activity  has  been  identified  as  a  key  driver  of  deforestation  (UNREDD,  201668)  among 
others. The major vegetation types are tropical moist broadleaf forests and tropical dry forests. Sparse 
forests  are  observable  in  the  dry  zone  and  grasslands  are  not  significant  in  acreage.   The  annual 
deforestation  rate  is  1.14%  according  to  FAO  estimates.  The  National  Forestry  Master  Plan  (1995) 
promotes  assisted  natural  regeneration,  enrichment  planting,  forest  conservation,  timber  and  fuel- 
wood plantations, watershed protection and restrictions on logging. 
9.       Water:  There   are   103   radial   river   basins   in   Sri   Lanka   with   considerable   variations   in 
hydrological  characteristics.  The  Mahaweli  river  system  is  the  longest  originating  from  central 
highlands  and  flowing  through  north  central  dry  zone  to  the  eastern  coast.  Sri  Lanka  depends 
primarily  on  its  surface  water  resources  for  agricultural,  domestic  and  industrial  uses. Agriculture  is 
largely sustained by  direct  rainfall and  irrigation  water  extractions from  rivers. River  water  is  used  to 
generate hydroelectricity and irrigation depending on the topographic characteristic of the river basin. 
Nearly  40  %  of  the  power  supply  is  generated  through  river-based  hydroelectricity generation.  The 
environmentally  hazardous  use  of  river  basins  include  sand  mining  and  waste  water  disposal. 
Seasonal  flooding  is  increasingly  observed  due  to  siltation  and  diversion  of  the  rivers  to  facilitate 
human activity. Agriculture accounts for about 85% of total water use, with domestic water supply and 
industry accounting for the remaining 15%. Most water used is surface water, with groundwater use of 
less than 5% of the total water stocks. Water for agriculture is drawn from monsoon precipitation and 
an extensive irrigation system of reservoirs. Agro-wells tap the sub-surface water resources. Water is 
an open-access resource for agriculture. 
68  UN REDD (2015), Drivers of Deforestation, Report compiled the policy and consultative evidence for Sri Lanka 
REDD readiness.
194 
Land Use: Small-scale agricultural holding size is determined based on the land use types: In
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:     Compliance with IFAD policies 
10. 
major irrigation systems (identified under the irrigation act of the country), this includes per household 
allocation  3  acres  of  low  land  to  cultivate  paddy (rice),  2  acres  of  high  land  to  cultivate  field  crops 
/vegetables  and  0.5  acres  of  homestead.  This  land  use  restriction  was  institutionalized  for  major 
irrigation areas several decades back during the agricultural resettlement programs around major river 
systems. These land holdings have undergone further division among the family members during two 
generations  to   smaller  holding  sizes   observed  today.   Small-holder  livestock  sector  is   largely 
dependent on open-access grasslands for fodder and open-access water sources. 
1.3.        Climate
Sri Lanka is vulnerable to a number of impacts of Climate Change including the rise in surface
11. 
temperature, changes in the amount and pattern of precipitation, increase in extreme climate/weather 
events  and  sea  level  rise.  Potential      change  in  the  country’s  climate  is  reported  in  a  number  of 
research  studies  (Chandrapala  1996;  Basnayake  et  al.  2002;  Zubair  et  al.  2005,  Ratnayake  and 
Herath 200569), which have been cited in the third and fourth assessment reports of the IPCC (IPCC, 
2007)70.
IPCC   regional   programmeions  based   on  AR4   scenario   of   GCMs   suggest   a   significant
12. 
acceleration of  warming in Asia. Warming will  be  stronger than  the  global mean  in  South Asia  while 
higher warming is  programmeed during the Northeast monsoon than during the  Southwest monsoon 
(Cruz  et  al.  200771).  Rainfall  programmeions for  Sri  Lanka  are  less  straightforward. Basnayake  and 
Vithanage (2004)72  report   an increase in  rainfall during the  Southwest monsoon   (mainly to  the  wet 
zone) and a decrease in Northeast monsoon rainfall (the  season which mainly  brings precipitation to 
dry zone) for a range of IPCC scenarios (A1, A1FI, B1, A2 and B2). IPCC predicts an increase in the 
occurrence of extreme weather events including heat waves and intense precipitation events in South 
Asia.  Inter-annual  variability of daily precipitation during the Southwest monsoon  is programmeed to 
increase. Ahmed et al. (2009)73  predict that the frequency of extreme wet events may increase by as 
Lanka.
much 
400% 
India 
and 
Sri 
as 
in 
Sri  Lanka’s  long-term  mean  annual  temperature  in  the  lowlands  is  27  °C.  An  altitude-based
13. 
reduction of temperature is observable in the central highlands.  Mean annual precipitation varies from 
under  1,000  mm  in  the  North-western  and  South-eastern  coastal  areas  to  over  5,000  mm  in  the 
western slopes of the highlands located in the center of the island. The spatial pattern of precipitation 
is  influenced by  topography and  there  are  two  seasonal  wind  regimes  (Chandrapala 1996)74.   The 
Southwest  monsoon  (SWM)  is  from  May  to  September  and  the  Northeast  monsoon  (NEM)  from 
December to February. There are two inter-monsoons: March to April (first inter-monsoon (IM1)) and 
October  to  November  (second  inter-monsoon  (IM2)).  Based  on  the  precipitation  received  in  these 
69 
Ratnayake, U.; Herath, G. 2005. Changes in water cycle: effect on natural disasters and ecosystems. Proceedings of 
Workshop on Sri Lanka National Water Development Report, eds. Wijesekera, N. T. S.; Imbulana, K. A. U. S.; Neupane, B. 
Paris, France: World Water Assessment Programme. Paris, France 
70 
IPCC. 2007. Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fourth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Core Writing Team, Pachauri, R.K; Reisinger, A. (eds.). Geneva, 
Switzerland: IPclimate change. 104 pp 
71  Cruz, R. V.; Harasawa, H.; Lal, M.; Wu, S.; Anokhin, Y.; Punsalmaa, B.; Honda, Y.; Jafari, M.; Li, C.; Huu Ninh, 
N. 2007. Asia. Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to 
the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Parry, M. L.; Canziani, O. F.; 
Palutikof, J. P.; van der Linden, P. J.; Hanson, C. E. eds. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. pp 469- 
506. 
72 
Basnayake, B. R. S. B.; Vithanage, J. C. 2004a. Future climate scenarios of rainfall and temperature for Sri Lanka. 
Proceedings of the 60thAnnual Session of Sri Lanka Association for the Advancement of Science (SLASS). Section E1. pp 222. 
73 
Ahmed, S. A.; Diffenbaugh, N. S.; Hertel, T. W. 2009. Climate volatility deepens poverty vulnerability in developing countries. 
Environmental Research Letters 4 
74 
Chandrapala, L. 1996. Long term trends of rainfall and temperature in Sri Lanka. In:Climate Variability and Agriculture, Abrol, 
Y. P.; Gadgil, S.; Pant, G. B. (eds.). New Delhi, India: Narosa Publishing House. Pp 153-162.
195 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:     Compliance with IFAD policies 
monsoons,  the  country  is  demarcated  into  three  climatic  zones:    Wet  Zone,  Dry  Zone  and  the 
Intermediate Zone (Figure 1).
Sri Lanka’s warming trend for last century is 0.003 °C per year (IPCC, 200175). Mean daytime
14. 
maximum and mean night minimum temperatures have both increased with trends of  0.026 °C  and 
0.017  °C  per  year,  respectively  (Zubair  et  al.  200576)  during  the  last  four  decades,  signalling  a 
significant increasing rate. The localised warming trends are summarised in Figure 2. 
Figure 1: Climatic zones 
75 
IPCC. 2001. Climate Change 2001: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Third 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, McCarthy, J.; Canziani,O.; Leary, N.; Dokken, D.; 
White, K. (eds). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
76 
Zubair, L.; Hansen, J.; Chandimala, J.; Siraj, M. R. A.; Siriwardhana, M.; Ariyaratne, K.; Bandara, I.;Bulathsinghala, H.; 
Abeyratne, T.; Samuel, T. D. M. A. 2005. Current climate and climate change assessments for coconut and tea plantations in 
Sri Lanka. IRI, FECT, NRMS and UoP Contribution to AS12 Programme Report START, Washington, DC., USA.
196 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:     Compliance with IFAD policies 
Figure 2: Warming trends by location (Source: Zubair et al. 2005) 
El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) is  found to  influence precipitation in  Sri Lanka (Suppiah
15. 
1996)77. There are mixed findings about the trends in precipitation over the longer term. The majority 
of the studies indicate a declining trend. However, all the studies report increasing variability. Although 
no significant changes in rainfall amount have been observed during the SW M and IM2, rainfall in the 
NEM  (corresponding  to  the  ‘Maha’  season  when  the  majority  of  dry  zone  agricultural  areas  in  the 
country receive rainfall) and IM1 has reduced, with NEM showing increased variability (Jayatillake et 
al.200578).  The  intensity  and  frequency  of  extreme  climate  events  (floods  and  droughts)  have 
increased in recent times triggering natural disasters (Imbulana et al. 200679). South-western Districts 
(mainly Ratnapura and Kalutara) have been experiencing floods twice a year. However, the number of 
flood incidences has increased to four times a year (with at  least one severe event) since 2008, as a 
result of scattered rainfall episodes of high intensity. High intensity rains are usually accompanied by 
slopes.
landsides 
mountain 
on 
Several  programmeed  climate  scenarios  on  temperature  based  on  IPCC  climate  change
16. 
modeling platform relevant to Sri Lanka (and South Asia) are summarised in Table 1. 
Table 1:Potential temperature scenarios relevant to Sri Lanka 
Source 
Climate Model 
Scenario 
Programmeed              temperature 
variation 
IPCC 2007  AOGCM 
A1FI 
B1 
+5.44 oC. (South Asia) 
+2.93 oC (South Asia) 
77 
Suppiah, R. 1996. Spatial and temporal variations in the relationships between the Southern Oscillation phenomenon and 
the rainfall of Sri Lanka. International Journal of Climatology 16(12): 1391-1407 
78 
Jayatillake, H. M;, Chandrapala, L.; Basnayake, B. R. S. B.; Dharmaratne, G. H. P. 2005. Water resources and climate 
change. Proceedings of Workshop on Sri Lanka National Water Development Report. Wijesekera, N.T. S.; Imbulana, K. A. U. 
S.; Neupane, B. eds. Paris, France: World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP). 
79 
Imbulana, K. A. U. S.; Wijesekera, N. T. S.; Neupane, B. R. eds. 2006. Sri Lanka National Water Development Report. 
MAI&MD, UN-WWAP, UNESCO and University of Moratuwa, Sri Lanka, Paris and New Delhi.
197 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:     Compliance with IFAD policies 
Basnayake 
et al. 
200480
Reduced versions 
of HadCM3, 
CSIRO, CGCM 
A1FI 
+2 to +3 oC (Sri Lanka) 
De Silva 
200681
Reduced version 
of HadCM3 
A2 
+1.6 oC by 2050 (Sri Lanka) 
17.  Climate  change  has  impacts  on  Sri  Lankan  rural  agriculture  mainly  through  the  changes  in
seasonality  of  precipitation.  Monsoon  rains  occur  in  a  bi-modal  pattern  every  year:  first  monsoon 
brings rains to the island from South-Western direction. The South and South-Western and the central 
regions  of  the  island  receive  annual  precipitation above  2500mm  as  a  result.  The  second  monsoon 
enters  the  island  from  North-Eastern  direction.  The  Eastern,  North  Central  and  Northern  regions 
receive an annual rainfall exceeding 1750 mm as a result. In between the two main monsoons, there 
is  inter-monsoon  precipitation  which  occurs  in  all  the  coastal  regions  with  varying  intensity.
Precipitation  replenishes  the   extensive  river   and   reservoir  system   which  serves  as   the
18. 
backbone for agricultural water requirement in the dry periods.   Based on the field experience during 
the SAP design mission, the farmers’ cropping pattern and cropping decisions do not show significant 
variations that could be attributed to climate change. However, there is increasing evidence of delays 
in  planting  decisions  (sometimes  as  long  as  for  four  weeks  in  the  life  of  a  12  week  crop)  due  to 
variations in the precipitation pattern. Climate change introduces a substantial variability in the annual 
mm.
800 
precipitation 
ranging 
5000 
from 
mm 
to 
Variations of  daylight  hours and temperature anomalies do  not display observable grassroots
19. 
level  impacts  on  the  staples  and  field  crops  that  are  cultivated in  the  dry  zone,  at  least  from farmer 
experience.  However,  there  is  a  need  to  validate  the  impacts  of  changes  of  daylight  duration  and 
temperature  anomalies  on  yields  through  research  studies  at  the  field  level.  Drought  tolerant  and 
flood/salinity resistant  varietal  development has  been  an  agronomic  priority for  crop  development at 
the  national  policy  and  research  institutional  level  (especially  at  Rice  Research  and  Development 
Institute and Field crop research and development institute). For rice and field crops, there had been 
development of drought tolerant varieties in terms of the water requirement and the length of the crop 
cycle. Further, prolonged droughts have  implications for  livestock husbandry in  terms of  direct  water 
establishment.
and 
requirement, 
temperature 
ambient 
fodder 
water 
for 
South Asia is identified by UNFCCC as a high risk region for climate impacts. Climate change
20. 
studies  collectively  highlight  the  variability  of  precipitation  and  drought  incidence  as  preliminary 
climate   related   challenges.  Secondary  challenges  arising   from   these   primary  threats   include 
prolonged droughts and flash floods. IW MI (2010) programmes a rise in mean temperature by 0.9 to 
4ºC for Sri Lanka (over the 1961-1990 baseline) by the year 2100 and calculates a potential increase 
in  ‘Maha’ (Nov-Feb) season irrigation  water  requirements for  paddy to  the  degree of  13  to  23%  by 
2050. Programmeions based on the HadCM3 circulation model (IPCC) anticipate a decrease in North 
East  Monsoon  rainfall  between  34%  (A2  scenario)  and  26%  (B2  scenario)  by  the  2050  and 
2ºC.
of 
temperature 
increases 
1.5 
to 
In  terms  of  specific  locations  that  the  SAP  design  mission  in  Oct-Nov  2016,  four  of  the  six
21. 
locations visited were around the administrative district of Anuradhapura. It  is  locate in the Dry Zone 
(Agro-climatic  area)  and  records  a  mean  annual  precipitation  of  1,298mm.  Comparing  the  rainfall 
trends  between  1949-1959  and  2000-2010, annual  precipitation  has  declined  by  7%. Anuradhapura 
receives rainfall from both Monsoons. Mean precipitation for the North Eastern Monsoon is 903 mm. 
80 
Basnayake, B. R. S. B.; Rathnasiri J.; Vithanage J. C. 2004. Rainfall and temperature scenarios for Sri Lanka under the 
anticipated climate change. Paper presented at 2nd   Aclimate change Regional Workshop for Asia and the Pacific, Manila, 
Philippines
81 
De Silva, C. S. 2006. Impacts of climate change on water resources in Sri Lanka. Paper presented at the 32 
WEDC
nd 
International Conference, November 13-17, 2006, Colombo, Sri Lanka 
198 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:     Compliance with IFAD policies 
comparing the two time points, there is only a 1% decline in precipitation in this monsoon. However, 
the precipitation from the South Western Monsoon declined by 19% between the two time points.
22. 
The agricultural sector  in  Sri  Lanka contributes to carbon emissions through deforestation for
agricultural land  use  and  land  management practices  (i.e.  fertiliser,  soil  carbon  stocks) mainly. The 
poor logistics and poor road infrastructure also contribute to agriculture-related emissions.
23. 
Sri Lanka’s forest distribution is expected to be substantively affected by climate change , with
increases in tropical very dry (5%) and tropical dry forest (7%) and a decrease in tropical wet forest 
(11%) areas (Somaratne and Dhanapala 199682).
Impacts of climate change on agriculture may negative influence the country’s economy. Seo et
24. 
al. (2005)83  find that  nationally, the impact on agriculture (rice, tea, rubber and coconut) will result in 
economic  losses  up  to  20%.  Significant  positive  economic  impacts  are  also  predicted  based  on 
alternative scenarios of HadCM3, CSIRO, CGCM, and PCM models. The drought risk is prominent in 
the  Dry  zone  of  the  country  (agro  climatic  zone  with  annual  rainfall  below  750  mm  annual 
precipitation). Monsoon rainfall intensities lead to an annual flooding pattern in low lands of W et zone 
affecting livelihoods of  (nearly) half  a  million citizens  every  year.   Given the  small size  of  the  island, 
extreme weather events such as super storms and Tsunami are potential high risk factors. 
1.4.        Key Issues
25. 
With  reference  to  the  socio-cultural  context,  the  potential  concerns  for  SAP  targeted  areas 
include the following: 
   Households  in  the  programme  areas  are  highly  reliant  on  agricultural  land  for  income 
generation  and  food  security.  The  market-linked  agricultural  value  chains  will  further 
increase  the  pressure  for  land  acquisition  and/or  conversion.  Land  ownership  is  an 
unresolved  issue  in  resettled  areas  both  in  historical  agricultural  settlements  and  the 
recent post-conflict resettlements. Lack of private titles to land hinder development of the 
land  and  contribute  to  low  productivity.  Low  land  productivity  remains  a  longstanding 
problem in the Sri Lankan smallholder agriculture. 
  
  
 Lack of  youth participation in agriculture remains a significant limitation to modernisation 
of  agriculture. Significant economic migration of  youth  to  the  cities  poses  a  challenge to 
seasonal labour needs of agriculture. 
Farmer  health  has  risen  to  be  a  national  issue.  Surface  water  contamination  from 
agricultural run-off is  a  significant threat to  both  the  environment and farmer health  The 
prevalence of chronic kidney disease (CKD) has been reported recently around intensive 
agricultural areas (the scientific basis of CKD incidence is still under investigation).  Lack 
of safety guidelines and absence of training in occupation hazard prevention worsen the 
situation. 
   Nutritional security is a key social and  public health issue. Low birth  weight (18% of the 
babies  born  below  beyond  2.5  Kg)  and  wasting  are  recorded  as  areas  for  concern 
relative to other countries of comparable circumstances. 
26. 
With reference to climate and environment, Sri Lanka is dually challenged. Being an island with 
large  proportion  of  low-lying  land  area,  sea  level  rise  poses  an  imminent  threat  to  many 
livelihoods. High  dependence on  precipitation for  agriculture  and  power  generation makes  Sri 
Lanka vulnerable to variations of weather patterns. Primary environmental and climate issues of 
following:
critical 
importance 
targeted 
include 
areas 
SAP 
the 
the 
to 
82 
Somaratne, S.; Dhanapala, A. H. 1996. Potential impact of global climate change on forest distribution in Sri Lanka. Water, 
Air and Soil Pollution 92(1-2): 129-135. 
83 
Seo, S. N.; Mendelsohn, R.; Munasinghe, M. 2005. Climate change and agriculture in Sri Lanka: a Ricardian valuation. 
Environment and Development Economics 10: 581-596.
199 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:     Compliance with IFAD policies 
   Climate   change   impacts  in   the   form   of   erratic   rainfall   may  contribute  to   reduced 
agricultural  productivity  (due  to  delayed  or  early  onset  of  monsoon  rainfall,  increased 
intensity  of  rains  and  prolonged  drought).  Increasing  frequency  of  storms,  floods  and 
landslides pose livelihood risks in agricultural sector. 
   Land degradation, soil erosion, decline of soil fertility and increase of land salinity remain 
significant environmental concerns in the targeted areas in North Central Province. This is 
a result of continuous mono-cropping under inorganic inputs. 
   Limited  and  lack  of  timely  information,  both  in  magnitude  and  quality,  on  weather  and 
water resources contribute to the uncertainty of agriculture sector activities. 
II. Potential programme’s social, environmental, and climate change impacts and risks 
2.1.       Key potential impacts 
Under  the  4P  model  of  the  SAP,  the  actual  localities  and  the  farmer  coverage  will  be
27. 
determined  through  a  negotiation  process  between  PMU,  promoter  company,  and  other  institutional 
stakeholders. The potential impacts can only be programmeed under several general scenarios at this 
point. Table 2 outlines several key impacts and potential mitigation strategies. 
Table 2: Potential Negative Impacts of SAP supported programmes 
Activity 
Creation of 
private 
company 
centred farmer 
collectives 
Potential negative 
impacts 
Social cohesion within 
the village may be 
weakened due to 
business-motivated 
collective formation in 
contrast to the more 
traditional farmer 
collectives based on 
the irrigation 
infrastructure and 
cultural norms. 
The role of women 
(and youth) in the 
created  business 
collectives may 
deteriorate under a 
possible male–led 
structure. 
Mitigation strategy 
Participatory training and knowledge dissemination 
sessions will enhance the bonds between the members 
of the business-motivated collectives that are targeted 
by the 4P model. 
Sensitisation of the farmers to merits and demerits of a 
membership to private company linkage will increase 
the farmer understanding of the need to additional 
institutions to negotiate their interests in addition to the 
traditional purposes of a farmer collective. 
Provisions have to be made to build female and youth 
participation requirements to the constitutions of the 
farmer organisations created under the 4P model. 
Expansion of 
agricultural 
activity for 
commercial 
purposes 
using 
subsidised / 
open access 
resources 
Irrigation infrastructure 
and water resources 
are largely publicly 
owned and in most 
cases common- 
access. Under 
business-led models, 
exploitation of such 
resources may 
exacerbate. 
An irrigation  water pricing regime can include 
environmental consciousness into the business plans of 
the 4Ps. Alternatively, explicit attention should be paid 
in the investment plans to rehabilitate the irrigation 
infrastructure and scoping for alternative water sources. 
At the level of watershed, it is important that 4Ps 
integrate provisions to  ensure data availability 
(hydrogeological, soil and water quality, sedimentation 
loads, catchment inflows) that is important to continuous 
monitoring. 
200 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:     Compliance with IFAD policies 
Exploitation of open– 
access pastures in 
dairy farming 
Promoting minimum or zero grazing regimes for fodder 
supply with supplementary establishment of high quality 
pastures. 
Intensive and 
high input 
agricultural 
models 
Potential increase in 
soil erosion, surface 
and subsurface water 
pollution 
Promoter 
company- 
driven farming 
technologies 
Potential negative 
impacts from 
introduction of 
inappropriate 
technologies and 
gradual disappearance 
of traditional 
knowledge. 
Incorporation 
of high value 
alien crop 
varieties  and 
livestock 
breeds 
Potential negative 
impacts on biodiversity 
High 
agrochemical 
use in cash 
crops 
Vulnerability of 
introduced species to 
climate related pest 
and disease 
outbreaks. 
Potential negative 
impacts from over-use 
of agrochemicals on 
human health, surface 
and groundwater 
contamination and 
increased resistance 
to pests/disease 
Soil conservation measures and low chemical input 
farming will be incentivised both through market 
segmentation and farmer/ promoter capacity building . 
As a precondition for approval, the 4P stakeholders will 
have to enter into an agreement for explicit activities 
targeting ecosystem restoration. 
Safeguards will be articulated to ensure that no invasive 
alien species are introduced and chemical inputs are 
used in a judicious manner, and genetic purity of wild 
relatives and landraces are protected. 
Furthermore, on-farm trials will have to be undertaken 
using a participatory action research (PAR) approach. 
This will facilitate a more rapid identification and 
adoption of resilient varieties and will help put traditional 
knowledge to good use. 
Incorporation of crop rotation to retain the agro 
biodiversity of the targeted localities is necessary. As a 
partial corrective measure, it is recommended that at 
least 20 percent of the cultivated area in terms of annual 
cropping cycle under the 4P programme to allow for 
natural vegetation or wild crop varieties. Exotic crop 
species that can spread through natural regenerative 
means will have to selectively introduced. 
Cross-breeds and artificial insemination regimes  will 
imply lower preferences to local livestock breeds and 
their attributes. W ith time, the livestock types will 
transition in favour of market-demanded types. This will 
make the agro-ecosystem poor in terms of diversity 
while making the introduced breeds managed under 
semi or fully intensive systems vulnerable to climate- 
related pest and disease outbreaks . 
Precision application of chemical fertilisers and 
pesticides can be promoted to minimise agrochemical 
run-off and residue build-up. The supported 
programmes will be required to provide support on 
production and application of organic fertilisers 
(compost) and organic pesticides. 
It is important to introduce local product and process 
standards specific to cultivation and management 
practices in order to incentivise low chemical input 
farming systems and deter high chemical input 
methods. 
Vertical 
integration of 
agricultural 
Elimination of small 
scale traditional 
farmers, vendors due 
In order to safeguard the interests and protect the 
livelihoods of the non-beneficiary farmers in the targeted 
areas, it is important for the SAP to liaise with local 
201 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:     Compliance with IFAD policies 
value chains         to organised collection 
and retailing. 
agrarian development programs. Such activities may 
include sponsoring rural infrastructure in non-beneficiary 
neighbourhoods of the selected target area.
2.2.       Climate change and adaptation 
The   potential   localities   of   implementation  of   4Ps   under   SAP   are   mainly   the   Dry   and
28. 
Intermediate  zones  of  the  country.  The  possible  climate  change  scenarios  and  their  impacts  on 
agricultural  activity  will  be  critical  information  for  establishing  suitable  adaptation  strategies.  It  is 
important to summarise the current information on anticipated climate threats to Sri Lankan agriculture 
strategies.
as 
discussion 
adaptation 
prelude 
of 
to 
a 
a 
The  adaptation  scenarios  to  climate  change  falls  differently  on  different  sectors.  This  note
29. 
mainly considers impacts on agriculture. The changes in rainfall and temperature, together with other 
climatic  factors,  may  increase  the  average  evapotranspiration  (1-2%  for  scenarios  B2-A2)  and 
maximum  annual  potential  soil  moisture  deficit  (4-11%  for  scenarios  B2-A2)  by  2050.  These 
programmeions  will  be  significant  in  the  Dry  zone  (where  staples  and  field  crops  are  cultivated 
intensively) and the availability and reliability of crop water requirements will be under severe pressure 
as  a  consequence.  De  Silva  et  al.  (2007)84  suggest  that,  by  2050,  average  paddy  irrigation  water 
requirement during  the  ‘Maha’ season  will  increase  by  23  and  13%,  respectively, for  the A2  and  B2 
scenarios  due  to  reductions  in  average  rainfall,  increase  in  potential  evapotranspiration  and  early 
ending of rainfall season. The corresponding water requirements for field crops and semi-perennials, 
pertaining to  4P  programmes will  be  less  than  those  for  paddy. The  adoption  of  micro-irrigation and 
conjunctive use of ground water and surface water will be necessary as adaptation measures for the 
potential  high  water  requirements  under  high  evapotranspiration  regimes.  Low  cost  soil  moisture 
conservation  strategies  such  as  mulching,  compost  incorporation  and  minimum  tillage  could  further 
top-soil.
advance 
retention 
water 
the 
the 
of 
in 
30.  Temperature rise has physiological impacts on plant growth. Punyawardena (2007)85 states that
crop injuries are possible with temperature increases. For paddy, ambient temperature exceeding 35 
°C for   60–90 minutes at the flowering stage, can cause crop damages, including high rate of unfilled 
grains due to increased spikelet sterility. For field crops, temperature damages could be mitigated by 
considering  structures  for  shading  during  the  most  physiological  vulnerable  stages  (i.e.  seedling, 
flowering) and inclusion of trees both as means of partial shading and as natural devices for cooling 
temperature.
the 
ambient 
Various combinations of simultaneous hot and  wet  weather could also be  detrimental to plant
31. 
growth.  Mendelsohn  et  al.  (2004)86    finds  that,  with  medium  warming  and  only  small  increase  in 
precipitation,  economics  losses  of  23%  can  be  programmeed.  The  largest  adverse  impacts  are 
programmeed to  be  in  the  north-western and  south-eastern lowlands in  the  dry  zone,  while the  wet, 
high  elevation  areas  are  expected  to  benefit  from  climate  change.  As  an  adaptation  measure  for 
combined  impacts  variations  in      temperature  and  moisture,  use  of  semi-protected  structures  (i.e. 
partial  greenhouses)  for  high  value  crops  is  recommended.  Such  adaptation  measures  will  have 
added benefits in pest and disease control. 
84 
De Silva, C. S.; Weatherhead, E. K.; Knox, J. W.; Rodriguez-Diaz, J. A. 2007. Predicting the impacts of climate change – a 
case study of paddy irrigation water requirements in Sri Lanka. Agricultural Water management 
93(2007): 19-29. 
85 
Punyawardena, B. V. R. 2007. Impacts of climate change on agriculture in Sri Lanka and possible response strategies: 
Impacts, adaptation and mitigation. National Conference on Climate Change 2007. Centre for Climate Change Studies 
86 
Mendelsohn, R.; Dinar, A.; Basist, A.; Kurukulasuriya, P.; Ajwad, M.; Kogan, F.; Williams, C. 2004. Cross sectional analyses 
of climate change impacts. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3350. World Bank
202 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:     Compliance with IFAD policies 
32.  Majority of the literature on climate adaptation with reference to Sri Lanka focus on crops and
the analyses of impacts of climate change and potential adaption strategies for animal husbandry are 
rare.  Livestock  sector  programmes under  SAP  needs  to  consider climate adaptation seriously given 
the  fact  that  semi-intensive housing  and  management practices  carried  out  by  4P  programmes  are 
vulnerable to climate related shocks with regard to  water, fodder, disease outbreaks and heat stress. 
Suitable  adaptations  include  use  of  semi-automated  drinking  devices  (i.e.  siphons),  use  of  fodder 
mixes  including  local  herbs  with  rotational  grazing,  rainwater  harvesting  for 
livestock  use, 
establishment  of  shade  trees  that  can  contribute  to  fodder  supply.  Development  of  climate–tolerant 
cross-breeds  is  another  useful  adaptation  approach  but  may  be  costly  depending  on  the  context.
In  summary,  the  likely  climate  scenarios  and  programmeed impacts  signal  high  risks  for  Sri
33. 
Lankan agriculture sector, especially for the small-holder sector which does not have ready access to 
risk-mitigation tools.  In  terms  of  adaptation at  the  farm  level,  improved techniques of  soil  and  water 
conservation, good  agricultural practices,  appropriate  selection  of  crops  can  reduce  the  exposure to 
climate  induced  risks.  At  the  community  level,  environmental  education  and  building  capacity  on 
climate  resilient  farming  is  mandatory  through  targeted  advisory  and  extension  services.      Early 
warning  systems  and  access  to  financial  and  economic  instruments  of  risk  mitigation  such  as 
weather-indexed insurance will further reduce the uncertainty in farming. The availability of proper risk 
management may also reduce the  likelihood of  farmers resorting to  inappropriate approaches to risk 
reduction  such  as  overuse  of  agrochemicals  and  manipulating  harvesting  (i.e.  early  harvesting)and 
post-harvest practices  (i.e. forced ripening). 
III. Environmental and social category
The programme’s potential negative impacts in the spheres of environment and social aspects
34. 
are  identified  and  mitigation measures  discussed  in  the  previous  sections.  Thus,  in  line  with  IFAD’s 
Social,  Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment  Procedures,  the  SAP  programme  is  classified  as 
relevant to Category B of environmental and social impact. 
IV. Climate risk category
The  potential  climate  risks  are  discussed  in  detail  in  the  previous  sections.  The  capacity
35. 
building  and  policy  engagement provisions under  SAP have  helped  articulate strategic  and  practical 
measures  for  the  programme  to  contend  with  climate  change  impacts,  and  in  this  regard,  the 
programme’s overall focus on sustainable agriculture can be considered a climate change adaptation 
strategy  compared  to  conventional  agriculture.  Environmental  and  climate  safeguards  can  be 
integrated into the programme to address negative impacts. Considering potential climate impacts on 
potential/targeted  areas  in  the  country  and  the  measures  included  in  the  programme  for  building 
adaptive capacity, and  ecosystem and  community resilience, the  Climate Risk  Category is  assessed 
Moderate.
as 
Preliminary Climate Risk Screening of the potential programme target area is recorded in table
36. 
3. 
Table 3: Preliminary climate risk screening 
Question 
Yes 
No 
Additional Explanations 
Is the target group of the programme dependent 
on climate-sensitive natural resources (such as 
drought-prone  crops,  rainwater-fed  agricultural 
plots, migratory fishstocks)? 
X 
Agricultural systems under SAP 
have been selected through 
substantive experience both with the 
promoter companies and farmers. 
However, exceptions to this norm 
exists in the general farming 
experience in Sri Lanka (i.e prawn 
farming which failed under local 
203 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:     Compliance with IFAD policies 
Has the programme area been subject to 
extreme weather events in the past, such as 
flooding, drought, tropical storms, or heat waves? 
X 
X 
Could changes in temperature, rainfall, or 
extreme weather affect the programme impact, 
sustainability or cost over its lifetime? 
Will climate variability likely affect agricultural 
productivity within the programme (crops/ 
livestock/fisheries) or incidence of pests and 
diseases? 
Would weather-related risks or climatic extremes 
adversely impact upon key stages of identified 
value chains in the programme (from production 
to markets)? 
Does the programme have potential to integrate 
climate resilience measures without extensive 
additional costs (such as applying improved 
building codes; expanding capacity building 
programmes; or including climate risk issues in 
policy processes) 
Would the programme benefit from a more 
detailed climate risk and vulnerability analysis to 
identify the most vulnerable rural population, 
improve targeting and identify additional 
complementary investment actions to manage 
climate risks? 
X 
X 
X 
X 
conditions) 
Anuradhapura district is exposed to 
a six month drought period annually, 
irrigation tanks, agrowells and tube 
wells however help farmers adapt to 
the water shortages. Flooding has 
been experienced but with a low 
frequency (once in ten years). 
Climate conditions can affect the 
programmes related agricultural 
output. The long term experience by 
the farmers are seasonal economic 
losses of 15-20%. 
Open field conditions are susceptible 
to climate related pest and disease 
outbreaks. 
Company-linked systems have risk 
mitigation tools built into them and 
season to season coordination 
based on advanced information than 
would not be accessible to a farmer 
alone. 
As was discussed under the section 
on ‘climate adaptation’, there are low 
cost alternatives of enhance climate 
resilience. 
As a measure of creating future 
sustainability in a publicly supported 
programme, a detailed climate risk 
assessment is suggested especially 
when novel product and 
management systems are adopted 
as part of 4Ps. Time-tested crops 
and livestock have the advantage of 
being informed by indigenous 
knowledge and community practices 
which may not be available for novel 
crops and livestock types centred on 
a market driven agribusiness model. 
V. Recommended features87 of programme design and implementation 
5.1.  Mitigation measures 
87   Guidelines  as  to  what  constitutes  ENRM  Core  Principles  and  Best-Practice  Statement  can  be  found  in  IFAD 
‘Environment and Natural Resource Management Policy’ (2011)
204 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:     Compliance with IFAD policies 
37.  At the point of initial screening and subsequent technical evaluation (TEC) of each proposed 4P
programme,  a  committee  consisting  of  expertise  (also)  in  environmental  science  is  recommended. 
This  will  enhance  the  capacity of  both  the  PMU  and  promoter  to  develop  investment and  operation 
plans  taking  into  account  the  environmental  issues  in  the  targeted  locality.  At  the  final  technical 
clearance  of  the  4P  programme  by  National  Steering  Committee  (NSC),  it  is  important   that  clear 
terms  of  reference  be  required  from  the  promoter  company/institutions  regarding  the  social  and 
programme.
environmental 
expectations 
the 
of 
Water budgeting and analysis of  water use efficiency  should be  integral to  the screening and
38. 
implementation of 4Ps under SAP . The analysis will include a climate risk and disaster assessment to 
determine the resilience of  existing water supply to climate shocks. Returns to water use need to be 
assessed both  in  terms of economic value and  yield.   Such an  analysis  will  provide a  menu of  crop 
options  for  the  promoter  company  and  the  farmers  to  choose  from.  National  and  regional  expertise 
can by procured for this type of study. This will greatly improve the resilience of smallholder farmers in 
change.
contending 
induced 
climate 
stress 
water 
with 
by 
The new 4Ps focusing the dairy industry under SAP  should consider  a "zero-grazing" policy in
39. 
common access areas  and  adjacent forests. The fodder needs may be  supplied by on-farm pasture 
stands.  This  will  help  build  household  level  resilience  and  rehabilitate  the  ecosystem  to  better 
impacts.
withstand 
change 
climate 
Renewable, environment and climate friendly energy technologies such as solar photo-voltaics
40. 
to power the micro irrigation, biogas coupled with livestock should be incentivised though subsidies in 
order to facilitate uptake. Such initiatives can compensate or partially offset the environmental burden 
of  the  coal-dominated  grid  electric  power  used  in  large  agricultural  processing  operations.
Agrochemicals, especially fertilisers have a significant carbon footprint due to carbon emissions
41. 
during their production and formation. As such, it is important that agrochemical application be done in 
the  most  efficient  method  possible  and  only  when  there  are  no  alternatives.  Therefore,  efficient 
nutrient management and  integrated pest and disease management (IPM) should be  included in the 
approved farm model under each 4P as relevant to the selected crop (livestock) type and the chosen 
scale of farming. 
5.2.  Multi-benefit approaches
SAP design and implementation should pay attention to creating opportunities of multifunctional
42. 
initiatives. Sustainable consumption need to accompany sustainable production. The new 4Ps should 
be screened for their innovativeness in sustainable consumption in addition to sustainable production 
chains.
activities 
proposed 
value 
the 
in 
43. 
In  order  to  generate  cross-cutting  environmental  benefits  from  the  agribusiness  partnership
model adopted for SAP, it is important that farming model be matched with the resources on location 
and the social infrastructure of the targeted area.
The current implementation of 4Ps in Sri Lanka focuses largely on dairy industry at the small
44. 
holder  level  with  private  promoters  through  upgraded  milk  collection  centres.  Environmentally 
sustainable  multi-benefit  approaches  can  be  introduced  to  dairy  farming  through  accompanying 
biogas units and solar PV technologies for cattle sheds. 
5.3. Incentives for good practices
The  PMU  will  conduct  sustainability  assessments  of  all  4P  proposals,  in  terms  of  financial,
45. 
social and environmental viability. Only those proposals that are sustainable in the long term need to 
be  prioritised  to  receive  programme  support.  In  addition,  the  adoption  of  non-polluting  farming 
practices and processing technologies need to  be  incentivised through small scale grants and loans.
46. 
Successful  implementation  of  sustainable  farm  models  need  to  scaled  up  and  promoted
through a continuous process of evaluation and knowledge sharing. Technical assistance units need 
to  be  trained  and  tasked  to  conduct  awareness  building  in  climate  change  effects  and  risks  in  the
205 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:     Compliance with IFAD policies 
agricultural  sector  in  the  long  term.  The  farmers  and  promoters  of  4P  programmes  should  made 
aware  of  the  risks  faced  with  increasing  climate  change  impact,  and  the  financial  consequences  of 
selection  between  conventional  and  new  adaptive  farming  systems  should  be  disseminated  clearly.
47. 
Farmer level training on GAP and GMP (FAO guidelines) and simultaneous sensitization of the
promoter companies to crop and livestock models that incorporate GAP guidelines are needed as a 
prerequisite to enhance the environmental sensitivity and food safety elements of the value chain.
48. 
The energy saving, water saving initiatives within the 4Ps need to recognised in scaling up the
4Ps.  Appropriate  rating  systems  should  be  devised  to  convey  the  level  of  water  and  energy  use 
efficiencies on a regular basis. 
5.4.  Participatory processes
It    was   observed   at    the    SAP   field   mission   that   farmer   collectives   did    not    have
49. 
organisation/institutional  structures  that  facilitate  participatory  decision  making.  The  only  exception 
was  the  organic  agricultural movement in Anuradhapura which  was  collaborating with  Nelna  Pvt  Ltd 
which  encouraged  predominantly  female  membership  of  farmer  organisation  including  the  office 
bearers with regular meetings scheduled every month.  The participatory decision making is essential 
for  building  farmer  capacity  in  terms  of  environmental  sensitivity  and  climate  sensitivity.  The  local 
climate  knowledge  at  the  grassroots  level  is  built  around  experienced  farmers  in  the  absence  of 
interventions in climate adaptation capacity at the grass roots level. In order for the local knowledge to 
be  disseminated across  generations,  it  is  important  that  experienced farmers  act  as  mentors  to  the 
farmers.
youth 
new 
and 
The water release decisions and crop selection at the major irrigation systems are determined
50. 
through a participatory process between the members of the farmer organization (FO) and officials of 
Mahaweli/irrigation, agrarian department. However, such mechanisms are not functioning at the level 
of minor irrigation systems and for ground water extraction. A traditional norm of water sharing (called 
“bethma” 
scarcity.
vernacular) 
during 
exists 
water 
time 
of 
in 
Also,  collective land use  in  paddy cultivation (called the “yaya”  approach in  vernacular) is  an
51. 
example  of  participatory  cultivation  which  under  strong  traditional  norms  using  a  system  of  labour 
sharing  (called  “aththama”  in  vernacular).  Traditional  agricultural  practices  have  participatory 
processes  built  into  them.  In  implementing  modern  farming  models,  replacement  of  the  traditional 
farmer collectives with buy-back /forward-contract groups   need to be  carefully monitored in terms of 
the  method  of  selection  of  leadership,  the  level  of  participation  in  decision  making  and  the 
responsibility.
of 
concentration 
VI. Analysis of alternatives 
The proposed 4P approach under SAP takes into consideration the market driven demand for a
52. 
particular crop/livestock product as the starting point of screening. Subsequently, appropriate capacity 
of  the  promoter  company and  the  producers  and  the  suitability of  location  and  scale  are  assessed. 
With this context in mind, the environmental and climatic suitability of the alternatives proposed should 
be  assessed at  the  point of  screening in  the  first  place, and  if  the  other  objectives are  substantively 
met,  environmental  and  climatic  safeguards  need  to  be  recommended  for  implementation  in  order 
adaptation.
facilitate 
mitigate 
negative 
process 
impacts 
the 
or 
of 
A preliminary analysis of the alternative merits of potential crops and livestock was carried out
53. 
during  the  SAP  design  stage,  where  the  level  of  impact/feasibility/effectiveness was  considered  for 
each  of  the  alternatives  based  on  the  consultation  with  the  programme  management  unit  technical 
staff and the SAP design team.   Starting from  a pool of  15 alternatives, a multi  criteria analysis was 
and
carried 
out 
54. 
Evaluation of  the key priority area at  the preliminary design stage of  SAP are  summarised in 
Table 4.
Table 4: Multi-criteria analysis of product alternatives
206 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:     Compliance with IFAD policies 
Alternative 
Envir. impact: 
Social: 
1:low 
2:moderate 
1:low 
3:high 
2:moderate 
3:high 
climate 
change 
vulnerability: 
1:low 
2:moderate 
3:high 
technical 
feasibility: 
1:high 
2:moderate 
3:low 
Cost: 
Summary 
Score 
1:low 
2:moderate 
3:high 
<9: desirable 
>9: undesirable 
1  Maize 
2 
3 
4 
Sesame 
Dairy 
Pepper 
5  Gherkin 
6 
7 
8 
Chilli 
Tomato 
Passion 
9  Mango 
10  Pineapple 
11  Apiculture 
12  Palm 
(treacle) 
13  Poultry 
14  Fishery 
15  Seaweed 
3 
2 
3 
1 
2 
2 
3 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
3 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
2 
3 
3 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
2 
2 
3 
1 
1 
2 
3 
1 
2 
2 
2 
2 
1 
3 
2 
2 
1 
1 
2 
2 
1 
3 
3 
2 
3 
1 
2 
2 
2 
1 
3 
2 
1 
1 
3 
1 
1 
11 
9 
11 
6 
8 
7 
11 
6 
9 
8 
7 
7 
10 
8 
11 
55.  The analysis led to the recommendation that multiple crop design or the intercropping design
need  to  be  promoted  on  account  of  two  reasons:  first,  farming  system  strength  and  ecosystem 
stability; second, the income smoothing and profitability per hectare and per season basis. Hence, the 
following alternatives were recommended as potential agricultural models for investing under the SAP. 
(a)  Sesame + maize+ chilli 
(b)  Passion fruit 
(c)  Gherkin + maize + chilli 
(d)  Dairy 
(e)  Palm (Treacle) 
(f)   Vegetable seeds
7.1. Institutional framework 
VII. Institutional analysis
The key institution relevant to the implementation of SAP is the special programmes division of
56. 
the Presidential Secretariat. However, the functions and the domain of  the SAP overlap with number 
of  government institutions in  Sri  Lanka. The main  institutions,  whose mandates are  closely linked to 
environmental  and  resource  implications  of  SAP,  include  Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Ministry  of  Rural
207 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:     Compliance with IFAD policies 
Economics  Affairs,  Ministry  of  Environment,  Mahaweli  Development  Authority,  and  the  Irrigation 
Department.
As  a  signatory to  the UNFCCC and  a  country that has  ratified the  Kyoto Protocol on  climate
57. 
change,   Sri Lanka is   under   obligation to contribute to efforts to mitigate climate change. Sri Lanka 
made  its  Initial  National  Communication  on  Climate  Change  in  2000  and  its  Second  National 
Communication in 2011. A national focal point (i.e. Climate Change Secretariat) has been established 
to  climate  change.
under  Ministry  of  Environment 
to  draft  and 
inform  policy 
related 
The  environment  concerns  related  to  the  programme  come  under  the  purview  of  several
58. 
parliamentary  acts  and  policies  currently  in  force.  A  summary  of  relevant  environmental  policy  and 
general  policy  initiatives  and  their  significance,  along  with  government  institutions  administering  the 
policy is outlined below in Table 5. 
Table 5: Policy framework for environmental decisions 
Policy 
Description 
Relevant authority 
Ministry of Environment, 
Central Environment Authority 
Forest Department, Ministry of 
Environment 
Department of Wildlife 
Conservation (DWC), Ministry 
of Environment 
National Environment 
Policy - 2003 
National Forestry 
Policy – 1995 
National Policy on 
Wild Life Conservation 
- 2000 
The policy aims to promote the sound 
management of Sri Lanka's 
environment balancing the needs for 
social and economic development and 
environment integrity. It also aims to 
manage the environment by linking 
together the activities, interests and 
perspectives of stakeholders and to 
assure environmental accountability 
The policy was drawn up to provide 
clear directions for safeguarding the 
remaining natural forests of the 
country in order to conserve 
biodiversity, soil and water resources. 
In accordance with the policy, the 
forests under the jurisdiction of the 
Forest Department is being 
reclassified and placed under four 
management systems ranging from 
strict conservation, non-extractive use, 
management of multiple use forests for 
sustainable production of wood and 
management of forests with 
community participation. 
The policy renews the commitment of 
the government to conserve wildlife 
resources through promoting 
conservation, maintaining ecological 
processes and life sustaining systems, 
managing genetic diversity and 
ensuring sustainable utilization and 
sharing of equitable benefits arising 
from biodiversity. It emphasizes the 
need for effective protected area 
management with the participation of 
local communities. 
208 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:     Compliance with IFAD policies 
National Air Quality 
Management Policy – 
2000 
National Watershed 
Management Policy – 
2004 
Cleaner Production 
Policy – 2004 
National Biosafety 
Policy – 2005 
National Policy on 
Wetlands – 2005 
Ministry of Environment, 
Central Envt. Authority 
Ministry of Environment, 
Mahaweli Development 
Authority, Department of 
Irrigation 
Central Environmental 
Authority, Climate Change 
Secretariat 
Biodiversity Secretariat, 
Ministry of Environment, 
Department of Quarantine 
(Customs) 
Ministry of Environment, 
Ministry of Disaster 
Management 
The purpose of this policy is to 
maintain good air quality to reduce 
morbidity due to air pollution and in 
turn reduce national health 
expenditures. 
Policy aims to conserve, protect, 
rehabilitate, sustainability use and 
manage the watersheds while 
managing their environment 
characteristics with the involvement of 
people. 
The objective of this policy is to 
incorporate the cleaner production 
concept and practices into all 
development sectors of the country. To 
implement the policy sectoral policies 
were developed for health and tourism 
in collaboration with the Ministry of 
Health 
The policy on biosafety set the overall 
framework in which adequate safety 
measures will be developed and put 
into force to minimize possible risks to 
human health and the environment 
while extracting maximum benefits 
from any potential that modern bio 
technology may offer. 
This policy seeks to give effect to 
National Environment Policy and other 
relevant national policies, while 
respecting national commitments 
towards relevant international 
conventions, protocols, treaties and 
agreements to which Sri Lanka is a 
party. 
59.  The  private  sector  agribusiness  companies  have  membership  in  industry  organisations  and
interest  groups.  For  public  listed  companies  and  limited  liability  companies,  Chamber  of  Commerce 
(SL)  acts  as  the  overarching  organisation.  For  Small  and  Medium  scale  companies  which  are  not 
members of bodies such as Chamber, lobby groups such as fruit and vegetable exporters association, 
Spice  council  and  National  Agribusiness  council  serve  as  representative  organisations.  Except  for 
corporate  responsibility  obligations,  private  sector  institutions  are  not  subject  to  environmental 
legislation  in  Sri  Lanka.  Their  activities,  depending  on  the  scale,  have  to  undergo  clearance  and 
approval from the government policy framework on a case by case basis. If  programme scope of any 
private programme has command area larger than 50 ha, Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) and 
/or Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) may be required by the Central Environment Authority.
60. 
At the level of civil society and farmer organisations, the representation and formal registration
is  with  either  Department of Agrarian  Development or  Ministry of  Social  services. The  environment 
implications of the farmer collectives or civil society organisation are not regulated explicitly under the
209 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:     Compliance with IFAD policies 
current legislative framework. However, for purposes of complaints and grievance redress at the local 
level, the Divisional Secretariat offices of the Ministry of Public Administration serve as focal point. 
7.2. Capacity building
SAP     includes     capacity     building     under     both     component     1(value     chains)     and
61. 
2(credit/microfinance). There is scope under   component 1 for capacity building   on environment and 
climate  change  activities.  Capacity  building  should  target      PMU,  private  companies  ,  CBOs  and 
farmers and be relevant to the planning, implementation and evaluation stages. To facilitate a smooth 
implementation  of  climate  change  adaptation  measures  such  as  the  transition  to  low-input 
multifunctional  agriculture,  improved  water  availability  and  resilience  to  climate  shocks,  targeted 
training and exposure visits need to be undertaken. In particular, the following thematic areas can be 
prioritised  for  capacity  building:      clean  and  safe  agriculture  production  (GAP  guidelines  and 
precautions  for  safe  handling,  use,  storage  and  disposal  of  agrochemicals),  standardization  and 
processing.
certification 
post-harvest 
products 
process 
and 
and 
of 
In  all  SAP  funded  4P  programmes,  farm  models  should  incorporate  use  of  agrochemicals
62. 
approved  by  the  national  regulatory  bodies  both  for  conventional  and  experimental  agricultural 
methods.  It  is  important  that  capacity  building  of  programme  target  groups  be  carried  out  in  the 
focal  points.
presence  or  under 
representation  of  national  authorities  and 
relevant 
Current farmer organisations, both under major irrigation schemes and minor irrigation systems,
63. 
have large deficits of organisational capacity to be met in order to upgrade their role in environmental 
stewardship.  The  conventional  roles  of  subsidised  fertiliser  distribution  and  irrigation  water  release 
have had limited capacity building needs due to the top-down approaches adopted in each case. If the 
conventional farmer organisations are to be upgraded to implement, monitor and evaluate sustainable 
restructuring  of 
environment  management,  special  environment  education  programs  and 
considered.
organisational 
constitutions 
need 
be 
to 
In terms of overall agricultural sector needs to meet climate challenges, Sri Lanka agricultural
64. 
sector needs technological capacity building in scoping for ground water resources, methodologies of 
conjunctive  use  of  ground  water  and  surface  water,  water  harvesting  and  channelling  technologies 
appropriate for Dry Zone. Technological and research capacity in the areas of drought tolerant varietal 
development in staple food crops and major field crops exists within the national research institutions 
but  an  infrastructure  for  generating  early  warnings,  knowledge  management  framework  to  harness 
traditional knowledge and  timely adaptation needs  are  not  available. Capacity development in  these 
areas is necessary. 
7.3.  Additional funding
The  current  components  of  SAP  highlight the  market and  financial elements  of  value  chains
65. 
explicitly. Supplementary funding or linkages may be necessary to promote transfer of energy-efficient 
and  water-efficient  technologies.  Further,  the  agribusiness  companies  in  Sri  Lanka  do  not  display 
substantive  Research  and  Development  capacity  in  terms  of  environmental  and  climate  sensitivity. 
Therefore,  linking  training  programs  in  ecosystem  management  and  climate  adaptive  technologies 
can be jointly supported/organised by other environment-focused funding initiatives. A number of non- 
governmental  organizations  are  active  in  the  country  implementing  community  based  programmes 
aimed at  reducing GHG  emissions through  the  Small  Grants Programme of  the  Global Environment 
(GEF).
Facility 
Linking  the   environmental  and  climate  priorities  of  SAP  to  the  national  climate  change
66. 
mitigation  strategy  under  the  UNFCCC  focal  point  (i.e.  Climate  Change  Secretariat  and  Sri  Lanka 
Climate Fund) may generate synergies in terms of funding and technology transfer at the public sector 
level.
community 
and 
VIII. Monitoring and Evaluation 
67. 
Indicators on  environment and  adaptation to  climate change  need  to  be  included in  the  SAP
M&E system. In addition to including the  number of farmers, farmer organisations, private promoter
210 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:     Compliance with IFAD policies 
companies sensitised for climate resilient and environmentally sustainable agriculture in the log frame 
of SAP, the following indicators (see Table 6 below) are recommended for inclusion in the programme 
relevant.
logical 
frame 
as 
In order to monitor and evaluate the ENRM and climate change aspects, it is important that t he
68. 
partners  of  the  programmes  (producer,  processers)  be  located  precisely.  In  this  respect,  it  is 
recommended  that  locations  of  input  providers,  producers  and  processors  be  mapped  using  GIS 
methodologies.  Precise  locations  of  production  activities  and  processing  activities  are  important  for 
ecological,  hydrological  and  environment  impact  assessments.  Building  a  comprehensive  database 
including  geo-spatial  identification  will  also  facilitate  the  upgrading  of  value  chains  to  include 
traceability. 
Table 6: Suggested SAP indicators to cover environmental and climate aspects 
Suggested Indicator 
Relevant RIMS Indicator 
Area  of  land  cultivated  or  under  animal 
husbandry 
climate-resilient 
practices 
adopting 
Extent   of   land   with   rehabilitated   or   restored   ecosystems 
services (RIMS 1.1.17) 
Number    of    processing    units    with 
increased water use efficiency (measured 
via  percentage  of  water  savings  with 
reference  to  an  industry  benchmark)  per 
each 4P project 
Number  of 
farmer  organisations  / 
community based organisations   affiliated 
with  each  4P,  engaged      in  climate  risk 
management,  NRM  or  DRR  activities  as 
part of the routine engagements 
Nominal  value  of  new  or  value-added  to 
the  existing        climate-resilient  rural 
infrastructure under each 4P 
of 
Knowledge-products 
Number 
by 
agribusiness  sector  firms  and  PMU  on 
environment-smart  and  climate-resilient 
value chains by each 4P 
Agricultural production/processing facilities in vulnerable areas 
with increased water availability ( RIMS 1.2.12) 
Groups involved in climate  risk management, natural resources 
management  (NRM)  or  disaster  risk  reduction  (DRR)  activities. 
(RIMS 1.6.11) 
Value of infrastructure protected from extreme weather events 
(RIMS 1.4.9) 
National and international policy processes on climate issues to 
which the project is contributing  (RIMS 1.6.12 ) 
IX. Further information required to complete screening, if any 
Prior to the implementation of 4P programmes with scope of larger than 80 ha88 in total, a water
69. 
budget  analysis  to  account  for  inflows  and  outflows  of  the  programme areas  is  recommended. The 
analysis  should  include  a  climate  risk  and  disaster  risk  assessment  to  determine  the  resilience  of 
existing  water supply infrastructure to  climate shocks and for  identifying required adaptive measures 
through  a  participatory consultation/study. Water  saving  and  emissions  reduction  assessments need 
to be carried out (if the programme operation area exceeds 80 ha) after completion of two seasons of 
cultivation (in case of crops) or one year of animal husbandry. The information thus generated should 
be used in fine-tuning the environment and climate impact mitigation strategy of each 4P programme.
70. 
Research on climate change impacts on groundwater resources in Sri Lanka both in terms of
quantity and quality are generally rare. Given the critical role that ground water may play in the future 
climatic scenarios, the combined use of surface and ground water needs to be assessed for intensive 
88  The 80 ha threshold is based on the extent of command area identified for minor irrigation systems under the 
agrarian development act.
211 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:     Compliance with IFAD policies 
agricultural initiatives. Therefore, study and  scoping for  ground  water  is  advocated in  SAP targeted 
areas.
It is important for the SAP programme format, which focuses on a 4P agreement/programme as
71. 
the functional unit,  to  consider assessment of  soil  fertility, resource use  efficiency (especially water), 
ecological and biodiversity impact and climate vulnerability if a  programme is scaled beyond a single 
agro-ecological classification or a single watershed. Such an investigative study should be carried out 
at least once, especially if the crop plan repeats over five cropping cycles without modification. 
X. Budgetary resources and schedule
72. 
Given  the  ‘moderate’ environment and  social  rating  and  ‘moderate’ climate  risk  rating,  a  full-
scale ESIA is not necessary. Mid-term assessments on environmental and climate relevant indicators 
will inform the need to revise the environment and climate strategy of SAP. 
XI. Record of consultations with beneficiaries, civil society, general public etc.
This SECAP review note was compiled drawing on literature and discussions with institutional
73. 
stakeholders  and  community  including  farmer  groups,  women  and  youth.  The  discussions  were 
carried out during the design mission undertaken between 31st  October - 7th    November   2016 in Sri 
Lanka.  Field  mission  was  carried  out  over  three  days  covering  three  districts:  Kurunegala, 
Kandy.
Anuradhapura 
and 
A common feedback by the farmers is  the lack  of  understanding and conviction on the terms
74. 
stipulated  in  the  contract  agreement  with  the  agribusiness  company  with  relation  to  the  price  and 
quantity  of  buy-back.  Similarly,  farmers  were  not  fully  informed  with  the  range  of  cultivation  options 
available  and  the  merits  of  the  prescribed  option.  It  is  important  that  complete  and  unbiased 
information on the parameters of contract of the agreement be revealed in advance to all stakeholders 
SAP.
4P 
for 
programmes 
under 
each 
the 
of 
Dairy  farmers  who  are  continuing  the  buy-back  contracts  with  Cargill’s  Dairies  Pvt  Ltd  were
75. 
consulted  in  Dambadeniya,  Kurunegala  District.  The  increased  milk  yields  under  sheltered  cattle 
houses were evident. The managed feeding and veterinary services regimes had resulted in improved 
cattle  health  and  consistent  yield  according  to  the  farmers. With  respect  to  the  environmental  and 
energy   footprint, the semi-intensive rearing has reduced the pressure on open-access pastures to a 
certain extent, but not adequately. The perspiration water loss has reduced due to availability of cattle 
sheds and improved the water use efficiency on farm. This particular locality had continuous access to 
rains.
precipitation 
originating 
monsoon 
from 
both 
Second  session  of  consultation  was  conducted  at  Meegalewa, Anuradhapura  District  with  a
76. 
farmer  group  currently  involved  in  chilli  cultivation.  This  locality  comes  under  the  major  irrigation 
systems of Mahaweli, where the agricultural lands are fed by perennials reservoirs/tanks connected to 
the  Mahaweli  river  system.  The  two  types  of  chilli,  one  targeting  local  market  and  other  targeting 
export markets, were being cultivated on  a  longer cropping cycle of  6  months. This, in  fact,  was  the 
main  issue  faced  by  the  farmers  since  the  four-month  irrigation  water  release  period,  which  is 
designed to irrigate paddy cultivation, was shorter than the length required for chilli and the frequency 
of water release was lower than required for chilli. This dual issue has led to over-exploitation of sub- 
agro-wells.
surface 
extracted 
stocks 
water 
via 
Women-led farmer group (in Viharakalanchiya, Anuradhapura) which is engaged in chemical -
77. 
free maize cultivation with the support of a registered NGO (i.e. Pragathi organic growers society) and 
Nelna  Pvt  Ltd  was  an  example  of  serving  both  environmental,  organizational  and  social  goals 
simultaneously.  The  three  hour  consultation  with  this  group  displayed  the  gaps  in  the  issues  of 
organization  and  implementation  even  though  there  was  conviction  on  good  environmental,  health 
and social values and practices. Other consultations displayed a conservative female participation of 
up  to  15  %  in  the  farmer  collective  and  weak  environmental  sensitivity  of  the  participants.
78. 
Consultation  with  a  farmer  group  involved  in  chilli  seed  production  (the  F1  hybrid)  through
cross-pollination between  a  male  line  and  a  female  line  (developed by  Ministry of Agriculture)  was
212 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:     Compliance with IFAD policies 
carried  out  in  Galnewa, Anuradhapura District.  F1  hybrid  seed  production  plots  are  cultivated  under 
greenhouse structures and micro-irrigated water supply. Foundation hybrids are especially vulnerable 
to  variations  in  ambient  temperature and  day-light  hours.  Farmers  were  conscious  of  climate  linked 
stages.
pest 
post-harvest 
pre-harvest 
disease 
attacks 
during 
and 
and 
79. 
Pepper  and  Nutmeg  farmer  group  in  Manikinna,  Kandy  District  mainly  reported  the  lack  of
processing  and  market  access  infrastructure.  It   was  observable  that  farmers  resort  to  locally 
assembled dryers which were not energy efficient compared to industry standards.
Consultation with farmer group and administrators of  the “protected agriculture entrepreneurs
80. 
association” based in  Peradeniya, Kandy District   revealed the challenges faced by farmers in terms 
of  support  structures  such  as  poly-tunnels  and  greenhouses.  Overcast  skies  during  prolonged 
monsoonal  rains  are  reported  by  farmers  as  an  adverse  condition  for  high  value  horticulture.  This 
issue  can  only be  mitigated under  additional lighting  within  greenhouse structures  which  will  require 
more  energy.  In  order  to  facilitate  such  high  value  production  processes  that  need  tailored 
environmental conditions,  alternative  and  renewable  energy  sources  such  as  wind/solar  need  to  be 
promoted.
213 
Sri Lanka 
Smallholder Agribusiness Partnerships (SAP) Programme 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:     Contents of the Programme Life File 
Appendix 13: Contents of the Programme Life File 
The contents of the Programme Life File include the following documentation: 
     OSC Concept Note 
     OSC Minutes 
     In-country CPMT Minutes: 20 July 2016 
     CPMT Minutes: 16 September 2016; 27 September 2016; 17 November 2016; 17 January 
2017 
     QE Panel Report 
     Detailed Design Mission TORs; 2nd Design Mission TORs 
     PDR: Detailed Design 
215 
