Sudan
Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme
Project Design Report
Document Date:
15/07/2019
Project No.
2000002105
Report No.
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AWPB
BIRDP
CAA
Annual Work Plan and Budget
Butana Integrated Rural Development Project
Central Accounts Assistant
CAADP
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Project
CACC
CAdA
CAP
CC
CCU
CD
CDC
CDC
CDE
Cluster Advocacy and Communications Committee
Central Administrative Assistant
Cluster Adaptation Plans
Climate Change
Central Coordination Unit
Country Director
Cluster Development Committee
Community Development Committee
Community Development Expert
CDGO
Community Development and Gender Officer
CDO
CDT
CIF
Cluster Development Officer
Cluster Development Team
Community Investment Funds
CLASP
Community Livelihood Adaptation and Sustainability Plans
COSOP
Results Based Country Strategic Opportunities Programme
CPA
CPC
Central Procurement Assistant
Cluster Procurement Committee
CPCU
Central Project Coordination Unit
CPIA
CPM
CQ
DA
DG
DPD
ESIA
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
Country Programme Manager
Consultants’ Qualifications
Designated Account
Director General
Deputy Project Director
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
ESMP
Environmental and Social Management Plan
FB
FFS
FI
FM
FMO
FNC
Fixed Budget
Farmer Field Schools
Financial institutions
Financial Manager
Forestry Management Officer
Forestry National Corporation
FR&A
Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD financed projects
GAM
GAN
GDP
Global Acute Malnutrition
Global Advisory Network
Gross Domestic Product
GHGs
Green House Gases
GoS
GP
Ha
HCE
HH
Government of Sudan                   
Good Practice
Hectare
Higher Council of Environment
Households
IAMDP
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project
IC
ICB
IPM
Individual Consultants
International Competitive Bidding
Integrated Pest Management
IPSAS
International Public Sector Accounting Standards
IRF
IWRM
LCS
LDCF
LEN
LIP
Integrated Risk Framework
Integrated Water Resources Management
Least Cost Selection
Least Developed Countries Fund
Local Extension Network
Livelihood Investment Plan
LMRP
Livestock Marketing and Resilience Programme
LTR
M&E
Letter to the Recipient
Monitoring and Evaluation
MAPS
Methodology for Assessing Procurement Systems
MARFW
Ministry of Animal Resources Fisheries and Wildlife
ME
MFI
MKIO
MoAF
Microenterprises
Microfinance Institutions
M&E, KM and Innovations Officer
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
MOFEP
Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning
MoIWR
Ministry of Irrigation and Water Resources
MPER
Ministry of Production and Economic Resources
MPPPW
Ministry of Physical Planning and Public Works
NA
NAC
Native Administration
National Audit Chamber
NAPA
National Adaptation Programme of Action
NCB
NEC
NPSC
NR
NRGF
NRLG
NRLIP
National Competitive Bidding
Network Executive Committees
National Project Steering Committee
Natural Resources
Natural Resources Governance Framework
Natural Resources Livelihood Groups
Natural Resources Livelihood Investment Plans
NRLMP
Natural Resources and Land-use Management Plans
NRM
PD
PFI
PFS
PIM
QBS
QCBS
RADO
RPCC
RPS
SAAA
SACC
SAO
SC
SGCE
SCSP
SDG
Natural Resources Management
Project Director
Partner Financial Institutions
Pastoral Field Schools
Project Implementation Manual
Quality Based Selection
Quality and Cost-based Selection
Rural and Agricultural Development Officer
Regional Policy Coordination Centre
Regional Policy Specialist
State Administrative and Accounts Assistant
State Advocacy and Communications Committee
State Accounts Officer
State Coordinator
Senior Gender and Community Development Expert
State Cluster Stakeholder Platforms
Sudanese Pounds
SECAP
Social Environmental and Climate Assessment
SIA
SKCE
SLDE
SMEE
SNRE
SPA
SPCU
SPE
SPO
Senior Internal Auditor
Senior Knowledge Management and Communications Expert
Senior Livelihoods Development Expert
Senior Monitoring and Evaluation Expert
Senior NRM expert
Senior Programme Accountant
State Project Coordination Unit
Senior Procurement Expert
State Procurement Officer
SPoO
State Policy Officer
SR
SSC
Stock Routes
State Steering Committee
SSNRMP
Sudan Sustainable Natural resources Management Project
SSS
Single Source Selection
SUDANIP
Sudan’s National Agriculture Investment Plan
TA
Technical Assistance
UNCAC
United Nations Convention Against Corruption
US
VDC
United States of America
Village Development Committee
VSCG
Village Savings and Credit Groups
VWG
WA
Vulnerable Women’s Groups
Withdrawal Applications
WRMO
Water Resources Management Officer
WSRMP
Western Sudan Resources Management Programme
YP
hafir
Young Professional
water storage structure
jubraka
gardens near the homestead
wadi
crossing
bridge built over feeder roads
Executive Summary
1/43
Introduction: The Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme (SNRLP) aims to increase the food
security, incomes and resilience of pastoralist, agro-pastoralist and small crop farmers engaging in joint natural resources
(NR) governance and management and NR related businesses in targeted landscapes[1]. Target households (HH) will
increasingly adopt NR management practices, technologies and business models that enhance the quality and
sustainable use of NRs, secures the access to NRs for vulnerable users and promotes building resilience of NR related
livelihoods. The programme duration is six years. Target outreach is 120,000 households (HH) with 720,000 HH
members.
Benefits: Around 84,000 HH (70%) will adopt environmentally sustainable and climate resilient technologies bringing
200,000 Ha of land under climate resilience management. Felling of 40,000 trees will be prevented and EUR 0.6 million
will be saved by adoption of gas stoves by 10 000 HHs. Water availability to communities will be extended by 4 to 6
months per year during dry season through the construction/ rehabilitation and sustainable management of 242 hafirs,
water points and other water harvesting structures, combined with rangeland management to avoid vegetation and land
degradation around the water structures. Communities will earn EUR 2.7 million net income from selling water in 6 years.
At least 8,000 livestock heads will gain weight by access to 40 tons of fodder produced by 9,000 HH, construction of 300
fodder storages, 5 mobile animal health clinics and services from 450 trained community animal health workers. Project
supported activities will produce net income of EUR 62.5 million and increase the earnings of 84,000 HH (70%). At least
560 youth will find jobs as employees in new youth businesses. At least 10 public institutions at the federal, state and
locality level will implement improved NRM related regulations and policies. At least 10 policies-relevant frameworks,
decision supporting tools or knowledge products will be completed and 500 government staff members will be trained on
Climate Change (CC) adaptation and NR governance.
Programme area: SNRLP will be implemented in nine States across the Butana region in the East, the Sennar Region in
the South-East and the Kordofan Region in the West of Sudan. The nine States are the River Nile, Khartoum, Gazira,
Gedaref and Kassala States in the Butana region; the Sennar State in the Sennar region and; the North, South and West
Kordofan States in the Kordofan region. Additionally, SNRLP will engage with the White Nile and the Blue Nile States in
the Sennar region regarding inter-state NR governance and regulatory issues.
Target group: SNRLP’s principal target group will be poor smallholder farmers (50%), agro-pastoralists (30%) and
pastoralists (20%). Within these groups, there will be special emphasis on the inclusion of youth (30%), women (50%)
and vulnerable women headed households (14%). Additionally, within a given ecological unit, native administration
authorities and other actors who are using the natural resource, such as larger farmers or enterprises, will be included in
institutions and networks for improved governance and conflict management.
Ecosystem based cluster or network approach: Within the States, SNRLP will follow a cluster (term used in the on-
going Livestock Marketing and Resilience Project (LRMP) and the Integrated Agriculture and Marketing Development
Project (IAMDP)) or network (term used in the closing Butana Integrated Rural Development Project (BIRDP)) approach
focusing programme interventions on a group of neighbouring communities that share and use a common ecosystem
comprising rangelands, forests, water resources or farmland. Thus, the programme communities will be selected based
on the shared ecosystem used by them and not necessarily according to the administrative boundaries of the localities in
which they are situated. In the case the clusters or networks are crossing administrative boundaries all affected
administrations will be involved The cluster or network approach will ensure that all the communities in the cluster or
network jointly adopt the programme supported measures for coordinated improvement of the status of the ecosystem of
the cluster.
Programme phases: SNRLP will develop the clusters or networks in two phases, the integration phase and the scaling
up phase: The Integration Phase (Years 1 and 2) will focus on developing and showcasing the achievements of the
programme in around 50 ‘integration clusters’ or networks in the nine programme States (5-6 clusters per State). SNRLP
will catalyse rapid changes within these clusters by building on, consolidating  and scaling up the promising NR related
interventions of previous (WSRMP Kordofan and SUSTAIN Sennar) and or on-going (BIRDP Butana, LMRP and IAMDP
Sennar and Kordofan) projects in clusters and networks of communities. The integration clusters will become models of
NR governance and management, showcasing the success stories and motivating other clusters or networks in the States
to express interest in adopting the programme activities. The scaling-up phase (Years 3 and 6) will expand its outreach to
an additional 100 clusters or networks which express interest in adopting the programme interventions (after witnessing
the success of the integration clusters or networks) and fulfil a set of preconditions, demonstrating their preparedness for
SNRLP implementation. SNRLP will implement its activities under two components (C1 and C2). C1 will focus on scaling
up community-based NR management and businesses and C2 focusing on improving the institutional framework for
upscaling community based NRM. Each component will have two sub-components (SCs)
C1: Scaling up community-based NR management and businesses: C1 will focus at consolidating and upscaling
existing good practices in Sudan for empowering communities and networks or clusters of communities and build their
capacities in land-use planning and NR governance and management, that takes into account climate change risks.
SC 1.1 related to community mobilization, NR and land-use management planning will support the development of an
estimated 1,000 Village Development Committees (VDCs), other relevant community organizations and networks or
clusters of VDCs with the objective to strengthen their organisation in Cluster Development Committees or Network
Executive Committees (CDC/NECs) and their land and NR governance systems and institutions. Support will be provided
for mobilizing VDCs and CDC/NECs sharing NRs in common ecosystems and with common interests in addressing
governance and management issues; participatory development of NR and land-use management plans (NRLMPs) for
village networks or clusters; development of co-management arrangement for the "open access" common areas outside
traditional village managed land (hema); land registration; mitigation and resolution of conflict over access to and use of
NR; and the formulation of livelihoods investment plans (LIPs).
2/43
SC 1.2 will support the different interest and NRM groups to implement their LIP activities eligible within the areas of
rangeland and livestock rearing; forestland conservation and related businesses; catchment and water point management;
cropland development and climate adaptation in farming practices; and stock routes management and livelihoods of
pastoralists. Within these categories SNRLP will provide technical assistance (TA) and seed capital financing for four
ownership and investment types: i) public or common good investments managed by CDC/NECs or VDCs in partnership
with NRLGs ii) common good investments for group enterprises managed by NRLGs, VSCGs or VWGs; iii) small start-up
inputs for individual household owned production activities supported through NRLGs or VSCGs groups and iv)
Community Investment Funds (CIF) managed by VDCs as revolving funds in particular supporting vulnerable women
organized (VWGs) who cannot meet requirements for accessing micro finance institutions. SNRLP will support enterprise
training and business development activities in the clusters or networks in order to develop the capacity of the groups and
individuals to implement the NR related enterprises successfully. To support extension services to VDCs, CDC/NECs and
various NR and common interest groups the SNRLP will scale up the good experiences of the BIRDP in engaging youth
as extension resource persons and young professionals.
C2: Improving the institutional framework for upscaling community based NRM: This component will support
institutional capacity strengthening and policy engagement from local to State and Federal levels in order to institutionalise
and scale up proven community and inter-community land and NR governance and management models. It will build on
models proven to secure access and benefits to poorer rural communities from previous IFAD projects and build on and
complement the activities supported under C1. It will create an enabling environment for community institutions, native
administrations, locality governments and civil society organizations to better engage in policy formulation and
implementation processes at State and Federal level. Simultaneously, it will strengthen the capacity of the latter levels for
facilitating these processes.
SC 2.1 focusing on strengthening of legal and policy framework will support a participatory review of land and NR
governance policies and frameworks, establish an institutional structure for a comprehensive multisector and multilevel
consultation and discussion process which will lead to the formulation of focused strategies and revision of policies and
regulations. The component will also complement and support ongoing or proposed policy engagement processes
supported by Federal and State government and other development partners, including in particular those of other IFAD
supported projects, FAO, UNEP, UNDP, and the World Bank and national and international research institutions.
SC 2.2, building institutional capacities will focus on generating and disseminating knowledge products, fostering dialogue
and establishing or supporting multi-stakeholder platforms. Training will be provided to public and private extension
service providers and Locality, State and Federal government staff. Training will also be provided in knowledge
management, communication, monitoring and impact evaluation for documenting and disseminating lessons from
programme interventions.
Implementation structure: The Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry will be the Lead Project Agency. A Central
Project Coordination Unit (CPCU) will be established in Singa, in the Sennar State, in the office premises already
developed by the SUSTAIN project. The CPCU’s geographical location in the centre of the overall project area will
facilitate its leadership and oversight of implementation activities. The key staff in the CPCU will comprise: 1) the Project
Director (PD); 2) Senior NRM Expert (SNRE) as deputy PD and technical team leader of state-level technical staff; 3)
Financial Manager (FM); 4) Senior M&E Expert (SMEE); 5) Senior Livelihood Development Expert (SLDE); 6) Senior
Knowledge Management and Communications Expert (SKCE) 6) Senior Procurement Expert (SPE); 7) Senior
Programme Accountant (SPA); 8) and Senior Internal Auditor (SIA).
SNRLP will establish nine State Project Coordination Units (SPCU) for implementing project activities in the nine states
(Kassala, Al Gezira, Gadaref, Khartoum; River Nile Sennar, North Kordofan, West Kordofan and South Kordofan). A State
Coordinator (SC) with strong experience in NRM will head each SPCU and will be assisted by: 1) Water Resource
Management Officer (WRMO); 2) Forestry Management Officer (FMO); 3) Rural and Agricultural Development Officer
(RADO); 4) Community Development and Gender Officer (CDGO); 5) M&E, Knowledge Management and Innovations
Officer (MKIO); 6) State Accounts Officer (SAO); 7) State Administrative and Accounts Assistant (SAAA);  and 8) State
Procurement Officer (SPO).
SNRLP will also establish three Regional NRM Policy Coordination Centres (RPCC) one in Rufaa for the Butana region,
one in Singa for the Sennar Region and one in El Obeid for the Kordofan region. The RPCCs will anchor the
implementation of the policy, governance and regulations related activities the project. A Regional Policy Specialist will
head each RPCC and will be assisted by State Policy Officers (5 in Butana, 3 in the Sennar - including officers
responsible for Blue Nile and White Nile States, and 3 in Kordofan region).
Programme costs: Total programme cost including physical and price contingencies is estimated at EUR 77.7 million 
over a 6-year period. Component 1 on ‘Up scaling community based natural resources management and businesses’ 
represents 72.1% of the total programme costs and Component 2 on ‘Improving the institutional framework for up scaling 
community based NRM’ represents 14.4% of total costs. Project Management and Coordination represent 13.5% of the 
total programme costs. Out of the total programme cost of EUR 77.7 million, IFAD contribution is EUR 56.5 million 
(72.6%), of which EUR 45. 2 million is grant and EUR 11.3 million is loan. An  amount of EUR 1.8 million (2.3%) is 
GEF/LDCF grant. The remaining 19.5. million (25.1%) will be financed from domestic resources comprising Government 
contributions of EUR 11.7 million (15.1%), beneficiaries’ contribution of EUR 4.5 million (5.7%) and private sector EUR 
3.3 million (4.3%)
Sustainability: SNRLP’s sustainability is embedded in its exit strategy and will be supported by a number of programme
features. Community NRM institutions takes years to build/rebuild. Consolidating already existing institutions promoted by
previous projects as an entrance is part of the project’s sustainability promotion strategy. Institutional sustainability will be
supported by the strengthening and developing partnerships between a range of community level institutions (CDC, VDC,
NRLG, VSCG, VWG). Resource mobilisation by these institutions will strengthen their capacity to continue delivering the
programme benefits even after closure. Their involvement in the management of the physical facilities developed using
programme resources will contribute to the sustainability of these facilities. The engagement of the pastoralists in the
development of the NRLMPs at the cluster level ensure that there is long-term solution to conflict between them and
settled communities resulting in greater economic development. Marketing sustainability will be supported in partnership
with the current IAMDP and LMRP projects which are involved in strengthening crop marketing services and livestock
marketing services respectively (refer PIM). Technical sustainability will be achieved through the capacity building of the
technical departments of the government dealing with relevant subjects. Additionally, the community level institutions
along with the young professionals and business facilitators will be fully capacitated on the various technical aspects of
the programme. Documentation and circulation of information about success stories and good practices will be carried
out. Policy level interventions will remove regulatory gaps, policy overlaps, bottlenecks and support the sustainability of
the NR management practices. Environmental sustainability will be achieved through the incorporation of measures to
promote resilience to climate change and prevent environmental degradation in the NRLMP and LIPs.
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
1.
2.
3.
Population and income status: Sudan’s total area is around 1,886,000 km2. It has 61 million ha of arable land, of
which 17.4 million Ha (29%) are cultivated, 14 million Ha (23%) are pasture, and 21 million ha (34%) are forests. The
population is 42 million, with annual growth rate of 2.5% (2018). About 65% of the population lives in rural areas.
Economic conditions: Decades of civil conflicts, mismanagement and trade and financial sanctions have weakened
the national economy. The secession of South Sudan in 2011 resulted in the loss of three-quarters of the country’s oil
output, the primary source of government income. Dependence on agriculture has increased in the last few years due
to reduced revenue from oil and above 80% of the labour force is engaged in agriculture. Although the Government
of Sudan (GoS) has introduced reforms, e.g. more focus on agricultural sector development and the US lifted its
sanctions on Sudan in 2017, the economy has failed to revive. Unsustainable fiscal deficits, inflation and capital flight
persist. External debts around US$ 52.4 billion or 111% of the GDP, GNI per capita at 2,380 US$ (2017) and rural
poverty at 58% make Sudan one of the poorest countries in the world. Despite the economic struggles the road
infrastructure has improved, particularly connecting the major cities, though rural roads connectivity remains
underdeveloped. Telecommunication systems meet modern standards and have grown rapidly even in the rural
areas. Of late, the increasing economic pressures have resulted in widespread public protests and political
uncertainties. Most at risk are small-scale farmers and livestock herders in the rainfed sector, landless and internally
displaced people, households without assets and people in areas affected by drought and conflict.
Fragility: With a Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) score at 2.47 Sudan is classified as a fragile
country. Civil war and famine in South Sudan have caused 0.7 to 1.0 million refugees to seek safety in Sudan, putting
pressure on already strained resources especially in the border States e.g. West and South Kordofan and White Nile.
Most conflicts are between tribes over access to natural resources (NR). Previously, the communities mitigated such
conflicts through effective local governing bodies called Native Administration (NA). However, with changing policies
over time the strength of the NAs has been compromised without other effective systems replacing them leaving local
communities without alternative ways to manage and resolve conflicts. Currently, there are multiple parallel systems
for NR management and governance resulting in confused land tenure arrangements, inconsistencies in laws and
policies and unclear institutional arrangements leaving user rights open to dispute and sometimes causing severe
conflicts.
3/43
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
4/43
Poverty (SDG1), food insecurity SDG2): Sudan ranked 167 out of 188 countries on the Human Development Index
(2015). The National poverty level is at 46% (18.5 million). Rural poverty is much higher at 58% and in more
pronounced in the rainfed sector due to droughts, isolation from markets, poor infrastructure, , and lack of
management and governance of NR leading to overuse, degradation and conflicts. Additional pressure on
smallholder’s access to land and resources comes from expansion of mechanized farming and minig activities in the
landscapes traditionally used by smallholder agropastoralist communities. Households (HHs) with small herds and
small scale rainfed farms suffer most from food insecurity in the case of losses. There is an inherent sensitivity to
rainfall amounts, making climate change a critical factor affecting the economy, livelihoods, and food security. The
other causes of poverty and food insecurity include, moderate NR management and governance legislation coupled
with poor enforcement and lack of employment opportunities.
Social conditions: Domestic water supply in rural areas depends on the resources available and can comprise
access to piped water, deep wells and hand pumps. Rainwater and other sources of drinking water reflect the lack of
groundwater availability. Sanitation conditions are often poor. People with no toilet facilities represent over 50% of
the population. The most common toilet facilities, where they do exist, are traditional pit toilets. Most of the population
– except in isolated areas – do have access to some basic medical facility, maintained by the local authority and in
many cases supported by UNICEF and NGOs. Large urban centres have hospitals that are operated by the
respective states’ Ministry of Health. The outreach of the medical facilities is relatively good, staffing levels – and
levels of training – and equipment and supplies in most cases are unsatisfactory.
Smallholder agriculture: Agriculture is predominately rain-fed and pastoralist oriented. Pastoralism is widespread
and contributes 60% of the total agriculture revenue through livestock exports. Cotton and gum arabic are the major
agricultural exports. Sorghum and millets are the principal food crop. Sesame and groundnuts are consumed locally
and also increasingly exported. Rainfed farming systems sufferer from low and variable productivity due to erratic
climatic conditions, inappropriate tillage and soil and water conservation practices and weak or no management of
shared rangeland and forest resources leading to reduced soil fertility, land degradation and in some areas
desertification.
National strategies and policies: The GoS has focused on agricultural development to compensate for the loss of
oil revenues after the independence of South Sudan in 2011. The GoS is implementing an Agricultural Revival
Programme and an Integrated Solutions to Agricultural Sector Programme at the National level. These programmes
are focused on crop production for the Sudanese economy. The GoS also passed the ‘Rangelands and Fodder
Resources Development (Rationalizations) Act in 2015, enabling rural communities to register common rangelands
(and in some cases common forestland) as part of reinstalling joint governance and management. Nevertheless,
sustainable management of rangeland resources needs more attention. Agro-pastoralism and pastoralism have not
received due focus although the secession of South Sudan has multiplied the rangeland management and mobility
related challenges.
Recent political developments: Despite the political tensions after ousting the former president in April 2019,
IFAD's counterparts in the line ministries have proved to be reliable partners. Irrespective of the changes at the high
political level, requests and communications from the IFAD Country Office (ICO) have been treated with priority, the
debt repayment has been processed as scheduled and the projects are being implemented with minimal disruptions.
Sudan is open to three broad political scenarios:
1.  A peaceful and consensual transitional process: Across the current political spectrum, future elected
governments are likely to support IFAD's operations in the country.
2.  The Transitional Military Council (TMC) continues to rule: Little impact on IFAD's operations given the
TMC's commitment to ensure the functionality of governmental services.
3.  The worst-case scenario implies the start of armed conflicts: The continuation of the IFAD portfolio in
Sudan should be reassessed. This scenario is, however, unlikely because of the international community
stance against it.
9.
Contingency plan: As the deal engaging political parties and the TMC is about to be finalised, details being fine-
tuned and the international community supporting closing the deal, it is unlikely that the worst-case scenario will take
place. Nevertheless, should this happen, the proposed plan would be to delay the submission of the SNRLP to EB
until the situation has been resolved.
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
10.
Climate Change (CC): CC is a major environmental challenge with an on-going trend towards drier climatic
conditions. A survey in the Butana region found that 94% of pastoralists believe that the quantity and quality of
tree/shrub cover has deteriorated to a level which is insufficient to feed their animals. Satellite image analyses and
scientific data on recent changes in climate conditions are strongly consistent with the pastoralists’ perceptions. This
situation is attributed to the combined effects of temperature increase, rainfall decrease, overgrazing,  tree cutting for
charcoal production, and lack of effective and inclusive resources governance. Urgent adaptation interventions are
needed to mitigate the CC impacts, namely building local knowledge on climate change risks and adaptation options,
effective and inclusive resources governance systems able to mitigate climate change risks in resources
management, rehabilitation of tree/shrub rangelands, up- scaled adoption of water harvesting and soil water
conservation systems, and the diversification of livelihoods.
5/43
11.
12.
Gender and youth: Youth constitute 23% of the total population and 21% of poor. Around 55% of youth, aged 15 to
24, are poor. Rural youth do not have sufficient employment opportunities and lack the skills (business management
and technical) and access to finance to start and run their own businesses. Women contribute to the household’s
wellbeing and food security. Their specific responsibilities include: (i) farming on the HH fields with their husbands
and on the jubraka land (around 2 feddans(0.84 Ha) of land where  leafy vegetables, tomatoes, cowpeas, okra, millet
and maize for both HH consumption and sale are grown); (ii) all HH work, e.g. preparing food, collecting firewood and
fetching water; (iii) childcare; (iv) rearing small animals; and (v) petty trade. Women control cash income from petty
trade, poultry rearing and selling jubraka crops. Both, rural women and youth are affected by high rates of illiteracy,
persisting gender inequalities perpetuated by the customary law, and early marriage limiting women’s liberty and
opportunities for self-determination and engagement in income generating activities.
Nutrition: Sudan is rated 112 out of 119 countries in the Global Hunger Index indicating fragile food and nutrition
security and widespread undernourishment. There are 5.5 million (13%) food insecure people and 80% of them are
unable to afford their daily food need. Chronic malnutrition rate is at a staggering 38%. Under-nutrition is serious with
over 16.3% of the population in the global acute malnutrition (GAM) category. Around 58% pregnant women are
anaemic resulting in high rates of wasted (low weight-for-height) and stunted (low height-for-age) children. Sudan is
one of the 14 countries with 80% of the world’s stunted children. Over 2.2 million children less than five years are
stunted and face high risk of dying from infectious disease. Six (Kassala, Gezira, Khartoum, River Nile, Gedaref and
Sennar) out of the nine SNRLP States are amongst the top nine non-conflicted States with acute malnutrition.
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
13.
14.
15.
SNRLP addresses the main drivers of fragility, rural poverty and food insecurity. The GoS and IFAD held a COSOP
Review Workshop in November 2017 in which Natural resources management (NRM) and building resilience to CC
were identified as the top priorities for focusing pipeline projects in the remaining duration of the COSOP. The main
reasons provided for these priorities are resulting from the analysis of the main drivers of rural poverty and food
insecurity[2]. These reasons include: Land-use in Sudan is dominated by grazing, high rate of degradation and
conversion of parts of forestland into rangelands; NA systems are eroded and the legal and regulatory framework is
insufficient for effective NRM; the livelihoods of smallholder farmers, pastoralists and agro-pastoralists communities
are at risk due to increased variability in rainfall and encroachment of pastures and forests by mining and semi-
mechanized crop farming on rangelands and stock routes; the separation of South Sudan has restricted mobility of
pastoralists and created a vulnerable population of internally displaced people and increased pressure on NR in
some areas; and competition and conflict over land and NR is the major destabilizing factors and source of chronic
poverty in rural areas.
IFAD’s comparative advantage from working in other arid and semi arid regions. IFAD’s comparative advantage for
supporting the GoS in addressing the above mentioned challenges comes from its solid experience in working with
development partners and vulnerable pastoral and agropastoral communities in other semiarid and arid areas in the
region (e.g. Ethiopia, Chad, Djibouti, Tanzania) where livelihoods are dependent on the sustainable use of fragile
ecosystems and NR.
IFAD current portfolio in Sudan: (i) LMRP works, with a seven-year implementation period since March 2015, to
revive the livestock industry, optimize the use of a diminishing natural resource base under threat from climate
change and address widespread rural poverty. Activities of the community-led natural resource management and
enhanced adaptive capacities have proved to be particularly successful, and can provide guidance to the launching
of the SNRLP; (ii) IAMDP aims, with a six-year implementation period since February 2018 and a specific climate
change-dedicated subcomponent, at promoting home garden (jubraka) cultivation for enhanced nutrition and food
security. While the project is too young to showcase lessons, an exchange between the IAMDP and the SNRLP is
envisioned to ensure respective synergies; (iii) BIRDP, launched in 2008 and scheduled for completion in September
2019 after additional finances were acquired in 2016, established functional water structures and improved water
harvesting and agro-forestry systems; (iv) Under the auspices of BIRDP, the ICSP constitutes a complementary
project, partially financed by a Global Environmental Facility (GEF) grant, which works, since March 2015, to promote
a climate friendly rural development path by increasing carbon stocks and reducing Green House Gasses (GHG)
emissions. With afforestation activities at the heart of the project, the ICSP is currently elaborating its exit strategy
ensuring that its lessons and best practices will inform the SNRLP.
16.
Previous projects’ experience of tangible successes in NR governance and management at community level (lessons
learned next section). SNRLP will consolidate and scale up the community and intercommunity based approaches
that were applied successfully by other development partners and IFAD co-financed projects for effective NR
governance and management at the community level. Some examples of tangible results from these projects include:
the construction and setting up management arrangement of 230 hafirs, water yards and hand pumps benefitted
19 000 HH and let to 48% of the communities reported increase of land under vegetable production and 76%
17.
18.
increase in school enrollment (BIRDP); 26,000 ha of community rangeland reserves and 3000 ha of community
forestland established and successfully managed by networks of communities (BIRDP); 4400 km of stock routes
demarcated in Kordofan and setting up of 5 active conflict resolution centers able to solve 90% of reported conflicts
(WSRMP); increased dry season fodder availability through hay bailing, production of fodder crops and conservation
of forest lands extending milk production into dry season and increasing the weight gain rate in off-springs (reported
by beneficiaries in BIRDP and WSRMP).
6/43
Need for improving higher level NR governance frameworks. The previous IFAD co-financed projects have also
sought to build from these community successes, take into account the barriers encountered and support
consultations and discussions at the state and interstate levels for how to improve the wider NR policy frameworks.
This has led to the development of instruments for NR governance, such as the Natural Resources Governance
Framework for the Butana Region and the Land-use map for the Sennar state (SUSTAIN project). However,
institutional capacities for their implementation are still to be built. The SNRLP will, in addition to continuing the
consolidation and scaling up of the community and intercommunity based approaches, take on the challenge of
engagement at higher levels of governance in collaboration with government and other development partners.
Support the sustainability of the livelihood development activities of other ongoing IFAD co-financed projects in the
programme area: Other IFAD co-financed projects, LMRP and IAMDP, are active in the rainfed areas in Kordofan,
Butana and Sennar regions where SNRLP will be implemented. These projects focus on livelihood improvement of
target households through livestock fattening, agricultural production and marketing support. However, limited
investments in the sustainable management and resilience of NR by these projects can adversely affect the
sustainability of the livelihood development activities. Also, sustainable NRM requires investments over a longer
period of time. Where relevant, SRNLP will support the ecological clusters which includes communities supported by
other IFAD projects, building on the investments of the earlier and on-going projects and securing the sustainability of
the livelihoods development activities promoted by these projects.
B. Lessons learned
19.
NR are an important platform where competitive livelihoods and societies can be integrated and brought together into
collaborative and cooperative processes that tend to diffuse social tension while addressing priority livelihood issues
and interests. The networks and the co-management experience that provided for the inclusion of pastoralists in the
mainstream community development process are typical examples. Various IFAD co-financed and other projects
have concretely demonstrated that targeted communities are active agents of change. In spite of the overwhelming
odds working against them, they reflect strong determination to enhance the quality of their NR and to rebuild their
lives. In short, the complex management of NRs and conflicts over resources can be achieved at community and
inter-community level when issues of ownership, eligibility, allocation of power to manage and control, and the
sharing of benefits from NRs are addressed. E.g.:
The Butana BIRDP experience shows that the establishment and formalization of community-based networks for
NRM is a Good Practice (GP) for fostering community dialogue around sensitive topics like NRM; improving land-
use planning, management and governance of access to resources for all users; equitable distribution of resources
through communities participation in decision-making and empowerment of women and youth groups. The
networks has shown ability to grow also after project support ended.
When rural communities become aware of existing legislation (e.g. the 2015 Range and Pastures law), they
secure land rights and improve their livelihoods.
In Kordofan, home to many different ethnic groups, the WSRMP supported co-management of NR and stock
routes by establishing conflict resolution centres and investing in water points. These interventions resulted in
different forms of collaboration between pastoralists and rainfed farmers and contributed to social cohesion and
peaceful co-existence.
Community mobilisation around land-use mapping, formalising access and user agreements, and joint
rehabilitation and management of shared resources may reduce conflicts and increase benefits for all users
comprising pastoralists, agro-pastoralists, smallholder crop farmers, women and youth. Community mobilisation
includes mobilisation of Village Development Committees (VDC), and formalised networks (BIRDP) or clusters
(LMRP) of VDCs.
Involvement of mobile pastoralist communities in all stages of land-use governance and management is crucial.
However, securing livestock corridors and resolution of conflicts with settled communities cannot solely be done
by community networks or clusters and must involve interstate level collaboration and regulation.
Access to water for all uses is a key challenge for rural communities and there are good business models for
community managed water harvesting infrastructure where water fees can cover the management, maintenance
and investments in other community services. However, if water provision becomes too much of a business it also
increases the risk of elite capture and demand for water infrastructures beyond the actual need of the local
communities which will attract users and their animals from outside leading to overuse and degradation of the
vegetation and land in the surrounding area and conflict over resources may erupt. Establishment of water-points,
therefore, needs careful pre-analysis with the communities and the establishment of water and catchment
management arrangements.
20.
21.
22.
23.
7/43
There is a serious need for addressing land-use governance from the higher state, interstate and federal levels.
Experiences show that higher State, interstate and federal intervention is needed: i) for institutionalizing the
community-based practices and for securing their sustainability and further scaling up; ii) to prevent the lack of
governance and degradation of vast areas of rangelands in Sudan which are under an open-access regime (common
land) outside the jurisdiction of communities (access to these common rangelands are crucial for agro-pastoralists
and pastoralists communities often moving across state boundaries for seasonal grazing); iii) to prevent the
encroachment of the common rangelands and the blocking of the stock routes by mechanized farming investments
and settled communities. Many of the good examples on agreeing, formalizing and demarcating the corridors (e.g. by
LMRP, building on a previous World Bank supported experience), will only become sustainable when effectively
protected against incidences of encroachment by mechanized farming. The SNRLP will therefore engage also at
higher levels of governance using the experiences and empowerment in NR governance by community networks and
clusters as a push factor from below.
Experience from the formulation of the Butana NR Governance Framework shows that a such strategy is possible.
Building on the empowerment and NR governance capacities of the networks, the BIRD project facilitated a series of
NR fora in a bottom-up approach with the objective to put the different NR governance and tenure issues
encountered by the networks at the right level of governance and resolution. This process started with NR fora
between the Localities and the community networks dealing with issues the networks cannot solve on their own.
Subsequently, issues also out of the capacities of the Localities were brought to NR fora at the state level with
participation of the different sector administrations. This NR fora process has been an attempt to push the
government administrations at the different levels to play their role in creating integrated solutions for NR governance
that work for local communities and vulnerable groups.It has culminated with the Butana NR Governance Framework
agreed between the five concerned states which now needs to be implemented.
Women’s groups can generate significant internal capital through disciplined savings and profits earned on
investments and are willing to invest their funds in collective NR improvement activities. In WSRMP and LMRP some
of these groups in partnership with the CDCs, pooled their surplus funds to invest in the improvement of water
resources and water supply initiatives. The economic success of the women’s groups has stimulated the
development of men’s groups with active savings behaviour. SNRLP will capitalise on these lessons and promote
savings culture, internal capital generation and investments of group funds in profitable NR related activities.
In the absence of seed capital support, the adoption of innovative technologies and starting up microenterprises (ME)
to diversify smallholders’ livelihoods is very challenging. Although previous projects (WSRMP, SUSTAIN)
successfully tested innovations, e.g. water-saving technologies, brick housing, their adoption was constrained by
smallholders’ lack of access to finance. Financial institutions (FI) have limited rural outreach and mainly support
traditional activities such as livestock production (70-80%) crop production (10-15%) and ME/trading (5%). FIs are
particularly cautious about financing start-up businesses due to high risks and lack of suitable products. Short-term
credit offered at 24-36% profit margin discourages smallholders from borrowing to start-up MEs that generate limited
returns at the beginning. In this environment, total dependence on FIs to support start-up business arrangements was
a major bottleneck in projects like SDP. SNRLP will offer seed capital support for start-up NR based MEs in
collaboration with partnering financial institutions (PFIs). The share of the PFIs will be very limited at the beginning
and increase gradually to support the growth and scaling up of the MEs.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
Programme goals and objectives
24.
25.
Programme goal: SNRLP’s goal is to increase food security, incomes and resilience of pastoralist, agro-pastoralist
and smallholder crop farmers engaging in joint NR governance and management and development of related
businesses in targeted landscapes.
Development objective: The SNRLP’s development objective is to increase production, secure access to NRs for
vulnerable users and improve the sustainability of NR related livelihoods through scaling up community based NR
governance and management practices, technologies and business models. The development objective is in line
with the IFAD and Sudan RB COSOP SO1 as it focuses on the restoration of the ecosystem, the resilience of farming
systems and communities to climate change impacts and target groups access to basic agricultural services. It is also
aligned to SO2 by promoting diversification in smallholder livelihood systems, strengthening and capacity building of
community institutions, producers, women and youth and promoting target groups’ access to rural financial services.
26.
Programme duration: The duration of the programme is six years.
27.
28.
Programme outreach: SNRLP will reach at least 120,000 target HHs organised in 5,500 NR related groups across
1,000 VDCs and 150 clusters or networks. At an average of 6 members per household, the programme will benefit
720,000 HH members.
8/43
Key impact indicators: The key impact indicators are; i) 10% decrease in severe and acute malnutrition in children
in the target area as a proxy indicator for improved food security; ii) 84,000 HHs (70%) with increased income from
access to SNRLP services; iii) 72,000 HHs (60%) with an increased score in the resilience scorecards; iv) 84,000
HHs (70%) adopting environmentally sustainable and climate resilient technologies and practices; v) 72,000 HHs
(60%) with improved access to land, forests and water bodies for production purposes; vi) 84,000 HHs (70%) with
increased milk, meat, crop or forest produce; vii) 72,000 HHs (60%) with their ownership/user rights registered in
national cadastres or geographic information management systems; viii) 72,000 HHs (60%) reporting reduction in
disputes over NRs; ix) 84,000 HHs (70%) reducing time spent in collection fuelwood or water; x) 793,972 Ha of land
brought under climate resilient management practices; xi) 20 policy-relevant NR management knowledge
products/frameworks completed; xii) Nine multistakeholder platforms functioning at the State level; xiii) 500
government staff trained on CC adaptation and NR governance.
Geographic area of intervention
29.
30.
31.
32.
SNRLP will be implemented in a total of nine States across the Butana region in East, the Sennar Region in the
South-East and the Kordofan Region in the West of Sudan. The nine States are the River Nile, Khartoum, Gazira,
Gedaref and Kassala States in the Butana region; the Sennar State in the Sennar region and; the North, South and
West Kordofan States in the Kordofan region. Additionally, SNRLP will engage with the White Nile and the Blue Nile
States in the Sennar region regarding inter-state NR governance and regulatory issues concerning stock routes.
These States have high incidence of poverty ranging from 26-60% and malnutrition varying from 14-20% (refer PIM,
annex 2). The rural communities in the rainfed parts of these States are highly vulnerable to climate and economic
shocks as the NR base in these areas is under pressure from increasing population, high usage for livelihoods, lack
of regulation, mismanagement, unregulated mechanised medium to large scale farming, incursions of large herds
owned by wealthy farmers and CC, leading to drier conditions (refer PIM for more details). These factors have a
particularly adverse impact on smallholder farmers, agro-pastoralists and pastoralists whose livelihoods depend on
NR.
SNRLP will build on and upscale the positive NRM related experiences of mainly three previous IFAD projects
(BIRDP, SUSTAIN and WSRMP) that were active in these regions over the last decade. In addition it will consolidate
NRM components of the on-going LMRP and the IAMDP project.
Cluster/network approach: Within the States, SNRLP will follow a cluster or network approach focusing programme
interventions on a group of neighbouring communities that share and use a common ecosystem comprising
rangelands, forests, water resources or farmland. Thus, the programme communities will be selected based on the
shared ecosystem used by them and not according to the administrative boundaries of the localities in which they are
situated. The cluster/network approach will ensure that all the communities in the cluster/network jointly adopt the
programme supported measures for coordinated improvement of the status of their ecosystems. SNRLP will develop
around 150 clusters/networks consisting of 5-10 communities (refer PIM for more details). The expected distribution
of the clusters or networks in the three regions is presented below.
Table 1: Distribution of clusters
Region
States
Villages
Clusters
Av. village per
cluster
village per state
Butana
Kordofan
Sennar
Total
5
3
1
9
400
500
100
1,000
30
100
20
150
13
5
5
23
80
167
100
33.
In the Kordofan region, the programme clusters/networks will be developed mainly around the stock routes. In the
Butana region, they will be defined around the networks already supported by the BIRDP. In the Sennar region,
these will be developed around the existing clusters formed by LMRP.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
Inclusion of previous IFAD project supported communities: Most clusters or networks will developed around 1-2
nucleus communities which have already received support from recent IFAD projects related to livestock
development and crop production, adding more communities to cover shared resources and ecosystems.
Consequently, 40% of the 1,000 programme communities will be previously supported IFAD project communities and
the remaining will be new communities. SNRLP will not duplicate the past investments in the previous supported
communities. Instead, it will capitalise on these investments consolidating social infrastructures and strengthen the
NR governance and management mechanisms to enhance the benefits and sustainability of previous projects
interventions. These clusters will become models of NR governance and management, showcasing the sustainability
of previous investments and acting as catalysts for change for other clusters.
Programme phases: SNRLP will develop the clusters or networks in two phases. In the Integration Phase (Years 1
and 2) the SNRLP will focus on developing and showcasing the achievements of the programme in around 50
‘integration clusters/ networks’ in the nine programme States (5-6 clusters per State). SNRLP will catalyse rapid
changes within these clusters by building on and scaling up the promising NR related interventions of previous
projects in 1-2 communities, e.g. existence of strong VDCs, Community Development Committees (CDCs), Village
Savings and Credit Groups (VSCGs), previous investments in rehabilitation of water points, strong presence of
Partner Finance Institutions (PFIs), etc. The integration clusters will become models of NR governance and
management, showcasing success interventions and motivating other clusters or networks in the States to express
interest in adopting similar interventions. In the Scaling-up phase (Years 3 and 6) the SNRLP will expand its outreach
to an additional 100 clusters or networks with interest in adopting the programme interventions and in fulfilling a set of
preconditions, demonstrating their preparedness for SNRLP implementation. (refer PIM for more details).
Target groups: SNRLP’s principal target group will be poor smallholder farmers (50%), agro-pastoralists (30%) and
pastoralists (20%). Within these groups, there will be special emphasis on the inclusion of youth (30%), women
(50%) and vulnerable women headed households (14%). However, within a given ecosystem, other actors who are
using or influencing the use of natural resource, such as NA authorities, larger farmers or enterprises, will be
included in institutions and networks for improved governance and conflict management.
Smallholder farmers: Smallholder farmer HHs which are cultivating up to 15 feddans (7.14 ha) and are highly
dependent on NRs (range, crop and forest land and water resources). Their livelihoods are greatly affected by the
deterioration in the status of these NRs and poor HHs face food insecurity for 5-6 months a year arising from low
agricultural productivity. Around 50% of SNRLP target group will be smallholder farmer HHs. SNRLP will assist to
improve their income through: i) adoption of soil and water conserving techniques and climate resilient cropping
practices; ii) improved access to water supply during the dry months; iii) savings practices, access credit and seed
capital for improved or new livelihood activities; and iv) access to extension advice.
Agro-pastoralists: Agro-pastoralist are highly dependent on farmland, water resources as well as rangeland. Their
livelihoods are greatly affected by the degradation and shrinking of the rangelands and blocking of stock routes. For
food security they depend mainly on livestock income in addition to some farming. They face challenges in accessing
grazing areas, productivity of their animals, access to animal feed supplementation and veterinary services. Around
30% of SNRLP target group will be agropastoralist HHs. SNRLP will assist them to gain better access to fodder and
improved animal health services. The development and implementation of NR governance and management
framework by the clusters/networks will improve the quality of the rangelands and forest fodder buffers and the health
and productivity of their livestocks.
Pastoralists: Pastoralists are highly mobile mostly without farming practice and depend on NRs such as common
rangelands, agricultural residue from farmland and water resources. Pastoralists face challenges such as blocked
stock routes; loss of open access grazing areas; water shortage and primitive shelters in the stock routes; livestock
health issues and conflicts with agriculturalists. Around 30% of SNRLP target group will be pastoralist HHs. SNRLP
will support them to diversify their livelihoods by adopting a range of pastoralists’ enterprises such as milk production,
processing and handicrafts making and selling. Pastoral field schools (PFS) and start–up packages for supporting
pastoralists enterprises will be provided. Stock route development activities will provide the pastoralists with better
access to animal, health care and other services along the way. Their engagement with rural institutions and access
to conflict resolution centres will reduce conflict with settled communities.
Women: In smallholder farmer HHs, women are involved in the use of NRs through their involvement in crop
production, livestock care and regular HH activities. They carry out farming in the HH fields (jubraka, 2 feddans/0.9
ha), collect and sell forest produce, make handicrafts and practice petty trading activities. In agro pastoralist HHs
women are more involved in livestock related activities taking care of the young animals, milking and dairy
processing. Despite their heavy work burdens, women face discriminatory social norms leading to early marriage,
domestic violence and low levels of participation in decision-making at all levels. Women pastoralists are vulnerable
due to fewer livelihood alternatives, limited healthcare services and travel restriction in certain areas due to security
concerns. Women will constitute 50% of SNRLP target group. SNRLP will support a range of women specific NR
activities e.g. jubraka farming, home gardens, nurseries. Women will be involved in savings groups and provided
seed capital and access to credit to engage in a range of enterprises. Their access to gas stoves will replace
9/43
41.
42.
dependence on firewood and will ease their work and also reduce the pressure on the NRs. Nutrition awareness
training will be provided to women.
10/43
Vulnerable women headed households: Women-headed households include women left by/divorced from the
husband, women in polygamous households who are no longer supported, widows, single women responsible for
dependents, married women whose husband is incapable of functioning as an income earner, married women who
have been abandoned by their husbands for any reason. Out of the 50% outreach to women, around 14% will be
vulnerable women headed households. They will receive special support through access to revolving funds for gas
stoves and jubraka farming.
Rural youth (18-35 years), particularly unemployed young women and men: Most opportunities for young people
in rural areas are linked to agriculture. Rural unemployment is high due to limited education and skills, lack of capital
and lack of employment opportunities. Young men aspire to engage in activities such as mechanized agriculture,
animal fattening, shops and trades, hotels etc. Young women aspire to engage in teaching, tailoring, arts and crafts,
restaurants, food processing, poultry keeping, livestock fattening. Around 30% of SNRLP target households will be
youth. SNRLP will promote youth involvement in crop, fodder and forestry development activities. Youth groups’ will
partner with the VDCs in community water management services, rangeland management services, machinery
services and storage services. Access to seed capital financing and credit will support youth engagement in
enterprises promoting sustainable use of the NRs.
43.
Targeting strategy: In order to ensure the inclusion of the target households, especially the social inclusion and
empowerment of women, youth and pastoralists SNRLP will adopt geographic targeting, self-targeting and direct
targeting measures.
Geographical targeting measures will be adopted to reach those areas with higher concentration of target
households (refer to previous section);
Self-targeting measures offering activities suitable enough and of interest to the target households will be ensured
through participatory formulation of Natural Resources and Land-use Management Plans (NRLMP) and Livelihood
Investment Plans (LIP) the two key planning and investment tools for the clusters or networks and the
communities. Participatory development of these planning and investment tools will ensure that the activities which
are identified correspond to the priorities and capacities of the programme target group; Self-targeting will be
facilitated through use of gender-sensitive delivery systems (e.g. delivering training at village level), capacity-
building tailored to the needs of women, youth and pastoralists and an on-going consultative process with
beneficiaries through committees and forums;
Direct targeting of the target households will aim at achieving the outreach targets of 50% small-holder farmers,
30% agro-pastoralists, 20% pastoralists, and overall 50% outreach to women and 30% outreach to youth. The
nature of the activities that will be supported through direct targeting has already been highlighted in the earlier
section on target groups. Direct targeting will start with the development of the NRLMP and LIPs wherein
programme resources will be allocated to achieve the above mentioned outreach targets through different
programme supported activities. The targeting matrix summarising the targeting strategy is presented below.
Target households
(smallholders, agro-pastoralists,
pastoralists)
Programme areas selected with
Women
Youth
- high incidence of poverty ranging from 26-60%; Acute malnutrition ranging from 14-20%;
Geographical
targeting
- high dependence of small-holder farmers, agro-pastoralists and pastoralists on NR;
- vulnerable NRs due to increasing population, high dependence on NR for livelihoods, lack of
regulation, mismanagement , etc.
Self targeting
11/43
- Programme activities focused on
NR related actions will be adopted
by target groups due to their high
dependence on NRs.
- Participatory development of
NRLMP and NRLIP will tailor
programme activities according to
the needs of the target group
- Support to jubraka, home
gardens and nurseries favours
the involvement of women.
- Support to village savings and
credit groups favours women’s
inclusion
- Introduction of microirrigation,
domestic water supply etc, will
reduce drudgery of women
- 50% smallholders
Direct targeting
- 30% agro pastoralists
- 20% pastoralists,
- 50% women quota for seed
capital financing of NR related
enterprises
- 100% support to women for
home gardens, nurseries and
jubrakas
- 100% revolving fund support
to vulnerable women for
jubrakas and gas stoves
- Savings and credit groups,
nutrition awareness training
- 30% youth quota for seed
capital financing of NR related
enterprises
- 100% support to youth for
4,200 youth enterprises
- 50% youth groups involvement
in management of water supply,
machinery services and
community storage services
44.
Implementation of the targeting strategies: SNRLP will conduct sensitization of implementers and policy makers to
the strategic interests and needs of women, youth and pastoralists, quotas to ensure their representation in
programme-related decision-making bodies and committees and in programme–related activities. The M&E system
will incorporate smallholder HH, agro-pastoralist, pastoralist, gender, youth disaggregated indicators. The NRLMPs
will include socio economic details of each HH which will be used to determine their eligibility for programme support
and also for tracking the changes in their socio-economic standards over the programme lifetime. Women and youth
participation in community institutions will be improved through quotas for their participation in VDC and CDCs, NRM
forums at different levels and different committees formed by these institutions. Similarly, gender representation in
programme management will be ensured through steps such as ensuring sufficient number of women staff specially
at the community development level; including gender mainstreaming responsibilities in the ToRs of all staff members
and exposing staff to gender training including in the Gender Action Learning System (GALS) orientation training The
staff members trained on GALS will include the community development officers who will be responsible for
disseminating these inputs at the community level, both directly and indirectly through young professionals and young
extension agents.
45.
Nutrition and food security strategy: As presented in para 10, malnutrition in the project areas is firstly due to food
insecurity and periods of hunger among the target population which needs to be addresses as a priority and then
combined with nutrition awareness raising. The project’s nutrition and food security strategy is therefore foremost
focused at increasing food production and income generation from sustainably managed and equitably governed
natural resources securing access for more vulnerable groups. In addition to income generating activities, the project
will increase food production and also bust the nutrition value of available food through:
Mainstreaming a participatory diagnostic of food and nutrition security issues in the development process of
NRLMP, including: 1) mapping of sources of food and the periodic/seasonal availability disaggregated by different
food groups needed in a complete healthy family diet; and 2) identification of strategies for improving the food
system in terms of availability and access to food including for vulnerable groups. These strategies and activities
can be linked to the use of the landscape managed by the clusters/networks, improving local market exchange and
the exchange between the different communities using the landscape.
Securing access to dry season fodder, which has already been proven by BIRDP and SUSTAINs to expand
animal milk production into the dry season and increase meet production. This will improve the access to animal
proteins.
Increasing yields from field crops through improved cultivation techniques and land and water conservation
structures and practices.
Improving access to water and technical assistance for crop production in particular for women's vegetable
gardens (jubraka, where also some field crops and animal fodder will be produced), which combined with nutrition
awareness raising contribute to the improvement of family diets.
Providing support to women saving and credit clubs to build capacities to buffer against periods with food shortage
and engage in small production and income generating activities such as small animal production (poultry, goats
and picks).
12/43
D. Components/outcomes and activities
46.
The programme has been designed with two technical components, each with two subcomponents (SC) described
below (refer to PIM for more details).
Component 1: Scaling up community based NR management and businesses
47.
Component 1 will focus at consolidating and upscaling good practices for empowering communities and networks or
clusters of communities and build their capacities in land-use planning and NR governance and management, that
takes into account climate change risks. The communities targeted will include mobile (pastoralists), semi-mobile
(agro-pastoralists) as well as settled communities of small crop farmers. Subcomponent 1.1 will support communities
in the creation of a strengthened village and inter-village framework for land-use planning, negotiation of resources
governance arrangements and joint resources management. Within this framework subcomponent 1.2 will support
NRM and interest groups in implementing livelihood investment plans to increase their resilience and benefit streams
derived from NRs, production systems and related small businesses.
SC 1.1: Community mobilization, NR and land-use management planning
48.
This subcomponent will support an estimated 1000 Village Development Committees (VDCs) and 140 networks or
clusters of VDCs. The objective is to strengthen their organisation in Cluster Development Committees or Network
Executive Committees (CDC/ NECs) and their land and NR governance systems and institutions. Support will be
provided for: mobilizing VDCs and CDC/NECs sharing NRs in common ecosystems and with common interests in
addressing governance and management issues; participatory development of NR and land-use management plans
(NRLMPs) for village networks or clusters; development of co-management arrangement for the "open access"
common areas outside traditional village managed land (hema); land registration; and mitigation and resolution of
conflict over access to and use of NR.
Mobilizing VDCs and CDC/NECs
49.
50.
51.
This activity will consolidate and scale up the development of community institutions already started in previous and
on-going IFAD projects. Communities already supported would have VDCs and some have been organized in
clusters for the development and implementation of Community Livelihood Adaptation and Sustainability Plans
(CLASP – IAMDP) and Cluster Adaptation Plans (CAP - LMRP). These clusters, however, tend to be project driven in
their formation and need consolidation and formalisation and there is a need to revisit if they adequately cover
common ecosystems and needs for addressing NR governance and management issues. To strengthen these
clusters, there is much to learn from the good practice developed and implemented under the Butana BIRD Project,
where NECs have been formed as a bottom up process defined by the communities and starting with a few pilots.
These have now been scaled both in size of each network, including new villages and hamlets allowing for a
comprehensive landscape approach, and in new networks formed. The activities and actions they take on to solve
common issues go well beyond what the project initially supported (which included Climate Resilience Village
Adaptation Plans). This shows their empowerment and that they are fully embracing that by working together they
can more effectively pursue their common development aspirations.
In order to facilitate the development of VDCs for new communities and consolidate existing VDCs and initiate
familiarisation and discussions on the project’s objectives and interventions, the project (Gender Officers at state level
backed by the Senior Community Mobilisation and Gender Expert at the CPU) will mobilise a general assembly
comprising all households in the community. The assembly will decide on (or reconfirm/adjust) general functions,
number of members (around 10-12), and elect or reconfirm the VDC members including youth and at least 30%
women. The VDC will in consultation with the assembly form subcommittees as needed and as the VDC activities
evolve. These could among others be on water, forest, rangeland and livestock/pastoral groups, farmland and crop
production, innovative technologies and small businesses, or women, youth and vulnerable groups subcommittees.
Departing from an initial regional/State-level mapping of socio-ecological units (such as wadis), assessments of NR
governance issues and identification of intervention strategies, the project will facilitate consultations with VDCs for
the development or consolidation of CDC/NECs. Already existing CDC/NECs will be taken into account as well as
success factors from the Butana best practice. The project will mobilise a general assembly at the socio-ecological
unit level comprising all members of the concerned VDCs. The assembly will decide on (or reconfirm/adjust) general
functions of the CDC/NECs, representation of VDCs and different groups (elder, youth, women, nomadic pastoralist
communities) in the CDC/NEC, and elect or reconfirm CDC/NEC members including youth, elderly, at least 30%
women and when relevant representatives for mobile pastoralist communities. The members of the CDC/NECs will
elect a three member leadership team comprising a Chairperson, a secretary and a treasurer. The CDC/NEC will in
consultation with the cluster or network assembly form subcommittees as needed and as the cluster/network
activities evolve. These could in addition to the ones mentioned for the village level be on land-use mapping,
resources governance and registration of community rangeland and forest land, and conflict resolution. In addition the
CDC/NECs should establish two more crosscutting committees namely a cluster advocacy and communications
committee (CACC - see component 2) and a Cluster Procurement Committee (CPC – see component 3).
13/43
52.
The programme will aim to meet the target for VDC and CDC/NEC development during the first four years of
implement to allow sufficient time for capacitating these institutions before the end of the programme. The broad
targets for the development of VDC, CDC/NECs is presented below:
Table 3 – Outreach of VDC and CDC/NECs
Details
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Year 5
Year 6
Total
- No of CDCs/NECs
30
45
60
15
- No of VDCs
200
300
400
100
- No of groups (details follow)
500
1,000
2,500
1,000
500
150
1,000
5,500
53.
The VDCs and CDC/NEC will be supported in their formalisation by registering as voluntary organisations and
opening a bank account. The members will be trained on the principles of land-use planning, NR governance and
integrated NRM practices, transparency, accountability and organisational management, resource mobilisation and
reporting, and investment in cluster/network and community development activities. Facilitation will also be provided
to raise awareness, and apply tools for implementing specific targeting strategies that ensures representation and
participation of youth, women, vulnerable households and nomadic pastoralist communities in subcommittees,
interest groups.
Development of NRLMPs
54.
55.
The project will support the CDC/NECs in conducting a participatory community and inter community planning
process leading to the formulation and ownership of a NRLMP. The NRMLP will provide a framework for the
communities to address NR governance issues, invest in their NR and derived livelihoods, and enhance their food
and nutrition security and resilience. In addition to village assemblies and VDCs, representatives of Locality
governments, native administrations and NGOs covering the target communities should be involved in the process.
The process will aim at addressing governance and land-use issues related to forest, range and crop land as well as
areas important for protection of water resources, areas adequate for rainwater harvesting and related catchments.
Special attention will be given to livestock routs, where relevant, in order to increase mutual benefits and avoid
conflicts between the cluster or network communities and pastoralists and agro-pastoralists passing through their
area.
The NRLMP formulation process will include: i) review of eventual existing CLASP or CAPs and progress in their
implementation and identify gaps to be addressed in inclusiveness, sustainability of interventions, landscape and NR
governance coverage, and mainstreaming food and nutrition security and climate change resilience in NR
management and livelihood investment activities; ii) mapping existing land and NR uses and users including women,
youth and mobile pastoralists and ensure all are included in the process; iii) assessing climate change risks and
livelihood vulnerabilities combining analysis of historical trends and future scenarios with local knowledge; iv)
analysing the main degradation risks, related drivers, and access limitations for vulnerable groups associated with
current land-uses; v) mapping of sources of food and the periodic/seasonal availability disaggregated by different
food groups needed in a complete healthy family diet and analysis of causes of food shortage; vi) formulation of a
vision for future land-uses and NR governance and management at the cluster/network and community levels; vii)
identifying and prioritizing interventions and investments for improving productive and sustainable use of NRs,
improving food and nutrition security and livelihood resilience, exploring new opportunities for small businesses, and
linking the different land-uses in integrated farming, food and NR use systems; viii) mapping of existing native
administration practices and formulation of by-laws and regulations for community land and NR use, that will support
the implementation of the vision of the NRLMP and guide investments; ix) formulation of indicators, targets and
timelines and monitoring and follow up mechanism for the implementation of the NRLMP; and x) adoption of the
NRLMP as a live document by the village and VDC assemblies. SNRLP will use LDCF/GEF funds to support the
participatory climate change vulnerability assessment, capacity building in managing climate change risks and
identification of adaptation and resilience enhancing activities as part of the NRLMP formulations.
56.
In the formulation and implementation process of the NRLMPs attention will be given to strengthening linkages
between local community institutions and native administration and local and state government institutions that should
have a role in facilitating land-use governance and NRM at a more macro level. For local governments (Localities)
the focus will be on strengthening their role in facilitating linkages between communities and the State governments
around land and NR policy issues and development services but also in facilitating linkages between communities
across Localities.
14/43
Development of co-management arrangement for "open access" common areas
57.
58.
These linkages and involvement of the macro level is particular relevant in regulating access and use of natural
resources in the "open access" common areas including part of livestock corridors, rangeland and forest areas
outside traditional village managed land (Hema). These areas will not be captured by the NRLMPs and are highly
complex because of the many different users and may require conflict resolution centers. There are a few initial
experiences with rehabilitation and establishment of co-management arrangements with surrounding villages of some
of these areas, but institutionalised governance systems does not exist.
The project will facilitate that the capacities build in the clusters/networks on NR governance and management are
used to further develop and implement co-management of common “open access” areas. Joint land and NR use
governance and management plans will be developed between CDC/NECs and other mobile users of the areas and
clear management responsibilities will be identified and assigned by the relevant State governments. These
responsibilities could either be assigned to community networks or clusters or to Localities, native administrations or
the State government. The project will also support a mechanism for monitoring the adherence to the plan and a
revenue collection and reinvestment plan for ensuring the long term sustainable use. At the same time the project will
under component 2 support that these arrangements are institutionalized at higher levels of governance and the
functionality of the conflict resolution centres will be supported and strengthened.
Land registration
59.
To support the institutionalisation of the NRLMPs the project will support the CDC/NECs in having them authorized
and registered by the respective State governments and incorporated into State-level land use zoning and planning
frameworks (see component 2). Capitalizing on the 2015 Range and Pastures law, where appropriate, the pastoral
communities and CDC/NECs will be supported in the demarcation and registration of livestock routes, village hema,
communal rangelands and community forest land. This will secure their assigned user rights by the State
government. SNRLP will use LDCF/GEF funds to partly support land registration activities.
NR Conflict resolution mechanism
60.
In the formulation of the NRLMP attention will be given to identify the traditional and existing roles of native
administration in supporting the governance of land and NRM in particular in dispute and conflict resolution. Needs
for adjusting and strengthening this framework in order to implement the NRLMPs will be identified. On this basis the
project will support the strengthening of rules and bylaws and conflict resolution procedures and institutions including
escalation steps, roles and responsibilities, and training of mediators and community institution members so they can
fulfil their roles. The project will also support reinforcement of conflict resolution centers established by the previous
WSRM project along three stock routes in Kordofan and eventually support the establishment of new centers in all
project regions in relation to the co-management of "open access" common areas which may include other stock
routes.
SC 1.2: Implementation of NR-based Livelihood Investment Plans
61.
This subcomponent will support the formation of different interest and NRM groups and their formulation and
implementation of Livelihoods Investment Plans. These plans will all be aligned with and contribute to the
implementation of the NRLMPs developed under subcomponent 1.1. Village youth as well as young professionals will
be engage in supporting the groups creating win-win benefits for their professional growth combined with local
presence of technical support and facilitation persons for the groups, VDCs and CDC/NECs.
Formation of groups and formulation of livelihoods investment plans (LIPs)
62.
Based on the land-use and NR governance and management framework and priority interventions identified in the
NRLMP different NRM and interest groups will be formed at village and cross village level who would like to come
forward and propose ideas for LIPs. Depending on the area of investment and in order to increase the involvement
and benefits to women, youth and vulnerable households, the groups may be characterized as the following types: i)
Village Savings and Credit Groups (VSCGs); ii) NR Livelihood groups (NRLGs); and iii) Vulnerable Women’s Groups
(VWGs). They will start as informal groups but as they evolve the project may support them in registering as
voluntary organisations or producer associations and opening bank accounts. According to needs and interests they
will all be offered training in: simple financial literacy including number record keeping, budgeting and financial
planning and management of cash flows; and organisation management. They will also be offered additional training
on topics of general relevance such as climate change risks and measures to build community and household
resilience; healthy diets and nutrition also supporting family resilience on which basic training has already been
conducted during the development of the NRLMPs.
63.
Around 3000 VSCGs will be supported building on the positive experience from previous and current IFAD projects
and involving 70% women. The groups will be supported from the beginning of the engagement with communities in
parallel to the formulation of the NRLMPs. In addition to the training already mentioned they will be trained in saving
and credit management, and (when maturity and willingness allows) how to organise into VSCGs associations and
access and manage capital from micro finance institutions (MFI). When the VSCGs have built sufficient capital, they
will be supported in the development of LIPs for small investments in individual or collective businesses related to the
sustainable use of NR and increasing the resilience of their livelihoods by diversifying and increasing productivity.
15/43
64.
65.
66.
Around 3000 NRLGs will be supported expected to involve at least 30% women and coming together around
common NR management and production interests. These groups may be business or non-business oriented and
include VDC/CDC/NEC subcommittees, youth groups, mobile pastoralist groups and groups for forestry
development, water management, provision of machinery services, livestock or crop production. Under the
leadership of the VDCs and CDC/NECs initial ideas for proposals will be prioritised and the project will support the
groups in the development of LIPs.
Based on participatory wealth and vulnerability ranking exercises, the project will support VDCs in reaching out to
women heading households or women from other vulnerable households with limited capacities to be economically
productive and encourage them to form VWGs. An effort will also be done to reach out to mobile pastoralist and
where relevant internal and cross boarder displaced communities to facilitate the formation of VWGs. Around 840
VWGs will be supported in developing LIP proposals for micro businesses and activities that will improve their
nutrition security and resilience of their livelihoods.
All LIPs should demonstrate that the proposed activities and investments comply with the following eligibility criteria:
alignment with the NRLMP including its NR governance and management framework assigning land-uses;
beneficiary co-financing; social inclusiveness (generation of benefits to women, youth or vulnerable households); no
duplication of previous similar support to the same group; supporting sustainable use of NR; increasing livelihood
resilience and nutrition security for vulnerable groups; and biophysical, engineering, economic, and organisational
feasibility. (Refer to PIM for further details on the selection and approval of LIPs for financing).
67.
The broad targets for development of groups NRLPM and LIPs is presented below:
Table 4: Groups, NRLMPs and LIPs to be supported
Details
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Year 5
Year 6
Total
- No of groups
500
1,000
2,500
1,000
500
- No of NRLMPs
20
40
80
10
- No of LIPs
250
1,000
2,500
1,250
500
5,500
150
5,500
Eligible LIP activities
68.
69.
70.
LIPs activities will be eligible within the following NR related investment areas, and cover replication of successful
business models and NR management arrangements from previous and on-going projects as well as new
innovations:
Rangeland and livestock rearing. This will include: training of community rangeland guards and other community
members in sustainable rangeland management and rehabilitation and protection of buffer areas for particular dry
years; fencing of areas for seed production and collection; rangeland demarcation and rehabilitation through seed
broadcasting, planting or seeding of native fodder shrub trees, and small rainwater harvesting structures including
earth bunds and pits; introduction of hay baling and construction of storage facilities for dry season fodder; livestock
rearing and training of youth in community para veterinary services and provision of start-up vet kits; small businesses
related to processing and selling of livestock products.
Forestland conservation and related businesses. This will include: supporting VDCs and CDC/NECs in awareness
raising on community forest conservation and management for community and individual benefits (forest fruits and
medicine plants and dry season fodder availability); organisation and training of youth forest guards combined with
establishment of brick making or gas refilling micro businesses reducing pressure on forest wood and generating
economic incentives for forest guarding in terms of incomes from brick making and gas refilling services; Facilitating
access to gas stoves via revolving or micro finance schemes managed or facilitated by the CDC/NECs; Training,
establishment and operation of community or individual tree nurseries; small businesses related to processing and
marketing of non-timber forest products.
71.
72.
16/43
Catchment and water point management. This will include: developing a cluster or network level framework for
Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) including a hydrological model with current and future water
supply and demand scenarios for wadis, instalment of rain gauges and streamflow monitoring for community-based
water resources monitoring and periodic calibration of the hydrological model, and identification of topographical
optimal placements and types of water harvesting structures; feasibility studies and construction of water yards and
hafirs (include fencing and inlets and outlets structures/pipes, wells, solar panel pumps and drinking troughs for
animals away from the water points) or other community water harvesting infrastructures including water spreading
and diversion along selected wadi systems; training of youth as water guards for management of water points and
protection of the catchment area/buffer zone; training and facilitation for the establishment of water management
committees and governance and operation schemes under VDCs or CDC/NECs including fee collection and
reinvestment in further expanding water harvesting and distribution infrastructure (e.g. pipes and solar pumps) and
coverage of labour, O&M and depreciation costs; development of water management manual with detailed guidelines
and rules.
Cropland development and climate adaptation in farming practices. This will include: organisation of women in farmer
field schools (FFS) groups for experimental learning in jubrakas cultivation of vegetable, fodder and other crops, the
use of climate adapted soil and water management techniques, intercropping, tree windbreaks with nitrogen fixing
fodder trees species or other species with food or economic value, and integrated pest management (IPM);
investment in the establishment of community jubrakas including fencing and water source using solar pumps (partly
financed from LDCF/GEF resources) and complementing with nutrition training and exchange of nutritious recipes
using locally produced food; training crop producer groups in the introduction of trees, soil and water management
practices, IPM and drought resilient varieties in open field farming; and construction of small soil management and
water harvesting structures e.g. stone or earth bunds and planting terraces; small businesses related to processing
and marketing of crop products and provision of quality seeds inputs, bio pesticides and machinery services.    
73.
Stock routes management and livelihoods of pastoralists. This will include: Training of conflict mediators and
establishment of conflict resolution centers in conflict prone areas along the stock routs (SR); establishment and
management of water points outside Hemas including water management committees with representation of all SR
users; training of young community para veterinarians and establishment of veterinary services centers with access
for mobile pastoralists; organisation of Pastoral Field Schools (PFS) for capacity building and investments with
pastoralists in their livelihoods; and nutrition training for pastoralist women and facilitation of exchange of food and
recipe among pastoralist, agropastoralist and smallholder farmers along the routes.
Financing for LIP implementation
74.
Financing for LIP implementation: The funding provided by the programme for the implementation of LIPs will be
determined under the following four ownership and investment types:
100% programme financing of technical assistance (TA) and 80% seed investment capital for public or common
good investments managed by CDC/NECs or VDCs in partnership with NRLGs covering fixed assets, tools,
machinery and equipment, essential civil work (e.g. hafirs or water yards, community storage facilities, forestry
related enterprises). Beneficiaries will contribute with assignment of land, their time, labour and initial operation
and maintenance costs until fee cost recovery is operational;
Up to 80% programme financing of TA, and 70% seed investment capital (100% for pastoralist enterprises) for
common good investments for group enterprises managed by NRLGs, VSCGs or VWGs covering fixed assets,
tools, machinery and equipment, essential civil work (e.g. brick making machines for youth groups, soil and water
management and terraces works for crop producer groups, women's groups community jubrakas receiving for
investments in fencing and water supply system). Beneficiaries will contribute with the remaining 30% investment
cost, assignment of land, their time, labour and operation costs;
Programme financing of TA and 70% of seed investment capital for small start-up inputs for individual household
owned production activities supported through NRLGs or VSCGs groups, where beneficiaries will cover the
investment cost (e.g. individual jubrakas where women receives training and seeds for the first year but no fencing
or water supply system); and
Seed capital of 100% to establish Community Investment Funds (CIF) managed by VDCs as revolving funds in
particular supporting vulnerable women organized in VWGs who cannot meet requirements for accessing micro
finance institutions (e.g. gas stoves and cylinders given to women in a VWG, who repay to the VDC, who revolves
the funds to benefit women in another VWG, small livestock which will be repaid in livestock offspring revolved to
other women). Seed capital investment planned over the programme life is presented below.
75.
The beneficiary contribution for remaining investment costs and working capital can be from own savings, borrowings
from the internal capital of VSCGs and other sources of finance mobilized by the beneficiary. Building on experiences
and partnerships achieved in other IFAD supported projects, SNRLP will select partnering financial institutions (PFI)
and facilitate beneficiaries’ linkages to them so they can eventually meet their beneficiary contribution through access
to credit. The SNRLP will provide training and capacity building support to the PFIs as well as support to develop their
infrastructure and reduce the cost of delivery in the programme villages.
76.
77.
The PFIs will provide the full range of their services in the programme supported communities including support to
other non-SNRLP related activities. They will provide savings deposit services which will enable programme
supported groups to deposit their surplus funds in savings accounts. The PFIs will be involved in the appraisal of
enterprise related LIPs and will be encouraged to partner with the beneficiaries from the beginning to finance the
implementation of the LIPs. The successful NR based enterprises initiated through seed capital support will meet
their future additional financing needs for growth and scaling up, through the PFIs and beneficiary savings. SNRLP
will provide cash flow management training to the beneficiaries in order to promote reinvestment of returns for
supporting the growth of the enterprises (refer PIM for more details on PFI partnership). 
17/43
Business development services. SNRLP will support enterprise training and business development activities in the
clusters or networks in order to develop the capacity of the groups and individuals to implement the NR related
enterprises successfully. Business development services will be provided in partnership with other development
partners, credit officers of the PFIs, community development officers (CDOs) employed by the programme, private
sector representatives where relevant and young professionals and local extention networks (refer PIM for more
details).
Engagement of village youth and young professionals
78.
79.
80.
81.
To support extension services to VDCs, CDC/NECs and the various NR and common interest groups and to increase
opportunities for youth, the SNRLP will scale up the good experiences of the BIRDP in engaging youth in supporting
project activities. Two different groups of youth will be engaged. One group will be young people from the project
supported villages selected by the village assembly who will be trained as extension resource persons in the different
activities prioritized in their NRLMPs and LIPs.
Another group will be young professional (YPs), who will go through a practical learning-by-doing training YP
programme backed by locality and state extension staff. They will be paid a small allowance and be housed in and by
the communities. Their continuous presence will facilitate their rapid learning and understanding of village challenges,
dynamics and aspirations and create strong confidence with the people. This will allow them to effectively support
social mobilization and organisation, investment and management planning, day-to-day capacity building and
technical assistance, and overall catalyse sustainable change processes within the communities related to NR
governance, management and livelihood issues.
Experience from the BIRDP shows that the vast majority interested and embarking on the YP programme are women.
With their presence as articulated and supporting professionals in the villages the YP programme also has a strong
impact on the mobilization of women in the villages, change in culture to more openness towards women
participation, and accepting women speaking in meetings.
An average of three YPs will be engaged per cluster/network for 2-3 years resulting in around 450 YPs engaged over
the project life. At least 50% but more probably 80% of them will be women. The YP programme will be published
through announcements in graduate school, student networks, newspapers and radio. After completing 2 years of
service in the project communities they will have increased their employability and the SNRLP will promote their
employment in government technical departments, NGOs, and other civil society organisations.
Component 2: Improving the institutional framework for upscaling community based NRM
82.
This component will support institutional capacity strengthening and policy engagement from local to State and
Federal levels in order to institutionalise and scale up proven community and inter-community land and NR
governance and management models. It will build on models proven to secure access and benefits to poorer rural
communities from previous IFAD projects and build on and complement the activities supported under sub-
component 1.1. In particular the component builds on the successful experience from the formulation of the Butana
NR Governance Framework supported by the BIRDP, where a bottom-op approach was used, building on the
empowerment and NR governance capacities of the networks, to facilitate a series of NR fora securing horizontal and
vertical dialogues leading to the framework agreed by the 5 states (see section on lessons learned). The component
will create an enabling environment for community institutions, native administrations, Locality governments and civil
society organizations to better engage in policy formulation and implementation processes at State and Federal level.
At the same time it will strengthen the capacity of the latter levels for facilitating these processes. The component will
also complement and support ongoing or proposed policy engagement processes supported by Federal and State
government and other development partners, including in particular those of other IFAD supported projects, FAO,
UNEP, UNDP, and the World Bank and national and international research institutions. Particular attention will be
given to generating and disseminating knowledge products, fostering dialogue and establishing or supporting multi-
stakeholder platforms.
SC 2.1: Strengthening of legal and policy frameworks
83.
This subcomponent will support a participatory review of land and NR governance policies and frameworks and
establish an institutional structure for a comprehensive multisector and multilevel consultation and discussion
process. This process will lead to the formulation of focused strategies and revision of policies and regulations.
Reviews of land and NR governance frameworks
84.
18/43
As a first activity this sub-component will support four systematic reviews (one federal and three regional) by
independent consultants of existing studies and other knowledge products on the status of land and NR governance
frameworks. They will include mapping of existing inter-sectoral and interstate and multi-level land and NR related
policy and legislation and analyse key NR degradation and exclusion drivers, gaps, inconsistencies, strengths and
complementarities between the different policy and legislative frameworks. Important inputs will be: the three initial
regional/State-level mapping of socio-ecological units, assessment of NR governance issues and identification of
intervention strategies supported by subcomponent 1.1; the Natural Resources Governance Framework for Butana
(NRGF) developed with support from the BIRDP; the Land-Use Map for Sennar identifying unsustainable land-use
trends and sustainable desired scenarios developed with support from the SUSTAIN project; and the governance and
management frameworks developed for three stock routs in Kordofan supported by the WSRMP project and status
and lessons learned from their implementation.
NR consultation fora for policy formulation and implementation
85.
86.
87.
The findings from the reviews will be presented and analysed in a series of NR consultative forums/multi-stakeholder
platforms at Locality, State, Inter-state and Federal levels. The CACCs created under each CDC/NEC facilitated by
subcomponent 1.1 will be the voice of the communities in this consultation process. The CACC will have
representatives from the CDC/NECs technical committees, women, youth and native administration authorities. They
will be responsible for lobbying, advocating and communicating cluster level NR governance and management issues
(identified in the NRLMP formulation and implementation process) with the local authorities, different levels of
government and the private sector. The project will also support Locality level fora with representatives from the
relevant CACCs, mobile communities and the Locality government as well as workshops, exchange visits and other
mechanisms for sharing lessons and for formulating joint actions and proposals between Localities.
At the state level the project will facilitate the establishment of a State Cluster Stakeholder Platform (SCSP) with
representation from: all concerned CACCs and CDC/NECs; mobile pastoralists communities; Localities; NR related
technical departments of ministries at the State level; NGOs supporting NR issues in the state; parliamentarians;
private sector; and experts from research institutions and other development partners. The SCSPs will serve as a
consultation fora and engage and follow-up with the State Government on NR policy, governance and management
issues based on evidence and results from project implementation at the cluster/network level. The SCSPs will
enable the clusters/networks to increase their engagement with the government and participate in consultation
processes to have favourable influence on NR policy, governance and management frameworks and to strengthen
the institutional setup for implementing these frameworks.
Interstate platforms will be supported for further consultations at interstate and between the state and federal levels.
These platforms may form an interstate task force to follow up on the implementation of reforms and coordinate
various initiatives to strengthen NR governance and management. The project will encourage the SCSPs to create
State Advocacy and Communications Committee (SACC). The SACCs will take the lead on representing issues
related to state and interstate and state-federal NR governance and management in the interstate platforms. Finally,
at federal level it is anticipated that the GoS will confirm the roles and responsibilities of different sector ministries in
convening and participating in relevant Federal level platforms that can identify and resolve blockages and monitor
and assess progress being made. Consideration will be given to how their participation can be formalized, for
example, through the establishment of (or support to already existing but not active) inter-ministerial committee.
Strategies for NR governance and management and revision of policies and regulations
88.
89.
Based on the four reviews of NR governance frameworks widely discussed and enhanced in the multilevel and
multisector consultation process, recommendations will be made for revising policies and legislation, developing
guidelines, and strengthening associated implementation strategies. Two key areas, which requires interstate
collaboration and the involvement of the federal level, are expected to be addressed: 1) the regulation of land and NR
use in livestock routes and open access rangeland and forest areas, including strengthening provisions for the
assignment of user rights to communities; and 2) how to harmonise and strengthen the sustainability and
inclusiveness of institutions and investments in land and NR management.  
The relevant State and Federal agencies are expected to be key partners in the review process and agreements
reached on the recommendations. Based on the agreements, the project will support processes for revising policy
and legislation at State level in the targeted regions and at Federal level. The systematic reviews will also identify
other ongoing or planned initiatives aimed at supporting the revision of policy and legislative frameworks and
agreements will be reached on how the project will complement these. Information on revised or new legislation will
be disseminated widely at community and Locality levels through various media, including radio, plays, and written
materials (in Arabic). Information will also be disseminated at higher levels and in other States and nationally through
policy briefs, information notes, workshops and other relevant media.
90.
An important activity in the revision of policy and legislative frameworks will be a revision of locality level land-use
zoning plans and related regulations to incorporate community cluster/network NRLMPs. Likewise state level land
19/43
use zoning plans and related regulations will be revised with particular attention given to identifying ‘open access’
common rangeland and forest areas and livestock routes, especially those that are being encroached on by semi-
mechanized or mechanized crop farming or urban expansion. The project will support an appropriately costed
(affordable) updating or revision of these plans. Information from cluster/network and Locality NR governance and
spatial planning processes will also be incorporated. A priority state for this activity will be the Gedaff state where
mechanised farming is causing rapid land-use changes, exclusion and potential conflicts. Maps and information on
the revised associated land use regulatory frameworks will be disseminated widely, including at Locality and
community levels. Mechanisms will be set up for monitoring and providing feedback on any further encroachment of
livestock routes and ‘open access’ rangeland or forest areas. This will link to the institutional strengthening described
in SC 2.2.
Expansion of existing early warning systems to SNRLP communities
91.
92.
93.
94.
SNRLP will use LDCF/GEF funds to strengthen the existing Early Warning System (EWS) infrastructure in Sudan as
a major element of disaster risk reduction. The aim of the drought and flood monitoring system is to prevent the loss
of life and reduce the economic impact of disasters by warning local communities of drought and flood risks,
improving their preparedness and decreasing risks associated with crop and food loss. To this end, the SNRLP will
build on the early warning infrastructure built by the GEF-funded Climate Risk Finance for Sustainable and Climate
Resilient Rain-fed Farming and Pastoral Systems Project as well as LMRP's Drought Monitoring, Preparedness and
Early Response System (DMPERS), strengthen its capacities and expand it to the whole SNRLP  area. In a first step,
a thorough needs assessment will identify existing gaps and potential interventions to improve the existing
infrastructure built by the two mentioned projects, focusing on  the four inter-related elements: risk knowledge (data
should be systematically collected and analyzed and risk assessments performed), monitoring and warning service
(the system should be in place to monitor hazards and provide early warning services), dissemination and
communication, and response capability.
A functioning Geographic Information System (GIS) is an important part of any early warning system to help local
institutions and communities to base their decisions for land-use on sound and accurate information. Therefore,
SNRLP will address the gaps in existing efforts to establish an integrated GIS system for early warning purposes and
support the mapping of ecosystems in the targeted area, showing agroecological zones, livestock routes, climate
change and environmental vulnerability. Such tools, besides the obvious usefulness for planners, will allow inserting
the local actions within an integrated and ecosystem vision of natural resources management and adaptation to
climate change. A special attention will be given to mapping the livestock routes, pastoralists being one of the most
vulnerable groups.  Indeed, the region targeted by the programme is crossed by many livestock routes, which pass
through vulnerable areas which have been affected by drought and rainfall reduction, negatively impacting the
quantity and quality of livestock production. It is thus important to get a clear picture of the vulnerability of the different
zones traversed by the livestock routes, as a tool for negotiation and sustainable solutions. This will lead to enhance
climate resilience of livestock routes and pastoralists through sustainable rangeland and water management
investments.
Depending on the outcomes of the needs assessment, other potential interventions to strengthen the capacities of
existing early warning systems in Sudan, could focus, inter alia, on improving the data collection infrastructure (e.g.
by purchasing and installing additional weather stations, etc.), the data analysis and forecasting capacities (e.g. by
providing better or additional hardware and software components, capacity building measures for the Meteorological
Authority and other institutions, etc.) and/or existing communication and response capacities (e.g. by providing better
infrastructure, capacity-building measures, international exchange visits, etc.).
SNRLP will partner with both of the above mentioned initiatives as well as the Meteorological Authority, the Remote
Sensing Authority, the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Irrigation and the Agricultural Research Corporation to
identify and address the needs in the existing early warning infrastructure. Further, the SNRLP will partner with
ICRAF, which is undertaking the same exercise in Chad in two IFAD funded projects (PARSAT and RePER), and
other potentially relevant institutions active in the targeted areas and involved in early warning activities, such as FAO
and UNEP.
SC 2.2: Building institutional capacities
Training for extension and research service providers
95.
Training will be provided to public and private extension service providers and Locality, State and Federal
government staff in: community-based NR governance and management and the related roles of the Native
Administrations, Localities and States; appropriate investments in sustainable land and NR use; climate risk reduction
and climate change adaptation strategies; Development of Land-use zoning maps and related regulations
incorporating native administration; GIS; etc. A full list of possible trainings will be developed following a needs
assessment to be done during the start-up of the project and will be updated as new needs are identified. Focus
should be at addressing capacity gaps currently limiting the implementation and enforcement of existing NR policies
and legislation. The trainings will be accompanied with exchange visits and learning routes between States and other
projects as well as to other countries.
96.
Training will also be provided in knowledge management, communication, monitoring and impact evaluation for
documenting and disseminating lessons from project interventions. Linkages will be made to both national and
international universities and research institutions to strengthen the capturing and analysis of lessons learnt. The
project will also facilitate linkage to international research institutions and in particular the research being done by the
CG centres involved in land and NR governance, namely ICARDA, ILRI, IWMI, CIFOR, ICRAF and IFPRI.
20/43
Consolidating capacities for implementation of existing instruments
97.
The three different project regions have different challenges linked to NR governance and management and have
developed different instruments, that needs further support for consolidation and implementation. The NRGF for
Butana is in a final draft stage and is expected to have been endorsed by all partners in the 5 states at the time of the
start-up of SNRLP. The SNRLP will support its implementation including the needed strengthening of involved
institutions, development of regulations and procedures, and the harmonisation in the implementation across the five
states. The key instrument developed for Sennar is the Land-use map which identifies current unsustainable land-
uses causing degradation of NRs, exclusion of vulnerable groups and potential conflicts including from blocking of
stock routs. It also proposes possible sustainable future scenarios for land uses. The project will support with training,
materials and equipment for the effective use of the land-use map for decision making in reforming policies and
regulations and for follow-up monitoring. In the case of Kordofan, stock routes have been demarcated, conflict
resolution centers have been established, and co-management arrangements with pastoralists communities have
been initiated. The SNRLP will further the institutionalisation of these routs by supporting their registration, re-
demarcation and consolidate co-management arrangements which were implemented with insufficient support at the
end of the WSRMP.
98.
Another important new instrument that can contribute to more inclusive and sustainable NR governance frameworks
in all regions is the 2015 Range and Pasture Law, which provides for the registration of common pasture and
forestland. The project will support its regularization and piloting for registration of not only community forest and
pasture land, but also for registration of ‘open access’ common land and stock routes. Finally, as part of strengthening
NR governance and management frameworks and capacities at inter-community level, the project will support the
construction of cluster/network level integrated community development centers.
Establishing a framework for revenue generation and reinvestment
99.
Various interventions, including previous and current IFAD projects, investing in water infrastructures in rural areas
have built community-based models for water management and revenue generation for O&M costs, depreciation
costs and reinvestment in further expanding water distribution infrastructures. Likewise, different models have also
been developed and implemented for the management of other NRs including rangeland and forest. To capitalize on
these experiences and in order to facilitate their scaling up, the project will support the relevant government
institutions in each region in the establishment of a framework and guidelines for revenue generation for covering
O&M and depreciation costs but also for reinvestment in land and NR use and management by communities. This
could include collecting of fees and tariffs for water use, harvesting of non-timber forest products, sustainable
harvesting of wood from community forests, access to grazing and community forest fodder buffer, etc. Guidance
would include percentage allocation of revenue generated to community, cluster/network, Locality and higher levels
and safeguards for ensuring that an adequate proportion is re-invested in measures for improving sustainable land
and NR use.
E. Theory of Change
100.
Small crop farmers, agro pastoralists and pastoralists, as the main target group in the areas of intervention of the
programme, encounter major development challenges related to constraints in access to and lack of governance and
management of NR, climate change causing more water stress, periodic food insecurity, and a poor enabling
environment for business development (see annex 2 for details). These challenges are driving high levels of poverty
and periodic food insecurity and fragility among the target groups.
101.
SNRLP will address these challenges to achieve the desired changed situation, established in the goal and
development objective (increase the adoption of NR management practices, technologies and business models that
enhances the quality and sustainable use of NRs, secures the access to NRs for vulnerable users and generate food
security, incomes and resilience), by building on important opportunities existing in the country context. These
include: i) political support for the development of the agricultural sector to diversify the economy; ii) government
recognition of the importance of effective NR management and governance frameworks to avoid conflicts and
alleviate poverty; and iii) existence of proven good practices to build on in the country for community and inter-
community NR governance and management, resulting in increased production and incomes and reduced conflicts.
102.
Through the activities presented in the component 1 description, the programme will build community
clusters/network capacities and arrangement for NR access and use negotiation, conflict resolution, agreements and
registration/titling, which will provide the basis for planning of activities and investments in improved NR management
and NR based businesses increasing production and incomes. The main instruments for identifying and obtaining
agreements on investments to be supported by the programme will be NRLMPs and LIPs. Seed capital support and
technical assistance will be provided to enable implementation of start-up NR related enterprises identified through
LIPs. The component 1 outcome will be increased production from scaling up community based NR governance and
management practices, technologies and businesses. To further sustain and institutionalize community
cluster/network’s NR governance and management frameworks and facilitate scaling up, component 2 will support:
policy-relevant knowledge products; NR policy fora starting from cluster/network level and going up to the federal
level fostering both vertical and horizontal dialogues between and within all levels involved in NR governance and
management; harmonisation and streamlining of NR legal and policy frameworks; capacity building of public and
private service providers, state and federal government staff. The foreseen component 2 outcome will be institutions
at the federal, state and locality levels adopting and implementing improved regulations and policies on NRM. Refer
to annex 2 for schematic illustration.
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
103.
Alignment with SDGs. SNRLP is aligned with: SDG 1 (end poverty) contributing to indicator 1.4 (poor and
vulnerable have equal rights to economic resources, access to basic services, and ownership to land and other NRs)
and 1.5 (build the resilience of the poor and vulnerable to climate, economic and environmental shocks and events);
SDG 2 (achieve food security) contributing in particular to the indicators 2.3 (double the agricultural productivity and
incomes of small-scale food producers including through secure and equal access to land and other productive
resources) and 2.4 (ensure sustainable food production systems and resilient agricultural practices that increase
productivity and production); SDG 5 (gender equality) particularly indicator 5.5.a (women’s equal rights to economic
resources, as well as access to ownership and control over land); SDG 6 (availability and sustainable management of
water) particularly indicator 6.4 (increase water-use efficiency and ensure sustainable withdrawals and supply of
freshwater to address water scarcity); and SDG 15 (sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems) particularly indicator
15.3 (restore degraded land and soil, including land affected by desertification, drought and floods).
104.
Country ownership and alignment with national priorities. The focus of SNRLP was decided by representatives
from government agencies in the November 2017 COSOP Review Workshop in line with national priorities for
supporting the agricultural sector and local governance systems for NR management avoiding conflicts. SNRLP will
contribute to the objectives of the Sudan National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA). It is aligned with the
Sudan’s National Agriculture Investment Plan (SUDNAIP), which is a five-year investment plan with target of six
percent annual growth in agriculture GDP.
105.
Potential synergies and partnerships. SNRLP will develop synergies with other GEF supported projects such as
the Sudan Sustainable Natural Resources Management Project (SSNRMP) in the Butana and the Kordofan regions.
Synergies will be developed with FAO (e.g. water harvesting, land tenure, agro-forestry, policy dialogue; UNDP (solar
energy solutions, financing NR based enterprises); UNEP (adaptation to climate change). Synergies with the National
Forum for Agriculture, Food Security and Nutrition and the High Council for Environment will support coordination
among the different interventions, knowledge management and policy making processes in the water, rangeland and
forest sectors of Sudan. Strong synergies will be developed with the IFAD-supported ongoing projects such as
LMRP, IAMDP in areas related to improved livestock and crop production technologies and marketing linkages.
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
106.
Programme costs: Total programme cost including physical and price contingencies is estimated at EUR 77.7 
million over a 6-year period. Component 1 on ‘Up scaling community based natural resources management and
 businesses’ represents 72.1% of the total programme costs and Component 2 on ‘Improving the institutional 
framework for up scaling community based NRM’ represents 14.4% of total costs. Project Management and 
Coordination represent 13.5% of the total programme costs (refer Annex 3 for details).
107.
Investment costs are EUR 70.2 million and represent 90.4% of total costs. Taxes and custom duties are accounting 
for EUR 11.7 million, that is 15% of total costs and the foreign exchange component is at EUR 8.8 million or 11.3% 
of the total Project costs. The recurrent cost accounts for EUR 7.5 million or equivalent to 9.6% of the total costs. 
The exchange rate used is EUR 1.0 = SDG 53.9. Foreign currency costs have been estimated at 11% and those for 
local currency costs have been estimated at 89%. The cost per direct beneficiary household amounts to about EUR 
648 or EUR 108 per beneficiary.
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
108.
Programme financing/co-financing strategy and plan: Out of the total programme cost of EUR 77.7 million, 
IFAD contribution will be EUR 56.5 million (72.6%), of which EUR 45.2 million is grant and EUR 11.3 million is loan.
 GEF/LCDF will be grant in the amount of EUR 1.8 million (2.3%) as GEF/LDCF grant. The remaining 19.5 million 
(25.1%) will be financed from domestic resources comprising Government contributions of EUR 11.7 million 
(15.1%), beneficiaries’ contribution of EUR 4.5 million (5.7%) and private sector in the form of credit support from 
MFIs EUR 3.3 million (4.3%).
21/43
109. Table 5: Programme costs by component (and subcomponents) and financier
110. (Thousands of Euros)
IFAD Grant
IFAD Loan
GEF grant
Beneficiaries
Private
Sector
Government
Total
Component/
subcomponent
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
Amount
A. Upscaling Community based natural resources management and businesses
Community
mobilization and
NRM planning
Implementation
of Community
NRM and
Livelihood
investment Plan
4 087
60 1 079
16 306
5
275
4
-
-
1 060
16
6 808
26 118
53 6 474
13 1 065
2
4 094
8
3 315
7
8 188
17
49 254
Subtotal
30 205    54  7 553
14 1 371
2
4 370
8
3 315
6
9 248
17
56 061
B. Improving the institutional framework for upscaling community based NRM
Strengthening of
the NR legal and
policy framework
Building of
Institutional
capacities
3 486
61 872
15 387
7
-
3 575
66 894
16 -
-
78
-
1
Subtotal
7 061
63 1 765
16 387
4
78
.7
C. Project Management & Coordination Unit
7 891
75 1 973
19 -
-
-
Total
45 157
58 11 291
15 1 758
2
4 448
-
6
-
-
-
-
-
972
17
5 717
-
-
915
17
5 462
1 887
17
11 179
-
601
6
10 465
3 315
4
11 736
15
   77 705
c. Disbursement
22/43
111.
The programme will maintain a pool Designated Account (DA) at Central Bank of Sudan to receive funds from IFAD
Loan, IFAD Grant and GEF/LDCF Grant in EUR. The funds will flow from DA to a pool operating account opened in
local currency Sudanese Pound (SDG) which is managed by Central Programme Coordination Unit (CPCU). The
funds will subsequently flow from pool operating account in SDG to bank for each state based on quarterly cash
forecast/reports. Payments can be made from DA, pool operating accounts and the bank account of each state to
suppliers, contractors, investments plans, matching grants, etc. In order to track the income and
expenditures/transactions, and to enable accurate reconciliation of the designated and project accounts, separate
ledgers will be set up and maintained for receipts and expenditures from each financing source separately. The
programme will be required to submit quarterly Withdrawal Applications (WA) for replenishment and other
disbursement methods of direct payment and reimbursement will be available.
112.
SNRLP has eight categories with major portion of the funding is allocated to the two categories of civil works and
training (45% of the total IFAD financing) while the recurrent cost categories represent 13% of the total IFAD 
financing. Around EUR 60 million (77%) of programme resources is expected to be disbursed till Year 3 and the 
remaining EUR 18 (23%) to be disbursed in the last three years of the programme.
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
113.
Summary of benefits: Over the 6 years of implementation SNRLP will have the following benefits: i) increase the
earnings of at least 84,000 HH (70%) by generating net income of EUR 63.1 million (6 years) from project supported
activities; ii) At least EUR 14 million will be generated by 5,500 groups through member savings contributions and
retained profits iii) at least 560 youth will be employed in SNRMP supported youth businesses, iv) At least 84,000 HH
(70%) will adopt environmentally sustainable and climate resilient technologies and practices. Consequently, 200,000
Ha of land will be brought under climate resilience management, including cropland (163 213 ha), rangeland (28 602
ha), stock route (6 000 ha) and forestland (2 157 ha) v) Felling of 40,000 trees will be prevented and EUR 0.6 million
will be saved by adoption of gas stoves by 10 000 HHs vi) Water availability will be extended by 5 to 6 months per
year during dry season through the construction/ rehabilitation of 104 hafirs, 100 water harvesting structures and 50
boreholes. Communities will earn EUR 3 million net income from selling water in 6 years; vii) At least 8000 livestock
will increase in weight as a result of access to 40 tons of fodder production by 9000 HH in the programme area (in 6
years), construction of 300 fodder storages, 5 mobile animal health clinics along the livestock routes, 450 trained
community animal health workers; viii) At least 10 institutions at the federal, state and locality level that will implement
improved NRM related regulations and policies. Twenty policies-relevant frameworks/knowledge products will be
completed and 500 government staff members will be trained on CC adaptation and NR governance. Project
activities could be scaled up/adapted to other states/in a future operation or if additional financing becomes available.
114.
Financial analysis: Financial analysis was based on 12 models: agroforestry in existing communities; agroforestry
in new communities; hafir development; brick production; fodder production, home garden (jubraka), home nursery,
individual agroforestry, gum arabic production, community farming with tree belt, community nursery, gas stoves
(Refer annex 4 for details). The models were analysed based on December 2018 prices. The “with” and “without”
programme scenarios were compared.
115.
SNRLP’s economic internal rate of return (EIRR) over 15 years is estimated at 24% and the Net Present Value
(NPV) is positive and EUR 13.8 Million. The economic analysis suggests that the Programme is feasible. Sensitivity
analysis indicates that the EIRR drops to 20% with increase in costs by 20%. In terms of scenario analysis, the
programme remains profitable with an increase in programme costs by 20% and a simultaneous decrease in benefits
by 20%. The sensitivity tests of the programme suggest that the programme is robust and worthwhile especially
considering the conservative assumptions made in the computation of the benefits (refer annex 4 for details).
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
116.
Exit Strategy: SNRLP’s exit strategy will be based on: i)Building community level organisations and human
capacities: SNRLP will support the self-governance and management of the NRs in the clusters by community level
institutions (NRLGs, VSCGs, VWGs and VDCs) facilitating smooth programme exit. Even after the programme these
entities will implement and monitor the users’ compliance to NR governance frameworks while carrying out NR
related economic activities. They will also manage physical infrastructure such as hafirs, and water yards;
ii)Developing partnerships and linkages of the community organisations: The cluster development approach will
naturally support linkages and partnerships between different communities within a cluster. SNRLP will support intra-
community linkages between small groups (VSCGs, NRLP, VWG) and the respective VDCs; inter-community
linkages between VDCs and CDC and linkage between pastoralists and settled communities through the
representation of the pastoralists in the CDCs. Also, linkages between the government technical departments and
community institutions through State and locality level forums and partnerships with private-sector service providers
23/43
24/43
(financial institutions, machinery service providers) will continue even after the programme; iii)Mobilising local and
external resources: As a part of the exit strategy SNRLP will support the community institutions to mobilise local and
external financial resources to continue the benefits to the communities even after the programme. The community
institutions will be trained to mobilise resources through: i) self-generation of internal capital from the different types
of livelihood enterprises; ii) generation of membership and user fees for use of common NRs by users; and iii)
participation in the planning and allocation of government resources for the NR development activities the
programme areas; iv)Phasing of activities and resources: SNRLP will calibrate the phasing of the programme
activities in a manner that allows sufficient time for the establishment, stabilisation strengthening and empowerment
of the local institutions to function and develop on their own by the time of programme closure. The selection of all
more than 75% of the clusters the establishment of the local institutions within these clusters will completed within the
first four years of implementation. Simultaneously, scaling up of the success stories will be pursued through; i)
collaboration with other IFAD supported projects and projects implemented by other development partners; and ii)
promoting collaboration between the SCSP and the State government to implement the success stories in other
clusters; and v)Supporting stakeholders to evolve their activities in the programme area: For example, the CDCs will
be supported to include new villages as members as well as develop direct linkages with other CDCs. Similarly,
financial institutions will be encouraged to expand their roles to support the full range of savings and credit
requirements of the rural communities.
117.
Sustainability: SNRLP’s sustainability is embedded in its exit strategy and will be supported by a number of
programme features. Institutional sustainability will be supported by the strengthening and developing partnerships
between a range of community level institutions (CDC, VDC, NRLG, VSCG, VWG). Resource mobilisation by these
institutions as described earlier will strengthen their capacitate to continue delivering the programme benefits even
after closure. Their involvement in the management of the physical facilities developed using programme resources
will contribute to the sustainability of these facilities. The engagement of the pastoralists in the development of the
NRLMPs at the cluster level ensure that there is long-term solution to conflict between them and settled communities
resulting in greater economic development. Marketing sustainability will be supported in partnership with the current
IAMDP and LMRP projects which are involved in strengthening crop marketing services and livestock marketing
services respectively (refer PIM). Technical sustainability will be achieved through the capacity building of the
technical departments of the government dealing with relevant subjects. Additionally, the community level institutions
along with the young professionals and business facilitators will be fully capacitated on the various technical aspects
of the programme. Documentation and circulation of information about success stories and good practices will be
carried out. Policy level interventions will remove regulatory gaps, policy overlaps, bottlenecks and support the
sustainability of the NR management practices. Environmental sustainability will be achieved through the
incorporation of measures to promote resilience to climate change and prevent environmental degradation in the
NRLMP and NRLIPs.
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
Risk
Risk Mitigation
Rating
Political commitment and security
situation
Despite the unpredictability in political circumstances, and due to
IFAD's reputation and recognized catalyst role in Sudan's
development, SNRLP will ensure that implementation is rooted
within local entities, communities and grass-root institutions, which
have proved resilient in the past and will persevere potential
changes and fluctuations at the high political level. IFAD's long-
standing experiences and networks from previous IFAD-funded
projects are important assets to ensure future high-level support
across potential political scenarios and changes. While most parts
of Sudan proved to be safe amid past political and economic crises,
ICO will continue to closely monitor political and security
developments in the country and strictly comply with the
instructions provided by UNDSS.
High
Macro-ecomonic and financial
instability, fluctuating exchange rate
and inflation
25/43
Community-based implementation, using bankwhich offer
preferable exchange rates, mobilization of co-financing, obtaining
high-level governmental support.
High
Climate Change related risks:
Increasing temperatures, rainfall
variability and prolonged dry spells
and droughts resulting in crop failure
and low rangeland productivity
negatively affecting the livelihoods of
the target group.
Promoting sustainable and climate resilient agricultural practices
(rangeland rehabilitation and management preserving buffer areas
for dry years, terraces, conservation agriculture, crop rotation and
intercropping with climate adapted varieties, composting, water
harvesting, IPM and other agro-ecological practices such as
permaculture).
Medium
Land conflicts between different
resources users (crop farmers and
pastoralists)
Community and intercommunity participatory land use mapping
and planning, negotiation and agreements on user rights backed
up by a conflict resolution mechanism, involvement of mobile
pastoralist communities in all stages of land-use governance and
management.
Medium
118.
The financial management risk assessment is HIGH. After implementing mitigation measures the risk rating can
improve to MEDIUM:
FM risk
category
Initial risk
rating
Proposed FM risk mitigating measures
Residual
risk
rating
A.    Inherent
Risks
Country Level
1.   The
Transparency
International
Corruption
Perceptions
Index 2017
ranked Sudan
at 6th from the
bottom of the
list (score of
16), indicating
that Sudan is
highly corrupt.
2.   The
economy of
Sudan is
suffering from
high inflation.
The exchange
rate
depreciation
issue
continues.
High
N/A
High
26/43
a)   Centralised PMU structure.
b)   Project supported by the CCU.
High
Medium
Entity and
Project design
a)     SNRLP
will be the
largest IFAD
project in
Sudan (9
states spread
over 3
regions).
b)    Inability
manage large,
geographically
spread project.
c)    
Implementation
will happen at
the village
cluster level
through SIUs
and service
providers.
B.    Project
Control Risks
27/43
a)   The criteria for staff recruitment include the need to have prior experience
on donor funded projects and (preferably) training received by IFAD/IFIs on
financial management and disbursement.
b)   The PMU will be independent and ring-fenced.
c)   The organisation structure includes procurement positions at both SIU
and PMU level.
d)   The finance staff at the PMU will be recruited from the market on a
competitive basis.
High
e)   SIU staff will be seconded to existing IFAD funded projects within the
same state for at least one month at project start-up as a way of capacitating
and training these staff members.
High
f)    IFAD FM training will be provided for all PMU and SIU financial
management staff at project start-up / undertake e-learning,
g)   The Financial Manual developed during project design includes various
sections on the interaction between the Central PMU and SIUs with regards
to FM matters.
h)   The project will appoint 3 project accountants which will be based at a
regional level (one per region, based at main state in region), with the
intention of moving between SIU’s and supporting SIU FM functions and/or
assisting in the case of vacancies/disruptions cased by high staff turnover.
1. Organization
& Staffing
a)   The project
will utilise MoF
staff resources,
largely at state
level. MoF staff
not adequately
qualified / lack
knowledge of
IFAD's
procedures.
b)   MoF staff
do not join the
state units at
project start-up
(delayed start).
c)   In current
projects the
practice if often
that FM staff
are responsible
for
procurement
(at state level).
d)  
Coordination
between
Central PMU
and SIU’s is a
challenge
e)   Project
structures
created within
Ministries are
significantly
influenced by
the Ministry.
f)    High staff
turnover is an
issue for all
IFAD projects
in Sudan.
28/43
a)   Budget coordination and consolidation will remain with the PMU.
a)   State and Locality levels will receive assistance to ensure that the budgets
are prepared in a realistic and appropriate manner.
b)   Training will be provided on regular basis to all staff – including
procurement and subject specialists on the preparation of budgets.
c)   The PIM developed during design provides detailed guidance on the
construction of budgets in line with IFAD requirements
d)   Quarterly management meetings (State Coordinators and Unit Heads) will
be held to discuss budgets and implementation progress.
e)   Interim financial reports, prepared by each SIU and consolidated by the
PMU, showing progress against budgets to be submitted to IFAD quarterly as
outlined in the Financial Manual.
High
f)    The IFAD office in Sudan will provide implementation support on
processes and procedures.
Medium
g)   The current exchange rate regime has resulted in more stable exchange
rate which mitigates the risk of inaccurate budgets due to exchange rate
fluctuations.
h)   IFAD cost tables developed at design considers staff salaries in terms of
both basic salaries and benefits/incentives.
i)    At project start up the project is required to develop staff salary bylaws
which is aligned to the IFAD cost tables. To be submitted to IFAD for no
objection.
j)    Interim financial reports to be submitted to IFAD will compare budget to
actual expenditure per cost category (including salaries) and will function as a
monitoring tool for staff cost overruns.
2. Budgeting
a)   Project
budgeting will
follow a bottom
up approach,
however
budget
preparation
capacity at the
village cluster
level is weak.
b)   Lack of
knowledge of
IFAD
budgeting
procedures.
c)   Too many
layers within
the budget
creation and
approval
process.
d)   Overruns
and unrealistic
budgets.
e)   Possible
exchange rate
fluctuations
may result in
budgets which
are not
accurate.
f)    Current
experience in
Sudan
indicates that
staff salaries
are often not
paid in line
with the IFAD
cost tables.
The cost tables
include basic
salaries but do
not consider
additional
benefits to
staff.
29/43
a)     The Financial Manual clearly details fund flow and disbursement
arrangements (including all bank accounts to be opened for purposes of
managing flow of funds).
b)    The PMU will maintain control of funds disbursed to SIUs, based on
levels of activity.
c)     The Financial Manual developed during design includes detailed cash
flow forecasting procedures will ensure adequate liquidity management.
d)    Government’s contribution will largely be in-kind, reducing the reliance on
cash contributions to the project.
High
e)     Government funds should be pre-paid into the dedicated account every
month.
Medium
f)     The Financial Manual outlines steps to take to escalate the issue if
Government contributions fall short of commitment.
g)    Training will be provided to all staff, including senior managers, on IFAD
financial management and disbursement procedures.
h)     A mid-year follow up on implementation will be conducted in the first
year to ensure that things are on track.
3. Funds Flow
&
Disbursements
a)   Liquidity
management
within the
project.
b)   IFAD
experience on
existing
projects
indicate that
Government is
slow to provide
their cash
contributions to
the
project.which
results in pre-
financing by
IFAD.
c)   There is a
risk of
implementation
delays due to
lack of
knowledge of
IFAD
procedures
related to
disbursements.
d)   There is a
risk of portfolio
suspension
due to arrears.
4. Internal
Control
a)   Weak
control
structures
magnified with
vast distances
between
Centre and
States.
b)  
Remoteness of
villages where
expenditures
are going to
take place.
c)   Limited FM
staff at state
level and
segregation of
duties
d)   Rural
finance
mechanism
and lack of well
defined internal
controls
5. Accounting
Systems,
Policies &
Procedures
a)   Manual or
Excel based
accounting
prevails.
b)   Policies
and
procedures are
created but are
not adhered to
by accounting
staff.
c)   Lack of
consistency
with different
layers within
the Project
structure in
application of
accounting
policies and
procedures.
d)   Projects
are not familiar
with the
30/43
a)   The FM organisational structure was developed with consideration of the
need for adequate segregation of duties at both PMU and SIU level.
High
b)   A detailed Financial Manual was developed by IFAD during design which
considers many lessons learnt from existing projects and aims to outline
improved internal controls which are specific to project activities.
High
a)     The successful implementation of accounting software at both PMU and
State level will be a condition precedent in the Financing Agreement.(Gov will
funds via start up cost allocation)
31/43
b)    The TOR for the accounting software procurement is included in the
Financial Manual and pays specific attention to recording of in-kind
contributions
Medium
High
c)     A Detailed Financial Manual has been developed during the project
design.
d)    All finance staff will be required to take and pass IFAD’s e‑learning on
financial management.
concept of
accounting for
in-kind
contributions
and the
accounting
system does
not cater for it.
e)   IFAD
experience in
Sudan indicate
that accounting
software
developed for
projects by
local suppliers
are often not in
line with the
terms of
reference.
f)    Locally
developed
accounting
software often
lacks the
ongoing in-
country
technical
support aspect.
g)  
Procurement of
internationally
developed
accounting
software if too
expensive for
the project.
6. Reporting &
Monitoring.
h)   Accounting
software is
unable to
produce
consolidated
financial
management
reports (which
includes all
sources and
uses of
finance).
i)    Projects do
not prepare
and submit
interim
financial
reports to IFAD
in the required
32/43
a)   The TOR for the accounting software which is included in the Financial
Manual pays specific attention to 1) required financial reports in line with IFAD
requirements 2) reporting on in-kind contributions 3) consolidated reporting 4)
reporting per financier (to identify pre- financing issues)
b)   Requirements related to IFAD’s Handbook for Financial Reporting and
Auditing of IFAD-financed projects is incorporated in the Financial Manual and
pays specific attention to:
a.     The requirement to prepare financial reports in line with IPSAS cash
High
b.    The requirement to prepare and submit interim financial statements on a
quarterly basis
Medium
c.     The requirement to report on in-kind contributions (including guidance on
how to measure such contributions)
c)   IFAD recently developed an IPSAS cash reporting template which will be
shared with the project in Excel format with the intention of assisting the
financial reporting process.
d)   The Financial Manual prescribes the requirement to adopt IPSAS cash
basis of accounting.
format and in a
timely manner.
j)   
Management
monitoring of
financial
reports do not
take place.
k)   In-kind
contributions
are not
accounted for/
reported on in
the financial
statements.
l)    Projects do
not adopt
accounting
standards
which are
acceptable to
IFAD (in line
with IFAD’s
Handbook for
Financial
Reporting and
Auditing of
IFAD-financed
projects)
m)  Accounting
systems do
generate
reports which
allow the ability
to monitor
IFAD pre-
financing of
Government
contributions.
7. Internal
Audit
a)   Internal
auditor
assigned to
project is on
part time job
b)   Ex ante
check of each
transaction,
therefore the
true nature of
the function
does not exist.
c)   Internal
audit function
does not exist
at the
locality/village
levels.
d)   Lack of
independence
of internal audit
function.
8. Auditing
a)   National
Audit Chamber
(NAC) is not in
compliance
with IFAD
Audit
Guidelines and
TORs.
b)   Revolving
matching
equity to PFIs
is not audited
33/43
a)   Internal auditor recruited from open market.
High
b)   Internal audit firm services recruited at midterm, scope to cover activities
at state / locality level
Medium
c)   Both to report directly to Steer Co in order to maintain independence.
a)   NAC was invited to IFAD training recently held in Sudan with the
purposes of communicating IFAD auditing requirements.
b)   Continue the dialogue with NAC and invite them to any future FM training
to Sudan portfolio to ensure that IFAD requirements are fulfilled.
Medium
c)   TOR to include agreed upon procedures related to use of rural finance
mechanisms,
Low
d)   The design team met with NAC and confirmed the IFAD requirement to
provide a no objection to the scope of work. NAC agreed to facilitate this
process with the projects, including for this project.
e)   A recent amendment to the Companies Act of Sudan requires that audits
be undertaken in line with international standards. NAC has confirmed that
they audit in line with ISA.
Project
Fiduciary Risk
at design:
OVERALL FM
RISK
HIGH
MEDIUM
I. Environment and Social category
119.
Based on IFAD's environmental and social categorization and criteria scheme and the results of the guiding
34/43
questions for environmental and social risk screening, the SNRLP project is classified as category B. With its focus
on NRM interventions, the programme will have a positive environmental impact. The range of NRM initiatives
supported will include water harvesting structure, soil and water conservation measures, forestry development
initiatives and rangeland development steps. Some of these initiatives, e.g. developing water points can have
negative consequences through as depletion of the aquifer and related depletion of rangeland. Similarly, the
promotion of NR related livelihoods and technologies could have unintended adverse environmental and/or social
impacts (e.g. small-scale aquaculture, natural resources-based value chain development, slaughterhouse, earth
dams, etc.). These adverse impacts, however, are likely to be limited in scope and magnitude and are easily
mitigatable through related awareness-raising, promotion of environmentally and climate resilient practices and close
follow-up from the project team. No formal Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) is required at the
stage of project design, however the SECAP note summarises the mainstreamed activities which are recommended.
120.
To identify the main environmental and climate risks in a cluster, the NRLMP in each cluster will be backed by a
Climate Risk Assessment and Management Plan (CRAMP). The CRAMP will be developed as a part of the NRLPMs
development process. The CRAMP will influence the CDC/NECs at the time of developing the NR vision for the
clusters. It will also highlight the climate risks to be considered (in the NRLMPs) while identifying the interventions for
attaining the NR vision of the cluster or network.
121.
Similarly each LIP will be backed by a Climate Adaptation Investment and Management Plan (CAIMP). The CLAIMPs
will identify the specific climate risk and mitigation measure association with the implementation of the activities
defined in each LIP. Together the CRAMP and CAIMPs will address:
122.
Mechanized, rain-fed agriculture sector issues such as impacts of traditional rain-fed agriculture; mechanized
irrigation; traditional irrigation, livestock husbandry, health-related impacts (water and chemicals); solid wastes and
hazardous management issues. The solutions explored in response to these issues will include avoiding cultivation of
water consuming varieties of crops; planting more trees (forest and horticulture) to keep the environment cool;
reintroducing drought tolerant varieties and less water consuming of crops (e.g. Guar); farmers providing ground
water irrigation frequently to protect their crops from drought; farmers taking necessary action to collect water from
deeper level; maintaining the humidity of land; practice diversified associate crop production and mulching system;
local seed collection and preservation systems; changing the food habits of the livestock and arrange alternative
fodder like dry straw instead of depending upon natural fodder for the cattle; Proper arrangement for vaccines and
other preventive measures for poultry birds and livestock.
123.
Forestland management issues such as Forestry sector environmental impacts, deforestation rates and impacts,
potential conflict ‘flashpoint’ over wood and charcoal. The solutions which will be explored will include, afforestation
and plant protection programs, planting more trees by the side of crop fields and ponds, measures to combat
desertification and the advancement of sand dunes, particularly in North Kordofan, afforestation measures.
124.
Freshwater resources issues such as, hafirs’ design and maladaptation, conservation of wetlands, Invasive plant
species, water (and soil) pollution, soil erosion, groundwater exploitation, fresh water fisheries, water sector
environmental governance. The solutions which will be explored will include increasing water availability by using
naturally depressed areas as artificial reservoir of water, installing deep tube-wells, farmers providing ground water
irrigation to protect crop from drought, farmers depending upon pond and reservoir water, initiating supplemental
irrigation, farmers taking necessary action to collect water from deeper level.
125.
The project is positioned to have a positive social impact. It is designed to promote resilience of communities living in
fragile areas of Sudan with a strong focus on collaboration between communities and the inclusion of marginalized
groups such as women, youth and pastoralists. It will capitalize on the social capital built by previous IFAD projects:
village institutions, networks, community extension agents and leverage these for participatory planning and
sustainable NRM and use these villages to promote best practices in social mobilization in new villages. The creation
of representative bodies inclusive of different users of NR (especially those who may be marginalized such as
women, youth, pastoralists) will help to build peace through negotiation of conflicting interests.
126.
SNLRP will leverage the inter-linkages between rural development, the economic and social empowerment of
women, youth and pastoralists. The project will have a positive impact on nutrition through facilitating access to
increased incomes from agricultural production and small businesses, increased availability of food, provision of
water, labour saving machinery, renewable energy (solar and gas), GALS training to facilitate women’s
empowerment and more equitable distribution of responsibilities and resources and nutrition awareness training. The
pastoralists are a community in transition in a challenging environment. A diagnosis will be undertaken to maps their
location and characteristics in the selected localities, analyse their specific issues and identify strategies and
investment opportunities to include them in the formulation of the NRLMP.
127.
IFAD has a Complaints Procedure to receive and facilitate resolution of concerns and complaints with respect to
alleged non-compliance of its environmental and social policies and the mandatory aspects of its Social,
Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures. For more information, visit the IFAD webpage:
https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/accountability-and-complaints-procedure. The component 1 community participatory
process leading to the development and agreement on NRLMPs which are setting the frameworks for the
participatory development of LIPs, complies with FPIC requirements.
J. Climate Risk classification
35/43
128.
The SNRLP has been classified as High Risk and will operate in regions in Sudan which are characterized by being
highly vulnerable to climate change, such as North Kordofan. Since 2015, most of the references on Sudan have
mentioned that Sudan is highly vulnerable to climate change with some particularly fragile sectors such as food
security, water resources and agriculture. Accordingly, a Climate Risk Assessment (CRA) will be prepared. As
discussed in the earlier section, CRAMP and CLAIMPs will be developed to support the NRLMPs and LIPs to
consider the climate related risks and include appropriate solutions to adapt to these risks.
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
129.
The Inter-Ministerial Steering Committee: An Inter-Ministerial Steering Committee, is already in place and meets
two times a year to oversee all IFAD co-financed projects in Sudan. The Minister of Agriculture and Forestry (MoAF)
chairs the committee. Other representatives are from the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (MOFEP),
Ministry of Irrigation and Water Resources (MoIWR), Ministry of Animal Resources, Fisheries and Wildlife (MARFW)
and the State Ministries of Production and Economic Resources (MPER) in the programme supported States. The
Central Coordination Unit (CCU) for IFAD co-financed projects is included in the committee. Specifically for SNRLP,
the committee will provide an enabling environment, remove bottlenecks in the policy engagement activities at the
National and State levels; review and approve NR governance and management related policy and best practice
recommendations emerging from the CPCU and champion the adoption of these recommendations by National and
State level agencies.
130.
National Programme Steering Committee (NPSC): The NPSC will be constituted to meet every quarter to oversee
programme planning, review progress, provide strategic guidance and facilitate linkages to government services and
private sector stakeholders. The undersecretary of the MoAF will chair the NPSC. Other members will be the
undersecretaries of the MOFEP; MARFW; MoIWR; Higher Council of Environment (HCE) and the Forestry National
Corporation (FNC). Also, the Director Generals (DG) of the MPER of the nine programme States and the senior
coordinatior of the CCU will be members. The NPSC will constitute a NPSC Technical Committee from within the
NPSC members to serve as a standing committee empowered to meet whenever needed to resolve implementation
bottlenecks that cannot be settled at the State level.
131.
State Steering Committee (SSC): A SSC in each State will oversee planning, review progress, facilitate linkages
between programme stakeholders and removing bottlenecks affecting smooth implementation. The Director General
of the MPER will Chair the SSC in each State. Other members will include representatives of the technical
departments of the MPER, FNC, and the Ministry of Physical Planning and Public Works (MPPPW). The SSC will
also include relevant Localty commissioners, cluster representatives and representatives from the Women’s
Association, Pastoralists’ Association and Farmers’ Association. The SSC will meet on a quarterly basis. It will
constitute a SSC Technical Committee from within the SSC members to meet whenever needed to resolve any
programme implementation bottlenecks encountered within the State.
Implementation structure
132.
SNRLP implementation will be headed by a central programme coordination unit (CPCU) in Sennar assisted by a
State programme coordination Unit in each of the 9 states.
133.
Central Programme Coordination Unit (CPCU): The CPCU, located in the former premises of the SUSTAIN project
in the Singa town (Sennar State), will serve as the programme headquarters and will lead overall programme
implementation. The Programme Director (PD) will head the CPCU and will implement the programme through a
central technical support team and a central operations support team. An internal audit team will also be located in
the CPCU (Refer PIM for organisational structure).
Central technical support team: The central technical support team will be responsible for overall technical
planning, implementation oversight, technical guidance to the SPCUs. It will comprise the Senior NRM Expert
(SNRE); Senior Livelihoods Development Expert (SLDE); Senior Gender and Community Development Expert
(SGCE); Senior M&E Expert (SMEE) and a Senior KM and Communications Expert (SKCE); The Senior NRM
Expert will be the Deputy Programme Director. Any other member of the technical team can function as the
36/43
Deputy Programme Director in the absence of the SNRE.
Central operations support team: This team will be responsible for programme financial planning, management
and control; overseeing programme procurement, contracting and contract management and staff evaluation.
Also, it will develop an internal system to monitor, record and report in detail all types of contributions from
community, locality and state levels. It will consist of the Financial Manager (FM), Senior Central Programme
Accountant (SCPA), Senior Central Procurement Expert (SCPE) Central Procurement Assistant (CPA), Central
Programme Accountant (CPA), and the Central Administrative Assistant (CAA).
The CPCU will also deploy 3 regional programme accountants (RPA) to strengthen the capacity at SPCUs. Each
regional position will be responsible for 3 SPCUs and will be based in one of these SPCUs. The allocation of
SPCUs to regional staff and the SPCU where they will be based will be finalised by the Financial Manager during
programme start-up. The regional staff will be paid from the CPCU programme budget, which will be responsible
for oversight and support of their allocated states. The regional programme accountants will report to the Financial
Manager based at the CPCU.
The internal audit team: A qualified Senior Internal Auditor (SIA) will be based at the CPCU. Given the large
organisational structure and geographical spread of SPCUs, the services of an internal audit firm will be procured
at midterm to support the SIA. The internal audit plan will cover the CPCU and SPCUs. Both the internal auditor
and firm will maintain independence by reporting directly to the NPSC.
134.
State Programme Coordination Units (SPCU): Nine SPCUs, one in each State, will lead programme
implementation in the States. The nine SPCUs will be in Kassala (Kassala State), Rufaa (Gezira State), Subagh
(Gadaref State), Abu Dileg (Khartoum State); Al Damir (River Nile State); Singa (Sennar State); El Obeid (North
Kordofan State), Al Foula (West Kordofan State) and Al Abbassiya(South Kordofan State). The State Coordinator
(SC) heading an SPCU will be assisted by a State technical support team, a State operations support team and a set
of Cluster Development Teams (CDT). The composition and functions of these teams are given below:
State technical support team: This team will be based in the SPCU and will be responsible for technical planning,
implementation, monitoring, follow-up and reporting of all State level programme activities. It will also train, guide
and backstop the CDTs, YPs and LEN volunteers during programme implementation. This team will comprise the
Water Resources Management Officer (WRMO); Forestry Management Officer (FMO); Rural and Agricultural
Development Officer (RADO); Community Development and Gender Officer (CDGO); and the M&E, KM and
Innovations Officer (MKIO). i) The WRMO, FMO and RADO will have technical oversight from the Senior NRM
Expert in the CPCU ii) The CDGO will have oversight from the SGCE in the CPCU iii) the SKCE will have technical
oversight from the SMEE.
State operations support team: This team will be based in the SPCU and will be responsible for all State level
financial, procurement and administrative aspects of the programme. It will comprise the State Accounts Officer
(SAO); State Procurement Officer (SPO) and State Administrative and Accounts Assistant (SAAA).
The Programme Accountants at SPCU level will report directly to the respective state coordinators and via matrix
management to regional accountants. The proposed structure will allow for adequate segregation of duties.
Cluster development teams: Each State will have 2-4 cluster development teams. Ten Cluster Development
Teams (CDT) will be deployed to the Kordofan region, 8 to the Butana Region and 2 to the Sennar region
according estimated number of ecosystem-based clusters in the States. The CPCU can fine tune this distribution
as the time of implementation based on the actual number of clusters selected in each state. The CDTs will carry
out cluster mobilisation activities through training and capacity building of groups, VDCs and CDCs; follow-up
programme activities implemented at the community level; ensure inclusion of vulnerable groups, (women,youth
and pastoralists) in the programme activities; mentor YPs and young extension agents and prepare and submit
cluster reports to the SPCUs. Each CDT will consist of two Cluster Development Officers (CDO), one male and
one female. The CDTs will be based in the Localities close to the programme clusters. The YPs and young
extension agents, will be considered as informal part of the CDTs based in the clusters or networks on voluntary
basis.
Cluster or network procurement committee (CPC): Each cluster or network will form a cluster procurement
committee consisting about 5-8 members drawn in a manner that all the communities are represented. The CPC
will be trained in procurement and carry out all cluster or network level procurement activities with supervision
from the SPCU. The CPC members will be volunteers and not paid by the programme.
135.
Regional Policy Coordination Centers: SNRLP will establish three Regional Policy Coordination Centers (RPCC),
one in each sector, to anchor the programme activities related to NR policy, laws, governance and regulations in the
sector. The Gazera SPCU in Rufaa, the Sennar SPCU in Singa and the North Kordofan SPCU in El Obeid will host
the SPCCs in the Butana, Sennar and Kordofan regions respectively. A Regional Policy Specialist (RPS) will lead
each SPCC supported by a team of State Policy Officers (SPoO) one from each State in the sector. However, the
Sennar SPCC will have a slightly different configuration with one SPO from the Sennar State and two SPOs from the
neighbouring Blue Nile and White Nile States in order to ensure coordination and harmonisation of inter-state
policies, laws and regulations mainly targeting pastoralists using the same stock-routes running across the three
states.
136.
Recruitment of staff: All staff members in the CPCU will be recruited competitively from the open market. All SPCU
staff will also be recruited competitively. Interested Government staff can apply and get selected through the
competitive recruitment process. Since project management and technical capacity staff members have remained a
challenge in the Sudan country programme, SNRLP will mitigate the risk by retaining the qualified staff on the ground
from previous projects. Supervision missions will assess staff performance and capacity on a regular basis and
recommend steps to address capacity gaps.
37/43
137.
IFAD has a Complaints Procedure to receive and facilitate resolution of concerns and complaints with respect to
alleged sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA). For more information, visit the IFAD webpage:
https://www.ifad.org/en/document-detail/asset/40738506.
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
138.
Financial management: The financial management risk assessment is HIGH. After implementing mitigation
measures the risk rating can improve to MEDIUM:
Risks
Mitigations
-   High country risk (inherent)
-   None
-   Implementation over a large geographical
area and weak internal control environment
-   Centralised/ring-fenced CPCU, CCU support, regional accounting
support staff, competitive recruitment of key staff, IFAD development
of PIM before start-up
-   Inadequate disbursement from GoS and IFAD
pre-financing of such contributions
-   Formalised withdrawal process from GoS based on cashflow
needs, CCU facilitation
-   Lack of skills/experience
-   IFAD e-learning, training, secondments to existing programmes,
-   Implementation readiness
-   Early procurement of accounting software and appointment of key
staff funded by GoS ( both will be considered as a condition precedent
to disbursement)
-   Non-compliant and irregular financial
reporting
-   Adoption of IPSAS cash, monthly/quarterly/annual reporting
(guidelines in PIM)
-   Weak internal audit function
-   Assigning an internal auditor, appointment of a firm at mid-term,
reporting directly to Steering Committee
139.
The financial management structure will comprise a CPCU team with a Financial Manager, Senior Central
Programme Accountant, Central Programme Accountant, Central Administrative assistant, Senior Central
Procurement Expert, Central Procurement Assistant and Senior Internal Auditor. The CPCU team will be responsible
for overall coordination of the programme. The CPCU team will be assisted by 9 SPCU teams comprising of a State
Accounts Officer, State Administrative/Accounts assistant and State Procurement Officer. SPCU level capacity will be
strengthened by 3 regional programme accountants (refer programme management section above).
140.
All financial management staff (including procurement) will be sourced on a competitive basis (ToRs outlined in PIM)
as outlined in the paragraph above for Recruitment of Staff . Newly appointed staff will spend an amount of time with
existing projects to build capacity. All programme staff will undertake the IFAD FM e-learning course. The internal
controls and other financial management arrangements are outlined in the Financial Manual Section of the PIM. It
has been tailored to meet the specific needs of the programme and will be handed over to the Financial Manager
once he/she is appointed. The Financial Manager will be responsible for ensuring that this document is changed and
updated as required, subject to IFAD no objection.
141.
Budgeting: The AWPB will be initiated at the cluster or network level based on beneficiaries needs (bottom up
approach). The AWPB format and preparation guidelines are defined in the PIM. The accounting system functionality
will allow for the monitoring of actual to budget expenditure by category, component and financier.
38/43
142.
Flow of funds and disbursement arrangements: The IFAD Loan, IFAD Grant and LDCF/GEF Grants will be
denominated in Euro and will be advanced to a Euro-denominated designated account (DA) maintained at Central
Bank of Sudan. The programme will use available IFAD disbursement methods. The DA will be managed on an
imprest basis. The programme will be required to submit quarterly Withdrawal Applications (WA) or once 30% of the
advance has been utilised (whichever occurs earlier). Details of authorised allocation, Statement of Expenditure
(SoE) threshold and other disbursement related details will be outlined in the Letter to the Borrower/Recipient.
143.
The CPCU will open an SGD pool account for receiving both IFAD Loan, IFAD Grant and LDCF/GEF and
Government contributions. Government contributions to the CPCU pool account will take place on a monthly basis in
advance, based on formal requests from the programme to Government and based on the Governments’
commitment as captured in the AWPB. If Government does not contribute the required amount in a timely manner,
the programme, with the assistance of the CCU will engage with Government to resolve the issue. From the CPCU
pool account, funds will be disbursed to the respective SPCU bank accounts (SGD) based on SPCU level cashflow
needs.. Beneficiary cash contributions are made into the relevant SPCU bank accounts. From the SPCU bank
accounts, payments will be made directly to suppliers of goods/services or via rural finance mechanisms as outlined
in the PIM.
144.
All bank accounts in the programme will have at least three authorised signatories. All payments will be by bank
transfers or cheque payment, except for petty cash expenditures or expenditure related to activities implemented at
community/locality level where it is not possible to pay by cheque. Cash payments will be managed via advance
payments as outlined in the PIM.
145.
Accounting systems, policies and procedures and financial reporting: The programme will adopt the International
Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) Cash accounting standard which is acceptable in terms of the IFAD
Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD financed projects (FR&A) handbook. Accounting software
procurement/installation will be a disbursement condition . A proposed ToR for the accounting software is included as
an annexure to the PIM and specifies the requirement for ongoing technical support and software updates. The
accounting system will allow monitoring by source of finance to ensure that pre-financing by IFAD/GEF if GoS
contributions do not occur. All accounting policies and procedures are documented in the PIM. The CPCU will
prepare monthly management reports in a suitable format which will serve as an internal monitoring tool. The
programme will provide interim (quarterly) and annual financial statements in line with the IFAD FR&A handbook
(details in the PIM).
146.
Internal and External Audit arrangements: The National Audit Chamber (NAC) will conduct the annual audit. Some
shortcomings in their audit reporting has been identified but recent IFAD financial reporting and auditing training
intervention and ongoing engagement is expected to address this issue. NAC will perform both the annual statutory
audit and additional agreed upon procedures, designed for the purposes of testing and validating expenditure at the
beneficiary level. The scope of work will be agreed annually and submitted to IFAD for no objection. A qualified senior
internal auditor will be assigned to project and based at the CPCU. Given the large organisational structure and
geographical spread of SPCUs, the services of an internal audit firm will be procured at midterm. The internal audit
plan will cover the CPCU and SPCUs. Both the internal auditor and firm will maintain independence by reporting
directly to the National Programme Steering Committee.
147.
Use of Country Systems: Currently, IFAD-financed programmes in Sudan place reliance on country systems with
regards to 1) internal audit (MoFEP internal auditor seconded to projects); 2) external audit (NAC statutory audit); 3)
treasury (DA with the Central Bank of Sudan); and 4) organisation (Financial Management staff seconded to
projects). This programme therefore is expected to continue its reliance partially on country systems in relation to
these elements.
148.
Implementation readiness: EUR 340 000 will be allocated as start-up cost to cover costs related to disbursement
condition. The cost includes cost of procurement and implementing the accounting software and recruitment of key
staff and staff training.
39/43
149.
Anticorruption and good governance framework: IFAD’s anticorruption and good governance framework will be
applicable to the programme.
150.
Procurement: Procurement at levels of national competitive bidding (NCB) and international competitive bidding
(ICB) methods will be carried out by the Central Coordination Unit for IFAD co-financed projects (CCU) on behalf of
the projects. However, the procurement function at CCU will require streamlining/strengthening of its capacity.
Recently, CCU has recruited a procurement assistant, assigned from the Government, how will need further training
particularly on IFAD Procurement Guidelines and knowledge of IFAD Procurement Handbook. The Programme
procurement will follow Government Guidelines as far as they are in line with the IFAD Guidelines. Also considering
capacity gaps indicated, close monitoring from the ICO will be made to ensure no deviation occurs.
151.
Arrangements for procurement: Depending on procurement volume and value, SNRLP procurement activities will be
carried out at CCU level, CPMU level, SPIU and community level. Considering the relatively weak capacity at present,
close monitoring by ICO will be exercised to guide the process. The Programme will follow the procurement
thresholds set in the Letter to the Borrower and in the approved Procurement Plan. Procurement of goods and works
will be bulked into sizeable bid packages to attract adequate competition thus resulting in cost-effective and efficient
procurement. At community level, procurement with community participation will receive oversight from the
procurement staff in the SPCUs to ensure adherence to required procedures and processes.
152.
Procurement Methods: Procurement of works and goods will be done through: (i) international competitive bidding
(ICB); (ii) limited international bidding (LIB) or restricted tendering; (iii) national competitive bidding (NCB);
(iv) international or national shopping or requests for quotations; (v) direct contracting; and (vi) procurement with
community participation. Similarly, the procurement of consulting services will done through (i) quality and cost-based
selection (QCBS); (ii) quality based selection (QBS); (iii) selection under a fixed budget (FBS); (iv) selection based
on consultants’ qualifications (CQS); (v) least cost selection (LCS); (vi) single-source selection (SSS); and
(vii) selection of individual consultants (IC). For each contract to be financed from the IFAD financing proceeds, the
types of procurement methods, estimated cost, prior review requirements and time-frame will be agreed between the
Programme and IFAD when approving the Programme Procurement Plan.
153.
Thresholds for Procurement Methods: While eventually the specific thresholds for procurement financed under the
Programme will be stipulated in the Letter to the Recipient (LTR), following are the recommended thresholds:
Type of procurement
Thresholds
Procurement method
1
Works
-   More than EUR 300,000
-   ICB*
-   EUR 50,000-300,000
-   NCB
-   Less than EUR 50,000
-   National shopping & community participation
2
Goods
-   More than EUR 200,000
-   ICB*
-   EUR 25,000-200,000
-   NCB
-   Less than EUR 25,000
40/43
-   National shopping
3a
Consulting services (firms)
-   More than EUR 100,000
-   QCBS
-   Less than EUR 100,000
-   CQS
3b
Consulting services (individual)**
-   Individual consultant selection procedures
*using the WB’s standard bidding documents.
**The specific nature of the assignment will determine the method of procurement and will be pre-determined in
each approved procurement plan.
154.
Thresholds for Prior Review: For the purposes monitoring and review of IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines , the
following shall be subject to prior review by the Fund: i) Award of any contract for goods and equipment estimated to
cost EUR 50,000 equivalent or more; ii) Award of any contract for works estimated to cost EUR 100,000 equivalent or
more; iii) Award to a firm of any contract for consultancy services estimated to cost EUR 100,000 equivalent or more;
iv) Award to an individual of any contract for consulting services estimated to cost EUR 25,000 equivalent or more;
and v) Award of any contract through direct contracting, single source selection, including selection of United Nations
agencies, irrespective of the amount. Furthermore, for consultancy services, all terms of reference, short-listing (if
applicable) and draft contracts will be subject to IFAD prior review. The aforementioned thresholds may be modified
by IFAD during the course of Programme implementation (Refer PIM for more details)
155.
Staffing and Capacity Development: The staffing of the procurement function in the Programme will comprise one
senior procurement expert with a central procurement assistant at the CPCU and one state procurement assistant at
each of the nine SPCU offices. These positions will be filled competitively, at the CPMU and SPIU levels and their
contracts will be performance-based contracts. Competent GoS staff will be eligible to compete and if selected, will
be hired as Programme staff and it will be their responsibility to take all necessary arrangements in accordance with
the labour laws of the country. These staffs, as well as community procurement committees entrusted with
procurement at cluster levels will undergo intensive capacity development to establish sound procurement
management system in the Programme. Refer PIM for more details.
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
156.
Planning: The period of the Annual Work Programme and Budget (AWPB) will coincide with the annual budget
period of the GoS from January to December. SNRLP will develop the AWPB through a participatory approach. The
CPCU will prepare a common AWPB template for all SPCUs along with guidelines. AWPB development will
commence with consultation between the Community Development Teams (CDTs) and the CDC/NECs about the
activities for the next year. In consultation with the CDTs the SPCU technical officers will develop technical work
plans for the next year. Each SPCU will organize a 2-3 days AWPB development session where the technical work
plans and targets will be agreed to and reflected in the AWPB format. The targets set will be aligned with the targets
in the log frame. The Finance Officer will prepare the technical and operations budget of the SPCU. The M&E, KM
and Innovation officer will prepare the annual M&E plan and the Procurement Officer will prepare the Procurement
Plan (PP). Based on these inputs SPCU coordinator will compile and share the draft State AWPB with the CPCU
along with M&E plan and PP.
157.
The CPCU will review and consolidate the AWPBs and PPs for the nine States and share the consolidated AWPB
with IFAD for an initial review. Comments from IFAD will be discussed in review meetings of the CPCU and the
SPCUs. The CPCU will fine tune the AWPB addressing the comments from IFAD and submit the final AWPB to IFAD
for no objection. If IFAD does not provide comments after thirty (30) days of receipt of the AWPB and PP, the AWPB
shall be deemed acceptable.
158.
M&E: The M&E system will be established and managed by the CPCU and the SCPUs with support from IFAD in
accordance with established IFAD procedures. It will be built around the set of selected indicators outlined in the
logical framework taking into account key IFAD corporate indicators and project specific indicators. The CPCU will
have the overall responsibility for M&E and follow a participatory approach. The Senior M&E Expert at CPCU will be
responsible for the proper functioning of the overall M&E system and will guide the deployment of the M&E system at
the SPCU level. The person will also be responsible for oversight of the data collected and consolidation of the data
from different states. Standardized data collection formats will be designed based on which the YPs, young
extension agents, VDCs and the CDC/NECs will collect data about programme performance in the cluster or network
levels. The CDOs will validate the results and submit the reports to the SPCU where the M&E, KM and Innovation
Officer will consolidate and report the results to the CPCUs for programme level consolidation and reporting against
the logframe indicators and preparation of monthly and semi annual reports submitted to IFAD.
41/43
159.
Management Information System (MIS): Within the first three months of the Programme, the CPCU Senior M&E
Expert must develop the required specifications for a Management Information System (MIS), which will be
instrumental in the data collection and analysis as well as in their reporting. The MIS must incorporate mobile and
internet technologies which can make the data collection and dissemination of results easy and readily accessible.
The MIS must have sufficient tools (information dashboards, charting tools, and custom reports) for data review,
analysis and dissemination. The CPCU Director will closely work with the Senior M&E Expert to procure a
consultant/firm to develop and implement the MIS.
160.
Reporting: Monthly report: The SPCUs will prepare monthly status reports with quantitative information on progress
against the planned targets. The status report will include technical reports prepared by the technical officers in the
SPCUs. The SPCUs will submit these reports to the CPCU Director for review no later than five (5) working days
after the end of the month. Semi-annual progress reports: The CPCU will develop semi-annual Progress Report
based on the monthly reports received from the SPCUs and submit these reports to IFAD no later than forty-five (45)
days after the end of the period. The Senior M&E expert in the CPCU will be responsible for the preparation of the
semi-annual reports (refer PIM for more details). Semi-annual M&E reports will be updated prior to IFAD supervision
missions. Updates to the progress on Logframe Core Indicators will be provided during supervision missions and at
any other time as requested by IFAD.
161.
A Start-up Workshop will be conducted at the onset to present the steps for AWPB preparation as well as the M&E
system. Under the guidance of the CPCU staff a special session on M&E system will be organised to brief
participants about the Project Logical Framework, progress reporting and evaluation arrangements. Additionally,
IFAD’s new core indicators, and key performance indicators will be presented.
162.
Baseline studies: Baselines will be carried out only in those areas which were not previously covered by IFAD-funded
interventions. For all the other areas, data available from impact studies and PCRs will be used. If needed,
researches will be carried out to investigate aspects which are relevant for implementation, but not reported by
previous IFAD interventions documentation (refer PIM for more details).
163.
Knowledge Management: KM will enable the country programme to build a credible knowledge base of practical
and actionable know-how that can be used to better address  challenges related to the community governance of NR
in Sudan. To produce knowledge which is demand-driven, the knowledge needs of the target groups, specifically
women, youth and pastoralists will be assessed. Consultation will be held to identify and address knowledge and
capacity priorities, needs, gaps and solutions. Based on this information, information materials and training for target
groups will be produced with support of the M&E, KM and Innovation officer in the SPCU.
164.
The CDTs will play a crucial role in liaising with VDCs to identify lessons learned and best practices from the field.
The lessons learned and best practices collected at the field level will be transmitted to the state level, through the
SPCUs M&E, KM and Innovation officers. The latter will have to identify those experiences or innovations that can be
potentially useful to broader audiences and use it as inputs for the preparation of Knowledge Products (KPs). In the
case of case studies, she/he will provide support to the CDTs to produce written materials (refer PIM for more
details).
165.
Learning: Another task which should be regularly performed by the CPCU Senior M&E expert refers to the promotion
of specific learning events to the benefit of the programme teams in the nine States such as project learning days:
this will allow all the participants to get training on specific issues, and possibly interact and exchange ideas and
experiences on a regular basis. Documentation containing the main points arisen during these events will be
produced shorty after their implementation, distributed among participants and but also shared at a wider level with
all relevant stakeholders.
166.
Communication: The SPCUs will regularly provide the CPCU with KPs. The Senior M&E expert in the CPCU will
arrange and prepare these products for a wider sharing among all the stakeholders of current IFAD funded
interventions in Sudan. This will be carried out through the KM unit of the Central Coordination Unit (CCU) for IFAD
co-financed projects based in Khartoum. The CCU web page already has relevant information of all IFAD projects in
the country (both ongoing and closed) and this will be the main dissemination channel also for SNRLMP. To increase
the visibility, a specific hyperlink to this web should be added in the IFAD intranet page covering operations in Sudan.
This action should be carried out in close liaise with NEN KM focal point in Rome by the first of year of
implementation (refer PIM for details).
b. Innovation and scaling up
167.
42/43
Innovation and scaling up: The innovations which are built into the programme includes: i) SNRLP will adopt an
ecosystem based cluster approach where a cluster of communities sharing a common ecosystem (rangeland,
forestland, farmland or water resource) will be targeted instead of individual isolated communities. Joint action by all
the communities using a common ecosystem approach will result in faster and lasting NR governance and
management results. This approach is an improvement over selecting individual isolated villages followed by
previous projects where neighbouring villages are often unreached even though they have similar needs ii) The
NRLMPs will present comprehensive land use plans for the cluster or network and provide a vision for the
improvement of the NRs in the cluster or network through integrated governance and management of the NRs.
Though some project such as LMRP has something similar in the form of CAPs, the scope of these CAPs are limited
as they focus mainly on areas of project investment without addressing the issue of governance and management of
the NRs; iii) The clusters or networks will be developed around the concept of the governance and management of
the common resources shared by the different communities resulting in the resolution of conflicts and improvement of
the health of the common NRs. Ongoing projects have relatively less focus on investment in the improvement of
common resources; iv) Pastoralists will be a key target group. They will be involved in consultations regarding the
management of the common resources from the beginning and will also participate in the governance structures
developed for oversight of the common resources. Seed capital support to support start up pastoralist youth
enterprises will be provided; v) The use of young professionals and youth extension agents have demonstrated good
results in the BIRDP. SNRLP will scale up these experiences across the programme area.
M. Implementation plans
a. Implementation readiness and start-up plans.
168.
Implementation readiness and start-up plans: The ICO will take steps to ensure readiness for implementation of
the programme: i) The office facility for the SNRLP CPCU will be secured in the Singa town of the Sennar State. A
large office building has been financed by the SUSTAIN project and will be only partially occupied by the State Office
of the IAMDP. This premise will be secured as the office of the SNRLP CPCU. Similarly, office space will be secured
for the 9 SPCUs; ii) A committee will be established to oversee the recruitment of the programme staff; iii) The assets
of the BIRDP project, which will be closing soon, will be inherited mainly vehicles, office equipment etc. Similarly,
some of the assets of the IAMDP State Office in Sennar, sharing premise with the SNRLP CPCU, will shared some of
its assets mainly vehicles and office equipment; iv) With the assistance of the current IFAD co-finance projects
operating in the SNRLP project area the 9 State Governments will be oriented to the ecosystem based cluster
approach and will also collect and prepare background details (maps, literature, survey) that is necessary for mapping
the clusters or networks v) Partnership commitments will be secured from the Microfinance Unit of the Central Bank
of Sudan (CBS-MFU) and the Sudanese Microfinance Development Company (SMDC) to assist the process of
selecting PFIs once the SNRLP starts implementation vi) Accounting software procurement/implementation will
commence once the financing agreements enter into force. A proposed ToR for the accounting software is included
as an annexure to the Financial Manual section of the PIM and specifies the requirement for ongoing technical
support and software updates.
b. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
169.
Programme supervision: IFAD's supervisory function will be ongoing and support will be provided to resolve issues
that may arise during implementation. Supervision Missions will take place at least once per year and will be
organized by IFAD´s ICO in coordination with the Borrower, the Lead Programme Ministry and the CPCU. The
Supervision Missions will pay particular attention to smooth and timely implementation of the programme and to the
achievement of its intended objectives and outcomes, and to the progress made on achieving the log frame and CIs
(refer PIM for more details). The supervision missions will monitor the programme feasibility and capacity to deliver
on an annual basis based on the following high level triggers: 
Triggers
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Year 5
Year 6
Number of SPCUs established and fully
staffed
9
Progress in implementation of AWPB
At least 80
percent
achieved
At least 80
percent
achieved
At least 80
percent
achieved
At least 80
percent
achieved
At least 80
percent
achieved
At least 80
percent
achieved
No of NRLMPs developed and approved
20
43/43
40
80
10
No of groups formed, capacitated and
developing their LIP
500
1,000
2,500
1,000
500
170.
Mid-term review: A Mid-Term Review (MTR) will be carried out three years after programme start-up. This will be an
external review led by IFAD. It will assess implementation progress and likelihood of the achievement of the
programme development objectives trough the evaluation of results reported up to that moment against the Log
frame indicators. The MTR will also pinpoint (if need be) corrective actions to be put in place in the remaining
implementation period before completion (refer PIM for more details).
171.
Programme completion process and report: The programme completion review is a process undertaken by the
Government of Sudan in close coordination with IFAD at the end of the implementation cycle in order to report on the
results achieved through programme interventions. The main purposes of the review process are to promote
accountability, reflect on programme performance, produce lessons learnt to inform new programme/project designs,
define an exit strategy for sustainability. The learning dimension of the completion process should be emphasized
since it provides useful information for improvements in future programme/project designs and programming. (refer
PIM for more details).
Footnotes
[1] The project will target landscapes consisting in ecological units where within communities are using shared NRs such
as wadis (watersheds), forest or rangeland.
[2] Other references are: i.) Hamid Omer et al., 2017. Policy Making processes in the water, forest and rangeland sectors
of Sudan, UNEP, Khartoum, Sudan; ii.) Mia Madsen and Mohammed el Hassan, 2017. ‘Securing Communal Land and
NR Rights through participatory governance methods; lessons from Sudan’, Conference on Land Policy in Africa 2017,
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia; iii.) IFAD, 2017. ‘Western Sudan Resources Management Programme, Project completion report,
El Obeid, Khartoum, Sudan’.
Sudan
Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Document Date:
15/07/2019
Project No.
2000002105
Report No.
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme
Logical Framework
Results Hierarchy
1/5
Name
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Outreach 
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households members Project
reports
Household members
504000
720000
Annual
CPCU
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
Non-women-headed households
42000
60000
Women-headed households
Households
42000
60000
84000
120000
Project
reports
Annual
CPCU
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the project Project
reports
Annual
CPCU
Males
Females
Young
Indigenous people
Total number of persons receiving
services
42000
60000
42000
60000
25200
36000
42000
60000
84000
120000
Project Goal 
Improved food security, incomes and resilience of
pastoralist, agro-pastoralist and smallholder crop farmers in
Butana, Kordofan and Sennar regions.
Reduction of severe acute malnutrition in children
Prevalence of wasting in children
under five (%)
16.5
14.5
Baseline,
mid & end
line survey
Baseline,
Mid-term,
Completion
CPCU
Households reporting an increase of at least 20% in income as a
result of services provided by the project
Households
Percentage
36000
84000
30
70
Baseline,
mid & end
line survey
Baseline,
Mid-term,
Completion
CPCU
- Stable political and
macro-economic
environment - No
major natural
disaster affects the
Project Area
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
2/5
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Development Objective 
Increase production, secure access to NRs for vulnerable
users and improve the sustainability of NR related
livelihoods in Butana, Kordofan and Sennar regions.
Baseline,
mid & end
line survey
Baseline,
Mid-term,
Completion
CPCU
Baseline,
mid & end
line survey
Baseline,
Mid-term,
Completion
CPCU
- Government
willingness to
improve access to
NR
Baseline,
mid & end
line survey
Baseline,
Mid-term,
Completion
CPCU
Households with increased score of at least 30% in the resilience
score card (appendix 5.2)
Households
Percentage
24000
72000
20
60
1.2.1 Households reporting improved access to land, forests, water
or water bodies for production purposes
Males
Females
Young
Indigenous people
18000
36000
18000
36000
10800
21600
18000
36000
1.2.4 Households reporting an increase in production
Households
Males
Females
Young
Indigenous people
Households
40
70
24000
42000
24000
42000
14400
25200
24000
42000
48000
84000
Outcome 
Outcome 1: Increased adoption of NR management
practices, technologies and business models that enhances
the quality and sustainable use of NRs
3.2.2 Households reporting adoption of environmentally
sustainable and climate-resilient technologies and practices
Annual
SPCU
Progress
reports by
SPCUs
Households
Males
Females
Young
Indigenous people
30
70
18000
42000
18000
42000
10800
25200
18000
42000
- NRM practices are
disseminated and
adopted widely -
Good quality BDS
are available -
Smallholder access
to rural financial
services
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
3/5
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
3.2.3 Households reporting a significant reduction in the time spent
for collecting water or fuel
Annual
SPCU
Progress
reports by
SPCUs
Males
Females
Young
Indigenous people
24000
42000
24000
42000
14400
25200
24000
42000
Number of hectares of land brought under climate resilience
management
Annual
SPCU
Progress
reports by
SPCUs
Cropland (Ha)
Rangeland (Ha)
Stock routes (Ha)
Forest land
65285
163213
11441
28602
3750
600000
1400
2157
Output 
Output 1.1: Inter-community framework for NR and land-use
governance effectively implemented
Number of cluster/network NR and Land-Use Management Plans
(NRLMP) with CCA mainstreamed being implemented
Plans
70
150
1.1.1 Persons whose ownership or user rights over natural
resources have been registered in national cadasters and/or
geographic information management systems
Males
Females
Young
Indigenous people
18000
36000
18000
36000
10800
21600
18000
36000
Progress
reports by
SPCUs
Progress
reports by
SPCUs
Semi-
annually
SPCUs
Semi-
annually
SPCUs
Persons reporting reduction in dispute over use of land and natural
resources
Indigineous people
18000
36000
Progress
reports by
SPCUs
Semi-
annually
SPCUs
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
4/5
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Output 
Output 1.2: Access to technical assistance and finance
facilitated to support the implementation of Livelihood
Investment Plans (LIP) aligned with NRLMPs
Percentage
Males
Females
Young
30
60
18000
36000
18000
36000
10800
21600
3.1.1 Groups supported to sustainably manage natural resources
and climate-related risks
Groups supported
Total size of groups
Males
Females
Young
Indigenous people
3850
5500
84000
120000
42000
60000
42000
60000
25200
36000
42000
60000
Progress
reports by
SPCUs
Semi-
annually
SPCUs
Outcome 
Outcome 2: Legal, policy and institutional framework for
upscaling community based NRM improved
Number of institutions at the federal, state and locality level that
have adopted and implemented improved regulations and policies
in the realm of NRM
M&E
system
Annual
SPCU
Women in leadership position
1155
1650
Institutions
5
10
- The capacities of
institutions are
developed -
Government support
review of framework
for NRM
Output 
Output 2.1: Natural resources legal and policy frameworks
strengthened
Policy 1 Policy-relevant knowledge products completed
Number
5
10
Policy 2 Functioning multi-stakeholder platforms supported
Number
6
9
M&E
system
M&E
system
Annually
CPCU
Annually
CPCU
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Output 
Output 2.2: Institutions capacitated on community based
CCA and NR governance, management and suitable
technology related issues
5/5
Name
Baseline Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency Responsibility
Number of institutions staff trained on CC adaptation and NR
governance
M&E
system
Annually
CPCU
Males
Females
150
100
300
200
Sudan
Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Document Date:
15/07/2019
Project No.
2000002105
Report No.
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 2:  Theory of Change  
Major contextual challenges for 
targeted households in the project 
intervention areas 
Constraints in access to and lack of 
management of natural resources (NR): 
 pressure from land-use competition 
from mining and large and medium 
scale crop farming  
 multiple and parallel systems for NR 
management and governance 
resulting in confused land tenure 
arrangements, disputes and low 
incentives for engagement 
 Limited knowledge on legal 
instruments for securing land rights 
 unsustainable use of range- forest- 
and crop-land resources leading to 
soil erosion and low productivity 
 rainfed conditions with limited access 
to water for livestock and 
complementary irrigation 
Additional challenges from climate 
change: 
 Increase temperatures, rainfall 
variability and occurrence of 
prolonged dry spells and droughts 
High poverty levels and periodic food 
insecurity and fragility among small crop 
farmers, agro-pastoralists and pastoralists.  
Degraded NRs threatening the sustainability 
of livelihood development initiative of past 
IFAD co-financed projects. 
Poor enabling environment for business 
development:  
 low business  management skills and lack of 
enterprise and business development 
support for small farmers and pastoralists 
 limited access to finance due to less 
appetite of financial institutions to support 
high risk rural businesses 
 lack of infrastructure and service businesses 
supporting small farmers’ value chains (e.g. 
veterinary and extension services, market 
places, dealers/repair services for small 
scale renewable energy systems). 
 Limited access to markets 
Opportunities: 
 Political support for the 
development of the 
agricultural sector to 
diversify the economy 
 Government recognition of 
the importance of effective 
NR management and 
governance frameworks to 
avoid conflicts and alleviate 
poverty 
 Proven good practices to 
build on in the country for 
community and inter-
community NR governance 
and management, 
increasing production and 
incomes and reducing 
conflicts 
Desired change 
Project goal: 
 increased food security, 
incomes and resilience of 
pastoralist, agro-
pastoralist and small crop 
farmers engaging in joint 
natural resources 
governance and 
management and 
development of related 
businesses in targeted 
landscapes. 
Development objective: 
increased adoption of 
natural resources 
management practices, 
technologies and business 
models enhancing NR 
sustainable use and 
securing access for 
vulnerable resources 
use+rs 
Expected results 
Proposed project 
interventions 
Component 1 will support: 
 Community mobilization and 
development of NR 
Management and Livelihood 
Investment Plans (NRMLIP) 
 Formation of NRM, Business 
and saving groups (self-
targeting) for the different 
activities prioritized in the 
NRMLIP    
 Processing of land titles 
 Facilitation of technical 
assistance and finance for the 
implementation of NRMLIP 
priorities such as: 
-  range- and forest-land 
demarcation, rehabilitation, 
and management;  
-  livestock corridor 
demarcation, water points 
and service along the route;  
-  water harvesting and 
catchment conservation;  
-  soil and water  
management and climate 
resilient practices in crop 
farming; 
-  innovations in alternative 
livelihoods and 
technologies 
 Provision of business 
development services for 
rural businesses supporting 
small farmers’ and 
pastoralists’ value chains 
Component 2 will support: 
 Policy relevant knowledge 
products based on 
component 1 evidence 
 Policy workshops 
 Streamlining of NR legal and 
policy framework 
 Capacity building of public 
and private service providers 
and state and federal 
government staff 
Outcome 
1: 
Increased 
production 
from scaling 
up 
community 
based NR 
governance 
and 
manageme
nt practices, 
technologie
s and 
businesses 
Outcome 2: 
institutional 
framework for 
upscaling 
community 
based NRM 
improved 
Sudan
Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Document Date:
15/07/2019
Project No.
2000002105
Report No.
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 3:  Programme costs and financing: Detailed costs tables 
1. 
Introduction  
1. 
This section describes the assumptions underlying the derivation of programme 
costs, estimated programme costs and financing plan. The programme costs are based 
on parameters collected during the design mission in December 2018. The key 
parameters are presented below: 
Programme Duration: The implementation period of the Sustainable Natural 
2. 
Resources and Livelihood Programme is 6 years.  
Price Contingencies: Price contingencies will cover the expected price increase 
3. 
between programme preparation and programme start up as well as throughout the 
programme implementation period. All costs have been estimated on the basis of prices 
prevailing in Sudan in December 2018 and on the basis of expected local inflation rate. 
The inflation has been assumed at 12.10 and 8% for the last 4 years of the programme 
and international inflation rate (2% per year over the six-year implementation period).  
Physical Contingencies: aim to cover uncertainties related to units’ costs. They 
4. 
are assumed at 5%, and they are applied only to production and infrastructure 
investments.  
Taxes: The levels of taxes in the unit costs were estimated to include 
5. 
Governmental duties and taxes. Most costs items include VAT, which account for 17%. 
As per IFAD rules and regulations, local VAT and import taxes are considered as a 
contribution to programme costs by the Government of Sudan (see financing tables). 
The Value Added Tax (VAT) applies to virtually all expenditure categories except 
international technical assistance, and staff allowances. An average amount of 17% VAT 
is included for all equipment, training and workshops, studies (realized by service 
providers) funded with IFAD funds.  
Exchange Rate: The exchange rate used in the analysis is fixed at 1 EUR= 53.9 
6. 
SDG.  
Total Cost: Total Programme Cost including physical and price contingencies are 
7. 
estimated at EUR 77.7  million over a 6-year period. Component 1 on ‘Up scaling 
community based natural resources management and businesses’ is the main 
investment and represents 72.1% of the total programme costs, while Component 2 on 
‘Improving the institutional framework for up scaling community based NRM’ component 
representing 14.4% of total programme costs. ‘Programme Management and 
Coordination Unit’, represent 13.5% of the total programme costs.  
Programme Financing: The Financing Plan covers (i) an IFAD Grant of EUR 
8. 
45.2 million (ii) IFAD Loan of EUR 11.3 million (iii) GF/LDCF Grant of EUR 1.8 million (iv) 
contribution from Government of EUR 11.7 million (v) beneficiaries (in-kind and cash) 
contributions estimated at EUR 4.5 million, and (vi) private sector contribution estimated 
at EUR 3.3 million. 
The base costs are calculated at December 2018 prices and include estimated 
9. 
duties and taxes. Total contingencies are respectively at 16% of total costs, or 19% of 
total base costs.  
Investment costs are EUR 70.2 million and represent 90% of total costs. Taxes 
10. 
amount to EUR 11.7 million, that is 15% of total costs and the foreign exchange 
component is at EUR 8.8 million or 11.3% of the total programme costs. The recurrent 
cost accounts for EUR 7.5 million or equivalent to 9.6% of the total costs. The exchange 
rate used is EUR 1.0 = SDG 53.9. Foreign currency costs have been estimated at 11% 
and those for local currency costs have been estimated at 89%. The cost per direct 
beneficiary household amounts to about EUR 648 or EUR 108 per beneficiary.  
Table 1:  Program Costs by Component (EUR’000) 
A. Upscaling community based natural resources management and businesses
Community mobilization and NRM planning.
Implementation of Community NRM and Livelihood Investment Plan.
Subtotal
B. Improving the institutional framework for upscaling community based NRM.
Strengthening of the NR legal and policy framework
Building of institutional capacities
Subtotal
C. Project Management & Coordination Unit
Total PROJECT COSTS
999
4.053
5.052
345
727
1.073
3.857
9.982
2.015
18.989
21.004
1.311
1.195
2.506
1.325
24.835
2.372
17.642
20.014
2.045
1.300
3.345
1.380
24.739
1.078
6.826
7.904
1.415
1.233
2.648
1.315
11.867
254
1.646
1.900
542
622
1.164
1.285
4.349
91
98
189
58
385
443
1.301
1.933
6.808
49.254
56.061
5.717
5.462
11.179
10.465
77.705
Proposed Program Financing:  Out of the total programme cost of EUR 77.7 
11. 
million, IFAD contribution will be EUR 56.5 million (72.6%), of which EUR 45.2 million is 
grant and EUR 11.3 million is a loan. The GEF/LCDF grant is EUR 1.8 million (2.3%). The 
remaining 19.5 million (25.1%) will be financed from domestic resources comprising 
Government contributions of EUR 11.7 million (15%), beneficiaries’ contribution of EUR 
4.5 million (5.7%) and private sector EUR 3.3 million (4.3%).  
Table 2: Programme Components by Financiers (EUR’000) 
based natural resources management and businesses
Community mobilization and NRM planning.
Implementation of Community NRM and Livelihood Investment Plan.
Subtotal
B. Improving the institutional framework for upscaling community based NRM.
Strengthening of the NR legal and policy framework
Building of institutional capacities
179
C. Project Management & Coordination Unit
Total PROJECT COSTS
4.087
26.118
30.205
3.486
3.575
7.891
45.157
60,0
53,0
53,9
61,0
65,4
75,4
58,1
1.079
6.474
7.553
872
894
1.973
11.291
15,9
13,1
13,5
15,2
16,4
18,9
14,5
306
1.065
1.371
387
-
-
1.758
4,5
2,2
2,4
6,8
-
-
2,3
275
4.094
4.370
-
78
-
4.448
4,0
8,3
7,8
-
1,4
-
5,7
-
3.315
3.315
-
-
-
3.315
-
6,7
5,9
-
-
-
4,3
1.060
8.188
9.248
972
915
601
11.736
15,6
16,6
16,5
17,0
16,8
5,7
15,1
6.808
49.254
56.061
5.717
5.462
10.465
77.705
8,8
63,4
72,1
7,4
7,0
14,4
13,5
100,0
Domestic contribution: The eventual total domestic contribution during the programme 
life will be around EUR 40 million or around 72% of the IFAD contribution. This is 
because the EUR 7.8 million (10%) contribution from the beneficiaries and the private 
sector, currently reflected in the programme costs, represents only their initial co-
financing contribution (along with seed capital from SNRLP) for starting up the project 
supported activities/NR based enterprises.  
Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme [SNRLP]Project Components by Year -- Totals Including ContingenciesTotals Including Contingencies (EUR '000)201920202021202220232024TotalRepublic of Sudan Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme [SNRLP] Components by Financiers Beneficiaries(EUR '000) IFAD GrantIFAD LoanGEF(cash & in kind)Private SectorThe GovernmentTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Upscaling community Subtotal 7.06163,21.76515,83873,5780,7--1.88716,911. 
Table 3. Expenditure Accounts by Financiers (EUR’000) 
Republic of Sudan
Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Pr  ogramme [SNRLP]
Expenditure Accounts by Financiers
(EUR '000)
IFAD Grant
%
Amount
IFAD Loan
%
Amount
GEF
Amount
%
Beneficiaries
(cash & in kind)
%
Amount
Private Sector
%
Amount
The Government
Total
Amount
%
Amount
%
I. Investment Costs
Civil Works
Goods & Services
Consultancies
Training & Workshops
Equipments & Materials
Grants
Credit, Guarantee Funds
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Salaries & Allowances
B. Operations and Maintenance
Total Recurrent Costs
Total PROJECT COSTS
52,6
       10.624
2.656
                  5.535         53,1         1.384
1.530
2.538
1.601
107
-
9.815
6.120
10.150
6.396
427
-
39.253
60,1
65,8
49,6
80,0
-
55,9
5.541
363
5.904
45.157
80,0
66,4
79,0
58,1
1.385
91
1.476
11.291
13,2
13,3
15,0
16,4
12,4
20,0
-
14,0
20,0
16,6
19,8
14,5
-
201
693
-
864
-
-
1.758
-
-
-
1.758
-
1,9
6,8
-
6,7
-
-
2,5
-
-
-
2,3
3.018
1.079
222
124
6
-
-
4.448
-
-
-
4.448
15,0
10,3
2,2
0,8
-
-
-
6,3
-
-
-
5,7
453
461
-
-
1.844
-
557
3.315
-
-
-
3.315
2,2
4,4
-
-
14,3
-
100,0
4,7
-
-
-
4,3
3.431
1.773
1.621
2.624
2.193
0
-
11.643
0
93
93
11.736
17,0
17,0
15,9
17,0
17,0
-
-
16,6
-
17,0
1,2
15,1
20.182
10.433
10.187
15.436
12.905
534
557
70.232
6.926
547
7.473
77.705
26,0
13,4
13,1
19,9
16,6
0,7
0,7
90,4
8,9
0,7
9,6
100,0
-
12. 
Civil Works is the major expenditure account, estimated at EUR 20.2 million, or 
about 26% of the total programme costs. The other investment expenditure accounts 
are training and workshops for an amount of EUR 15.4 million or 19.9% of total costs, 
equipment’s and materials for an amount of EUR 12.9 million or 16.6% of total costs, 
goods and services for an amount of EUR 10.4 million or about 13.4% of the total cost, 
consultancies for an amount of 10.2 million or 13.1% of total costs, grant for an amount 
of EUR 0.5 million or 0.7% of total costs and credit, guarantee fund for an amount of 
EUR 0.5 million or 0.7% of total base cost. The recurrent costs represent 9.6% of total 
costs at EUR 7.5 million, comprising salaries and allowances for an amount of EUR 6.9 
million or 8.9% of total costs, operations and maintenance for an amount of EUR 0.5 
million (0.7% of programme costs). The breakdown of expenditure accounts by 
component is reflected at the table 3 and table 4  
Table 4: Expenditure accounts by components – Totals including contingencies 
(EUR’000) 
 I. Investment Costs
Civil Works
Goods & Services
Consultancies
Training & Workshops
Equipments & Materials
Grants
Credit, Guarantee Funds
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
Total Recurrent Costs
Total PROJECT COSTS
Taxes
Foreign Exchange
108
-
3.597
3.010
93
-
-
6.808
-
6.808
1.060
25
20.073
6.704
2.148
7.165
12.073
534
557
49.254
-
49.254
8.188
6.903
-
-
3.510
2.207
-
-
-
5.717
-
5.717
972
121
-
1.861
595
2.811
194
-
-
5.462
-
5.462
915
54
-
1.868
337
243
544
-
-
20.182
10.433
10.187
15.436
12.905
534
557
2.992         70.232
7.473
10.465
601
1.715
7.473
77.705
11.736
8.818
13.  Disbursements:  To  enable  easy  monitoring  of  progress,  the  below  graph 
forecast  the  expected  disbursement  per  year.  This  will  allow  continuously  tracking 
progress during supervisor and following up mission.  
 Republic of SudanSustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme [SNRLP]Expenditure Accounts by Components - Totals Including Contingencies(EUR '000)Upscaling community basednatural resources managementImproving the institutionaland businessesframework for upscalingcommunity based NRM.StrengtheningCommunityImplementationof the NRProjectmobilizationof Community NRMlegal andBuilding ofManagement &and NRMand LivelihoodpolicyinstitutionalCoordinationplanning.Investment Plan.frameworkcapacitiesUnitTotalA. Salaries & Allowances ----6.9266.926B. Operations and Maintenance ----547547 
14. Detailed costs by component 
Component 1. Upscaling community based natural resources management and businesses 
1. Stock route m anagem ent and livelihoods of pastoralists
Study on Pastoralist
Material for stock route demarcation and rehabiliation
Feasibility study  for w ater point construction /j
Construction/ rehabiliation of hafirs w ith solar panels /k
Construction of sand /rocks dams /l
Construction of boreholes w ith solar panels /m
SECAP localities specific ESMP /n
Construction of hand pumps
Technical assistance and training (TA&T) for w ater point management committees /o
Mobile animal health clinique along the livestock routes /p
Training of young community animal health w orkers
Animal health w orker start-up kits /q
Pastoral Field Schools (PFS) for pastoralists groups and communities /c /r
Small start-up input packages for PFS livelihood activities /s
Subtotal
2. Rangeland and livestock rearing 
39
11
150
394
240
325
190
90
175
500
150
6
13
100
2 383
-
11
-
3 308
961
1 301
950
90
525
-
975
39
13
900
9 072
-
7
-
-
-
-
3 308       1 181
-
325
-
-
-
-
225
9
13
250
2 003
-
1 301
-
90
350
-
900
36
25
750
6 767
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
39
28
150
8 191
1 201
3 252
1 141
270
1 051
500
2 250
90
63
2 000
20 226
41
11
159
430
263
350
202
99
182
521
156
6
13
104
2 537
-
12
-
3 972
1 133
1 462
1 118
106
590
-
1 095
44
14
1 011
10 557
-
9
-
4 298
-
1 522
-
113
420
-
1 078
43
30
898
8 411
-
-
-
1 648
-
395
-
-
-
-
286
11
16
318
2 675
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
41
-
32
-
-
159
-      10.348
1 396
-
3 729
-
1 319
-
318
-
1 192
-
521
-
2 616
-
105
-
-
73
-
2 331
-      24.180
Republic of Sudan Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme [SNRLP] Table 1. Upscaling community based natural resources management and businesses Detailed Costs Base Cost (EUR '000)Totals Including Contingencies (EUR '000)201920202021202220232024Total201920202021202220232024Total I. Investment Costs A. Community mobilization and NRM planning Community mobilization and sensitization -200150150--500-235192208--635Stakeholder awareness workshops /a 32-----3234-----34Young Professional programme /b 91818189-721021232513-92Establishment and strenghtening of VDCs /c 8012012080--40085141154111--491Establishment of NR clusters/networks /d 300450600150--1 501318529769208--1 824Establishment of State NR Cluster/Networks stakeholder platforms /e -204030--90-245142--116Mapping role of customary institutions in NRM 9-----910-----10Strengthen role of customary institutions in NRM -9----9-11----11Scale up and expand the establishment of co-management mechanism 555---15566---18Scale up co-management at the level of locality /f 11172217--6712202923--84Scale up co-management at the level of State level /g 6171111--456201416--56Natural resource and land-use management plans (NRLMPs) 315472629157--1 573333555806218--1 912registration/authorization of community forests; hema; community range enclosures; NRLMPs /h 7869----1478381----164Manual for NRM (water, range, forests, Livestock routes, agriculture and community development -47----47-55----55Construction or rehabilitation of buildings for conflict resolution centres /i -4444---88-5256---108Equipment and materials for Conflict resolution centers -4040---80-4548---93Training of conflict resolution mediators (Ajaweed) -100100100100-400-118128138150-534Subtotal 8451 6281 780714109-5 0768961 9122 278987163-6 236B. Implementation of Community NRM and Livelihood Investment Plan TA&T of youth rangeland guards /t 00000-100000-1Material for rangeland demarcation and fodder production /u 2525622556--5632730128878--694Support individual fodder production /v 50513450113--1 12553603577156--1 388Rent of machineries for rainwater harvesting structures and fire belts /w -0----0-0----0Fence, seeds, water harvesting tools/ machine services for three enclosures /x -150----150-176----176Construction of fodder storage (hay bales) /y 3036045060--9003242357783--1 115Subtotal 1051 2791 1252290-2 7391121 5051 4423170-3 3753. Forestland conservation and related businesses Training on NR Conservation related business 205060402010200215977553016258TA&T for development of community manual and training of forest youth group /z 9090120---30095106154---355Youth business support - demos of innovative technologies /aa 15908421--2101610610829--258Youth business support - replication of innovative technologies /bb 3028525263--6303233532387--777Private sector support to gas stoves 1726222356--5571726222356--557Forest development group activities ( community, forest, agroforestry, etc. ) 12018022560--58512721228883--710Initial working start-up money for gas stove revolving schemes for poor households /cc 6611001671673353466110016716733534Training of women's groups in production of seedlings and operation of tree nurseries,and  overall farming practices /dd 1117281711-831219352316-106Infrastructure for women group farms and nurseries /ee 9538038095--950101447487132--1 167Infrastructure for individual women home nurseries /ff 10708040--200118210355--251Subtotal 4131 4851 552558198434 2494371 6891 897687213504 973 
Subtotal
Subtotal
C. Im plem entation support investm ent 
455
3 800
320
16 334
420
14 115
420
5 161
200
2 249
1 167            73      40 650       4 053       18 989      17 642       6 826     1 646            98     49.254
1 816
284
498
561
378
529
-
-
Senior Livelihood Development Expert
Senior Gender and Community Development Expert
Senior NRM Expert
Subtotal
Subtotal
Total
2
2
2
6
103
4 748
2
2
2
6
103
18 065
2
2
2
6
94
15 989
2
2
2
6
91
5 965
2
2
2
6
91
1 367
2
2
2
6
91
164
12
12
12
36
572
46 297
2
2
2
6
103
5 052
2
2
2
6
103
21 004
2
2
2
6
94
20 014
2
2
2
6
91
7 904
2
2
2
6
91
1 900
12
2
12
2
12
2
36
6
91
572
189      56 061
4. Catchment and water point management TA&T for usage of manual for water management, forest, rangeland and agricultural land /gg -5645---101-6558---123Feasibility study for water infrastructure 32-----3233-----33Subtotal 325645---132336558---1565. Cropland and climate adaptation in farming practices TA&T of young community extension/IPM agents in crop farming 8118---2781310---32TA&T of farmers groups in climate adaptation in farming practices /hh 33445533--16535527146--203Support to IPM agents 1427207--681432269--81Water harvesting for crop production and environmental conservation /ii 1251 157985188--2 4541331 3601 262260--3 014Construction of Jubraka  ( women home garden) /jj 1211 085965241--2 4121281 2761 236334--2 974Construction of Jubraka ( for vulnerable households) 60422241145--86864496309200--1 070Subtotal 3602 7462 274613--5 9943823 2302 914849--7 3746. Small innovative businesses and training for women, youth and CDCs TA&T for soil work machinery service provider groups and development of operation/business plan /kk --101414-38--131921-53Soil work machinery for service provider groups /ll -500500500--1 501-536558579--1 673Vocational training for women and youth /mm -100200100100-500-118256138150-662Nutrition training and awareness raising /nn -76767474-300-8997103111-400Training of saving and credit groups and VDCs and subcommittees /oo -3030303030150-3538424548209TA&T for women and youth groups in small business activities /pp -100200100100-500-118256138150-662Start-up inputs for women and youth businesses -450900450450-2 251-5291 154623673-2 979Guidelines for revenue generation and reinvestment in land and NRM 15-----1516-----16TOT for Business Mentors /qq -3015---45-3519---55GALS TOT /rr -90----90-106----106GALS NRM & Livelihoods FAIR /ss ---68--68---94--94Workshop on Targeting, Gender, GALS and M&E /tt 37-----3739-----39Subtotal 521 3761 9321 337769305 495551 5662 3911 7371 149486 9477. Spot transport improvement for resilience Wadi crossings /uu -320420420200-1 361-378529561284-1 751Incentive package to partner financial institutions /vv 455-----455498-----4981. Allowances for young professional rural development programme /ww 12123---2712123---272. Cluster/Network Development support Cluster/Network Development Officer 4040404040402434040404040402433. SPCU Implementation Support Forestry Management Officer 1111111111116611111111111166Water Resources and Management Officer 1111111111116611111111111166Rural and Agricultural and Development Officer 1111111111116611111111111166Community Development and Gender Officer 1111111111116611111111111166Subtotal 4444444444442664444444444442664. CPCU Implementation support  
\a This is a preparatory activity only in year 1 for stakeholder orientation involving state, localites, RAUs, relevant govt depts, private sector, civil society partners; 2 national level and 2 each per state.
\b traininig w orkshop for the YP. Once/state in year 1 and 5; 2 times/state for yrs 2,3,4
\c in kind contribution in terms of venue and hospitality. Includes the cost of registration of the performning VDCs, amend quantity phasing as show n
\d in kind contribution in terms of venues and hospitality. Includes cost of registration; change phasing
\e lumpsum for praparatory activities for establishing the forums and furnishing the secretariat
\f in kind contribution recorded under Govt. staff support in terms of 6 month secondment
\g in kind contribution recorded under Govt. staff support in terms of 6 month secondment paid, building and main office
\h Community contribution based on support through 5 days per month ( 2 people) through voluntary w ork
\i Community in kind contribution under land, labour etc.
\j Study of w ater resources availability including hydrological dynamics in the catchment and aquifers, w ater uses and management, and definition of engineering requirements  taking into account climate change trends.
\k these w ill be governed by the VDC and managed by w ater management groups partnering w ith the VDCs
\l small w ater harvesting structures
\m these w ill be governed by the VDC and managed by w ater management groups partnering w ith the VDCs)
\n in kind contribution recorded under land, space and labour through voluntary mechanism
\o 2 trainees from each VDC and  it is estimated that each session consist of ~ 20 trainees per Cluster.  The basis of the training w ill be supported on already developed integrated NR manual ( w ater, forestry etc)
\p mobile vet clinic cars, 3 in Kordofan, 1 in Sennar and 1 in Butana. Strategy for the use of management to be developed by the PCU
\q one group per cluster, 3 member per group
\r PFS curricula w ill have needs based and may include, but not be limited to: accounting, literacy, animal health and nutrition, milk and meet processing, first aid, rangeland and stock route management, conflict resolution, advocacy and participation in
     la
\s equipment, furniture, plastic covers to protect teaching materials against the rain , small generator etc.
\t 3 trained person per cluster
\u groups of 30 each w ith 5 fd per person, groups 30,45,60,15
\v groups of 30 each w ith 5 fd per person, groups 60,90,120,30
\w  These structures are earth or stone bunds and pits increasing the rainw ater harvesting in soils. The machineries w ill be managed by community service provider groups and w ill provide services for structures for increasing rainw ater harvesting in soils
     for
\x Three of equal size enclosures w ill be distributed one in each of the thee sectors ( Buthana, Kordofan and Sennar)
\y multipurpose storages, w ill be ow ned by the VDC and managed by storage management groups partnering w ith the VDCs
\z 35 trainees per class
\aa alternative energy brick making etc, other livelihood diversification activities
\bb alternative energy brick making etc, other livelihood diversification activities
\cc These revolving schemes w ill be managed by w omen's saving and credit groups and are for ultra poor households that cannot afford MFI credits for the initial investment in a gas stove and cylinders
\dd IPM, soil and w ater management
\ee Includes fence, pipes and irrigation system and solar pumps and shelterbelt. 5 in Sennar, 15 in Kordofan and 20 in Butana
\ff individual farm up to 0,1 feddan per w oman
\gg 2 trainees from each community. Class size is 30 people
\hh include soil and w ater management, intercropping, integration of trees in cropping systems and selection of resilient varieties. Around 150 farmers per session
     per\jj in kind contribution through land, labour and follow up agricultural plant husbandry.The size of land per one jubraka is 0,2 feddan for individuals\kk 2 or 3 different type of SP  for each cluster. Class size of 30 SPs per class\ll environmentally friendly tractors preferably the small size\mm Could be in setting up and repair of solar cells, mechanics, housebuilding, electrician, accountant, etc.\nn 1 nutrition trainer covers 4 villages per year ( 3 months training per village). It is advisable to look for local female teachers and train them on nutrition awarness, whenver possible\oo May include training in literacy, accounting, procurement, organisation management and formalisation, access and manage capital from MFI , sustainable resource management  and first aid\pp Could be in organic charcoal from groundnut shells, recreational businesses, forest fruits and medicine plants, etc.\qq The cost includes cost of travel, accommodation,per diem, venue, meals and drinks during workshops and expert faciliation. These will be three 5 day workshops in each region for 25 participants who will be trained as Business Mentor\rr This cost covers travel, board and lodging, workshop and facilitation expenses. Each workshop will be 10 days. One will be held in each State\ss This fair will involve women and men GALs champions  from the communities who have been practicing GALS-10 from each state.This cost covers travel, board and lodging, workshop and facilitation expenses\tt These five three-day workshops will be held for the staff of the PCU, SCU, Specialists in the Focal Units in each region. There will be three workshops in Butana and one in each in the Kordofan and Sennar region. Each worskhop will have approximately     35 p\uu preference for establishing crossing is to connect member of cluster or more\vv to cover cost of infrastructure such as office equipment, office furnishing, etc; cost of technology adoption e.g. MIS system and partial operations costs\ww communities cotribution through lodging, food, transporation etc. 
Component 2. Improving the institutional framework for upscaling community based NRM 
Republic of Sudan Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme [SNRLP] Table 2. Improving the institutional framework for upscaling community based NRM Detailed Costs Base Cost (EUR '000)Totals Including Contingencies (EUR '000)201920202021202220232024Total201920202021202220232024Total I. Investment Costs A. Strengthening of the NR legal and policy framework. Baseline mapping and assessment of environmental governance and Climate change in project areas 50-----5053-----53Cluster/Network NRM forums /a 2080100100--3002194128138--382NRM forum at Locality level --453024-99--584236-135NRM forum at State level ---36--36---50--50NRM Sector level forum ----15-15----22-22Inter-State NRM forum ----25-25----37-37Review of existing NRM policies and legal frameworks -60----60-71----71initiate a process of negotiating possible legal reforms and harmonization /b ----30-30----45-45Media public awareness activities on NRM targeting communities, legislators, and authorities at local, state and federal levels 11111161111128Collate and reviews of existing studies and other knowledge products on land NR governance and climate change in Sudan and project areas -25----25-29----29presentation of findings of reviews in multi-stakeholder platforms at Sector, State and Federal levels and make recommendations -803020--130-943828--160Support to processes for revising policy and legislation at State and Federal level ---50--50---69--69Policy briefs/notes and knowledge products on NRM at various levels -12182430-84-14233345-115Map/review locality land use plans -143215434329473-169276606446614Present results of mapping in multi stakeholder workshops at different levels --345618--4671027Establishment of savings groups, and NR livelihood groups and vulnerable women group /c 220330330220--1 100233388423304--1 349development of LIPs (livelihood investment plan) 75300750375150-1 65080353961519224-2 136Expansion of existing early warning systems to SNRLP beneficiaries 108711113044-383109813316659-467Subtotal 3761 1191 6031 033367364 5343981 3112 0451 415542585 770B. Building of institutional capacities Facilitate Implementation of NRGF -Butana -232330308113-2629424512154Equipment and materials for implementation of Sennar land use map 75-----7578-----78BDF Role in NRM and implementation of NRGF -101010101050-121314151670Integrated community development centers at the cluster level -9610810848-360-11313814972-472Environmental, social impacts climate change Training 505050505050300535964697581401Network local Exchange Visits and Learning Routes /d -30454530-150-35586245-200International Exchange Visits and Learning Routes for selected project staff and networks leaders and relevant line ministry representatives /e -8080808080400-94103111120129556Training of public and private extension service providers 55776535569109847GIS Training /f 150300150---600159353192---704Materials and Equipment /g 25252525--10026283032--116Operationalization of the 2015 Range and Pasture Law 25505025--15027596435--184Institutional capacity building on NRM related laws, policies, regulation and enforcement /h -12202020-72-14262830-97Community land mapping and registration process in Gedarif State -50505050-200-59646975-267Constitute and facilitate state level apex for NR networks /i ---606060180---839097270Constitute and capacitate multi-level task forces for following, evaluation and monitoring of the agreed upon issues during the forums /j --999936--1212131552Constitute and capacitate inter-ministerial committees at state level -2015---35-2419---43Constitute land and NR governance working groups --999936--1212131552Training for locality, state, and federal government staff on community-based NR and land governance 75757575--300808896104--368Training package for locality, state, and federal government staff on M&E, KM, Legislations, etc. 75757575--300808896104--368Foster linkage and partnership with research and training institutions and related international institutions and centers engaging in NR and land governance research 55555-2556677-32Training of community-based institutions on NRM and Governance based on NR Manual 5050100100--3005359128138--379Training of community institutions on the established framework and guidelines for revenue generation and reinvestment in land and natural resource use and management 5050100100--3005359128138--379Institutitional Capacity Assessment of the relevant line ministries and department at federal, state and locality level 40-----4042-----42Subtotal 6251 0061 0068834072314 1586611 1821 2871 2206083725 330C. Implementation support investment 1. - State Policy Officer 9999995799999957Regional Policy Officer 4444442244444422Subtotal 1313131313137913131313131379Total 1 0152 1382 6231 9307882798 7721 0732 5063 3452 6481 16444311 179 
\a all NR forums at different levels must promote sustainable Investment in community abilities to initiate and lobby for reinforcing NRM regulations, laws and policies and CSR and sound environmental practices in production processes\b 1 Sector in Sennar, 1 sector in Butana and 1 sector in Kordofan and each cluster is represented for at least 7 members.\c Includes registration of the performing groups, assume 50% of groups registered; 5 to 6 groups per village\d sectoral and intersectoral visit\e 20 per visit\f target is to train 300 each one with 2 training, distributed over agriculture, forest, water, livestock, stock routes and others. Representing states, localities  project staff and other interest group\g GPS, PCs etc.\h targeting NR departments in the related line ministries at the state and locality level and the project staff\i Branch up the state level network into state level apex\j 4 session per state 
Component 3. Project Management and Coordination Unit 
Republic of Sudan Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme [SNRLP] Table 3. Project Management and Coordination Unit Detailed Costs Base Cost (EUR '000)Totals Including Contingencies (EUR '000)201920202021202220232024Total201920202021202220232024Total I. Investment Costs A. Investment Costs 1. - Project Start ip Workshop 31-----3133-----33Baseline study 13-----1314-----14Develop KM Strategy and Communication Strategy 4-----45-----5Refine and update the PIM 4-----45-----5Annual Review and Planning Workshop 4444442655667735Mid Term Review --31---31--39---39Project Completion Report -----44-----66Supervision by CPCU, SPCU, IFAD and Govt. 999999539101112131470Annual Audit 66666637778991049Accounting Software 80-----8081-----81Subtotal 152195019192328315723642729373372. Vehicles for CPCU Station wagon 44-----4444-----44Hard  top 119-----119120-----120Double cab 79-----7980-----80Subtotal 242-----242245-----2453. Vehicles for SPCU Hard  top 356-----356360-----360Double cab 435-----435440-----440Subtotal 791-----791800-----8004. Vehicles for Cluster develoment team Double cab 791-----791800-----800Motorbikes 22-----2223-----23Subtotal 813-----813823-----8235. Equipment and Office Furnishing for CPCU Generator 9-----99-----9Photocopier 3-----33-----3PC 16-----1616-----16Other furniture 18-----1818-----18Subtotal 45-----4547-----476. Equipment and Office Furnishing for SPCU Generator 79-----7982-----82Photocopier 28-----2829-----29PC 133-----133139-----139Other furniture 119-----119124-----124Subtotal 359-----359373-----3737. Equipment for Cluster Development Team Other office furnishing 119-----119124-----1248. Training for CPCU and SPCU Staff Training for CPCU and SPCU Staff ( external) 292929---88313438---103Training for CPCU and SPCU Staff ( internal) 29292929--11430343740--140Subtotal 58585829--20261687440--243Total Investment Costs 2 579771084819232 8542 631911386629372 992 
II. Recurrent Costs A. CPCU Salaries and Allowances 1. Salaries Project Director 343434343434203343434343434203Financial Manager 222222222222133222222222222133Senior Project Accountant 181818181818108181818181818108Senior M&E Expert 242424242424146242424242424146Senior KM and Communication Expert 1616161616169516161616161695Senior Procurement Expert 171717171717101171717171717101Central Procurement Assistant 1313131313137613131313131376Central Accounts Assistant 1515151515158915151515151589Senior Internal Auditor 1414141414148214141414141482Internal Auditor ( from external firm) /a 1414141414148214141414141482Central Administrative Assistant 1111111111116311111111111163Drivers 252525252525152252525252525152Cleaners 6666663866666638Guards 6666663866666638Subtotal 2342342342342342341 4052342342342342342341 4052. Staff Allowances Field and Travel Allowances 212121212121127212121212121127Subtotal 2552552552552552551 5322552552552552552551 532B. SPCU Salaries and Allowances 1. Salaries State Coordinator 152152152152152152911152152152152152152911M&E , KM and Innovation Officer 133133133133133133797133133133133133133797State Accounts Officer 114114114114114114684114114114114114114684Regional Accountant /b 434343434343259434343434343259State Procurement Officer 114114114114114114684114114114114114114684State Administrative and Accounts Assistant 959595959595570959595959595570Drivers 101101101101101101608101101101101101101608Cleaners 414141414141247414141414141247Guards 414141414141247414141414141247Field and Travel Allowances 535353535353316535353535353316Subtotal 8878878878878878875 3228878878878878878875 3222. Staff Allowances Field and Travel Allowances 1212121212127212121212121272Subtotal 8998998998998998995 3948998998998998998995 394C. Operating Costs Electricity and water 999999539101112131470Vehicles O&M 1111111111116612131415161888Equipment and generator operations and maintenance 4444442655667735Guest house and office rent 282828282828169303336394245225Stationery, communication and contigencies 999999539101112131470Accounting Software Maintenance 7777774388910111258Subtotal 68686868686841072808794102110547Total Recurrent Costs 1 2231 2231 2231 2231 2231 2237 3361 2271 2351 2421 2491 2561 2657 473Total 3 8011 3001 3311 2711 2421 24510 1903 8571 3251 3801 3151 2851 30110 465\a 15 working days per month plus travel/field allowances\b on rotational basis 
Sudan
Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Document Date:
15/07/2019
Project No.
2000002105
Report No.
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 4:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
1.
SNRLP financial and economic analysis  
The  main  sources  of  quantified  programme  benefits  are:  (i)  empowered  local 
1. 
communities  practicing  good  practices;  (ii)  capacitated  farmers  with  resilience  against 
climate change and (iii) resilient incremental crop/tree production. About 720 000 persons - 
including  pastoralists-  will  receive  programme  services  of  which  50%  (60  000)  are 
smallholder  farmers  adults,  20%  (24  000)  are  pastoralist,  30%  (36  000)  agro-pastoralist, 
14% (16 800) groups with women leadership. In total, programme aim is to target at least 
30% (36 000) youth and 50% (60 000) female group.  
The Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) on the investments in the  Programme 
2. 
area over 15 years is estimated at 24% and the Net present value (NPV) of the programme 
is positive (EUR 13.8 Million). The economic analysis suggests that the SNRLP Programme is 
feasible. All these worthiness indicators establish the economic feasibility of the programme.  
3. 
Sensitivity  Analysis:  The  sensitivity  tests  of  the  programme  suggest  that  the 
programme  is  robust  and  worthwhile,  especially  considering  the  conservative  assumptions 
made in the computation of the benefits. The programme promotes the inclusion of the poor 
households  and  has  a  positive  impact  on  household  welfare.  The  programme  has  low 
sensitivity on small changes in decrease of revenues and increase of costs.  
2.
Programme benefits 
The  programme  is  expected  to  generate  and  improve  rural  income  from  a  range  of 
4. 
on-farm and off-farm NR related enterprises. It will empower local communities to promote 
good local practices and support farmers to build resilience against climate change. Benefits 
are  expected  to  result  from:  (i)  crop/tree  production;  (ii)  increased  income  from  off-farm 
activities and income generating activities, especially for women and poor households; and 
(iv)  improved  institutional  framework  for  up  scaling  community  based  NRM  in  the 
programme area.  
Other  benefits  arising  from  the  programme  include  the  sustainable  development  of 
5. 
natural resources (rangeland and forests), gender equity and women involvement within the 
communities,  greater  community  participation,  better  nutritional  status  and  human  health 
from  the  improved  domestic  water  supplies  and  water  investments  and  increase  milk 
production  and  animal  weight  from  improved  range  management  practice.  The  main 
sources  of  quantified  programme  benefits  come  from:  (i)  resilient  incremental  crop/tree 
production;  (ii) increased  income  for  farm  community  groups  and  individual  smallholder 
farmers. 
6. 
Number  of  beneficiaries:  The  programme  is  expected  to  benefit  about  720  000 
direct  and  indirect  beneficiaries  or  120  000  households.  The  programme  has  an  expected 
adoption rate of 85%. 
7. 
The programme is expected to bring the following benefits: 
  At least 70% of the households reporting increase in income and production as a 
result of services provided by the programme 
  At  least  70%  of  the  targeted  households  reporting  adoption  on  environmentally 
sustainable and climate resilient technologies and practices 
  Total  net  income  for  all  beneficiaries  including  6  years  after  inclusion  into  the 
programme is estimated at value of EUR 63.1 million.  
  Ten  institutions  at  the  federal,  state  and  locality  level  that  have  adopted  and 
implemented improved regulations and policies in the realm of NRM 
  Twenty  policies-relevant  knowledge  completed  throughout  the  programme 
lifecycle and 500 institutions staff trained on CC adaptation and NR governance 
  Establishment  and  strengthening  of  1,000  VDCs,  140  clusters/networks  and  9 
State NR cluster/networks stakeholder platforms 
  Establishment of 5,500 saving groups and NR livelihood groups (i.e. estimated 5 
to 6 groups per village). Targeted beneficiaries included in the programme within 
first  year  will  have  net  benefit  of  5,6  million  EUR  during  six  year  life  cycle 
programme.  
  200 thousand of hectars of land brought under climate resilience management, of 
which  cropland  (163  213  ha),  rangeland  (28  602  ha),  stouck  route  (6  000  ha) 
and forestland (2 157 ha). 
  construction/rehabilitation  of  104  hafirs  with  solar  panels,  100  small  water 
harvesting  structures  such  as  sand/rock  dams  and  50  boreholes  with  solar 
panels. Hafirs will extend water availability for 5 to 6 months per year during dry 
season. Net income for all 104 hafirs is estimated at 3 million EUR for the 6 year 
life duration of the programme. 
  5 mobile animal health clinic along the livestock routes with 450 training of young 
 
community animal health workers 
technical  assistance  and  training  of  youth  rangeland  guards  (i.e.  3  per  cluster) 
and 22 500 feddan of  material for rangeland and fodder production (i.e. in total 
support  to  4  500  households  equivalent  to  150  groups,  each  group  on  average 
with  30  members  and  each  farmer  with  5  feddan  land  size  on  average).  It  has 
been estimated 20,3 tons to be produced under 22 500 feddan during 6 year life 
programme period. It has been estimated that 680 dairy livestock can benefit per 
year out of 22 500 feddan ( i.e. under assumption on average 13,6 kg of fodder 
consumption per day/per livestock) 
  45  000  feddan  of  land  for  individual  fodder  production  (i.e.  support  to  9,000 
households  equivalent  to  300  groups,  each  group  on  average  with  30  members 
and each farmer with 5 feddan land size on average). It has been estimated 6,8 
tons  per  year  of  fodder  production  for  total  45  000  feddan  and  1  360  dairy 
livestock  can  benefit  per  year  out  of  total  feddans  supported  (i.e.  under 
assumption on average 13,6 kg of fodder consumption per day/livestock) 
  construction of 300 fodder storages (hay bales) 
  support to  youth business through 280 machineries . Model assumes 2 youth to 
be employed per machinery ,therefore 560 youth will benefit out of this activity. 
  support  to  private  sector  gas  stoves  to  10  000  households  and  10  000 
households  to  receive  initial  working  start  up  money.  It  has  been  estimated  2 
trees saved per HH per year, therefore total saving of trees is estimated   at 40 
000.  Income saved under 20 000 households has been estimated at 0,6 million 
EUR. 
  195 forest development groups’ activities (community, forest, agroforestry etc.) 
  support to 50 women group farms or nurseries and 100  individual farms 
  support to 150 soil work machineries  
  500  vocational  training  for  women  and  youth  and  250  nutrition  and  awareness 
raising training  
3.
Financial Analysis 
8. 
The  primary  objective  of  the  financial  analysis  is  to  determine  the  financial  viability 
and incentives of the target group for engaging in the programme activities, by examining 
the impact of programme interventions on family labour, cash flow and net incomes.  
9. 
The  estimated incremental  production  of  the  farm  and  off  farm  models is  expecting 
improvement  in  productivity  due  to  the  programme  interventions.  The  analysis  has  been 
taken  by  taking  into  consideration  the  average  December  2018  prices  assuming  similar 
condition in area region. A cash-flow analysis is finally carried out to present the “with” and 
“without” programme analysis. 
Crop/Tree Models: Individual and community crop/tree budgets have been used to 
10. 
calculate the value of production net of inputs and labour costs. 
11. 
The  farm  models  characterize  typical  farming  households  (i.e.  on  average  one 
households  with  6  members)  or  community  with  the  size  of  30  households  (or  50 
households  for  agroforestry  community)  that  reflect  the  predominantly  mixed  plantation 
systems of the programme area and focus on the integration of crops to help cope with the 
risk of production failure. The presence of crops in these models helps to improve farmer’s 
cash  flow,  attenuate  risk,  creates  job  opportunities  and  contributes  to  household  food 
diversification.  
12. 
Most  models  are  expected  to  provide  farmers  with  physical  outputs  and  financial 
returns  that  are  attractive  in  relation  to  their  extra  labour  and  other  inputs  and  financial 
investment.  
13. 
Demand  for  labour  provides  opportunities  for  the  poorest  to  gain  employment.  The 
cost  of  farm  labour  set  at  going  market  rate  varies  and  it  is  estimated  to  be  from  SDG 
100/day  to  SDG  200/day.  Returns  to  labour  as  well  as  net  farm  income  within  different 
models increases by a rate that is substantial and much higher than the prevalent wage rate 
for inexperienced labour in the area. 
14.  Model  1  Agroforestry  existing  community  (25  feddan)  with  intercropping 
mechanism  and  gradual  rotational  practices  is  focused  on  the  community  that  already  has 
existing  agroforestry  with  average  of  25  feddan  approximately  of  50  households  within 
community. The model assumes increase in the size of the land under agroforestry by 50% 
from 12.5 feddan to 25 feddan. Investment costs reflect purchase of seedlings (acacia) with 
price  of  approximately  1  euro  and  there  is  a  need  for  750  seedlings.  Supplementary 
irrigation  is  included  with  the  cost  of  186  euros  for  the  vegetable  production  intercropped 
with small tree. Solar panel with the cost of 13 000 euros is used for energy production. The 
model takes into consideration gradual rotational practices of cutting trees. 5 years period is 
assumed  for  full  growth  of  plant.  Each  year  20%  of  trees  are  sold  and  replaced  with  new 
seedlings for income generating activities. Average net income of 1 072 euros per feddan is 
estimated from the model. The Benefit cost ratio estimated is 9.1: 1 showing that for each 1 
EUR spent in the model will generate a 9.1 EUR of benefits, which is in favour of the model. 
The NPV is estimated at EUR 143 314.  
15.  Model  2  Agroforestry  new  community  (25  feddan)  with  intercropping 
mechanism  and  gradual  rotational  practices  is  focused  on  communities  that  will  plant  new 
trees  with  average  of  25  feddan  approximately  of  50  households  within  community.  The 
model  assumes  that  there  were  no  trees  planted  before  the  programme.  First  cut  of  trees 
will  be  in  the  5th  year  accounting  for  20%  of  the  total  number  of  trees.  Vegetables 
(herewith  assumed  cucumber)  will  be  planted  each  year  for  the  purpose  of  assuring  cash 
flow liquidity. The investment costs include seedlings (acacia) with price of approximately of 
1 euro and there is a need for 3000 seedlings. Supplementary irrigation is included with the 
cost of 186  euros for the intercropping vegetable production. Solar panel with the costs  of 
13  000  euros  is  used  for  energy  production.  The  model  takes  into  consideration  gradual 
rotational  practices  of  cutting  trees,  where  assumed  that  after  5th  year  the  first  income 
generating activity from tree selling will be reflected with each year 20% of trees sold and 
replaced with new seedling. Average net income is 1 214 euros per feddan. The Benefit cost 
ratio estimated is 8,1: 1 showing that for each 1 EUR spent in the model will generate a 8.1 
EUR of benefits, which is in favour of the model. The NPV is estimated at EUR 145 494. 
16.  Model  3  Hafir  32  000  m3  capacities:  The  average  establishment  costs  is 
estimated  at  EUR  78  000  with  additional  maintenance  costs  of  2.5  %  each  year  and 
permanent  staff  of  2  employed  on  water  management.  The  Government  fee  of  10% 
revenues  is  reflected  and  transport  costs  of  approximately  370  euros  is  accounted.  The 
model contains solar panel for energy production (cost ~ EUR 20 000). It has been assumed 
that  per  one  village  development  community  there  is  240  households  that  could  use  the 
water  reservoirs  during  dry  season  period  (i.e.  ~usually  from  Nov  till  May).  The  cost  per 
water  for  households  is  estimated  to  be  in  total  EUR  24  000  per  year.    The  incremental 
income  is  on  average  EUR  11  276  per  year.  The  benefit  cost  ratio  is  1.4  and  NPV  is  EUR 
33,416. Internal rate of return for the model is estimated positive at 20%. 
17.  Model  4  is  based  on  electric  brick  machinery  (one  per  each  cluster):  The 
investment  costs  includes  brick  machinery  with  cost  of  EUR  2  783  and  two  staff  to  be 
employed  per  machine  during  active  period  of  production,  which  is  assumed  on  8  months 
every year. The salary per day accounts for up to 4 euros/day per person. Cement material, 
transportation, fuel and maintenance costs accounts for EUR 7 050. The model reflect price 
of EUR 0,32 euros per brick and one machinery can produce within 8 months 48 000 bricks 
in  total,  which  is  enough  for  96  houses  (i.e.  500  bricks  per  house).  For  construction  of  1 
house (i.e. 2 rooms capacity) there is estimated the need of 5 trees and therefore per one 
machinery there is saving of 480 trees per year. The average incremental income is EUR 7 
365. The benefit cost ratio is 1,9 and NPV is estimated at EUR 38 884.  
18.  Model  5  fodder  production  (guar)  on  5  feddan:  accounts  for  investment  costs 
for machinery usage for harrowing, ploughing etc. Seeds are needed every second year with 
costs  of  EUR  19  euros.  The  models  assumes  enlargement  for  50%  of  production  and 
reaching  yield  of  750  kg.  The  average  incremental  income  is  EUR  1  365;  B/C  ratio  is  not 
representative due to the small investment and operational costs.  The NPV is estimated at 
EUR 7 285. 
19.  Model  6  Home  garden  (Jubraka)  with  size  of  0,25  feddan:  includes  main 
production  of  cucumber  (0,075  feddan),  tomato  (0,075  feddan),  okra  (0,05  feddan)  and 
watermelon (0,05 feddan). The investment costs includes fencing, supplementary irrigation 
and  plastic  sheets.  The  recurrent  costs  includes  seeds,  water  fees  etc.  The  average 
incremental  income  is  EUR  23,  B/C  ratio  is  1,2,  IRR  accounts  for  20%  and  NPV  has  been 
estimated at EUR 39. 
20.  Model  7  home  nurseries  with  size  of  0,2  feddan:  includes  main  production  of 
fruits  trees,  lemons  (0,08  feddan),  orange  (0,08  feddan)  and  guava  (0,04  feddan)  and  it 
has  been  assumed  enlargement  of  50%  (i.e.  from  0,1  to  0,2  feddan).  The  models  covers 
net,  metal  protection  cover  seeds  and  revenues  are  reflected  4  times  per  years  (i.e.  on 
average  3  months  growth  period  per  year).  The  average  incremental  income  is  EUR  378, 
B/C ratio is 1,9 and NPV has been estimated at EUR 99. 
21.  Model  8  Agroforestry  existing  individual  plantation  with  size  of  5  feddan: 
with intercropping  mechanism  and  gradual  rotational  practices  is  focused  on  the  individual 
land  that  already  existing  agroforestry  with  average  land  size  of  5  feddan.  Model  assumes 
enlargement of size for 50 per cent from  size of 2,5 feddan to 5 feddan. Investment costs 
reflects  seedlings  (acacia)  with  price  of  approximately  1  euro  and  there  is  a  need  for  150 
seedlings each year. Supplementary irrigation is included with the cost of 186 euros for the 
intercropping  vegetable  production  in  the  period  of  small  tree  size.  The  model  takes  into 
consideration  gradual  rotational  practices  of  cutting  trees,  where  assumed  each  5  years  to 
full  growth  of  plant,  each  year  20%  of  trees  are  sold  and  replaced  with  new  seedlings  for 
the upcoming income generating activities. Average net income is 1 046 euros per feddan is 
estimated in the model. The Benefit cost  ratio estimated is 9,1: 1 showing that for  each 1 
EUR spent in the model will generate a 9.1 EUR of benefits, which is in favour of the model. 
The NPV is estimated at EUR 28 886.  
22.  Model 9, gum Arabic: with combination of old and new trees and the price per kg is 
currently  set  at  EUR  3,7.  Investment  costs  includes,  seedlings,  planting,  breeding  and 
operating  costs  are  land  preparation,  harvesting,  sacks,  transportation  and  zakat.  The 
average  incremental  income  is  EUR  107,  B/C  ratio  accounts  for  3,9  and  NPV  has  been 
estimated at EUR 370. Internal rate of return is 41%. 
23.  Model  10  contain  community  crop  production:  with  tree  belt  (5  feddan).  Each 
model  accounts  for  30  households.  It  has  been  assumed  sorghum  (2  feddan),  sesame  (1 
feddan), groundnuts (1 feddan) and fodder (1 feddan). Shelterbelt seedlings are included in 
the  model  planted  around  total  area.  The  investment  costs  includes  acacia  seedlings  each 
cost  of  EUR  1,2  and  there  is  a  need  for  600  and  seeds  for  above-mentioned  crops.  The 
machinery  services  are  included  for  some  crops  and  other  recurrent  costs.  The  income 
besides annual crops comes  each 5th year form the selling trees  of tree belt. The average 
incremental  income  is  EUR  164;  B/C  ratio  is  0,8,  since  programme  benefits  come  later  in 
the programme period. The NPV is estimated at EUR 332 and IRR is 21 per cent. 
24.  Model  11  is  a  community  nursery  on  5  feddan  with  30  households:  Main 
production  comes  from  orange,  lemons  and  guava  seedling,  which  can  be  sold  each  three 
months,  therefore  model,  accounts  for  four  seasons  per  year.  The  investment  is  irrigation 
scheme,  protection  metal  cover,  solar  panel,  shelterbelt  and  fence.  The  recurrent  costs 
include  seeds,  solar  panel  maintenance,  bags  etc.  The  average  incremental  income  is  EUR 
10 824, B/C ratio is 3,1 and NPV is 53,738.  
All these eleven models present a higher financial efficiency in terms of financial Net 
25. 
Present  Value  (NPV),  financial  internal  rate  of  return  (IRR),  and  the  financial  benefits-cost 
ratio (BCR). For instance, NPV is positive for the all eleven models (EUR 143 314 for model 
1, EUR 145 494 for model 2, EUR 33 416 for model 3, EUR 38 884 for model 4, EUR 7 285 
for model 5, EUR 39 for model 6, EUR 378 for model 7, EUR 28 886 for model 8, EUR 370 
for  model  9,  EUR  332  for  model  10  and  EUR  53  738  for  model  11).  Changes  in  financial 
indicators illustrate the predicted transformation in agricultural practices in the  programme 
area.  Analyses  of  the  farm  models  confirm  that  the  impact  of  the  programme  at  the  farm 
level  is  financially  attractive  for  family  households  and  net  farm  incomes  are  expected  to 
increase. For more details, refer to table 1. 
Table 1. Financial analysis models 
No. 
Model  
NPV 
B/C 
IRR  Average Incremental income 
1 
Agroforestry Existing Community, 25 feddan  
143,314 
9.1 
- 
Agroforestry New Community, 25 feddan  
Hafir, 32000 m3 
Brick Model /1 machinery 
Fodder Production, 5 feddan 
Home Garden (jubraka) 0, 25 feddan 
Home Nursery 0,2 feddan 
Agroforestry Existing Individual, 5 feddan  
Gum Arabic/1 feddan 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10  Community Crop Production with Tree belt, 5 feddan 
11 
4.
Comm. Nursery/ 5 feddan 
145,494 
33,416 
38,884 
7,285 
39 
378 
28,886 
370 
332 
53,738 
8.1 
1.2 
1.9 
- 
1.2 
1.9 
9.1 
3.9 
0.8 
3.1 
- 
29% 
- 
- 
20% 
- 
- 
41% 
21% 
- 
26,793 
30,360 
11,276 
7,365 
1,365 
23 
99 
5,229 
107 
163 
10,824 
26.  Model  12,  gas stove  (not  directly  income  generating):  The  aim of  the  activity 
of  the  gas  stove  was  to  influence  good  domestic  behaviour  and  sustainable  environmental 
behaviour  (e.g.  reducing  cut  tree  behaviour).  It  has  been  estimated  that  on  average  one 
household  consumes  2  bundles  per  week  of  wood,  therefore  in  total  104  bundles  of  wood 
are consumed per year. Under assumption that each tree can have 50 bundles capacity, it 
becomes  obvious  2  trees  saved  per  year/households  due  to  the  usage  of  gas  stove.  The 
savings  in  income  is  EUR  30  per  year  per  households,  under  assumption  that  half  bundles 
are bought and the other half is collected at the forest. On wood collection households spent 
approximately 183 hours/year, which is equivalent to 23 working days, so opportunity cost 
of time saved is additional EUR 63. 
27. 
Total  net  income  for  all  beneficiaries  including  6  years  after  inclusion  into  the 
programme  is  estimated  at  value  of  EUR  63.1  million.  The  values  are  in  the  absolute 
amounts  (i.e.  time  value  of  the  money  is  not  taken  into  consideration).  For  more  details 
please  refer  to  the  Table  2  below.  Discounted  values  are  reflected  in  the  financial  and 
economic analysis (i.e. table 3 and 5). 
Table 2. Total Net Income for all Beneficiaries 
Net Income/EUR 
Models 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
 AF Existing Community, 25 
fed 
AF New Community, 25 fed 
Hafir, 32000 m3 
Brick Model /1 machinery 
Fodder Production, 5 fed 
Home Garden, 0,25 fed 
Home Nursery 0,1 fed 
AF Existing Individual,  5 fed  
Gum Arabic/1 fed 
Crop Prod. + Tree belt, 5 fed 
Comm. Nursery/ 5 fed 
Gas Stove ( savings p.y.) 
Total  
Y1 
Y2 
Y3 
Y4 
Y5 
Y6 
Total  
Total No. of 
HH  
No. of 
Models 
No. of HH per 
model 
Total Net Income 
 25.261  
 6.218  
-72.742  
 6.247  
 2.018  
-162  
-228  
 7.975  
-38  
-651  
 13.135  
 30  
 41.796  
 22.396  
 20.338  
 7.556  
 2.050  
 75  
 224  
 7.975  
 224  
 996  
 25.250  
 30  
 41.796  
 22.396  
 20.338  
 7.556  
 2.018  
 75  
 224  
 7.975  
 232  
 1.009  
 25.250  
 30  
 41.796  
 22.396  
 20.338  
 7.556  
 2.050  
 75  
 224  
 7.975  
 364  
 1.060  
 25.250  
 30  
 22.497  
 41.930  
 20.338  
 7.556  
 2.018  
 75  
 224  
 4.113  
 379  
 342  
 24.694  
 30  
 41.796  
 41.893  
 20.338  
 7.556  
 2.050  
 64  
 121  
 7.975  
 363  
 1.170  
 25.148  
 30  
 214.941  
 157.229  
 28.946  
 44.025  
 12.203  
 204  
 790  
 43.986  
 1.523  
 3.927  
 138.729  
 178  
 1.000  
 1.000  
 2.250  
 32.100  
 13.500  
 27.200  
 2.000  
 438  
 2.438  
 17.475  
 1.000  
 19.600  
  120. 000 
 20  
 20  
104  
 150  
 450  
 27.200  
 2.000  
 438  
 1.219  
 583  
 33  
 19.600  
 50  
 50  
 22  
 214  
 30  
 1  
 1  
 1  
 2  
 30  
 30  
 1  
 4.298.817  
 3.144.576  
 4.924.004  
 6.603.721  
 5.491.419  
 5.545.974  
 1.580.953  
 19.243.671  
 1.856.736  
 2.287.507  
 4.624.284  
 3.490.909  
 63.092,571,05  
I
I
F
N
A
N
C
A
L
A
N
A
L
Y
S
S
Table 3. Financial analysis of the models 
Community and Individual Generating Income Activities 
Women Generating Income Activities 
Community Farm model's incremental benefits (in SDG) 
 Agroforestry Existing 
Community, 25 feddan 
/a  
 Agroforestry New 
Community, 25 
feddan /a  
 Hafir, 32000 
m3  
 Brick Model 
/1 machinery  
 Fodder 
Production, 5 
feddan  
 Individual Farm model's incremental benefits 
(in SDG) 
 Home 
Garden 
(jubraka) 
0,25 
feddan  
 Home 
Nursery 
0,1 
feddan  
 Agroforestry 
Existing 
Individual,  5 
feddan /a  
 Gum 
Arabic/1 
feddan  
 Community model’s 
incremental benefits 
(in SDG) 
 Crop 
Production 
with Tree 
belt, 5 
feddan/b  
 Comm. 
Nursery/ 5 
feddan  
PY1 
1.790.000 
1.250.000 
-4.015.300 
334.000 
72.700 
-10.236 
-15.900 
34.850 
-12.533 
-69.188 
2.250 
I
PY2 
PY3 
PY4 
PY5 
PY6 
PY7 
PY8 
PY9 
PY10 
 NPV (SDG)  
 NPV (EUR)  
/a including intercropping with vegetable 
1.790.000 
1.790.000 
1.790.000 
710.000 
1.790.000 
1.790.000 
1.790.000 
1.790.000 
710.000 
7.724.606 
143.313,7 
1.250.000 
1.250.000 
1.250.000 
2.330.000 
2.330.000 
2.330.000 
2.330.000 
2.330.000 
1.250.000 
7.842.132 
145.494,1 
1.001.700 
1.001.700 
1.001.700 
1.001.700 
1.001.700 
1.001.700 
1.001.700 
1.001.700 
1.001.700 
925.509 
17.170,9 
404.000 
404.000 
404.000 
404.000 
404.000 
404.000 
404.000 
404.000 
404.000 
2.095.871 
38.884,4 
74.450 
72.700 
74.450 
72.700 
74.450 
72.700 
74.450 
72.700 
74.450 
392.641 
7.284,6 
2.564 
2.564 
2.564 
2.564 
1.964 
2.564 
2.564 
2.564 
2.564 
2.122 
39,4 
8.300 
8.300 
8.300 
8.300 
2.767 
8.300 
8.300 
8.300 
8.300 
20.385 
378,2 
34.850 
34.850 
34.850 
25.350 
34.850 
34.850 
34.850 
34.850 
25.350 
1.556.975 
28.886,4 
1.586 
2.054 
9.165 
9.933 
9.091 
9.528 
9.528 
9.528 
9.528 
19.920 
369,6 
19.598 
20.313 
23.058 
-15.673 
28.988 
30.213 
30.983 
30.783 
-11.468 
17.897 
332,0 
655.250 
655.250 
655.250 
625.250 
649.717 
655.250 
655.250 
655.250 
625.250 
2.896.455 
53.737,6 
/b 2 feddan sesame, 1 feddan sorghum, 1 feddan G.N. and 1 fodder 
5.
Economic Analysis 
28. 
The  objectives  of  the  economic  analysis  are:  (i)  to  assess  the  overall 
programme viability; and (ii) to estimate the programme’s impact by calculating the 
economic rate of return. The computation of economic costs is derived from financial 
programme  costs,  by  excluding  transfers  such  as  duties,  taxes,  and  price 
contingencies.  Production  inputs  and  outputs,  labour,  and  other  items  have  been 
shadow priced to stand for market imperfections. Economic costs in border prices for 
major  agricultural  inputs  and  products  were  computed  using  the  associated 
conversion factors to adjust the local content of costs and goods assumed to be non-
traded.  Prices  requiring  a  different  conversion  factor  are  introduced.  The  related 
labour financial price is adjusted downward by using a standard conversion factor of 
0.8;  1,24  for  imported  agricultural  products  and  1,02  for  exported  agricultural 
products.  Shadow conversion factor is 1.12 which changes shadow exchange rate to 
value of SDG 60.18 for 1 EUR.    
29. 
Programme economic costs and benefits. The economic analyses include 
the investment and incremental recurrent costs of the programme components. The 
programme  financial  costs  have  been  converted  to  economic  values  by  removal  of 
price  contingencies,  taxes  and  duties.  In  order  to  avoid  double  counting,  the  final 
aggregation  considered  only  those  costs  that  were  not  included  in  the  financial 
models. Costs of replacing/maintaining of some specific equipment are considered. 
30. 
Benefits  estimation:  Incremental  production  was  calculated  by  calibrating 
the  incremental  benefits  by  the  standard  conversion  factors  and  then  aggregating 
them,  based  on  the  phasing  of  household  uptake  during  the  Programme 
implementation period. 
31. 
Based  on  the  expected  farmers’  responsiveness  to  the  programme,  the 
assumption  on  farmers’  participation  is  smooth  the  first  years,  and  increases  from 
programme  activities  such  as  extension,  market  development,  technical  assistance, 
training  and  awareness,  and  infrastructure.  Incremental  aggregated  financial  and 
economic  budgets,  production  and  inputs  including  labour,  financial  and  economic 
efficiency  measures,  and  other  technical  and  economic  indicators  were  then 
calculated. The phasing of beneficiaries participation to the Programme activities was 
based  on  the  rate  at  which  beneficiaries  are  projected  to  contribute  to  Programme 
output. The estimated economic value of net benefit at full development is EUR 13.8 
million.  
Table 4. Beneficiaries, adoption rates and phasing 
BENEFICIARIES, ADOPTION RATES AND PHASING  Adoption rates 
AF Exist. Comm 
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
AF New Comm. 
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
Haffir 
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
Brick 
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
Fodder Production 
PY1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
PY2 
210 
179 
210 
179 
450 
383 
7.170 
6.095 
2.700 
PY3 
310 
264 
310 
264 
675 
574 
8.575 
7.289 
4.050 
PY4 
380 
323 
380 
323 
900 
765 
12.245 
10.408 
5.400 
PY5 
100 
85 
100 
85 
225 
191 
4.110 
3.494 
1.350 
PY6 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Total 
1.000 
850 
1.000 
850 
2.250 
1.913 
32.100 
27.285 
13.500 
85% 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
Home Garden 
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
Home Nursery 
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
AF Exist. Ind. 
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
Gum Arabic 
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
Crop Production  
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
Comm. Nursery 
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
Gas Stove  
Adjusted (adoption rate) 
Nr of Targeted HH 
Adopting HH 
2.295 
5.440 
4.624 
400 
340 
92 
78 
500 
425 
3.562 
3.027 
200 
170 
4.000 
3.400 
3.443 
8.160 
6.936 
400 
340 
136 
115 
750 
638 
5.565 
4.730 
300 
255 
6.000 
5.100 
4.590 
10.880 
9.248 
800 
680 
166 
141 
938 
797 
7.012 
5.960 
400 
340 
7.800 
6.630 
1.148 
2.720 
2.312 
400 
340 
44 
37 
250 
213 
1.336 
1.135 
100 
85 
1.800 
1.530 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
11.475 
27.200 
23.120 
2.000 
1.700 
438 
372 
2.438 
2.072 
17.475 
14.854 
1.000 
850 
19.600 
16.660 
120.000 
102.000 
Table 5. Incremental net economic benefit at the programme level (SDG million) 
NET INCREMENTAL BENEFITS 
Agroforestry 
Existing 
Community, 
25 feddan 
/a  
Agroforestry 
New 
Community, 
25 feddan 
/a  
 Hafir, 
32000 m3  
 Brick 
Model /1 
machinery  
 Fodder 
Production, 
5 feddan  
 Home  
Garden 
(djubraka) 1 
feddan  
 Home 
Nursery 
0,1 feddan  
Agroforestry 
Existing 
Individual,  5 
feddan /a  
 Gum 
Arabic/1 
feddan  
 Crop 
Production 
with Tree 
belt/b  
 Comm. 
Nursery/ 5 
feddan  
Gas stove 
('000 SDG) 
Total 
Benefits 
('000 SDG) 
Net 
Incremental 
Eco Costs 
('000 SDG) 
Cash Flow 
('000 SDG) 
PY1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
303.510.900 
-303.510.900 
PY2 
2.992.564 
2.992.564 
-58.106.907 
9.425.398 
5.578.763 
-59.735.187 
2.785.552 
25.895.780 
-2.730.230 
-6.830.918 
-690.199 
6.272.000 
-72.150.819 
392.823.200 
-464.974.019 
PY3 
10.566.448 
10.566.448 
-68.865.803 
24.232.109 
14.073.609 
-77.351.010 
5.571.104 
64.122.885 
-3.657.606 
-8.889.743 
2.843.910 
15.993.600 
-10.794.049 
533.017.100 
-543.811.149 
E
C
O
N
O
M
I
C
A
N
A
L
Y
S
I
S
PY4 
20.640.850 
20.640.850 
-70.477.422 
44.487.696 
25.294.486 
-88.840.947 
11.142.208 
110.981.916 
-511.816.418 
-8.285.814 
8.317.623 
28.537.600 
-409.377.374 
148.925.700 
-558.303.074 
PY5 
27.777.263 
27.777.263 
53.272.052 
55.652.191 
28.273.922 
25.265.374 
13.927.760 
123.313.240 
64.750.436 
7.114.528 
17.111.337 
31.360.000 
475.595.366 
-116.747.400 
592.342.766 
PY6 
25.596.446 
25.596.446 
91.472.784 
57.566.250 
28.147.219 
61.258.853 
13.927.760 
107.305.890 
87.796.213 
6.870.835 
19.185.831 
31.360.000 
556.084.526 
-1.185.800 
557.270.326 
PY7 
23.842.249 
23.842.249 
91.472.784 
57.566.250 
28.273.922 
57.995.409 
13.927.760 
99.683.342 
378.816.557 
5.417.185 
19.042.364 
31.360.000 
831.240.071 
47.270.300 
783.969.771 
PY8 
22.614.311 
22.614.311 
91.472.784 
57.566.250 
28.147.219 
56.363.686 
13.927.760 
94.347.559 
410.755.383 
4.850.591 
18.918.079 
31.360.000 
852.937.934 
47.270.300 
805.667.634 
PY9 
27.526.062 
27.526.062 
91.472.784 
57.566.250 
28.273.922 
54.731.964 
13.927.760 
115.690.692 
376.557.477 
13.318.688 
19.214.211 
31.360.000 
857.165.872 
PY10 
29.280.258 
29.280.258 
91.472.784 
57.566.250 
28.147.219 
59.627.131 
13.927.760 
123.313.240 
394.330.865 
15.660.462 
19.376.859 
31.360.000 
893.343.086 
PY11 
25.596.446 
25.596.446 
91.472.784 
57.566.250 
28.273.922 
61.258.853 
13.927.760 
107.305.890 
394.377.262 
11.105.020 
19.185.831 
31.360.000 
867.026.463 
PY12 
17.693.395 
17.693.395 
73.178.227 
44.901.675 
22.568.456 
49.007.083 
11.142.208 
73.787.562 
392.309.820 
5.095.812 
15.201.518 
31.360.000 
753.939.151 
PY13 
7.388.577 
7.388.577 
45.736.392 
29.358.788 
14.200.313 
30.629.427 
8.356.656 
30.224.675 
389.284.294 
-1.865.052 
9.277.602 
31.360.000 
601.340.248 
PY14 
1.173.829 
1.173.829 
9.147.278 
7.483.613 
2.852.733 
6.125.885 
2.785.552 
4.708.776 
1.008.509 
-626.085 
1.834.499 
31.360.000 
69.028.419 
PY15 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
31.360.000 
31.360.000 
47.270.300 
47.270.300 
47.270.300 
47.270.300 
47.270.300 
47.270.300 
47.270.300 
809.895.572 
846.072.786 
819.756.163 
706.668.851 
554.069.948 
21.758.119 
-15.910.300 
NPV@ 13,4% ('000 SDG) 
NPV@ 13,4% ('000 EUR) 
EIRR 
 830.826  
  13.805  
24% 
32. 
Incremental  crop  production  will  either  be  consumed  by  the  households  in  the 
Programme  area  or  sold  to  local  and  external  traders  in  the  primary,  secondary  and 
terminal markets. Sales are made both for consumption in large cities such as Khartoum 
and  for  the  export  market  and  the  trade  tend  to  be  dominated  by  a  small  number  of 
large merchant buyers.  
Graph 1. Cash flow of incremental benefits, costs and net cash flow 
1 000 000 000
NPV 13,4%,  
830,826  
0
PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 PY6 PY7 PY8 PY9 PY10 PY11 PY12 PY13 PY14 PY15
-1 000 000 000
Total Benefits ('000 SDG)
Net Incremental Eco Costs ('000 SDG)
Cash Flow ('000 SDG)
NPV 13,4%
33. 
Assumptions:  Economic  pricing  has  been  based  on  the  following  assumptions: 
(i)  the  conversion  of  financial  programme  costs  into  economic  costs  have  been 
undertaken  by  multiplying  the  domestic  value  added  by  the  standard  conversion  factor 
(SCF), and adding-in the foreign exchange costs to convert financial values to economic 
values;  (ii)  A  SCF  equal  to  1,12  has  been  applied  when  converting  financial  prices  into 
economic  prices  and  the  opportunity  cost  of  labour  was  88%  which  represents  a 
conversion  factor  from  financial  to  economic  costs;  (iii)  the  exchange  rate  used  in  the 
economic  analysis  is  fixed  at  EUR  1  equal  to  SDG  60,18  computed  exchange  rate 
prevailing in December 2018 with taking into consideration standard conversion factor of 
1,12;  and  (iv)  an  economic  life  time  of  15  years  have  been  taken  to  assess  the 
improvement in technology used. 
34. 
The  Economic  Internal  Rate  of  Return  (EIRR)  on  the  investments  in  the 
Programme area over 15 years is estimated at 24% and the Net present value (NPV) of 
the  programme  is  positive  (EUR 13,8 Million).  The  economic  analysis  suggests  that  the 
SNRLP Programme is feasible. An estimate made over 15 years economic life time of the 
programme would generate an EIRR greater than that the 15 years period and a higher 
NPV. All these worthiness indicators establish the economic feasibility of the programme.  
Sensitivity  Analysis:  In  order  to  include  risk  factors,  a  sensitivity  analysis  in 
35. 
terms  of  “variable  by  variable”  and  “scenario”  analysis  was  done  to  test  changes  in 
economic  indicators  in  conjunction  with  aggregate  costs,  benefits,  and  delays  in  the 
realization of programme costs and benefits. The EIRR drops to 22% with an increase in 
costs of 10%. With an increase of costs by 20%, the programme is still worthy (EIRR of 
20%). However, with an increase of the aggregate costs by 50%, the EIRR with 16%.  A 
decrease of benefits by 10% to 50% still yields an EIRR greater than the 11%. 
In terms of scenario analysis, the programme remains profitable with an increase 
36. 
in  programme  costs  by  20%  and  a  simultaneous  decrease  in  benefits  by  20%.  But  an 
increase of costs by 50% with a simultaneous decrease in benefits by 50% and more will 
generate an EIRR 11%, which is lower than the social discount rate (13,4%).  
37. 
The sensitivity tests of the programme suggest that the programme is robust and 
worthwhile,  especially  if  we  consider  the  conservative  assumptions  made  in  the 
computation  of  the  benefits.  The  programme  therefore  has  a  positive  impact  on 
household welfare and allows farmers a higher propensity to participate to its activities.  
Table 6. Sensitivity analysis 
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS (SA) 
Base scenario 
Project benefits 
Project benefits 
Project benefits 
Project benefits 
Project costs 
Project costs 
Project costs 
1 year lag in ben. 
2 years lag in ben. 
3 years lag in ben. 
∆% 
Link with the risk 
matrix 
10% 
-10% 
-20% 
-50% 
10% 
20% 
50% 
Combination of 
risks affecting 
output prices, 
yields and 
adoption rates 
Increase of labour 
costs and input 
non labour costs ( 
i.e. fertilizator, 
seeds) 
Risks affecting  
adoption rates 
and low 
implementation 
capacity 
IRR 
24% 
25% 
22% 
20% 
11% 
22% 
20% 
16% 
20% 
18% 
16% 
NPV (SDG) 
830.826.100 
1.021.735.309 
639.916.890 
449.007.681 
-123.719.948 
722.999.500 
615.172.900 
291.693.102 
605.236.734 
406.304.313 
230.878.897 
Sudan
Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Document Date:
15/07/2019
Project No.
2000002105
Report No.
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 5:  Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review 
Note 
1.  Major landscape characteristics and issues      
1.1. Socio-Cultural context 
Sudan is situated in north-eastern Africa with a coastline bordering the Red Sea. It is the 
third  largest  country,  in  size,  in  Africa.  Sudan  has  been  in  conflict  for  most  of  its 
independent history. On-going conflict and fragility drivers in Sudan fall under four broad 
categories, among them, governance and political institutions and, the environment and 
natural  resources  (‘lack  of  economic  diversification  as  reflected  in  the  over-dependence 
on the extractive sector and, neglect of the agriculture and livestock sectors, which are 
marred  by  low  productivity  and  vulnerability  and  from  where  the  poorest  40  percent  of 
the population derive their livelihoods’).  
Gender  and  youth.  Gender  disparities  remain  persistent  in  Sudan.  Women  comprise 
only 23 percent of the formal economy, but 70 percent of the informal economy, with a 
majority  of  them  engaged  in  agricultural  production.  Youth  constitute  23%  of  the  total 
population and 21% of poor. Around 55% of youth, aged 15 to 24, are poor. Rural youth 
do  not  have  sufficient  employment  opportunities  and  lack  the  skills  (business 
management and technical) and access to finance to start and run their own businesses. 
Women  contribute  to  the  household’s  wellbeing  and  food  security.  Their  specific 
responsibilities  include:  (i)  farming  on  the  HH  fields  with  their  husbands  and  on  the 
jubraka  land  (2  feddans/0.84  Ha),  growing  leafy  vegetables,  tomatoes,  cowpeas,  okra, 
millet and maize for both HH consumption and sale; (ii) all HH work, e.g. preparing food, 
collecting firewood and fetching water; (iii) childcare; (iv) rearing small animals; and (v) 
petty  trade.  Women  control  cash  income  from  petty  trade,  poultry  rearing  and  selling 
jubraka  crops.  Both,  rural  women  and  youth  are  affected  by  high  rates  of  illiteracy, 
persisting gender inequalities perpetuated by the customary law, and early marriage. 
The  M&E  system  will  incorporate  smallholder  HH,  agro-pastoralist,  pastoralist,  gender, 
youth  disaggregated  indicators.  gender  representation  in  programme  management  will 
be ensured through steps such as ensuring sufficient number of women staff specially at 
the  community  development  level;  including  gender  mainstreaming  responsibilities  in 
the ToRs of all staff members and exposing staff to gender training and GALS orientation 
training (refer PIM for more details).  
Poverty,  food  insecurity,  nutrition.  Sudan  ranked  167  out  of  188  countries  on  the 
Human Development Index (2015). The National poverty level is at 46% (18.5 million). 
Rural poverty is much higher at 58% and in more pronounced in the rainfed sector due 
to    droughts,  isolation  from  markets,  poor  infrastructure,  pastoralism  and  conflicts. 
Households (HHs) with small herds and small scale rainfed farms suffer most from food 
insecurity  in  the  case  of  losses.  There  is  an  inherent  sensitivity  to  rainfall  amounts, 
making  climate  change  a  critical  factor  affecting  the  economy,  livelihoods,  and  food 
security.  The  other  causes  of  poverty  and  food  insecurity  include,  moderate  NR 
management  and  governance  legislation  coupled  with  poor  enforcement  and  lack  of 
employment opportunities. Sudan is rated 112 out of 119 countries in the Global Hunger 
Index  indicating  fragile  food  and  nutrition  security  and  widespread  undernourishment. 
There are 5.5 million (13%) food insecure people and 80% of them are unable to afford 
their daily food need. Chronic malnutrition rate is at a staggering 38%. Under-nutrition is 
serious  with  over  16.3%  of  the  population  in  the  global  acute  malnutrition  (GAM) 
category.  Around  58%  pregnant  women  are  anaemic  resulting  in  high  rates  of  wasted 
1 
(low  weight-for-height)  and  stunted  (low  height-for-age)  children.  Sudan  is  one  of  the 
14 countries with 80% of the world’s stunted children. Over 2.2 million children less than 
five years are stunted and face high risk of dying from infectious disease. Six (Kassala, 
Gezira,  Khartoum,  River  Nile,  Gedaref  and  Sennar)  out  of  the  nine  SNRLP  States  are 
amongst the top nine non-conflicted States with acute malnutrition.  
To  respond  to  those  challenges,  the  project  will  target  the  areas  where  malnutrition  is 
high (Acute malnutrition ranging from 14-20%). The project will have a positive impact 
on nutrition through facilitating access to increased incomes from agricultural production 
and  small  businesses,  increased  availability  of  food,  provision  of  water,  labour  saving 
machinery,  renewable  energy  (solar  and  gas),  GALS  training  to  facilitate  women’s 
empowerment  and  more  equitable  distribution  of  responsibilities  and  resources  and 
nutrition awareness training. Also, around 840 VWGs will be supported in developing LIP 
proposals for micro businesses and activities that will improve their nutrition security and 
resilience of their livelihoods. 
The  Appendix  5.2  of  the  SECAP  presents  the  ESMP  and  the  resilient  model  used  in  the 
project.  The  social  risks  are  analyzed  based  on  information  presented  in  the  Project 
Implementation Manual (e.g. Targeting strategy), and mitigation measures to respond to 
those risks are detailed. 
         1.2. Natural Resources & their Management  
The Republic of Sudan covers an area of about 1.87 million km2, (UN and Partners Work 
Plan,  2012  and  FAO,  2012).  In  general  terms,  desert  and  semi  desert  conditions  cover 
between  60-70  per  cent  of  the  country’s  total  area  (between  1.13  -  1.25  million  km2, 
FAO - UNEP)  
Interpretative  work  on  imagery  was  made  by  Sudanese  teams  at  the  Remote  Sensing 
Authority.  The  assessment  has  shown  that  some  50.7  per  cent  of  this  surface  area  is 
classed as bare rocks, bare soil and other unconsolidated materials (such as wind-blown 
sands free of vegetation in hyper-arid areas). A further 10% is classed as trees, 11.8% 
as shrubby vegetation, and 13.8% as herbaceous vegetation. In these areas agricultural 
land  use  is  largely  confined  to  the  strips  of  suitable  soils  along  the  Nile  and  Atbara 
Rivers.  In  all  some  12.6%  of  the  land  of  Sudan  is  cultivated,  mostly  under  traditional 
rainfed agriculture.  
Natural hazards threaten the natural resource landscape: dust storms and periodic, and 
persistent, droughts. Environmental issues persisting throughout are inadequate supplies 
of  potable  water,  wildlife  populations  threatened  by  excessive  hunting,  soil  erosion, 
desertification,  and  periodic  drought  and  flood.  This  data  challenges  the  mindset  of 
Sudan having an abundance of natural resources. A mind-set of scarcity would not only 
reflect  the  reality  but  would  also  place  more  emphasis  and  investment  for  the 
sustainable  management  of  the  resources.  Sudan  remains  essentially  rural  with  the 
majority  of  the  population  dependent  on  the  country’s  natural  resources  for  their 
livelihoods.  
This raises significant concerns about the possible appropriate institutional arrangements 
for the management of resources and conflict at local levels and about how to reconcile 
indigenous structures and the emerging new political forces. Pastoralism and agriculture 
have  historically  evolved  and  survived  as  complementary  livelihood  and  economic 
systems,  characterised  by  mutually  beneficial  exchange  processes.  In  many  places 
2 
though,  this  historical  relationship  has  been  altered  significantly,  with  the  two  systems 
competing  rather  than  complementing  one  another  (such  as  in  the  States  of  Kordofan 
and  Sennar).  The  situation  is  aggravated  by  resource  scarcity  and  degradation,  growth 
in  human  and  livestock  populations,  and  increasing  incidences  of  drought  and 
unpredictability  of  rainfall.  This  creates  challenges  for  the  balance  of  traditional  and 
formal  governance  systems  of  rural  Sudan  creating  a  further  driver  of  change  in 
environmental  governance.  Some  parts  of  Sudan  that  were  previously  agricultural  and 
pastoral have become deserts and some pastoral parts have been barred by settlers.  
Like in other Sahelian countries, livelihoods in Sudan depend heavily on soil, water and 
vegetation  resources.  It  is  estimated  that  agriculture  (crops,  livestock  and  forestry) 
contributes  35-40  percent  of  GDP  (with  livestock  accounting  for  50  percent  of  the 
production) and employs more than 80 percent of the total population (Lee, et al, 2013). 
Traditional  farming  accounts  for  60-70  percent  of  the  agricultural  output  and  is  largely 
subsistence production based on shifting cultivation and livestock rearing (Badri, 2012). 
The  wildlife  of  Sudan  presents  a  rich  base  of  biodiversity  of  high  value.  The  country  is 
also rich in mineral resources, especially gold. 
1.3  Climate  
Current climate and historical trends 
Rainfall in Sudan is characterised by enormous variability over space and time and is at 
its  lowest  along  the  edges  of  the  Sahara,  at  less  than  150mm,  to  more  than  700mm 
towards the south.   
The findings of a recent IFAD-analysis1 have shown that:   
  There  is  a  gradient  of  precipitation  from  North  to  South,  the  North  being  drier 
than the South.  
  Variability is intra-annual with two season, May-October wet and November-April 
dry.  The  variability  is  also  inter-annual  with  an  increase  in  precipitation  since 
1981  in  most  of  the  regions  (significant  for  North  Kordofan).  The  perception  of 
increase could be explained by the dry period in the 80’s in Sudan compare with 
the  present  situation.  Despite  this  dry  period,  in  the  Southern  part  of  South 
Kordofan  the  trend  is  significantly  negative  since  1981  during  the  wet  season 
(could have a negative impact on water recharge of the soil and subsequently on 
agriculture and people).  
  Furthermore,  the  inter-annual  variability  of  precipitation  can  be  huge  and  cause 
problem  of  droughts  if  water  is  not  well  harvested  and  stored  in  soil  during  the 
wet  years.  According  to  the  World  Bank,  the  variation  within  years  has  seen 
annual dry season rainfall totals increasing 20-30mm per decade in the extreme 
south,  while  annual  rainy  season  rainfall  totals  have  been  decreasing  by  10–30 
mm per decade, primarily in the west. 
  The  increase  in  heavy  to  medium  precipitation  (>10mm/day)  since  1981  as 
shown  in  the  Appendix  5.1  may  have  negative  effects  on  water  storage  by 
destroying small water harvesting infrastructure if not well set up and increasing 
erosion. 
According  to  the  World  Bank2,  the  air  temperatures  in  Sudan  have  been  steadily 
increasing  over  the  period  1960  –  2009,  with  temperatures  in  the  2000  –  2009  period 
1 Sudan Georeferenced Climate Trends Assessment 1960-2018. IFAD 2019 
3 
between 0.8°C and 1.6°C warmer than they were in the 1960 – 1969 period. There was 
an increases  of  between  0.2°C  and  0.4°C  per  decade  in the  periods  March  to  June  and 
June  to  September  from  1960  –  2009.  Also,  the  observed  records  suggest  a  fairly 
strong  warming  trend, with  only  Kadugli  station  near  the  border  with  South  Sudan 
suggesting a slight negative or cooling trend over the historic period (1960 -2010).  The 
IFAD  analysis  (see  Appendix  5.1)  based  on  the  CRU  data  set  observed  an  annual 
temperature slightly increasing significantly for the period 1901-2017 for the period May-
October and more steady for the period November-April. The positive trend varies from 
0.5% for maximum temperature, to 1% for mean temperatures, up to around 1.5% for 
minimum temperatures for of all the regions. 
Future Climate predictions 
Climate  scenario  analyses  conducted  as  part  of  the  preparation  of  Sudan’s  National 
Communications  to  the  UNFCCC  indicated  that  average  temperatures  are  expected  to 
rise  significantly  relative  to  baseline  expectations.  Projections  of  rainfall  under  climate 
change conditions also show sharp deviations from baseline expectations. 
Figure 1: CMIP5 RCP8.5 Ensemble Projection for Sudan. Source: World Bank 
By 2060, projected warming will range from 1.5°C to 3.1°C during August and between 
1.1°C  to  2.1°C  during  January.    Results  of  the  Ensemble  Projection  for  the  scenario 
RCP8.5  show  average  rainfall  will  decrease  in  the  West  of  the  country  but  will  mainly 
increase  in  the  South  and  East  by  2050.  The  maximum  consecutive  dry  days  will 
increase  as  for  the  number  of  days  with  very  heavy  precipitation  by  2050.  This  can  be 
2 World Bank Climate Variability Tool: 
http://iridl.ldeo.columbia.edu/maproom/Global/World_Bank/Climate_Variability/  
4 
interpreted by a concentration of precipitation in a short period of time during the year, 
and consequently, the increase of precipitation over the years may not be as positive as 
it could be but bring even more erosion and flood disasters.  
In  depth  analysis  of  climate  change  and  impacts  is  available  in  Appendix  5.1  of  the 
SECAP note.  
Adaptation Capacity 
For  the  Government  of  Sudan,  the  SNRLP  will  be  a  major  investment  in  improving 
natural  resources  management,  as  well  as  the  elaboration  of  new  policies  for  the 
sustainable  use  of  natural  resources.  Investments  in  national  weather  and  drought 
forecasting services, including in measures to increase data collection and existing data 
accessibility,  and  provide  improved  early  warning  of  drought  episodes  may  be 
considered.  This  work  is  really  needed  for  water  adaptation  planning.  By  combining 
fieldwork  and  remote  sensing  on  both  local  and  national  scales,  and,  validating  and 
disseminating  climate  change  findings  together  with  desertification  findings  could  be 
used as a benchmark for climate risk management and land use and adaptation planning 
(component 2). 
2.  Key potential impacts of the project   
International  development  practice  provides  an  opportunity  for  the  demonstration  of 
sustainable  development  principles. 
IFAD’s  Social  Environmental  and  Climate 
Assessment Procedures (SECAP) aims at adopting these principles. Conversely, projects 
that are poorly implemented may model shortcuts or poor practice that set precedents, 
this time undermining capacity building for environmental best practice.  
Compiling  the  findings  of  a  series  of  interviews  –  with  local  people  and  those 
implementing the intervention – which focused on how rainwater harvesting is enhancing 
lives  and  livelihoods,  interviewees  said  that  by  smart  harvesting  of  rainwater,  women 
and girls spent less time fetching water and therefore had more time for other activities 
such  as  gardening  or  school.  Stakeholders  had  anticipated  that  the  initiative  would 
increase the amount of water available for gardens and homes (with the introduction of 
solar  pumping)  and  would  have  a  positive  impact  on  health  and  nutrition.  Other 
expected  consequences  of  reduced  work  and  increased  water  were  higher  incomes, 
increased  food  security  (vegetable  varieties)  from  gardening,  improved  employment 
from  higher  education  and  improved  health.  Results  from  the  study  showed  that  girls’ 
school attendance increased as they were spending less time fetching water.  
Similarly, developing a water point may lead to depletion of the aquifer, or to depletion 
of  other  resources  such  as  rangeland.  Therefore,  water  interventions  need  attention  so 
that  the  economic,  social  and  environmental  aspects  of  life  and  livelihoods  in  these 
interventions are kept in balance.  Traditional livelihoods have developed to harness the 
variable  and  unpredictable  distribution  of  resources  –  such  as  migrating  to  maximize 
livestock  productivity  by  feeding  on  the  more  nutritious  recently  rain-fed  pastures. 
Significant  challenges  to  establishing  equitable  governance  exist,  but  promising 
initiatives have been included in the SNRLP.  
Community  mobilization  and  NR  and 
(Component 1) 
The  project  will  aim  at  consolidating  and  upscaling  good  practices  for  empowering 
communities and networks or clusters of communities and build their capacities in land-
use planning and NR governance and management by: 
land-use  management  planning 
5 
  Mobilizing  Village  Development  Committees  and  strengthen  their  organisation  in 
Cluster Development Committees or Network Executive Committees. 
  Formulating  Natural  Resources  and  land-use  management  plans  and  build  a  NR 
Conflict resolution mechanism. 
  Support the CDC/NECs in having their land authorized and registered. 
The  concepts  of  equitable  participatory 
in  environmental  governance  and  the 
development  of  co-management  arrangement  for  "open  access"  common  areas  will 
inform the programmatic approach of component 2. 
Governance principles and practices will be developed (Component 2) 
Drawing upon include Integrated Water Resource Management, National Adaptation Plan 
– (NAP and NAPA), REDD Plus, and work on pastoralist livelihoods: 
  Processes  of  consultation  for  institutional  and  constitutional  reform  will  be 
supported with exposure to developments in environmental governance;  
  Capacity  building  for  line  ministries  with  a  coordinated  approach  at  both  State 
and Federal level will be given;  
  Social  and  environmental  management  plans  will  include  a  sound  understanding 
of the governance context in which they operate.   
Project  procedures  will  support  best  practice  in  the  collaboration  between  communities 
and government in management of projects and their results, drawing on the principles 
of co-management.  
Promotion of alternative livelihoods (Component 1.2) 
The  promotion  of  alternative  livelihoods  and  technologies  within  the  Community  NRM 
and  Livelihood  Investment  Plans  and  business  development  services  could  potentially 
entail  activities  with  unintended  adverse  environmental  and/or  social  impacts  (e.g. 
chain  development, 
small-scale  aquaculture,  natural 
slaughterhouse,  earth  dams,  etc.).  These  adverse  impacts,  however,  are  likely  to  be 
limited  in  scope  and  magnitude  and  are  easily  mitigatable  through  related  awareness-
raising, promotion of environmentally and climate resilient practices and close follow-up 
from the project team.  
resources-based 
value 
Support  will  be  given  by  the  Project  to  activities  that  pilot  and  demonstrate  innovation 
and best practice on environmental, water governance, and adaptation, in particular with 
the provision of pumps and hafirs.  
Although  the  SNRLP  is  listing,  as  part  of  Component  1,  a  series  of  community  based 
natural resource management initiatives and best practices such as water harvesting, it 
will also include the analysis of potential impacts and benefits for the local resource - use 
in  the  3  to  5  Livelihood  Zones  within  4  to  5  social  -  ecological  systems,  including  the 
gender based, organically nutritional, home or communal gardens or Jubrakas where the 
SNRLP will operate. The example from water harvesting (in Kordofan) shows how taking 
a gender lens to a theory of change can highlight important changes/impacts in women 
and girls’ livelihoods and resilience.   
3.  Project’s Categorization (Environmental and Social Category) 
Based  on  IFAD's  environmental  and  social  categorization  and  criteria  scheme  and  the 
results  of  the  guiding  questions  for  environmental  and  social  risk  screening,  the  SNRLP 
project is classified as category B. Since sustainable NRM is at the center of the project, 
the  project  is  most  likely  to  have  overall  positive  environmental  impacts.    No  formal 
Environmental  and  Social  Impact  Assessment  (ESIA)  is  required  at  the  stage  of  project 
6 
design,  however  the  SECAP’s  note  in  the  PDR  summarises  the  mainstreamed  activities 
recommended.    
4.  Climate Risk Category / Classification  
The  SNRLP  has  been  classified  as  High  Risk  and  will  operate  in  regions  in  Sudan  which 
are characterized by being highly vulnerable to climate change, such as North Kordofan. 
Since  2015,  most  of  the  references  on  Sudan  have  mentioned  that  Sudan  is  highly 
vulnerable to climate change with some particularly fragile sectors such as food security, 
water  resources and agriculture. Accordingly, a Climate Risk Assessment (CRA) may be 
prepared  but  in  this  present  case,  the  project  is  clearly  geared  towards  adaptation  and 
featuring "no-regret/safe" kind of activities, the CRA is can be found in Appendix 5.1. 
The  SNRLP  will  feature  the  development  of  natural  resource  and  land-use  management 
plans  (NRLMPs)  prepared  for  each  system  of  cluster  or  network  of  villages.  Risk 
management, adaptation and livelihood actions will be identified and mainstreamed into 
the different investment plans for the 5 social - ecological systems at work using natural 
resources  available  in  each  region:  i)  Rangeland  and  livestock  rearing;  ii)  Forestland 
conservation  and  related  businesses;  iii)  Catchment  and  water  point  management;  iv) 
Cropland and climate adaptation in farming practices; v) Stock routes management and 
livelihoods of pastoralists. These may be complemented with LIPs (Livelihood Investment 
Plans).    
5. Recommended SECAP features of project design and implementation 
5.1  Climate change and adaptation potential 
The  following  elements  were  noted  in  the  design  and  implementation  when  it  came  to 
adaptation practices. Adapting to the impacts of climate change on water resources and 
food  production  is  one  of  the  serious  challenges  to  good  governance.  It  will  be  all  the 
more difficult, as the natural resources and the environment that provide vital, social – 
ecological  systems  and  services  come  under  increasing  stress  and  different  users 
compete for water and food:  
 
In  the  SNRLP,  we  are  in  the  presence  of  5  primary  and  secondary  ‘’systems’’: 
agro - land, pastoralism and grazing - land, forest - land, agro-forestry and agro - 
pastoralism. Component 2 will play a pivotal role in assisting the Government of 
Sudan  with  policies  (dialogue,  changes),  adaptive  water  and  food  management 
strategies  and  methods  to  increasing  water  and  food  productivity  to  overcome 
these challenges;   
  Climate  change  impacts  on  water  in  Sudan-  through  rainfall,  soil  moisture,  river 
flow  (Nile)  and  groundwater  recharge  directly  translate  into  impacts  on  food, 
livelihoods  and  ecosystems.  Water  and  food  are  the  interface  between  the  5 
systems  (above).    Under  current  trends  of  population  growth,  demand  for  food 
and water and changing diets in Sudan (and neighboring countries which rely on 
exports  from  Sudan),  food  demand  will  double,  and  water  demand  will  also 
increase  by  20  to  40  percent.  Climate  change  will  place  additional  stress  on 
already stretched water systems; 
  The right steps taken now in food – water- energy management will significantly 
reduce  poor  people’s  vulnerability  to  climate  change  by  reducing  water  -related 
risks  and  creating  buffers  against  unforeseen  changes  in  rainfall  and  water 
availability.  An  appropriate  assessment  agenda,  a  sign  of  good  governance,  will 
fill  the  knowledge  gaps  between  water,  food  and  CC  and  guide  the  right 
7 
investments  in  Component  1.  This  can  improve  the  livelihood  resilience  of  the 
farming  communities  and  ensure  food  security  as  well  as  contribute  to  the 
research in the water, food and livelihood nexus; 
  Building  resilience  through  better  water  and  food  management  is  a  key  output 
and outcome of Component 2 (and 1). Responses (activities) such as:  
  Thinking more creatively about the different forms/ways  of  water storage 
ranging  from  small  ponds  to  large  hafirs,  groundwater  recharge,  water 
harvesting and soil water conservation capture and storing water in fields 
and in the soil.  
  Understanding  pragmatically  the  impacts  of  i)  anticipated,  increased, 
climate  -proofed  and  well  adapted  investments  in  the  different  forms  of 
water  storage  on  the  environment  and  natural  resources,  and,  of  ii)  the 
long-term  feasibility,  reliability  and  variability  =  sustainability  of  these 
interventions, is a manifestation of good governance.     
  Increases in water productivity through higher yields, crop diversification, 
and  integrating  livestock  and  fisheries  is  an  effective  way  of  improving 
rural incomes and reducing risks by diversifying income sources. (improve 
productivity also help reduce GHGs). 
  Basin water management and allocation (between the 5 social - ecological 
systems)  is  becoming  more  difficult  under  CC  scenarios  in  water  scarce 
basins  and  sheds,  especially  with 
flows. 
Adjustments  in  water  allocation  and  repartition  in  the  vast  land  (and 
water) use map and landscape require both, knowledge of water flows as 
well as social and institutional governance mechanisms.  
increased  variability 
in 
  With the shift from drought response to drought risk mitigation (and crops 
monitoring)  new  approaches  such  as  early  warning  and  insurance  will  be 
needed  to  help  establish  targeted  safety  nets  for  farmers.  These 
approaches  will  require  precise,  downscaling  CC  predictions  at  the  basin 
level  which  could  pose  methodological  and  technological  challenges  for 
hydrological predictions in ‘’ungauged’’ situations.     
  Changes in cropping and land use patterns and allocations (new land use 
map?) because of CC will definitely need new water management policies 
and strategies to support these changes but also to meet the local needs 
of the different groups within the 5 systems.     
  The  drafting  of  new  evidence  -  based  policy  support  to  water  and  land 
managers  and  policy  makers  to  build  social  resilience  and  adaptive 
livelihood  in  order  to  extract  key  messages  and  provide  science  -  based 
guidance  for  future,  sustainable  critical  decisions  about  natural  resources 
in  general,  and  water  resources  in  particular.      The  concept  of  Climate 
Smart  Agriculture  (CSA)  also  introduces  a  new  angle  in  that  it  helps 
farmers,  government,  companies  and  NGOs  better  understand  and 
manage  the  risks  posed  by  climate  change  and  thus  become  more 
resilient.  In  order  to  make  such  efforts  meaningful  for  a  large  number  of 
stakeholders,  scaling  climate  smart  agriculture  necessitates  engaging 
multiple  actors  to  understand  site-specific  projections  of  climate  impacts 
and  develop  suitable  responses  accordingly.  This  novel  combination  adds 
value  to  existing  work  with  the  goal  of  achieving  adoption  at  scale  for 
locally  relevant  CSA  practices.  In  the  SNRLP,  the  Jubrakas,  will  take  new 
scale  and  dimensions.  Testing  a  CSA  approach  will  be  a  cost-effective 
choice.   
8 
5.2 Multi-benefit approaches 
The  project  will  assess  the  climate  change  exposure  at  a  subnational  scale,  develop 
appropriate  CSA  practices  with  farmers  incorporating  cash  crops  and  food  crops  to 
increase  the  resilience  of  these  systems,  and  codify  these  practices  in  adaptation 
guidelines.  These  guidelines  will  then  be  mainstreamed  through  existing  (certification) 
training curricula (in coordination with IFAD’s knowledge management division) and used 
to develop innovative impact investment products that will help finance and increase the 
adoption  of  identified  adaptation  strategies.  In  order  to  increase  impact  and  scale,  the 
results  will  be  promoted  through  broader  outreach  with  other  standards  organizations, 
impact  investors,  government  agencies  and  industry  leaders.  Its  desired  outcome  is  to 
contribute  to  a  common  adaptation  agenda  applicable  across  a  regional  scale  and 
applicable to other smallholder crops.  
The  long-term  objective  of  this  work  is  to  enable  key  public,  private  and  civil  society 
actors to interpret projected exposure to climate change by cropping system and region 
into  site-specific  CSA  practices;  and  to  incorporate  these  practices  into  their  work  with 
hundreds  of  thousands  of  farmers  through  extension  services  or  tailored  financing,  as 
needed.  To  further  scale  this  work,  the  project  will  engage  national  and  sub-national 
stakeholder  platforms  /networks  in  facilitating  public  private  dialogues  around  the 
promotion  of  inclusive  climate  change  adaptation  strategies,  segmented  by  degree  of 
climate exposure.  
5.3 Incentives for good practices  
During our field trips we had a number of requests for Jubrakas from women or groups 
of women.  
In  Jubrakas  (or  home/  communal,  gender  based,  organic  gardens),  there  will  be 
incentives  as  tangible  benefits  for  relinquishing  unsustainable  practices  (farming, 
processing,  etc.),  reducing  risk,  and  helping  smallholders  (and  gender-based 
households) adopt adaptation and mitigation measures, including funding. In fact, in the 
SNRLP, we have designed a sub -component that is aiming at Jubrakas becoming climate 
- smart agriculture (CSA) preferred ground for gender - based community, multicultural 
and highly nutritional, home and community gardens, and specifically targeting:    
o  gender and nutrition values in the household 
o  sustainably  increasing  agricultural  productivity  and  incomes  -  livelihood 
(green charcoal) through CSA 
o  adapting and building resilience to climate change 
o 
reducing and/or removing greenhouse gas emissions, by introducing agro-
forestry  and  agro-ecology  where  possible,  thus  increasing  productive 
biodiversity.  
5.4 Participatory processes  
In  this  section  we  integrate  some  of  the  participants’  recommendations  (from  the  field 
trips) with some of our own: 
  The need to Integrating and co-ordinating approaches  
  Adopting one of the principles of co- management of the resources  
  Working  with  vulnerable  communities  at  the  local  level  and  take  a 
bottom-up approach to project planning (component 2).  
9 
Many  local  communities  are  calling  for  the  amendment  of  some  water  resource  laws, 
particularly  those  that  govern  the  cost  and  distribution  of  water  and  the  use  of  money 
generated from water projects in vulnerable communities in arid and semi-arid lands. In 
many parts of the country people suffering from water shortages and scarcity are forced 
to  drink  with  their  animals  from  ponds  because  it  is  less  expensive  (though  they  still 
must pay for this water). Now, people have to buy hafir and well water. All the money is 
transferred  to  the  national  water  corporation,  but  there  are  no  standard  regulations 
governing  the  distribution  of  benefits.  Before  2002  the  communities  used  to  have  a 
reasonable share of the money (60%, which was then reduced to 40%). However, a law 
issued  in  2002  eliminated  their  right  to  a  share  of  the  money.  In  our  survey,  in 
Kordofan, we found very few Hafirs efficient and cost effective.   
Drafting a climate risk management policy and establishing monitoring and early warning 
systems  as  the  impact  of  climate-related  disasters  is  very  high:  the  provision  of  timely 
early warning by the Meteorological Authority could help reduce these impacts and is a 
sign of good governance and equity. 
6. Analysis of alternatives  
Most  of  the  activities  which  have  been  selected  are  cost  effective  and  are  related  to 
adaptation  practices  and  approaches  and  these  have  been  mainstreamed  into  the 
components and subcomponents.   
Adaptation is mainstreamed in both components. The methodology above contributes to 
capturing the adaptation undertone of the two components based on climate risk which 
is omnipresent in both components: managing climate risk and adaptation planning are 
excellent  indicators  of  good  governance  which  will  lead  to  Resilience,  Livelihood  thus 
Sustainability.  
The  climate  risk  approach  (methodology  and  pathway)  as  a  tool  for  adaptation  risk  - 
impact  assessment  has  evolved  and  has  become  the  innovative  (paradigm  shift?) 
cornerstone  of  causal  and  mainstreamed  adaptation  (work).  Risks,  vulnerabilities, 
resilience,  livelihood,  and  adaptation  are  all  linked  and  interchangeable  and  are 
themselves indicators of good governance and vice versa. 
The project will have two planning and investment instruments which both have climate 
change risk management and adaptation measures mainstreamed: 
1.       The  NR  and  Land-use  Management  Plans  (NRLMPs)  for  village  networks  or 
clusters. The NRLMPs set the framework for resources governance, use and conservation 
for improved livelihoods and income generation and managing current and future climate 
change and disaster risks.   
2.       The  Livelihoods  Investment  Plans  (LIPs)  for  groups  (of  NR  users,  producers, 
women  or  youth).  The  LIPs  must  be  aligned  with  and implement  priority  actions  of  the 
NRLMPs  including  climate  change  and  variability  adaptation  practices  and  investments 
and disaster risk reduction measures.  
7. Institutional framework  
Components/outcomes and activities 
The  Project  will  have  two  inter-linked  technical  components  and  a  project  management 
component:  
(i) upscaling of community based natural resources management practices, technologies 
and  businesses;  (ii)  improving  the  institutional  framework  for  upscaling  community 
based NRM; and (iii) project coordination. 
10 
Several  conventions  and  international  initiatives  have  been  signed  by  the  Sudanese 
government  and  therefore  have  been  taken  into  consideration  when  planning  the 
activities of the SNRLP (Component 1). Among these are the numerous milestones to Rio 
+20.  
As for component 2, The legal frameworks by sectors for the most significant governance 
issues in Component 2 are:  
Land tenure 
• 
•  Water 
•  Pasture and grazing 
• 
Forests  
More  information  on  the  institutional  framework  can  be  found  in  the  section 
“Organizational Framework” of the PDR. 
8. Capacity- building and additional funding  
IFAD will provide technical support to strengthen capacities for climate risk management 
in  the  agriculture  sector.    Agriculture  is  the  principal  economic  sector,  it  employs  more 
than 80 percent of the total population, but it is poorly diversified and largely dependent 
on  variable  rainy  seasons.  Most  farms  are  small,  and  there  has  been  little  adoption  of 
modern  technology  because  of  under  resourced  agricultural  support  services  and  weak 
supply  of  agricultural  inputs.  Within  the  agriculture  sector  there  are  limited  structures 
and resources for proactive climate risk management and adaptation to climate change. 
Strengthening of these areas require coordinated efforts at the national and local levels. 
Initiatives by the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Environment, the Meteorological 
Authority,  the  Sudan  Agriculture  Research  Center  (ARC),  and  regional  and  district 
agriculture  development  offices  are  critical  to  the  mainstreaming  of  risk  management 
and  climate  change  adaptation  into  agriculture.  Institutional  and  technical  capacity 
development is the key priority for improving the Ministry of Agriculture position as a key 
actor in agriculture adaptation. Institutional and technical capacity needs to be enhanced 
at the national and district levels, to ensure that climate change adaptation is addressed 
proactively  and  from  an  agricultural  perspective.  Building  institutional  and  technical 
capacity will also provide the Ministry with a comparative advantage in representing the 
agriculture  sector  in  national-level  adaptation  initiatives  facilitated  by  the  Ministry  of 
Environment (the HCNRE and the NCE).  
Elements  for  linking  the  loan  with  multilateral  or  bilateral  environmental  and  climate 
financing sources (i.e. Global Environment Facility, Least Developed Countries Fund and 
Special  Climate  Change  Fund  funding,  Green  Climate  Fund,  Adaptation  for  Smallholder 
Agriculture Programme) for enhanced results and impact has been considered.  Indeed, 
a  GEF  component  (2  million  USD)  will  support  the  incremental implementation  of  some 
of the initiatives of the SNRLP.  
11 
9. Monitoring & Evaluation  
Using  the  twin  tracks  of  climate  risk  management  (CRM)  and  adaptation  and 
development  outcomes,  we  seek  to  assess  adaptation  processes  at  multiple  scales  and 
through  an  evaluation  of  outputs,  outcomes  and  impacts  within  and  across  the  two 
components. This is to explore how adaptation or adaptation-relevant interventions and 
investments contribute to better climate risk management and to help keep development 
outcomes  on  track  in  the  context  of  increasing  climate  risks.  Specific  information  on 
Monitoring and Evaluation is available in the section L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and 
Communications Plans of the PDR.  
To  address  risks,  we  will  use  screening  and  safeguards  (SECAP)  to  climate  proof  / 
minimise  the  risk  of  maladaptation  or  increased  vulnerability.  To  assess  institutional 
sustainability,  we  will  evaluate  the  extent  to  which  mandated  organisations  (Min. 
Agriculture,  Min.  Water  resources)  depend  on  outside  assistance  to  plan,  manage  and 
implement (adapted) interventions over an appropriate time period. 
10. Further Information Required and Studies Leading to Potential 
New Outputs / Outcomes    
Several  studies  including  a  climate  risk  and  a  land  assessment  (component  2)  are 
mandatory  to  take  better  advantage  of  the  opportunities  offered  by  the  environmental 
social and climate context. The climate risk assessment (CRA) is a requirement because 
the classification of this project is “High” but this has been discussed  with OPR and the 
present analysis would be sufficient at this stage. Depending on the scope and the scale 
of component 2 there might be specific climate downscaling in key locations and regions 
in order to assess for e.g. the drought (and flood predictions) in order to come up with 
drought early warning systems (agri-met based).  Accordingly, several studies including 
downscale modelling may be needed to support the activities in component 2 (and GEF), 
particularly the water pillar. These are:  
1- 
scenario for sustainable watershed management in the semi-arid region of Butana.  
2- Modelling the hydrologic response of a Nile watershed to changes in land use patterns 
for environmental planning  
Modeling  and  assessing  land-use  and  hydrological  regimes  to  future  land-use 
Political  commitment,  strong  institutions  and  appropriate  governance  are  essential  to 
integrating  risk  issues  in  development  processes  and  to  reducing  disaster  risks..  In 
Sudan. there are major hazards, risks and disasters including droughts and floods.  
As  we  have  seen  above  in  Sudan,  water  resources  and  disasters  are  linked  in  many 
ways.  First,  several  natural  hazards  arise  from  hydrological  factors.  Second,  disasters 
triggered  by  natural  hazards  can  destroy  or  severely  damage  water  infrastructure, 
affecting water supply and reducing its quality. For example, drought can reduce surface 
or  groundwater  flows  and  flood  can  contaminate  water  quality.  Third,  water  resource 
degradation causes or worsens disaster risks arising from natural hazards. For example, 
degradation  of  watersheds  can  adversely  induce  or  exacerbate  river  basin  flooding  or 
landslides.  Unsustainable  water  resource  utilization  also  weakens  the  resilience  of 
communities  at  risk.  Because  of  these  reasons,  it  is  important  to  reduce  risks  to  water 
resources  in  a  multi-hazard  context.  Also,  because  water  risks  emanate  from  many 
sectors,  sources  and competing uses, water resource management is inter-sectoral and 
12 
multidisciplinary.  Therefore,  any  approach  to  understanding  and  managing  water  risks 
must be comprehensive and integrated. 
Output 1: A Groundwater Resources map (or an update of) 
The 2nd National Communication to UNFCCC (2013) (Impact on River Nile flow) 
states  that  "hence,  there  is  a  clear  finding  that  under  many  climatic  scenarios, water 
flow  in  the  Nile  River  will  decrease  considerably,  between  20%  and  30%.  This 
circumstance,  combined  with  the  increased  water  demand  discussed  previously, 
suggests that risks of increasing water stress in Sudan over the next 40 years will need 
to be integrated into water planning and policymaking." 
Thus,  the  capacity  of  groundwater  delivery  systems  to  meet  demand  may  take  on 
increasing  importance  with  climate  change.  Future  development  of  groundwater 
resources  to  address  direct  and  indirect  impacts  of  climate  change,  population  growth, 
industrialization,  and  expansion  of  irrigated  agriculture  will  require  much  more 
knowledge  of  groundwater  resources  and  aquifer  recharge  potentials  than  currently 
exists. Observational data on groundwater resources in Africa are extremely limited and 
significant  effort  needs  to  be  expanded  to  assess  groundwater  recharge  potential. 
Detailed  analysis  of  groundwater  conditions  for  water  resource  and  adaptation  planning 
would need to consider these constraints in Sudan.  
Output  2:  A  Disaster  (Drought  /Flood)  Risk  Reduction  Map  (or  update  of)  and 
Early Warning and Monitoring System The impact of climate-related disasters is very 
high  and  frequent  droughts/floods  in  the  last  few  years  in  Sudan  has  proven  that  the 
threat  is  omnipresent  and  will  increase  in  the  future  (IPCC,5);  the  provision  of  timely, 
water  security,  early  warning  by  the  Meteorological  Authority  could  help  reduce  these 
impacts. 
A  disaster  risk  reduction  map  for  the  mitigation  of  desertification  in  Northern  Kordofan 
and parts of Butana. It is recognized that while the natural phenomena causing disasters 
are  in  most  cases  beyond  human  control,  the  vulnerability  (of  affected  communities)  is 
generally a result of human activity. This is particularly clear in Sudan. 
11.  Time Frame and Budget 
There will not be an environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA) per say because 
the  project  has  been  categorized  as  B.  Furthermore,  this  is  an  adaptation  project  in 
which  the  adaptation  activities  have  been  mainstreamed  in  the  respective  components. 
Thus, a climate change vulnerability analysis and a climate risk assessment (CRA) will be 
included  in  the  preparation  of  natural  resource  and  land-use  management  plans 
(NRLMPs)  and  LIP  for  each  cluster  or  network  of  villages  and  risk  management, 
adaptation  and  livelihood  actions  will  be  identified  and  mainstreamed  into  the  different 
investment plans for the 5 social - ecological systems (in the 4 or 5 livelihood zones) at 
work  using  natural  resources  available  in  each  region:  i)  Rangeland  and  livestock 
rearing;  ii)    Forestland  conservation  and  related  businesses;  iii)  Catchment  and  water 
point  management;  iv)  Cropland  and  climate  adaptation  in  farming  practices;  v)  Stock 
routes management and livelihoods of pastoralists.  
Free prior and informed consent (FPIC) might be needed in component 2 in relation with 
land and communal forest issues.  
13 
The estimated time frame for the CRA is prior to, or eventually during the final selection 
of the sites because the vulnerability analysis informs targeting and site selection and is 
considered one of its main criteria. Its budget has been added to the project’s budget. As 
for  the  NRLMPs  their  budget  is  part  of  the  project  activity  costing.        The  CRA’s  time 
duration  is  between  3  and  4  months.  The  NRLMP’s  design  was  spanned  over  1  year 
(around  300  communities).      Consultations  with  marginalized  poor  sections  of  the 
communities (between December 1 and 18, 2018) and three different groups visiting the 
three  regions  of  the  project:  Kordofan,  Sennar  and  Butane)  including  women’s  groups, 
and  identifying  the  key  comments  provided  have  been  incorporated  into  project  design 
for effective implementation.  
12. Next Steps 
Learning from the CRA exercise that is being carried out concurrently for the IAMDP, the 
CRA was prepared in a 2 -stage approach. The first part or the vulnerability assessment 
/mapping was partly done at communities – specific level and with focus groups (11 of 
them  out  of  129).  The  vulnerability  assessment  fed  into  the  selection  of  the  localities  / 
project sites (and is helpful for the SNRLP since 60 % of the communities / localities to 
be  selected  for  the  SNRLP  are  ‘’old’’  IFAD  project  localities  (SUSTAIN,  LMRP,  IAMDP, 
BIRDP).  The  second  part  of  the  CRA,  partly  the  Crops  Suitability  Assessment,  will  be 
used  to  complete  the  CRA  and  will  feed  into  adaptation  planning  at  the  regional  scale. 
The adaptation model(s) and results (and the adaptation knowledge) of the CRA - stage 
2 could eventually be fed into the site -specific localities / communities in case of gaps, 
deficiencies,  maladaptation  and  vulnerabilities  still  existing  at  the  locality/community 
level  via  the  Cluster  Livelihood  and  Adaptation  Sustainability  Plans  or  CLASPs.  Please 
note that for SUSTAIN, LMRP, and BIRDP, climate change and therefore adaptation, was 
not  fully  mainstreamed  into  the  core  activities  of  these  projects  which  meant  leaving 
gaps  at  the  locality  and  household  level.  The  Crops  Suitability  Assessment  addressed 
more the nature and productive ecosystems (crops) and their vulnerabilities – adaptation 
resilience  -  and  less  adaptation  livelihood  (the  ‘’human’’  element  with  its  non  -climate 
vulnerabilities -environmental, social, health, income, conflicts, migration risks) in the 5 
social ecological systems.       
Undertake a CRA for the SNRLP or precisely a Strategic - Climate Risk Assessment (STR-
CRA)  since  the  3  regions  of  the  SNRLP  constitute  75  %  of  the  surface  of  Sudan.  As 
agreed, a climate change vulnerability analysis will be included in the preparation of the 
natural  resource  and  land-use  management  plans  (NRLMPs)  and  LIPs  (suggesting  to 
upgrade  to  CLAIMPs  or  Cluster  Livelihoods  Adaptation  Investment  and 
Management  plans)  for  each  cluster  or  network  of  villages,  and  risk  management, 
adaptation  and  livelihood  actions  will  be  identified  and  mainstreamed  into  the  different 
investment  plans  for  the  5  social  -  ecological  systems  at  work,  using  natural  resources 
available in each region: i) Rangeland and livestock rearing; ii)  Forestland conservation 
and  related  businesses;  iii)  Catchment  and  water  point  management;  iv)  Cropland  and 
climate adaptation in farming practices; v) Stock routes management and livelihoods of 
pastoralists.  
For the purpose of component 2 of the SNRLP and environmental governance, the three 
pillars, namely land tenure, water and forests are the most determining and pressing in 
view  of  Sudan’s  history  with  floods  and  droughts,  water  hazards  and  climate  risks. 
Accordingly,  it  is  suggested  to  push  the  analysis  and  expand  the  scope  of  the  Climate 
Risk  Assessment  (CRA)  into  drought  (flood)  monitoring  and  modeling  and  assessing 
land-use and hydrological regimes to future land-use scenario for sustainable watershed 
management  in  the  3  regions.  Or  at  least,  along  for  e.g.  the  stock  routes  which  are 
presently  /  and  will  be  in  the  future,  the  most  vulnerable  ‘’social  –  ecological’’  systems 
14 
and groups. Therefore, drought monitoring and early warning system(s) are essential for 
the pastoralists in their quest for water (as well as for the farmers in the northern parts 
of  Sudan  who  will  suffer  from  drastic  increase  in  temperature  and  precipitation 
variability).  It  is  noted  here  that idle  and/or  obsolete  parts  of  disaster  risk  reductions  / 
early warning systems exist in some states and would need ‘’incremental’’ efforts to put 
them back to work (could be included in the GEF 2 – million USD project).  
Once we have the results of the S- CRA it will be necessary to transfer, feed, aliment and 
climate - proof the investment plans (component 1) as described above for as many as 
300 + localities / communities using the CLAIMPs.    
15 
Appendix 5.1. Sudan Design Climate Change in depth analysis 
IFAD acknowledges climate-related risks as one of the factors affecting rural poverty and 
as  one  of  the  challenges  it  needs  to  address.  While  climate  change  is  a  global 
phenomenon,  its  negative  impacts  are  more  severely  felt  by  poor  people  in  Sudan  who 
rely heavily on the natural resource base for their livelihoods. As the most vulnerable and 
marginalised  people  in  rural  societies,  smallholder  farmers  and  herders  are  especially 
exposed  to  climate  change.  They  inhabit  some  of  the  most  vulnerable  and  marginal 
landscapes, such as hillsides, deserts and floodplains. They often lack secure tenure and 
resource rights, relying directly on climate affected natural resources for their livelihoods. 
Responding to this prioritization, IFAD proposes an overarching goal to enable poor rural 
people to improve their food security, raise their incomes and strengthen their resilience. 
Consistent  with  this  approach,  the  IFAD's  Policy  for  Environment  and  Natural  Resource 
Management also recommends greater attention to climate-related risks and resilience in 
order to manage environment and natural resource related shocks. 
For  investment  projects  with  a  projected  high  sensitivity  to  climate  hazards,  IFAD 
requires  a  climate  vulnerability  analysis  which  can  help  to  improve  the  targeting  of 
investment actions to include the most vulnerable and least resilient target groups: 
 
Improve  the  robustness  of  development  investments  from  climate-related 
hazards; 
 
Increase the resilience of development outcomes; and 
  Avoid  investment  actions  which  inadvertently  increase  vulnerability  to  climate 
hazards over the longer term. 
The  objective  of  the  climate  in  depth  analysis  is  to  analyze  the  occurrence  of  climate-
related  hazards  in  the  prospective  target  area  of  the  project  (including  a  historical 
analysis  of  hazard  types,  intensities,  frequencies  and  associated  losses  and  damages); 
the  physical  exposure  of  livelihoods,  ecosystems  and  critical  infrastructure  in  different 
locations  to  the  most  prevalent  climate  hazards  ('hot  spots'  mapping,  related  to  high 
precipitation  for  example);  the  key  properties  that  determine  the  susceptibility  of 
livelihoods, ecosystems and critical infrastructure in the target area to the most prevalent 
climate  hazards  (sensitivity  analysis);  impact  of  climate  change  along  the  value  chain 
supported by the project. 
In addition the analysis will help to understand the projected climate change impacts in 
the target area, based on representative ensembles of climate models and scenarios; the 
impacts  of  climate  change  on  health  in  project-affected  communities  indicating  those 
communities  or  groups  who  may  become  more  vulnerable  to  health  risks  as  a  result  of 
the project; Preliminary recommendations on how climate risks in the target area can be 
addressed in a larger investment programme. 
1 
16 
Zones of study:    
1.  Butana 
2.  Sennar 
3.  North Kordofan 
4.  West Kordofan 
5.  South Kordofan 
Sources: CHIRPS/Climate Hazards Group-USGS; University of East Anglia Climatic Research Unit 
CRU 
3 
4 
5 
3 
1 
2 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
3 
4 
5 
4 
5 
1 
2 
1 
2 
17 
Butana : 
18 
  Sennar : 
19 
North Kordofan : 
20 
West Kordofan : 
South Kordofan : 
21 
Climate analysis 
Precipitation 
  There  is  a  gradient  of  precipitation  from  North  to  South,  the  North  being  drier 
than the South.  
  Variability is intra-annual with two season, May-October wet and November-April 
dry.  The variability is also inter-annual with a significant increase in precipitation 
since 1981 in most of the regions for the two seasons but really slight for the dry 
season  (see  maps  on  the  right).  On  the  opposite,  in  the  Southern  part  of  South 
Kordofan  the  trend  is  significantly  negative  during  the  wet  season  (could  have  a 
negative impact on water recharge of the soil and subsequently on agriculture and 
people). 
Temperature 
  The temperature is significantly increasing in all the regions for the period 1901-
2017,  the  trend’s  increase  can  reach  up  to  1.6%  for  minimal  temperature.  The 
mean  temperature  increasing  trend  happen  especially  during  the  dry  and  most 
vulnerable months of the year. 
According to the IFAD analysis and supported by the Think Hazard tool, water scarcity is 
classified  as  high3.  This means  that  droughts  are  expected  to  occur  on  average  every  5 
years. Based on this information, the impact of drought must be considered in all phases 
of  the  project,  in  particular  its  effect  on  personnel  and  stakeholders,  and  during  the 
design  of  buildings  and  infrastructure.  Project  planning  decisions,  project  design,  and 
construction  methods  must  take  into  account  the  level  of  water  scarcity.  In  southern 
Sudan  where  the  project  area  is  found,  medium  confidence  in  an  increase  in  drought 
tendency.  The  present  hazard  level  may  increase  in  the  future  due  to  the  effects  of 
climate change. 
In  addition,  extreme  heat  hazard  is  also  classified  as  high.  This  means  that  prolonged 
exposure to extreme heat, resulting in heat stress, is expected to occur at least once in 
the next five years. Project planning decisions, project design, and construction methods 
must  take  into  account  the  level  of  extreme  hazard.  According  to  the  most  recent 
assessment  report  of  the  Intergovernmental  panel  on  Climate  Change  (IPCC,  2013), 
continued  emissions  of  greenhouse  gases  will  cause  further  warming,  and  it  is  virtually 
certain that there will be more frequent hot temperature extremes over most land areas 
during  the  next  fifty  years.  Warming  will  not  be  regionally  uniform.  In  Sudan,  the 
temperature  increase  in  the  next  fifty  years  will  be  slightly  higher  than  the  worldwide 
average.  
Impacts on agriculture and people 
The most vulnerable groups would be traditional rainfed farmers and pastoralists, groups 
least  resilient  to  climate  -  change  related  shocks.  Compounded  by  a  range  of  human 
pressures, these underlying conditions create a state of vulnerability in Sudan to climate 
impacts,  and  a  troubling  picture  of  vulnerability  to  anticipated  climate  change.  Drought 
as a recurring series of dry years has become a normal occurrence in the Sudanese Sahel 
region. The drought is threatening the existing cultivation of about 12 million hectares of 
3 http://thinkhazard.org/  
22 
rainfed,  mechanized  farming  and  6.6  million  hectares  of  traditional  rainfed  lands; 
pastoral and nomadic groups in the semi-arid areas of Sudan are also affected.  
During the 20th century Sudan experienced major droughts. The most devastating ones 
were  in  1913,  1940,  and  1954  which  covered  many  parts  of  the  country.  In  1913  and 
1940,  about  1.5  million  people  were  affected.  In  1984,  4.5  million  people  went  hungry. 
Some  of  the  affected  people  became  relief-recipient  and  less  work-oriented.  Different 
tribes responded differently to recurring drought. Insufficient and highly variable annual 
precipitation is a defining feature of the climate of most of Sudan. Availability analysis of 
rain  fall  retoured  from  1961  to  1990  in  northern  and  southern  Kordofan  that  annual 
precipitation ranged from 350 to 850 mm, within average annual variation of 65 percent 
in  the  northern  parts  of  Northern  Kordofan  and  15  percent  in  the  southern  parts  of 
Southern Kordofan.  
Annual  variability  and  relative  scarcity  of  rainfall  in  the  north  of  Sudan  in  particular  – 
have  a  dominant  effect  of  agriculture  and  food  security  and  are  strongly  linked  to 
displacement  and  related  conflicts.  Drought  events  also  change  the  ecosystem,  as  dry 
spells  kill  otherwise  long-lived  trees  and  result  in  a  general  reduction  of  the  vegetation 
cover,  leaving  land  more  vulnerable  to  overgrazing  and  erosion.  Together  with  other 
countries  in  the  Sahel  belt,  Sudan  has  suffered  a  number  of  long  and  devastating 
droughts  in  the  past  decades.  All  regions  have  been  affected,  but  the  worst  state, 
particularly in  the  Northern  Kordofan  state,  North  states,  Northern  and  Western  Darfur, 
and Red Sea and White Nile states. In the case of central Sudan, however, the eighteen 
recorded  years  of  drought  within  the  last  half  century  are  certain  to  have  had  a  major 
influence  on  the  vegetation  profile  and  soil  conditions  seen  in  2006  (UMEP,  2007).The 
vulnerability  to  drought  is  partly  related  to  social  and  development  factors  such  as  the 
tendency  to  maximize herd  sizes  rather  than herd  quality,  and  the lack  of  secure  water 
resources such as deep boreholes which can be relied upon during short-term droughts. 
The  human  health  sector  has  clear  links  to  climate  variability  through  both  direct 
exposure  as  well  as  indirect  pathways.  Obviously,  negative  health  impacts  come  from 
extreme  climate  events,  such  as  heat  waves,  floods  and  droughts.  Gradual  changes  of 
climate  affecting  water,  food  and  air  quality  also  have  negative  influence  on  human 
23 
health around the world. Beyond the physical effects are issues related to mental health. 
Research  has  shown  that  increased  numbers  of  extreme  events  can  leave  significant 
fractions  of  the  population  with  PTSD-like  symptoms.  Although  controversial,  studies 
indicate that there is linkage between rising temperatures and increase in aggression and 
violence in society (e.g. in Sudan with herders conflicts).  
Figure 2: Record high temperature in Sudan for 2050, CMIP5 RCP8.5 Ensemble Projection. Source: Climate Knowledge Portal, 
Wordl Bank. 
Major challenges are stretching the systems of environmental governance in Sudan. For 
many years and up to now, the impacts of climate change and variability on natural and 
productive  resources  and  their  unsustainable  exploitation  are  the  main  cause  of 
proliferation of conflicts over those resources, especially in rain-fed areas away from the 
banks  of  the  Nile,  in  Butana.  Rapid  population  growth,  shifting  cultivation  and  illegal 
charcoal  production  increase  deforestation  and  loss  of  biodiversity.  In  addition  and 
directly linked  with  those  practices,  drought  and  flood  disasters  are  often  the  burden  of 
the  population  of  the  Project  area,  increasing  once  more  soil  erosion  and  land 
degradation and making the desert creeps over the banks of the main Nile.  
By comparing the Population maps to the drought map, a vulnerability map can be  
An analysis of the daily heavy rainfall (>20mm/day) since 1981 up to 2017 and its trend 
by season for each of the project areas gives  detailed information about climate related 
risks and vulnerability. 
24 
Sudan Heavy rainfall events and vulnerability maps 
South Kordofan 
25 
West Kordofan 
26 
North Kordofan 
 Noh t lsm      
27 
Butana 
v  
28 
Sennar 
29 
There is sufficient disseminated evidence to support the following findings: 
  Moderate  to  severe  land  degradation  is  ongoing  in  the  desert  and  semi-arid 
regions that cover the northern half of Sudan; 
  A 50 to 200 km southward shift of the boundary between desert and semi-desert 
has occurred since rainfall and vegetation records began in the 1930s. This shift, 
however, has not been well quantified and is based largely on anecdotal evidence 
and small-scale studies; 
  The  desert  and  semi-desert  boundaries  are  expected  to  continue  to  shift 
southwards due to declining precipitation/reliability of precipitation; 
  Most of the remaining semi-arid and low rainfall savannah on sand, representing 
approximately 25 % of Sudan’s agricultural land, is at considerable risk of further 
desertification,  to  the  extent  that  food  production  in  these  regions  will  at 
minimum plateau, and more likely continue to drop significantly (i.e. up to 20 % 
or more); and 
  Modelled  predictions  of  a  future  70  %  drop  in  food  production  in  Northern 
Kordofan  have  already  taken  place  on  a  smaller  scale  and  on  a  short-term  and 
local  basis,  due  to  reduced  rainfall  and  ongoing  land  degradation  and 
abandonment. This trend is expected to worsen with time and the predicted result 
is  that  in  the  absence  of  major  changes  in  agricultural  patterns,  food  insecurity 
will only increase in these regions. 
The  area  at  greatest  risk  is  the  previously  drought-stricken  parts  of  Northern  Kordofan 
and  Khartoum  states,  and  conflict-  and  drought-stricken  Kassala  state.  Much  of  the 
evidence  for  the  above  findings  is  piecemeal,  anecdotal  and/or  based  on  site-specific 
data.  
Conflict,  displacement  and  food  insecurity  are  three  of  the  most  pressing  issues  facing 
Sudan,  and  the  main  reasons  for  the  current  international  humanitarian  aid  effort. 
Natural  and  partly  manmade  disasters  such  as  drought,  desertification  and  floods  are 
major contributing causes to these problems. 
30 
Appendix 5.2. Environment and Social Management Plan 
The project is applying a resilience model to identify adaptation actions to be supported 
and  develop  a  scorecard  to  monitor  changes  in  resilience  for  project  beneficiary 
households.  Indeed,  the  Project  Goal  aims  at  improving  food  security,  incomes  and 
resilience  of  pastoralist,  agropastoralist  and  small  crop  farmers  engaging  in  joint 
natural  resources  (NR)  governance  and  management  and  development  of  related 
businesses  in  targeted  landscapes.  Furthermore,  one  of  the  key  impact  indicator  is 
72,000 HHs (60%) with an increased score in the resilience scorecards. 
The  population’s  future  well-being  in  Sudan  depends  on  the  resilience  of  communities, 
cities  and  ecosystems,  and  resilience  provides  a  critical  point  of  integration  for 
adaptation  strategies.  Building  resilience  is  about  the  suitable  actions  taken  at  present 
time so that the impact of inevitable shocks and stresses are minimized and the rebound 
accelerated.  
Resilience is the ability to cope with adverse shocks and stresses, and to adapt and learn 
to live with changes and uncertainty. The ‘ability to resist, recover from, or adapt to the 
effects of a shock or a change’4. ‘Resilience is a long-term approach, not only focused on 
the  ability  to  bounce  back  but  also  integrating  adaptation  and  transformation  while 
undergoing  change’5.  Indeed,  building  resilience  delivers  near-term  economic  benefits 
and  jobs,  while  making  everyone  better  prepared  when  a  shock  hits.  There  may  be 
upfront costs to get this done, but money will be saved later: It costs sometimes more 
to rebuild in the wake of a disaster than to build in a way that can withstand the shock. 
Resilience can be approached at different levels, such as at the level of agroecosystems 
or  productive  territories,  countries,  communities  or  families,  and  facing  different  crises 
and shocks.  
The programme uses a resilience model focused on vulnerable rural families. This model 
helps to define the strategies of programme interventions to support the vulnerable rural 
in  improving  the  management  of  natural  resources  and  adaptive  capacities  to  climate 
change. The model followed in the Project is based on an identification and grouping of 
factors that contribute to the households’ capacities to face climate related stresses and 
shocks, reducing their effects and to recover quickly avoiding persistent adverse effects. 
The model is explained in more detail in the following figure. 
Figure  X:  Impacts  of  shocks  and  stresses  on  development  pathways  depending  on 
different levels of resilience 
The  previous  figure  illustrates  how  factors,  prevention  strategies  and  associated 
countermeasures  contribute  to  the  resilience  of  households  based  on  their  influence  on 
them: 
4 IDS, 2012 - Resilience: New Utopia or New Tyranny? 
5 BC3, 2011 – Multidisciplinary perspectives on urban resilience 
the  ability  of  households  to  recover  (in  blue)  after  a  shock  (graph  on  the  right) 
the  depth  of  the  impact  (in  green)  that  the  shocks  (graph  on  the  right)  and  the 
- 
stresses (graph on the left) have on households; 
- 
and stress (graph on the left). 
The  depth  of  the  impact  depends  on  factors  such  as:  i)  the  management  of  natural 
resources;  ii)  diversification  of  crops,  income  and  means  of  subsistence;  iii)  the  quality 
of the diet (health); iv) access by road and transport and other services; v) the quality 
and location of the assets (infrastructure, fields and equipment); vi) the existence of an 
early  warning  system  and  prevention  strategies;  vii)  membership  in  social  networks 
and/or  producer  organizations;  viii)  the  knowledge  and  skills  necessary  to  understand 
climate  trends,  the  risks  and  possible  impacts  on  the  means  of  production  and 
subsistence, and the effectiveness of the available adaptation options. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  capacity  and  speed  of  recovery  and  adjustments  depend  on 
factors  such  as:  i)  savings;  ii)  access  to  credit;  iii)  insurance  (where  life,  health,  home 
insurance,  etc.  are  generally  more  important  than  agricultural  insurance);  iv)  the 
effectiveness  of  public  (and  private)  response  programs;  v)  access  by  road;  vi)  the 
ability to access new technologies and adopt them in subsistence activities; and, again, I 
saw) belonging to social networks and/or producer organizations. 
The project will follow this resilience model in every steps of the implementation. Indeed, 
one  of  the  main  considerations  for  the  approval  and  the  adoption  of  the  NRLMPs  and 
NRLIPs by the CDCs and VDCs will be the extent to which they incorporate measures to 
promote  resilience  to  climate  change  and  prevent  environmental  degradation.  The 
incorporation  of  these  steps  during  the  implementation  stages  will  result  in  the 
sustainability of the benefits to the environment and climate change aspects. 
The environmental and social screening that has been presented in the SECAP note has 
predominantly identified at the concept note and design level, for there to be no or low 
risks related to the Project. Based on the findings the project has been categorised as a 
category  B  project.  The  full  design  mission  conducted  public  consultations  at  the 
ministerial  levels,  beneficiary  as  well  as  with  donor  and  partner  organisations,  NGOs, 
civil society, academia and women and farmer associations operating in Sudan. 
Targeting strategy 
SNRLP will be implemented in a total of nine States across the Butana region in East, the 
Sennar  Region  in  the  South-East  and  the  Kordofan  Region  in  the  West  of  Sudan.  The 
nine  States  are  the  River  Nile,  Khartoum,  Gazira,  Gedaref  and  Kassala  States  in  the 
Butana  region;  the  Sennar  State  in  the  Sennar  region  and;  the  North,  South  and  West 
Kordofan States in the Kordofan region. Additionally, SNRLP will engage with the White 
Nile and the Blue Nile States in the Sennar  region regarding inter-state NR governance 
and regulatory issues. These States have high incidence of poverty ranging from 26-60% 
and  malnutrition  varying  from  14-20%  (refer  PIM,  annex  2).  The  rural  communities  in 
the  rainfed  parts  of  these  States  are  highly  vulnerable  to  economic  shocks  as  the  NR 
base  in  these  areas  is  under  pressure  from  increasing  population,  high  usage  for 
livelihoods,  lack  of  regulation,  mismanagement,  unregulated  mechanised  farming, 
incursions of large herds owned by wealthy farmers and CC, leading to drier conditions 
(refer  PIM  for  more  details).  These  factors  have  a  particularly  adverse  impact  on 
smallholder farmers, agro-pastoralists and pastoralists whose livelihoods depend on NR. 
SNRLP  will  build  on  and  upscale  the  positive  NRM  related  experiences  of  mainly  three 
previous IFAD projects (BIRDP, SUSTAIN and WSRMP) that were active in these regions 
over the last decade. No activities will be in or close to buffer zones of a national park. 
The  “Programme  area,  the  geographical  targeting”  and  the  “target  groups  and 
strategies”  are  detailed  in  the  Project  Implementation  Manual  (points  2.2  and  2.3 
respectively).  
32 
Environment and Social Management Plan Matrix 
The matrix below presents the Project interventions, identifies the Social, Environmental and Climate 
risks and vulnerabilities of rural families, and presents the mitigation measure through the activities of 
the project. It also presents tentative questions proposed for the scorecard to monitor the increase in 
household resilience (the questions and the weight of each of them will be revised at the Project start-
up).
33 
Project 
Intervention 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigating Measure 
Tentative Score-card 
questions/Supervision 
and reporting related to 
COSTAB (if applicable) 
Component 1: Scaling up community based NR management and businesses 
Subcomponent 
1.1: 
Community 
mobilization 
and NR and 
land-use 
management 
planning 
Social:  
  Smallholder 
farmers, 
especially 
women  and  youth,  from  poorer,  more 
deprived  areas  are  unaware  of  the 
opportunity or lack the knowledge and 
confidence  to  apply  for  grants  and 
other project activities.  
  Risk  of  increasing  marginalization  of 
pastoralists  and  conflicts  due 
to 
unregulated  mechanized  agriculture, 
natural 
resource  degradation  and 
climate change. 
  Land use and registration issues could 
be worsened by the implementation of 
an agricultural project. 
  Lack  of  focus  on  smallholder  famers, 
women and youth.  
  Exclusion  of  women  from  decision-
making 
Environmental/Climate:  
  Land use and registration issues could 
be worsened by the implementation of 
an agricultural project.  
  Access  to  water:  risk  of  elite  capture 
and  demand  for  water  infrastructures 
beyond  the  actual  need  of  the  local 
up 
for 
and 
scale 
Social:  
  Mobilizing  VDCs  and  CDC/NECs  will 
the 
consolidate 
development  of  community  institutions 
already  started  in  previous  and  on-
IFAD  projects.  Communities 
going 
already  supported  would  have  VDCs 
and  some  have  been  organized  in 
the  development  and 
clusters 
Community 
implementation 
Livelihood Adaptation and Sustainability 
Plans  (CLASP  –  IAMDP)  and  Cluster 
Adaptation Plans (CAP - LMRP). 
  Development  of  NRLMPs: 
The 
programme  will  support  the  CDC/NECs 
participatory 
conducting 
in 
community 
community 
and 
the 
planning  process 
formulation and ownership of a NRLMP, 
land  registration  processes  and  NR 
Conflict resolution mechanism. 
a 
inter 
leading 
to 
of 
  Development  of  co-management 
arrangement 
for  "open  access" 
common  areas.  Special  attention  will 
be  given  to  livestock  routs,  where 
relevant,  in  order  to  increase  mutual 
benefits  and  avoid  conflicts  between 
Score-card: 
Can you explain how CVC 
have affected your 
production activities the last 
10 years and how they will 
be affected in the future?  
Can you explain what 
options of adaptation 
practices and changes in 
your production system you 
can and/or may implement 
to address these risks?   
Have you participated in 
any activities for 
rehabilitation of livestock 
routs agreed with your 
community and do you trust 
it will bring positive 
benefits? 
Do you think your 
community will be able to 
manage the open access 
common areas? (why, why 
not?)    
Project 
Intervention 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigating Measure 
Tentative Score-card 
questions/Supervision 
and reporting related to 
COSTAB (if applicable) 
communities, overuse and degradation 
of  the  vegetation  and  land  in  the 
surrounding  area  and  conflict  over 
resources may erupt.  
  Lack  of  knowledge  about  risks  and 
effects  of  the  Climate  Variability  and 
Change  and  options  of  adaptation 
practices 
  Climatic  shock:  the  main  effect  of 
climate change on weather patterns is 
the  increased  occurrence  of  extreme 
weather  events:  droughts,  flooding  in 
particular.  These  weather  shock  can 
have  a  direct  impact  on  crops  and 
damage infrastructure. 
  Risk  of  depletion  of  the  aquifer  and 
related depletion of rangeland. 
  Promotion  of  NR  related  livelihoods 
and 
have 
unintended  adverse  environmental 
impacts  
technologies 
could 
the cluster or network communities and 
pastoralists 
agro-pastoralists 
passing through their area. 
and 
  Formulation 
livelihoods 
of 
investment plans (LIPs) and support 
of    Village  Savings  and  Credit  Groups 
(VSCGs)  involving  70%  women,  NR 
Livelihood 
and 
Vulnerable Women’s Groups (VWGs)  
(NRLGs) 
groups 
  Self-targeting  will  be 
use 
of 
systems 
facilitated 
gender-sensitive 
through 
delivering 
(e.g. 
delivery 
level),  capacity-
training  at  village 
building 
the  needs  of 
women,  youth  and  pastoralists  and  an 
on-going  consultative  process  with 
beneficiaries  through  committees  and 
forums 
tailored 
to 
  Women  will  constitute  a  minimum  of 
30%  and  youth  will  constitute  a 
minimum of 30% of members of VDCs, 
interest  groups  and 
In 
addition  women  and  youth 
sub-
committees  will  support  women  and 
youth representatives in the clusters.  
clusters. 
  The  inclusion  of  women  and  youth  in 
forums  formed  for  discussion  on  NRM 
will  be  ensured.  The  representation  of 
35 
Project 
Intervention 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigating Measure 
Tentative Score-card 
questions/Supervision 
and reporting related to 
COSTAB (if applicable) 
women  (50  %  and  youth  (30  %)  in 
NRM  forums  at  locality,  State  and 
National level will be ensured.  
Environmental/Climate:  
  Village  Development  Committees 
(VDCs),  other  relevant  community 
organizations  and  networks  or 
clusters  of  VDCs.  The  objective  is  to 
strengthen their organisation in Cluster 
Development  Committees  or  Network 
Executive  Committees  (CDC/NECs)  and 
their  land  and  NR  governance  systems 
and institutions. 
with 
  Establishment  of  water-points  with 
the 
pre-analysis 
careful 
communities  and  the  establishment  of 
water  and  catchment  management 
arrangements. 
  Sensitization 
participatory 
and 
analysis  through  the  development  of 
NRLMPs  of  the  effects  of  Climate 
Variability  and  Change  on  productive 
activities, water and other means of life 
of 
identification  of 
mitigation practices.  
families  and 
  Climate  Risk  Assessment  and 
Management  Plan  (CRAMP)  will  back 
the  NRLMP  in  each  cluster  to  identify 
the  main  environmental  and  climate 
36 
Project 
Intervention 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigating Measure 
Tentative Score-card 
questions/Supervision 
and reporting related to 
COSTAB (if applicable) 
risks  in  a  cluster,  The  CRAMP  will  be 
developed  as  a  part  of  the  NRLPMs 
development  process.  The  CRAMP  will 
influence  the  CDC/NECs  at  the  time  of 
the 
developing 
clusters.  It  will  also  highlight  the 
climate  risks  to  be  considered  (in  the 
NRLMPs) 
the 
interventions for attaining the NR vision 
of the cluster or network.  
the  NR  vision 
identifying 
while 
for 
Investment 
  Each  LIP  will  be  backed  by  a  Climate 
and 
Adaptation 
(CAIMP).  The 
Management  Plan 
CLAIMPs  will 
the  specific 
identify 
climate  risk  and  mitigation  measure 
association  with  the  implementation  of 
the activities defined in each LIP. 
Subcomponent 
1.2: 
Implementatio
n of NR-based 
Livelihood 
Investment 
Plans.  
Social 
 
  Young  and  women  may  not  benefit 
professional 
project 
from 
opportunities.  
In the absence of seed capital support, 
innovative 
the 
technologies 
up 
to  diversify 
microenterprises  (ME) 
very 
smallholders’ 
challenging. 
livelihoods 
adoption 
starting 
and 
of 
is 
  Capital financing for youth and women 
to 
Social 
  Engagement  of  village  youth  and 
young  professionals 
support 
extension  services  to  VDCs,  CDC/NECs 
and  the  various  NR  and  common 
increase 
interest  groups  and 
opportunities for youth. The SNRLP will 
scale  up  the  good  experiences  of  the 
BIRDP  in  engaging  youth  in  supporting 
programme  activities.  Also,  experience 
from  the  BIRDP  shows  that  the  vast 
to 
Score-card: 
Did  you  benefit  from  seed 
capital  support  for  start-up 
your business? 
Does  the  land  developed 
have  sufficient  access  to 
water  resources  (stored  in 
soils  and/or  cisterns) 
to 
cover  the  needs  of  the 
production  during  the  dry 
season?  
37 
Project 
Intervention 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigating Measure 
may be insufficient to start business in 
remote and poor areas.  
 
  Low 
interest 
capacity 
Environmental/Climate:  
  Climatic  shock:  the  main  effect  of 
climate change on weather patterns is 
the  increased  occurrence  of  extreme 
weather  events:  droughts,  flooding. 
These  weather  shocks  can  have  a 
direct  impact  on  crops  and  damage 
infrastructure. 
Insufficient and / or insecure access to 
land and water for productive activities 
of 
and 
smallholders  to  adopt  new  climate 
smart approaches and technologies. 
  Water  is  a  scarce  resource  in  Sudan. 
The  project  could  risk  to  increase 
water insecurity through increased and 
limited 
unsustainable  pressure  on 
water resources. 
Inappropriate  agricultural  practices 
can 
low  and  variable 
to 
to  erratic 
(due  also 
productivity 
climatic  conditions),  land  degradation, 
desertification,  reduced  soil  fertility 
and health-related impacts (water and 
chemicals).  
lead 
 
  Community-based 
practices 
not 
majority  interested  and  embarking  on 
the  YP  programme  are  women.  With 
their  presence  as  articulated  and 
supporting  professionals  in  the  villages 
the  YP  programme  also  has  a  strong 
impact on the mobilization of women in 
the  villages,  change  in  culture  to  more 
openness towards women participation, 
in 
and  accepting  women  speaking 
meetings.  
  Business  development  support  to 
NR  related  enterprises  to  develop 
the  groups  and 
the  capacity  of 
individuals 
the 
implement 
enterprises successfully. 
to 
to 
the  beneficiary 
  Partnership  with  MFIs:  SNRLP  will 
select  partnering  financial  institutions 
(PFI)  that  are  ready  to  provide  access 
to  credit  to  beneficiaries  to  help  them 
contribution 
meet 
needed 
capital 
access 
financing.  SNRLP  will  offer  seed  capital 
support  for  start-up  NR  based  MEs  in 
collaboration  with  partnering  financial 
institutions  (PFIs).  The  share  of  the 
PFIs  will  be  very 
the 
beginning  and  increase  gradually  to 
support  the  growth  and  scaling  up  of 
limited  at 
seed 
Tentative Score-card 
questions/Supervision 
and reporting related to 
COSTAB (if applicable) 
Is  your  micro  business 
supported  by  the  RELAP 
MET  facility  constrained  by 
insufficient access to water? 
Have you introduced any  
CA practice to improve the 
fertility and water storage 
capacity of your soils? 
If yes 
Have  you  observed  any 
improvement  in  the  yields 
of your crops by using these 
practices?    
land  under  the 
Is  your 
developed  CA 
practices 
under profitable production? 
Supervision and 
reporting: The YPs and 
extension resource persons 
will assist the VDCs to 
prepare quarterly reports 
on the progress of the 
enterprises supported 
through seed capital 
financing. Based on the 
details of these reports the 
CDOs conduct regular 
monitoring of the 
programme supported 
38 
Project 
Intervention 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigating Measure 
sustainable,  common  areas  over-used 
and creating conflicts.  
the MEs. 
Environmental/Climate:  
  The 
project 
will 
promote 
environmentally  and  climate  resilient 
CA practices, to better manage limited 
resources  and  protect  soils  by,  among 
others,  avoiding  cultivation  of  water 
crops; 
varieties 
consuming 
supporting the plantation of more trees 
(forest  and  horticulture);  practicing 
diversified  associate  crop  production 
and  mulching  system;  collecting  local 
seed 
systems; 
reintroducing  drought  tolerant  varieties 
and less water consuming of crops (e.g. 
Guar).  
preservation 
and 
of 
Tentative Score-card 
questions/Supervision 
and reporting related to 
COSTAB (if applicable) 
enterprises. The technical 
team in the SPCU will also 
be responsible for 
monitoring these 
enterprises during the field 
visits. 
and 
livestock 
  LIPs  activities  will  be  eligible  within 
limited  NR  related  investment  areas  as 
rearing; 
Rangeland 
Forestland  conservation  and  related 
businesses; Catchment and water point 
management;  Cropland  development 
farming 
and  climate  adaptation 
practices;  Stock  routes  management 
and livelihoods of pastoralists. 
in 
  Interstate  and  federal  intervention 
the  project 
throughout 
is  ensured 
activities  i)  for  institutionalizing  the 
39 
Project 
Intervention 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigating Measure 
Tentative Score-card 
questions/Supervision 
and reporting related to 
COSTAB (if applicable) 
for 
community-based  practices  and 
securing their sustainability and further 
scaling  up;  ii)  to  prevent  the  lack  of 
governance  and  degradation  of  vast 
areas of rangelands in Sudan which are 
under an open-access regime (common 
jurisdiction  of 
land)  outside 
the 
communities; 
the 
common 
of 
encroachment 
rangelands  and  the  blocking  of  the 
stock  routes  for  use  by  mechanized 
settled 
farming 
communities. 
to  prevent 
investments 
and 
the 
iii) 
Subcomponent 
2.1: 
Strengthening 
of legal and 
policy 
frameworks 
Component 2 Improving the institutional framework for upscaling community based NRM  
Social 
Social 
  Policies  on  NR  taken  at  State  and 
Federal  level  are  not  appropriate  for 
local context.  
  Difficulty  for  locality  and  civil  society 
in  policy 
implementation 
to  engage 
organisations 
formulation 
and 
processes at State and Federal level. 
  Reviews of land and NR governance 
frameworks,  four  systematic  reviews 
(one  federal  and  three  regional)  by 
independent consultants. 
  NR  consultation  fora  for  policy 
implementation, 
forums/multi-
Locality, 
formulation  and 
NR 
consultative 
stakeholder  platforms  at 
State, Inter-state and Federal levels. 
  Strategies  for  NR  governance  and 
of 
revision 
management 
policies and regulations. 
and 
Subcomponent 
2.2: Building 
Environmental/Climate:  
  Lack of knowledge on CC risks and CA 
Environmental/Climate:  
40 
Project 
Intervention 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigating Measure 
Tentative Score-card 
questions/Supervision 
and reporting related to 
COSTAB (if applicable) 
institutional 
capacities 
practices  of  the  extension  and  service 
providers. 
  Lack  of  research  for  evidence-based 
impacts and decision making.  
  Difficulty  to  capitalize  on  previous 
experience and facilitate scaling up. 
CC 
government 
  Training for extension and research 
service  providers,  institutions  staff 
on 
and  NR 
adaptation 
governance.  Training  will  be  provided 
to  public  and  private  extension  service 
providers  and  Locality,  State  and 
Federal 
in: 
community-based  NR  governance  and 
management  and  the  related  roles  of 
the  Native  Administrations,  Localities 
and  States;  appropriate  investments  in 
sustainable  land  and  NR  use;  climate 
risk  reduction  and  climate  change 
adaptation  strategies;  Development  of 
Land-use  zoning  maps  and  related 
regulations 
native 
administration; GIS; etc. 
incorporating 
staff 
  Linkages  will  be  made  to  both  national 
and 
international  universities  and 
research  institutions  to  strengthen  the 
lessons 
capturing  and  analysis  of 
learnt. 
  Consolidating 
of 
capacities 
for 
implementation 
existing 
instrument,  e.g.  the  programme  will 
support  with  training,  materials  and 
equipment  for  the  effective  use  of  the 
land-use  map  in  Sennar  for  decision 
reforming  policies  and 
in 
making 
regulations 
follow-up 
monitoring. 
and 
for 
41 
Project 
Intervention 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigating Measure 
Tentative Score-card 
questions/Supervision 
and reporting related to 
COSTAB (if applicable) 
  Establishing  a 
the 
generation 
framework 
for 
revenue 
and 
reinvestment,  the  programme  will 
relevant  government 
support 
the 
institutions 
establishment  of  a 
framework  and 
guidelines  for  revenue  generation  for 
O&M and depreciation costs but also for 
reinvestment  in  land  and  NR  use  and 
management by communities. 
in  each  region 
in 
42 
Grievance and Redress Mechanism 
The proposed project will utilise the existing IFAD's grievance mechanism to allow affected 
to  raise  concerns  that  the  proposed  project  is  not  complying  with  its  social  and 
environmental  policies  or  commitments.  The  consultative  process  with  the  community  and 
beneficiaries      aims  to  ensure  prevention  of  grievances  that  might  arise  from  the  project 
activities.  However,  if  at  all,  there  are  any  grievances,  the  below  redressal  mechanism  is 
proposed:  
  Grievance  redressal  mechanism  would  be  shared  with  the  community  during  the 
project inception workshop and subsequent meetings with the beneficiaries 
  As  part  of  the  grievance  redress  mechanism,  the  contact  details  of  the  project 
partners  -  Cluster  Coordinator/  Project  Manager  would  be  made  available  to 
stakeholders  including  project  beneficiaries  and  the  community.  Contact  numbers 
would be displayed at common or predominant places along–with the project details. 
This is expected to promote social auditing of project implementation.  The grievance 
mechanism  will  be  available  to  the  entire  project  intervention  areas.  However,  the 
functionality  of  the  mechanism  rests  with  the  beneficiaries  considering  that  the 
project including the grievance mechanism is envisaged to be a bottom up approach.  
Grievances  are  aimed  to  be  addressed  at  the  field  level  by  the  project  team  which  will  be 
the  first level  of  redressal  mechanism.  If  the  grievance  is  not  resolved  at  the  field level, it 
will be escalated to the Project staff and then to IFAD who will be responsible for addressing 
grievances related to violation of any of the provisions of Environmental and Social Policy of 
the  Adaptation  Fund.    All  grievances  received  and  action  taken  on  them  will  be  put  up 
before  the  Project  staff  and  Steering  committee  meetings  and  will  also  be  included  in  the 
progress reports to the NIE for reporting and monitoring purposes. 
IFAD has established a complaints procedure to receive and facilitate resolution of concerns 
and  complaints  with  respect  to  alleged  non-compliance  of  its  environmental  and  social 
policies  and  the  mandatory  aspects  of  its  Social,  Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment 
Procedures  in  the  context  of  IFAD-supported  projects.  The  procedure  allows  affected 
complainants  to  have  their  concerns  resolved  in  a  fair  and  timely  manner  through  an 
independent process. IFAD may be contacted by e-mail at SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org.  
43 
Sudan
Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Document Date:
15/07/2019
Project No.
2000002105
Report No.
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 6:  First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
Description of 
activity by 
Category 
Description of activity by 
Component/subcomponent 
Unit 
Quantity 
Cumulative Expenditure  
 ( 000'EUR)  
Financier Rule ( 2019 and half 2020) EUR 000 
Plan ( 18 month)  Actual 
IFAD  
Grant 
IFAD  
Loan 
GEF/LCDF 
Grant 
BEN (Cash 
& In-kind) 
Govt.  
Private 
Sector 
Subcomponent 1.1. "A. Community mobilization and NRM planning" 
CST_EA 
Community mobilization and sensitization 
per village 
 200    
 117,66    
94,13 
23,53 
1.  Upscaling community based natural resources management and businesses 
CST_EA 
T&W_EA 
T&W_EA 
T&W_EA 
CST_EA 
T&W_EA 
Stakeholder awareness workshops /a 
network 
 20    
 33,92    
Young Professional programme /b 
training 
 18    
 20,13    
27,14 
16,11 
6,78 
4,03 
Establishment and strenghtening of VDCs /c 
per VDC 
 350    
 155,44    
118,13 
29,53 
Establishment of NR clusters/networks /d 
cluster 
 53    
 582,90    
443,01 
110,75 
Establishment of State NR Cluster/networks stakeholder platforms /e 
platforms 
Mapping role of customary institutions in NRM 
T&W_EA 
Strengthen role of customary institutions in NRM 
study 
training 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
CW_EA 
E&M_EA 
T&W_EA 
Scale up and expand the establishment of co-management mechanism 
unit 
Scale up co-management at the level of locality /g 
Scale up co-management at the level of State level /h 
Natural resource and land-use management plans (NRLMPs) 
registration/authorization of community forests; hema; community range 
enclosures; NRLMPs /i 
Manual for NRM (water, range, forests, Livestock routes, agriculture and 
community development) 
locality 
state 
plan 
unit 
manual 
Construction or rehabilitation of buildings for conflict resolution centres /j 
center 
Equipment and materials for Conflict resolution centers 
Training of conflict resolution mediators (Ajaweed) 
center 
training 
 1    
 3    
 2    
 8    
 4    
 3    
 11,76    
 9,54    
 5,29    
 8,24    
 21,76    
 15,82    
8,94 
7,64 
4,24 
6,60 
15,49 
11,27 
2,23 
1,91 
1,06 
1,65 
3,87 
2,82 
 53    
 610,88    
390,96 
97,74 
 115    
 123,51    
 1    
 2    
 2    
 5    
 27,64    
 25,89    
 22,48    
 58,83    
22,11 
18,64 
5,53 
4,66 
4,61 
17,87 
47,06 
11,77 
91,63 
61,75 
7,77 
29,15 
0,59 
2,39 
1,74 
30,54 
61,75 
2,59 
Total of subcomponent 1.1 
 1.851,71    
 -      
 1.236,06    
 325,73    
 153,39    
 136,53    
 -      
 -      
Subcomponent 1.2. " B. Implementation of Community NRM and Livelihood Investment Plan" 
1. Stock route management and livelihoods of pastoralists 
CST_EA 
Study on Pastoralist 
E&M_EA 
Material for stock route demarcation and rehabiliation 
CST_EA 
Feasibility study  for water point construction /k 
CW_EA 
CW_EA 
CW_EA 
CST_EA 
CW_EA 
T&W_EA 
Construction/ rehabilitation of hafirs with solar panels /l 
Construction of sand /rocks dams /m 
Construction of boreholes with solar panels /n 
SECAP localities specific ESMP /o 
Construction of hand pumps 
study 
km 
study 
unit 
unit 
unit 
each 
 unit  
 3    
 40,64    
 225    
 17,31    
32,51 
13,85 
8,13 
3,46 
 30    
 159,08    
127,27 
31,82 
 26    
 2.008,00    
1285,12 
321,28 
 60    
 829,14    
530,65 
132,66 
 15    
 1.080,64    
691,61 
172,90 
 18    
 760,40    
577,90 
144,48 
 8    
 151,62    
97,03 
28,81 
Technical assistance and training (TA&T) for water point management 
committees /p 
 session  
 63    
 477,45    
381,96 
95,49 
G&S_EA 
Mobile animal health clinics along the livestock routes /q 
 clinic  
 5    
 521,24    
416,99 
104,25 
T&W_EA 
Training of young community animal health workers 
 training  
 128    
 703,90    
563,12 
140,78 
E&M_EA 
E&M_EA 
E&M_EA 
Animal health worker start-up kits /r 
 kit  
 128    
 28,17    
Pastoral Field Schools (PFS) for pastoralists groups and communities /c /s 
 training  
 8    
 20,04    
11,27 
14,43 
2,82 
3,61 
Small start-up input packages for PFS livelihood activities /t 
 tend  
 110    
 609,68    
487,74 
121,94 
2. Rangeland and livestock rearing 
T&W_EA 
TA&T of youth rangeland guards /u 
 person  
 150    
 0,31    
0,24 
0,06 
E&M_EA 
Material for rangeland demarcation and fodder production /v 
 feddan  
 6.125    
 177,24    
141,79 
35,45 
G&S_EA 
G&S_EA 
E&M_EA 
Support individual fodder production /w 
 feddan  
 12.250    
 354,48    
170,15 
42,54 
Rent of machineries for rainwater harvesting structures and fire belts /x 
 service  
 300    
 0,03    
0,03 
0,01 
Fence, seeds, water harvesting tools/ machine services for three enclosures 
/y 
 feddan  
 300    
 88,25    
70,60 
17,65 
CW_EA 
Construction of fodder storage (hay bales) /z 
 store  
 70    
 243,48    
116,87 
29,22 
3. Forestland conservation and related businesses 
T&W_EA 
Training on NR Conservation related business 
 training  
 23    
 50,63    
40,50 
10,13 
T&W_EA 
TA&T for development of community manual and training of forest youth 
group /aa 
 training  
 45    
 148,40    
118,72 
29,68 
E&M_EA 
Youth business support - demos of innovative technologies /bb 
machinery  
 20    
 68,82    
55,06 
13,76 
401,60 
165,83 
216,13 
38,02 
30,32 
2,00 
14,09 
141,79 
97,39 
E&M_EA 
Youth business support - replication of innovative technologies /cc 
machinery  
 58    
 199,38    
95,70 
23,93 
C&G_FUNDS 
Private sector support to gas stoves 
unit 
 2.650    
 147,50    
79,75 
147,50 
Forest development group activities ( community, forest, agroforestry, etc. ) 
groups 
 70    
 233,04    
186,43 
46,61 
Initial working start-up money for gas stove revolving schemes for poor 
households /dd 
Training of women's groups in production of seedlings and operation of tree 
nurseries,and  overall farming practices /ee 
HH 
 650    
 36,18    
training 
 35    
 21,37    
28,94 
15,39 
7,24 
3,85 
Infrastructure for women group farms and nurseries /ff 
Infrastructure for individual women home nurseries /gg 
4. Catchment and water point management 
farms 
unit 
 15    
 324,31    
233,50 
58,38 
 23    
 51,76    
24,84 
6,21 
20,70 
TA&T for usage of manual for water management, forest, rangeland and 
agricultural land /hh 
training 
 19    
 32,65    
CST_EA 
Feasibility study for water infrastructure 
study 
 1    
 33,41    
26,12 
25,39 
6,53 
6,35 
5. Cropland and climate adaptation in farming practices 
TA&T of young community extension/IPM agents in crop farming 
TA&T of farmers groups in climate adaptation in farming practices /ii 
training 
session 
 9    
 15,07    
11,46 
2,86 
 50    
 60,88    
46,27 
11,57 
Support to IPM agents 
number 
 180    
 30,19    
24,15 
6,04 
1,07 
32,43 
1,67 
0,75 
6,09 
Water harvesting for crop production and environmental conservation /jj 
feddan 
 28.125    
 812,68    
390,08 
97,52 
325,07 
E&M_EA 
Construction of Jubraka  ( women home garden) /kk 
package 
 5.500    
 766,01    
153,20 
38,30 
268,10 
306,40 
G&S_EA 
Construction of Jubraka ( for vulnerable households) 
package 
 2.250    
 312,10    
181,02 
51,18 
74,90 
6. Small innovative businesses and training for women, youth and 
CDCs 
TA&T for soil work machinery service provider groups and development of 
operation/business plan /ll 
training 
Soil work machinery for service provider groups /mm 
unit 
25 
 267,79    
137,11 
23,57 
107,12 
Vocational training for women and youth /nn 
Nutrition training and awareness raising /oo 
training 
training 
 32    
 44,45    
 50    
 58,83    
47,06 
11,77 
Training of saving and credit groups and VDCs and subcommittees /pp 
training 
 15    
 17,65    
35,56 
14,12 
8,89 
3,53 
TA&T for women and youth groups in small business activities /qq 
training 
 50    
 58,83    
47,06 
11,77 
Start-up inputs for women and youth businesses 
tools 
 750    
 264,73    
211,78 
52,95 
Guidelines for revenue generation and reinvestment in land and NRM 
manual 
T&W_EA 
TOT for Business Mentors /rr 
workshop 
 1    
 1    
 15,91    
 17,65    
12,73 
14,12 
3,18 
3,53 
G&S_EA 
GRANTS 
T&W_EA 
CW_EA 
CW_EA 
T&W_EA 
T&W_EA 
T&W_EA 
CST_EA 
G&S_EA 
T&W_EA 
E&M_EA 
T&W_EA 
T&W_EA 
T&W_EA 
T&W_EA 
E&M_EA 
CST_EA 
T&W_EA 
T&W_EA 
T&W_EA 
CW_EA 
CST_EA 
GALS TOT /ss 
training 
 5    
 52,95    
42,36 
10,59 
GALS NRM & Livelihoods FAIR /tt 
unit 
 -      
 -      
Workshop on Targeting, Gender, GALS and M&E /uu 
workshop 
5 
 38,69    
38,69 
7. Spot transport improvement for resilience 
Wadi crossings /vv 
Incentive package to partner financial institution 
C. Implementation support investment 
unit 
unit 
 8    
 1    
 189,00    
 498,10    
120,96 
30,24 
398,48 
99,62 
37,80 
CST_EA 
1. Allowances for young professional rural development programme /ww 
unit 
 300    
 18,01    
11,53 
1,84 
3,60 
C. Cluster/Network Development support 
CST_EA 
Cluster/Network Development Officer 
per annum 
 30    
 60,65    
48,52 
12,13 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
B. SPCU Implementation Support 
Forestry Management Officer 
per annum 
 14    
 16,61    
Water Resource and Management Officer 
per annum 
 14    
 16,61    
Rural and Agricultural and Development Officer 
per annum 
 14    
 16,61    
Community Development and Gender Officer 
per annum 
 14    
 16,61    
A. CPCU Implementation support 
Senior Livelihood Development Expert 
Senior Gender and Community Development Expert 
Senior NRM Expert 
Total of subcomponent 1.2. 
Sub-Total of Component 1 
per annum 
per annum 
per annum 
 2    
 2    
 2    
 3,03    
 3,03    
 3,03    
13,29 
13,29 
13,29 
13,29 
2,43 
2,43 
2,43 
3,32 
3,32 
3,32 
3,32 
0,61 
0,61 
0,61 
 13.294,24    
 -      
 8.628,43    
2.146,17    
 343,01    
 1.262,39    
 -      
 914,74    
 15.145,95    
 -      
 9.864,50    
 496,39    
 1.398,91    
 -      
 914,74    
2. Improving the institutional framework for upscaling community based NRM 
Subcomponent 2.1. " A. Strengthening of the NR legal and policy framework." 
CST_EA 
T&W_EA 
T&W_EA 
T&W_EA 
T&W_EA 
Baseline mapping and assessment of environmental governance and 
Climate change in project areas 
baseline 
 1    
 53,03    
 42,42    
 10,61    
Cluster/Network NRM forums /a 
NRM forum at Locality level 
NRM forum at State level 
NRM Sector level forum 
forum 
forum 
forum 
forum 
0 
0 
0 
 30    
 68,28    
 54,62    
 13,66    
 -      
 -      
 -      
 -      
 -      
 -      
 -      
 -      
 -      
T&W_EA 
Inter-State NRM forum 
CST_EA 
T&W_EA 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
T&W_EA 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
T&W_EA 
T&W_EA 
Review of existing NRM policies and legal frameworks 
initiate a process of negotiating possible legal reforms and harmonization /b 
Media public awareness activities on NRM targeting communities, 
legislators, and authorities at local, state and federal levels 
Collate and reviews of existing studies and other knowledge products on 
land NR governance and climate change in Sudan and project areas 
presentation of findings of reviews in multi-stakeholder platforms at Sector, 
State and Federal levels and make recommendations 
Support to processes for revising policy and legislation at State and Federal 
level 
Policy briefs/notes and knowledge products on NRM at various levels 
Map/review locality land use plans 
Present results of mapping in multi stakeholder workshops at different 
levels 
Establishment of savings groups, and NR livelihood groups and vulnerable 
women group /c 
forum 
study 
training 
0 
0 
 -      
 -      
 -      
 1    
 35,30    
 28,24    
 7,06    
 -      
 -      
 -      
campaign 
 1,5    
 1,65    
 1,32    
 0,33    
study 
 0,5    
 14,71    
 11,77    
 2,94    
workshop 
 4,0    
 47,06    
 37,65    
 9,41    
unit 
unit 
plan 
0 
0 
 -      
 -      
 2,0    
 7,06    
 5,65    
 1,41    
 5,0    
 84,33    
 67,46    
 16,87    
workshop 
0 
 -      
 -      
 -      
baseline 
1.925 
 427,24    
 341,79    
 85,45    
CST_EA 
development of LIPs (livelihood investment plan) 
Expansion of existing early warning systems to SNRLP beneficiaries 
unit 
unit 
750 
 255,90    
 204,72    
 51,18    
53500 
 59,39    
 59,39    
Total of subcomponent 2.1. 
 1.053,94    
 -      
 795,64    
 198,91    
 59,39    
 -      
 -      
 -      
Subcomponent.2.2 "B. Building of institutional capacities" 
 -      
CST_EA 
Facilitate Implementation of NRGF -Butana 
baseline 
 7,5    
 13,24    
 10,59    
 2,65    
E&M_EA 
Equipment and materials for implementation of Sennar land use map 
unit 
 1,0    
 78,19    
 62,55    
 15,64    
T&W_EA 
BDF Role in NRM and implementation of NRGF 
training 
 2,5    
 5,88    
 4,71    
 1,18    
G&S_EA 
Integrated community development centers at the cluster level 
center 
 20,0    
 56,45    
 36,13    
 9,03    
11,29 
T&W_EA 
Environmental, social impacts climate change Training 
training 
 1,5    
 82,44    
 65,95    
 16,49    
G&S_EA 
G&S_EA 
Network local Exchange Visits and Learning Routes /c 
baseline 
 10,0    
 17,65    
 14,12    
 3,53    
International Exchange Visits and Learning Routes for selected project staff 
and networks leaders and relevant line ministry representatives /d 
baseline 
 0,5    
 47,06    
 37,65    
 9,41    
T&W_EA 
Training of public and private extension service providers 
training 
 7,5    
 8,24    
 6,60    
 1,65    
T&W_EA 
E&M_EA 
G&S_EA 
T&W_EA 
GIS Training /e 
Materials and Equipment /f 
training 
 10,0    
 335,57    
 268,46    
 67,11    
unit 
 75,0    
 40,11    
 32,09    
 8,02    
Operationalization of the 2015 Range and Pasture Law 
campaign 
 50,0    
 55,93    
 44,74    
 11,19    
Institutional capacity building on NRM related laws, policies, regulation 
and enforcement /g 
training 
 1,5    
 7,06    
 5,65    
 1,41    
CST_EA 
G&S_EA 
G&S_EA 
G&S_EA 
G&S_EA 
T&W_EA 
T&W_EA 
G&S_EA 
T&W_EA 
T&W_EA 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
Community land mapping and registration process in Gedarif State 
session 
 0,5    
 29,42    
 23,53    
 5,88    
Constitute and facilitate state level apex for NR networks /h 
Constitute and capacitate multi-level task forces for following, evaluation 
and monitoring of the agreed upon issues during the forums /i 
unit 
session 
0 
0 
 -      
 -      
 -      
 -      
 -      
 -      
Constitute and capacitate inter-ministerial committees at state level 
session 
 10,0    
 11,77    
 9,41    
 2,35    
Constitute land and NR governance working groups 
Training for locality, state, and federal government staff on community-
based NR and land governance 
Training package for locality, state, and federal government staff on M&E, 
KM, Legislations, etc. 
Foster linkage and partnership with research and training institutions and 
related international institutions and centers engaging in NR and land 
governance research 
Training of community-based institutions on NRM and Governance based 
on NR Manual 
Training of community institutions on the established framework and 
guidelines for revenue generation and reinvestment in land and natural 
resource use and management 
Institutitional Capacity Assessment of the relevant line ministries and 
department at federal, state and locality level 
session 
training 
training 
0 
75 
75 
 -      
 123,66    
 123,66    
 -      
 -      
 98,93    
 24,73    
 98,93    
 24,73    
session 
7,5 
 8,24    
 6,60    
 1,65    
training 
37,5 
 82,44    
 65,95    
 16,49    
training 
37,5 
 82,44    
 65,95    
 16,49    
study 
1 
 42,42    
 33,94    
 8,48    
II. Recurrent Costs 
State Policy Officer 
Regional Policy Officer 
Total of subcomponent 2.2. 
Total of Component 2 
per annum 
 14    
 14,24    
 11,39    
 2,85    
per annum 
 5    
 5,54    
 4,43    
 1,11    
 -      
 -      
 1.271,66    
 -      
 1.008,30    
 252,08    
 -      
 11,29    
 -      
 -      
 2.325,61    
 -      
 1.803,94    
 450,98    
 59,39    
 11,29    
 -      
 -      
Component 3." Project Management and Coordination Unit" 
3. Project management and Coordination Unit 
A. Investment Costs 
1. Investment Costs 
Project Start up Workshop 
Baseline study 
Develop KM Strategy and Communication Strategy 
Refine and update the PIM 
Annual Review and Planning Workshop 
Mid Term Review 
unit 
study 
unit 
unit 
 unit  
 unit  
 1    
 1    
 1    
 1    
 2    
 -      
 32,61    
 13,98    
 4,66    
 4,66    
 7,24    
 -      
 26,09    
 6,52    
 11,18    
 2,80    
 3,73    
 0,93    
 3,73    
 0,93    
 5,79    
 1,45    
 -      
 -      
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
CST_EA 
G&S_EA 
G&S_EA 
G&S_EA 
G&S_EA 
G&S_EA 
G&S_EA 
G&S_EA 
E&M_EA 
E&M_EA 
E&M_EA 
E&M_EA 
E&M_EA 
E&M_EA 
E&M_EA 
E&M_EA 
Project Completion Report 
Supervision by CPCU, SPCU, IFAD and Govt. 
Annual Audit 
Accounting Software 
2. Vehicles for CPCU 
Station wagon 
Hard  top 
Double cab 
3. Vehicles for SPCU 
Hard  top 
Double cab 
4. Vehicles for Cluster develoment team 
Double cab 
Motorbikes 
5. Equipment and Office Furnishing for CPCU 
Generator 
Photocopier 
PC 
Other furniture 
6. Equipment and Office Furnishing for SPCU 
Generator 
Photocopier 
PC 
Other furniture 
7. Equipment for Cluster Development Team 
E&M_EA 
Other office furnishing 
8. Training for CPCU and SPCU Staff 
 unit  
 unit  
 unit  
unit 
 unit  
 unit  
 unit  
 unit  
 unit  
 unit  
 unit  
 unit  
 unit  
 unit  
 unit  
unit 
unit 
unit 
unit 
unit 
 -      
 2    
 2    
 -      
 14,49    
 10,14    
 -      
 -      
 11,59    
 2,90    
 8,11    
 2,03    
 1    
 80,94    
 64,76    
 16,19    
 -      
 -      
 -      
 -      
 1    
 3    
 2    
 -      
 9    
 11    
 -      
 20    
 20    
 -      
 1    
 1    
 44,46    
 120,05    
 80,03    
 -      
 360,15    
 440,18    
 800,33    
 22,62    
 -      
 9,15    
 3,20    
 35,57    
 8,89    
 96,04    
 24,01    
 64,03    
 16,01    
 -      
 -      
 288,12    
 72,03    
 352,15    
 88,04    
 -      
 -      
 640,27    
 160,07    
 18,10    
 4,52    
 -      
 -      
 7,32    
 1,83    
 2,56    
 0,64    
 12    
 16,48    
 13,18    
 3,30    
 1    
 -      
 9    
 9    
 18,31    
 -      
 82,38    
 28,83    
 14,64    
 3,66    
 -      
 -      
 65,90    
 16,48    
 23,07    
 5,77    
 101    
 138,67    
 110,93    
 27,73    
 9    
 -      
 9    
 -      
 123,56    
 -      
 123,56    
 -      
 98,85    
 24,71    
 -      
 -      
 98,85    
 24,71    
 -      
 -      
T&W_EA 
Training for CPCU and SPCU Staff (external) 
per annum 
 2    
 48,29    
 38,63    
 9,66    
T&W_EA 
Training for CPCU and SPCU Staff (internal) 
per annum 
 2    
 47,08    
 37,66    
 9,42    
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
A. CPCU Salaries and Allowances 
1. Salaries 
Project Director 
Financial Manager  
Senior Project Accountant 
Senior M&E Expert 
Senior KM and Communication Expert 
Senior Procurement Expert 
Central Procurement Assistant 
Central Accounts Assistant  
Senior Internal Auditor 
Internal Auditor ( from external firm) /a 
Central Administrative Assistant 
Drivers  
Cleaners 
Guards 
2. Staff Allowances 
S&A_EA 
Field and Travel Allowances 
B. SPCU Salaries and Allowances 
1. Salaries 
State Coordinator 
M&E , KM and Innovation Officer 
State Accounts Officer 
Regional Accountant 
State Procurement Officer 
State Administrative and Accounts Officer  
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
 -      
 -      
 2    
 2    
 2    
 2    
 2    
 2    
 2    
 2    
 2    
 2    
 2    
 9    
 3    
 3    
 -      
 2    
 -      
 -      
 14    
 14    
 14    
 5    
 14    
 14    
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 -      
 -      
 50,63    
 33,23    
 26,93    
 36,40    
 23,74    
 25,31    
 19,01    
 22,14    
 20,57    
 20,57    
 15,82    
 37,97    
 9,49    
 9,49    
 -      
 31,64    
 -      
 -      
 227,84    
 199,36    
 170,88    
 64,80    
 170,88    
 142,40    
 -      
 -      
 -      
 -      
 40,51    
 10,13    
 26,58    
 6,65    
 21,54    
 5,39    
 29,12    
 7,28    
 18,99    
 4,75    
 20,25    
 5,06    
 15,21    
 3,80    
 17,71    
 4,43    
 16,46    
 4,11    
 16,46    
 4,11    
 12,66    
 3,16    
 30,38    
 7,59    
 7,59    
 1,90    
 7,59    
 1,90    
 -      
 -      
 25,31    
 6,33    
 -      
 -      
 -      
 -      
 182,27    
 45,57    
 159,49    
 39,87    
 136,70    
 34,18    
 51,84    
 12,96    
 136,70    
 34,18    
 113,92    
 28,48    
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
S&A_EA 
Drivers 
Cleaners 
Guards 
Field and Travel Allowances 
2. Staff Allowances 
S&A_EA 
Field and Travel Allowances 
C. Operating Costs 
O&M_EA_ 
Electricity and water 
O&M_EA_ 
Vehicles O&M 
O&M_EA_ 
Equipment and generator operations and maintenance 
O&M_EA_ 
Guest house and office rent 
O&M_EA_ 
Stationery, communication and contigencies 
O&M_EA_ 
Accounting Software Maintenance 
Total of Component 3. 
Grand Total of the Project 
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 per 
annum  
 36    
 20    
 20    
 2    
 -      
 2    
 -      
 2    
 2    
 2    
 2    
 2    
 2    
 151,89    
 121,51    
 30,38    
 61,71    
 61,71    
 79,11    
 18,00    
 -      
 14,49    
 18,11    
 7,24    
 46,35    
 14,49    
 11,87    
 49,37    
 12,34    
 49,37    
 12,34    
 63,29    
 15,82    
 -      
 -      
 14,40    
 3,60    
 -      
 -      
 11,59    
 2,90    
 14,49    
 3,62    
 5,79    
 1,45    
 37,08    
 9,27    
 11,59    
 2,90    
 9,49    
 2,37    
 4.520,12    
 -      
 3.616,10    
 904,02    
 -      
 -      
 -      
 -      
 21.991,68    
 -      
15.284,53    
 555,79    
 1.410,20    
 -      
 914,74    
Sudan
Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Document Date:
15/07/2019
Project No.
2000002105
Report No.
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 7:  Procurement Plan for first 18 months 
Bid 
Package 
Ref. 
Description 
Unit 
Quantity 
 Total Cost 
(EUR)  
Procurement 
Method 
Prior 
Review 
Start Date  Bid 
End Date  Responsible 
Remarks 
Opening 
Date 
Entity 
1. Civil Works 
Construction of wadi 
crossings 
Construction or 
rehabilitation of conflict 
resolution centres 
Construction and 
rehabilitation of hafirs with 
solar panels 
Unit 
Centre 
5 
2 
94,406  
NCB 
Yes 
Nov-19 
Dec-19 
Jun-20 
CPMU/CCU  The process will satart in 2019, but 
imlementation will be in 2020 
25,885  
NS (CP) 
No 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
Comm/SPIU 
Unit 
20 
1,845,889   NS (CP) 
No 
Dec-19 
Dec-19  May-20 
Construction and 
rehabilitation of hafirs with 
solar panels 
Construction of sand/rock 
dams 
Unit 
Unit 
Construction of sand/rock 
dams 
Unit 
Construction of boreholes 
with solar panels 
Unit 
Construction of boreholes 
with solar panels 
Unit 
Construction of hand 
pumps 
Unit 
15 
70 
15 
10 
8 
5 
1,384,417   NS (CP) 
No 
Dec-19 
Dec-19  May-20 
932,131   NS (CP) 
No 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Apr-20 
199,742   NS (CP) 
No 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Apr-20 
693,026   NS (CP) 
No 
Jan-20 
Jan-20  Mar-20 
554,420   NS (CP) 
No 
Jan-20 
Jan-20  Mar-20 
94,761  
NS (CP) 
No 
Dec-19 
Dec-19  Apr-20 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process is expected 
to be carried out by 
clusters/communities (since there 
is need to training of communities, 
it is not possible in 2019) 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process is expected 
to be carried out by 
clusters/communities (since there 
is need to training of communities, 
it is not possible in 2019) 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process is expected 
to be carried out by 
clusters/communities (since there 
is need to training of communities, 
it is not possible in 2019) 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process is expected 
to be carried out by 
clusters/communities (since there 
is need to training of communities, 
it is not possible in 2019) 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 
1.5 
1.6 
1.7 
1.8 
1.9 
1.10 
1.11 
1.12 
1.13 
1.14 
1.15 
1.16 
1.17 
Construction of hand 
pumps 
Construction of fodder 
storage facilities 
Construction of fodder 
storage facilities 
Infrastucture for women 
groups farms/nursuries 
Infrastucture for women 
groups farms/nursuries 
Unit 
3 
56,856  
NS (CP) 
No 
Dec-19 
Dec-19  Apr-20 
Store 
30 
101,925   NS (CP) 
No 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Mar-20 
Store 
50 
169,875   NS (CP) 
No 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Mar-20 
Farm 
10 
205,096   NS (CP) 
No 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Mar-20 
Farm 
8 
164,077   NS (CP) 
No 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Mar-20 
Infrasturcture for individual 
women home nursuries 
Unit 
20 
43,947  
NS (CP) 
No 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Mar-20 
Infrasturcture for individual 
women home nursuries 
Unit 
10.00 
21,973  
NS (CP) 
No 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Mar-20 
construction of clusters 
integrated development 
centres 
Total civil works 
Centre 
20.00 
56,448  
NS (CP) 
No 
Feb-20 
Feb-20  Apr-20 
6,644,875     
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process is expected 
to be carried out by 
clusters/communities (since there 
is need to training of communities, 
it is not possible in 2019) 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process is expected 
to be carried out by 
clusters/communities (since there 
is need to training of communities, 
it is not possible in 2019) 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process is expected 
to be carried out by 
clusters/communities (since there 
is need to training of communities, 
it is not possible in 2019) 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities 
2.  Vehicles, Equipment and 
Others  
2.1 Vehicles 
2.1.1 
2.1.2 
2.1.3 
Supply of 4WD station 
wagon vehicles 
Supply of 4WD hard-top 
vehicles 
Supply of 4WD double 
cabin vehicles 
Unit 
1.0 
44,469  
ICB 
Yes 
Dec-19 
Jan-20 
Apr-20 
CPMU/CCU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by CPMU/CCU (ICB 
not possible in 2019) 
Unit 
12.0 
480,265  
ICB 
Yes 
Dec-19 
Jan-20 
Apr-20 
CPMU/CCU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by CPMU/CCU (ICB 
not possible in 2019) 
Unit 
33.0 
1,320,727   ICB 
Yes 
Dec-19 
Jan-20 
Apr-20 
CPMU/CCU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by CPMU/CCU (ICB 
2.1.4 
Supply of veterinary 
mobile clinic 
Clinic 
5.0 
521,235  
ICB 
Yes 
Dec-19 
Jan-20 
Apr-20 
CPMU/CCU  Procurement process will be 
not possible in 2019) 
carried out by CPMU/CCU (ICB 
not possible in 2019) 
2.1.5 
Supply of motor bikes  
Unit 
20.0 
22,626  
NCB 
Yes 
Dec-19 
Jan-20 
Apr-20 
CPMU/CCU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by CPMU/CCU 
(perferable in 2020) 
2.1.6 
Soil work machinery for 
service provider groups 
Total vehicles 
2.2 Equipment  
Unit 
25.0 
267,790   NCB 
Yes 
Dec-19 
Jan-20 
Apr-20 
CPMU/CCU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by CPMU/CCU 
(perferable in 2020) 
2,657,112     
2.2.1 
2.2.2 
2.2.3 
2.2.4 
Supply of power 
generating sets 
Supply of multi-purpose 
printer/photocopier 
Supply of personal 
computers 
Materials and Equipment 
(GPSs, Pca for component 
2) 
Total equipment 
Set 
Unit 
Unit 
Unit 
10.0 
10.0 
91,585  
NCB 
Yes 
Oct-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU/CCU 
32,055  
NCB 
Yes 
Oct-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU/CCU 
113.0 
155,237   NCB 
Yes 
Oct-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU/CCU 
75.0 
40,110  
NCB 
Yes 
Oct-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU/CCU 
318,988  
2.3 Furniture and other 
equipment  
2.3.1 
2.3.2 
2.3.3 
2.3.4 
2.3.5 
2.3.6 
2.3.7 
Supply of office furniture 
(CPCU) 
Supply of office furniture 
(SPIU & Clusters) 
Supply of equipment for 
conflict resolustion centres 
Supply of materials for 
stock route demarkation 
Supply of animal workers 
starter kit 
Supply of small input 
package for PFS 
Equipment and materials 
for implementing Sennar 
land use map 
Set 
Set 
1.0 
18.0 
18,317  
NCB 
Yes 
Oct-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU/CCU 
247,281   NCB 
Yes 
Oct-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU/CCU 
Centre 
2.0 
22,478  
NS  
Km 
225.0 
17,313  
NS (CP) 
No 
No 
Feb-20 
Feb-20  Mar-20 
SPIU/CPCU 
Jan-20 
Jan-20  Mar-20 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities 
kit 
158.0 
33,938  
NS (CP) 
No 
Jan-20 
Jan-20  Mar-20 
Comm/SPIU  Being attached to young service 
providers, it is expected to in 2020 
Tend 
150.0 
801,789  
ICB 
Yes 
Dec-19 
Jan-20 
Apr-20 
CPMU/CCU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by CPMU/CCU (ICB 
not possible in 2019) 
Unit 
1.0 
78,185  
NCB 
Yes 
Oct-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU/CCU 
Total furniture & equipment 
1,219,302     
2.4 Other materials & non-consulting services  
2.4.1 
Materials for range land 
demarcation 
2.4.2 
Materials for range land 
demarcation 
2.4.3 
2.4.4 
2.4.5 
2.4.6 
2.4.7 
2.4.8 
2.4.9 
Provision of fencing, 
seeds, tools/machine 
rental for fodder inclosures 
Machine rental for water 
harvesting and fire belt 
construction 
Youth business support 
(innovative technologies - 
demos) 
Youth business support 
(innovative technologies - 
demos) 
Youth business support 
(innovative technologies 
replication) 
Initial working capital for 
poor HH gas stove 
revolving schemes 
Initial working capital for 
poor HH gas stove 
revolving schemes 
Fed 
3,300.0 
91,585  
NS (CP) 
No 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
Fed 
4,575.0 
126,971   NS (CP) 
No 
Jan-20 
Jan-20 
Feb-20 
Fed 
300.0 
88,246  
NS (CP) 
No 
Feb-20 
Feb-20  Mar-20 
Service 
300.0 
33  
NS (CP) 
No 
Jan-20 
Jan-20 
Feb-20 
Mechinery  10.0 
32,626  
NS (CP) 
No 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
Mechinery  15.0 
48,938  
NS (CP) 
No 
Feb-20 
Feb-20  Mar-20 
Mechinery  74.0 
244,692   NS (CP) 
No 
Mar-20 
Mar-20  May-20 
HH 
200.0 
11,132  
NS (CP) 
No 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
HH 
700.0 
27,829  
NS (CP) 
No 
Feb-20 
Feb-20  Mar-20 
2.4.10  Support individual fodder 
Fed 
6,000.0 
166,519   NS (CP) 
No 
Oct-19 
Oct-19  Dec-19 
production 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities selected for 
programme interventions 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities selected for 
programme interventions 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities selected for 
programme interventions 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities selected for 
programme interventions 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities selected for 
programme interventions 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities selected for 
programme interventions 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities selected for 
programme interventions 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities selected for 
programme interventions 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities selected for 
programme interventions 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities selected for 
programme interventions 
2.4.11  Support individual fodder 
Fed 
9,750.0 
270,593   NS (CP) 
No 
Jan-20 
Jan-20  Mar-20 
production 
2.4.12  Support to IPM agents 
Number 
60.0 
10,062  
NS (CP) 
No 
Oct-19 
Oct-19  Dec-19 
2.4.13  Support to IPM agents 
Number 
120.0 
20,124  
NS (CP) 
No 
Feb-20 
Feb-20  Mar-20 
2.4.14  Water harvesting for crop 
production and 
environmental 
conservation 
2.4.15  Water harvesting for crop 
production and 
environmental 
conservation 
2.4.16  Construction of Jubraka  
( women home garden) 
Fed 
15,000.0 
416,734   NS (CP) 
Yes 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
Fed 
20,625.0 
573,009   NS (CP) 
No 
Feb-20 
Feb-20  Apr-20 
Package 
5,600.00 
265,856   NS (CP) 
Yes 
Oct-19 
Oct-19  Dec-19 
2.4.17  Construction of Jubraka  
Package 
8,400.00 
406,034   NS (CP) 
No 
Feb-20 
Feb-20  Apr-20 
( women home garden) 
2.4.18  Construction of Jubraka 
( for vulnerable 
households) 
2.4.19  Construction of Jubraka 
( for vulnerable 
households) 
Package 
2,000.00 
268,376   NS (CP) 
Yes 
Oct-19 
Oct-19  Dec-19 
Package 
3,500.00 
469,658   NS (CP) 
No 
Feb-20 
Feb-20  Apr-20 
2.4.20  Start-up inputs for women 
tools 
750.0 
264,731   NS (CP) 
Yes 
Mar-20 
 Mar 20  May-20 
and youth businesses 
Total other materials & non-consulting services  
3,803,746     
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities selected for 
programme interventions 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities selected for 
programme interventions 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities selected for 
programme interventions 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities selected for 
programme interventions 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities selected for 
programme interventions 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities 
Comm/SPIU  Procurement process will be 
carried out by 
clusters/communities 
3. Training 
3.1 
3.2 
Conduct stakeholders 
orientation workshop 
Conduct young 
professionals training 
Network 
20.0 
31,800  
NS 
Training 
9.0 
10,067  
NS 
No 
No 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU/SPIU 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU/SPIU 
3.3 
3.4 
3.5 
3.6 
3.7 
3.8 
3.9 
3.10 
3.11 
3.12 
3.13 
3.14 
3.15 
3.16 
3.17 
3.18 
Conduct young 
professionals training 
Establishment and 
strengthening VDCs 
Establishment and 
strengthening VDCs 
Establishment of NR 
clusters 
Establishment of NR 
clusters 
Establishment of state NR 
clusters stakeholders 
Strengthen role of 
customary institutions in 
NRM 
Training of conflict 
resolution mediators 
(Ajaweed) 
TA and training (TA&T) for 
water point management 
committees 
TA and training (TA&T) for 
water point management 
committees 
Training of young 
community animal health 
workers 
Training of young 
community animal health 
workers 
Pastoral Field Schools 
(PFS) for pastoralists 
groups and communities  
TA&T of youth rangeland 
guards  
Training on NR 
Conservation related 
business 
Training on NR 
Conservation related 
business 
Training 
9.0 
10,067  
NS 
No 
Jan-20 
Jan-20 
Feb-20 
CPMU/SPIU 
VDC 
VDC 
150.0 
200.0 
66,617  
NS 
Yes 
Dec-19 
Dec-19 
Jan-20 
CPMU/SPIU 
88,822  
NS 
Yes 
Jan-20 
Jan-20 
Feb-20 
CPMU/SPIU 
Cluster 
23.0 
252,958   NS 
Yes 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU/SPIU 
Cluster 
30.0 
329,946   NS 
Yes 
Feb-20 
Feb-20  Mar-20 
CPMU/SPIU 
Platfrom 
1.0 
11,760  
Training 
2.0 
5,295  
IC 
IC 
No 
No 
Mar-20 
Mar-20  Apr-20 
CPMU/SPIU 
Mar-20 
Mar-20  Apr-20 
CPMU 
Training 
5.0 
58,831  
IC 
Yes 
Feb-20 
Feb-20  Apr-20 
CPMU 
Training 
25.0 
187,182   CQS 
Yes 
Oct-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU/SPIU 
Training 
50.0 
374,364   CQS 
Yes 
Jan-20 
Feb-20  Apr-20 
CPMU/SPIU 
Training 
68.0 
364,954  
IC 
Yes 
Oct-19 
Oct-19  Dec-19 
CPMU 
Training 
90.0 
483,028  
IC 
Yes 
Jan-20 
Jan-20  Mar-20 
CPMU 
Training 
8.0 
20,045  
IC 
No 
Oct-19 
Oct-19  Dec-19 
CPMU 
Training 
150.0 
306  
Training 
10.0 
22,011  
IC 
IC 
No 
No 
Oct-19 
Oct-19  Nov-19 
CPMU/SPIU 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU/SPIU 
Training 
23.0 
28,615  
IC 
Yes 
Feb-20 
Feb-20  Mar-20 
CPMU/SPIU 
20.0 
65,954  
IC 
Yes 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU/SPIU 
25.0 
82,443  
IC 
Yes 
Mar-20 
Mar-20  Apr-20 
CPMU/SPIU 
15.0 
20.0 
19.0 
3.0 
6.0 
9,160  
12,213  
32,651  
IC 
IC 
IC 
Yes 
Oct-19 
Oct-19  Nov-19 
CPMU/SPIU 
Yes 
Oct-19 
Oct-19  Nov-19 
CPMU/SPIU 
Yes 
Mar-20 
Mar-20  Apr-20 
CPMU/SPIU 
5,024  
IC 
No 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU/SPIU 
10,049  
IC 
No 
Jan-20 
Jan-20 
Feb-20 
CPMU/SPIU 
20.0 
24,354  
IC 
No 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU/SPIU 
30.0 
36,530  
IC 
Yes 
Jan-20 
Jan-20 
Feb-20 
CPMU/SPIU 
50.0 
32.0 
15.0 
35,298  
44,453  
17,649  
IC 
IC 
IC 
Yes 
Jan-20 
Jan-20  Dec-20 
CPMU/SPIU 
Yes 
Jan-20 
Jan-20  Dec-20 
CPMU/SPIU 
No 
Feb-20 
Feb-20  Mar-20 
CPMU/SPIU 
50.0 
58,831  
IC 
Yes 
Feb-20 
Feb-20  Mar-20 
CPMU/SPIU 
3.19 
3.20 
3.21 
3.22 
3.23 
3.24 
3.25 
3.26 
3.27 
3.28 
3.29 
3.30 
3.31 
3.32 
3.33 
3.34 
3.35 
Training 
Training 
Training 
Training 
Training 
Training 
TA&T for developing 
community manual forest 
youth groups 
TA&T for developing 
community manual forest 
youth groups 
Training seedling 
producing women groups 
Training seedling 
producing women groups 
TA&T on using manual for 
water management, forest, 
rangeland and agricultural 
land 
TA&T of young community 
extension/IPM agents in 
crop farming 
TA&T of young community 
extension/IPM agents in 
crop farming 
TA&T of farmers groups in 
climate adaptation in 
farming practices  
TA&T of farmers groups in 
climate adaptation in 
farming practices  
Vocational training for 
women and youth 
Nutrition training and 
awareness raising 
Training of saving and 
credit groups and VDCs 
and subcommittees 
TA&T for women and 
youth groups in small 
business activities 
TOT for Business Mentors  W/Shop 
Training 
Training 
Training 
Training 
Training 
Sessions 
Sessions 
TOT for GALS  
Workshop on Targeting, 
Gender, GALS and M&E 
Cluster NRM forums 
Training 
W/Shop 
1.0 
5.0 
5.0 
17,649  
52,948  
38,690  
IC 
IC 
IC 
IC 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Feb-20 
Feb-20  Mar-20 
CPMU 
Feb-20 
Feb-20  Mar-20 
CPMU 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU 
Recuit a facilitator for the workshop 
Yes 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU 
recuit a facilitator for the forums 
Forum 
10.0 
22,758  
Cluster NRM forums 
Forum 
20.0 
W/Shop 
4.0 
45,517  
47,065  
IC 
IC 
Yes 
Yes 
Feb-20 
Feb-02  Mar-20 
CPMU 
recuit a facilitator for the forums 
Apr-20 
Apr-20 
Jun-20 
CPMU 
The programme will recuit a 
facilitator for the workshop 
3.36 
3.37 
3.38 
3.39 
3.40 
3.41 
3.42 
3.43 
3.44 
3.45 
3.46 
3.47 
3.48 
presentation of findings of 
reviews in multi-
stakeholder platforms at 
Sector, State and Federal 
levels and make 
recommendations 
BDF Role in NRM and 
implementation of NRGF 
Environmental, social 
impacts climate change 
Trainin 
Network local Exchange 
Visits and Learning 
Routes 
International Exchange 
Visits and Learning 
Routes 
Training of public and 
private extension service 
providers 
GIS Training 
Institutional capacity 
building on NRM related 
laws, policies, regulation 
and enforcement 
Community land mapping 
and registration process in 
Gedarif State 
Constitute and capacitate 
inter-ministerial 
committees at state level 
Training for locality, state, 
and federal government 
staff on community-based 
NR and land governance 
Training for locality, state, 
and federal government 
staff on community-based 
NR and land governance 
Training 
2.5 
5,883  
IC 
No 
Mar-20 
Mar-20  Apr-20 
CPMU 
Training 
2.0 
109,924   CQB 
Yes 
Mar-20 
Mar-20  May-20 
CPMU/CCU 
Baseline 
10.0 
17,649  
No 
Jan-20 
Jan-20  May-20 
CPMU/SPIU  Visits will be arranged by the 
Baseline 
1.0 
94,129  
IC 
Yes 
May-20  May-20 
Jul-20 
CPMU 
Training 
10.0 
10,992  
IC 
No 
Mar-20 
Mar-20  Apr-20 
CPMU 
Training 
10.0 
335,575   CQB 
Training 
2.0 
9,413  
IC 
Yes 
No 
Jan-20 
Feb-20  Apr-20 
CPMU/CCU 
Mar-20 
Mar-20  Apr-20 
CPMU 
Sessions 
1.0 
58,831  
CQB 
Yes 
Mar-20 
Mar-20  May-20 
CPMU/CCU 
Sessions 
10.0 
11,766  
IC 
No 
Feb-20 
Feb-20  Apr-20 
CPMU 
programme 
The programme will contact 
potential providers and select the 
best 
Training 
25.0 
41,221  
IC 
No 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU/SPIU  Training/sessions will take place 
simultaneously at different 
programme locations 
Training 
50.0 
82,443  
IC 
No 
Feb-20 
Feb-20  Mar-20 
CPMU/SPIU  Training/sessions will take place 
simultaneously at different 
programme locations 
3.49 
3.50 
3.51 
3.52 
3.53 
3.54 
3.55 
3.56 
Training package for 
locality, state, and federal 
government staff on M&E, 
KM, Legislations, etc. 
Training package for 
locality, state, and federal 
government staff on M&E, 
KM, Legislations, etc. 
Foster linkage and 
partnership with research 
and training institutions 
and related international 
institutions and centers 
engaging in NR and land 
governance research 
Foster linkage and 
partnership with research 
and training institutions 
and related international 
institutions and centers 
engaging in NR and land 
governance research 
Training of community-
based institutions on NRM 
and Governance based on 
NR Manual 
Training of community-
based institutions on NRM 
and Governance based on 
NR Manual 
Training of community 
institutions on the 
established framework 
and guidelines for revenue 
generation and 
reinvestment in land and 
natural resource use and 
management 
Training of community 
institutions on the 
established framework 
and guidelines for revenue 
generation and 
Training 
25.0 
41,221  
IC 
No 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU/SPIU  Training/sessions will take place 
simultaneously at different 
programme locations 
Training 
50.0 
82,443  
IC 
No 
Feb-20 
Feb-20  Mar-20 
CPMU/SPIU  Training/sessions will take place 
simultaneously at different 
programme locations 
Training 
3.0 
3,298  
IC 
No 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU/SPIU  Training/sessions will take place 
simultaneously at different 
programme locations 
Training 
5.0 
5,496  
IC 
No 
Feb-20 
Feb-20  Mar-20 
CPMU/SPIU  Training/sessions will take place 
simultaneously at different 
programme locations 
Training 
13.0 
28,580  
IC 
No 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU/SPIU  Training/sessions will take place 
simultaneously at different 
programme locations 
Training 
25.0 
54,962  
IC 
No 
Feb-20 
Feb-20  Mar-20 
CPMU/SPIU  Training/sessions will take place 
simultaneously at different 
programme locations 
Training 
13.0 
28,580  
IC 
No 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU/SPIU  Training/sessions will take place 
simultaneously at different 
programme locations 
Training 
25.0 
54,962  
IC 
No 
Feb-20 
Feb-20  Mar-20 
CPMU/SPIU  Training/sessions will take place 
simultaneously at different 
programme locations 
3.57 
3.58 
3.59 
3.60 
reinvestment in land and 
natural resource use and 
management 
Programme Start up 
Workshop 
Training for CPCU and 
SPCU Staff (external) 
Training for CPCU and 
SPCU Staff (external) 
Training for CPCU and 
SPCU Staff (internal) 
Training for CPCU and 
SPCU Staff (internal) 
Total training 
4. Technical Assistance 
4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
4.4 
4.5 
4.6 
4.7 
4.8 
4.9 
Establishment of savings 
graoups and NR livelihood 
groups 
Establishment of savings 
graoups and NR livelihood 
groups 
Mapping role of customary 
institutions in NRM 
Study on Pastoralist 
Natural resource and land-
use management plans 
(NRLMP) 
Development of NR 
manual (water, range, 
forest, etc.) 
Feasibility study for water 
infrastructue 
Feasibility study for 
construction of water 
points 
Guidelines for revenue 
generation and 
reinvestment in land and 
W/Shop 
1.0 
32,611  
Training 
1.0 
32,191  
IC 
IC 
Yes 
Oct-19 
Oct-19  Nov-19 
CPMU 
Yes 
Feb-20 
Feb-20  Mar-20 
CPMU 
Training 
1.0 
32,191  
IC 
Yes 
Aug-20 
Aug-20  Sep-20 
CPMU 
Training 
1.0 
Training 
1.0 
31,386  
31,386  
IC 
IC 
4,243,036     
No 
No 
Nov-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU 
Mar-20 
Mar-20  Apr-20 
CPMU 
Programme to recruit facilitators 
and presenters 
The programme will contact 
potential providers and select the 
best 
The programme will contact 
potential providers and select the 
best 
Baseline 
825.0 
183,103   QCBS 
Yes 
Oct-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU/CCU 
Baseline 
1,100.0 
244,137   QCBS 
Yes 
Mar-20 
Apr-20 
Jul-20 
CPMU/CCU 
Study 
Study 
3.0 
3.0 
9,545  
40,635  
IC 
IC 
No 
Oct-19 
Oct-19  Dec-19 
CPMU 
Yes 
Oct-19 
Oct-19  Dec-19 
CPMU/CCU 
Plan 
53.0 
610,883   QCBS 
Yes 
Nov-19 
Dec-19  Mar-20 
CPMU/CCU 
Manual 
1.0 
23,532  
IC 
No 
Mar-20 
Mar-20  Apr-20 
CPMU 
Study 
1.0 
33,407  
IC 
Yes 
Oct-19 
Oct-19  Dec-19 
CPMU/CCU 
Study 
30.0 
159,083   QCBS 
Yes 
Dec-19 
Jan-20 
Apr-20 
CPMU/CCU 
Manual 
1.0 
15,908  
IC 
No 
Oct-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU 
NRM 
Baseline mapping and 
assessment of 
environmental governance 
and Climate change in 
programme areas 
Review of existing NRM 
policies and legal 
frameworks 
Media public awareness 
activities on NRM targeting 
communities, legislators, 
and authorities at local, 
state and federal levels 
Collate and reviews of 
existing studies and other 
knowledge products on 
land NR governance and 
climate change in Sudan 
and programme areas 
Policy briefs/notes and 
knowledge products on 
NRM at various levels 
Map/review locality land 
use plans 
acilitate Implementation of 
NRGF -Butana 
Operationalization of the 
2015 Range and Pasture 
Law 
Operationalization of the 
2015 Range and Pasture 
Law 
Institutitional Capacity 
Assessment of the 
relevant line ministries and 
department at federal, 
state and locality level 
Baseline study 
4.10 
4.11 
4.12 
4.13 
4.14 
4.15 
4.16 
4.17 
4.18 
4.19 
4.20 
4.20 
Baseline 
1.0 
53,028  
QCBS 
Yes 
Oct-19 
Nov-20  Dec-19 
CPMU/CCU 
Study 
1.0 
35,298  
IC 
Yes 
Feb-20 
Feb-20  Apr-20 
CPMU/CCU 
Campaign  2.0 
2,198  
IC 
No 
Jan-20 
Jan-20  Mar-20 
CPMU 
Study 
0.5 
29,415  
IC 
Yes 
Apr-20 
Apr-20 
Jun-20 
CPMU/CCU 
Unit 
2.0 
7,060  
IC 
No 
Apr-20 
Apr-20  May-20 
CPMU/CCU 
Plan 
5.0 
88,246  
QCBS 
Yes 
Jan-20 
Feb-20 
Jul-20 
CPMU/CCU 
Baseline 
7.5 
13,237  
Campaign  15.0 
16,779  
IC 
IC 
No 
No 
Mar-20 
Mar-20  May-20 
CPMU 
Oct-19 
Oct-19  Dec-19 
CPMU 
Campaign  35.0 
39,150  
IC 
Yes 
Feb-20 
Feb-20  Apr-20 
CPMU 
study 
1.0 
42,422  
CQS 
Yes 
Oct-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU/CCU 
Develop KM Strategy and  Unit 
Study 
1.0 
1.0 
13,976  
4,659  
IC 
IC 
No 
No 
Oct-19 
Oct-19  Nov-19 
CPMU 
Oct-19 
Oct-19  Nov-19 
CPMU 
Communication Strategy 
4.21 
4.22 
Refine and update PIM 
Accounting Software 
Unit 
Unit 
1.0 
1.0 
Total technical assistance 
4,659  
IC 
80,945  
CQS 
1,751,306     
No 
Yes 
Oct-19 
Oct-19  Nov-19 
CPMU 
Oct-19 
Nov-19  Dec-19 
CPMU/CCU 
Sudan
Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Document Date:
15/07/2019
Project No.
2000002105
Report No.
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
REPUBLIC OF THE SUDAN 
Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme 
(SNRLP) 
IFAD GRANT NO.  xxxx 
LDCF GRANT NO. xxxx 
PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION MANUAL 
Draft version 1.0 
To be further developed by the Programme Coordination Unit at 
programme start up 
January 2019
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
Acronyms and Abbreviations 
AWPB 
BIRDP 
CAA 
CAADP 
CACC 
CAdA 
CAP 
CC 
CCU 
CD 
CDC 
CDC 
CDE 
CDGO 
CDO 
CDT 
CIF 
CLASP 
COSOP 
CPA 
CPC 
CPCU 
CPIA 
CPM 
CQ 
DA 
DG 
DPD 
ESIA 
ESMP 
FB 
FFS 
FI 
FM 
FMO 
FNC 
FR&A 
GAM 
GAN 
GDP 
GHGs 
GoS 
GP 
Ha 
HCE 
HH 
IAMDP 
IC 
ICB 
IPM 
IPSAS 
IRF 
IWRM 
LCS 
LEN 
i 
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Butana Integrated Rural Development Project 
Central Accounts Assistant 
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Project 
cluster advocacy and communications committee 
Central Administrative Assistant 
Cluster Adaptation Plans 
Climate Change 
Central Coordination Unit 
Country Director 
Cluster Development Committee 
Community Development Committee 
Community Development Expert 
Community Development and Gender Officer 
Cluster Development Officer 
Cluster Development Team 
Community Investment Funds 
Community Livelihood Adaptation and Sustainability Plans 
Results Based Country Strategic Opportunities Programme 
Central Procurement Assistant 
Cluster Procurement Committee 
Central Project Coordination Unit 
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment 
Country Programme Manager 
consultants’ Qualifications 
designated Account 
Director General 
Deputy Project Director 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
Fixed Budget 
Farmer Field Schools 
Financial institutions 
Financial Manager 
Forestry Management Officer 
Forestry National Corporation 
Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD financed projects 
Global Acute Malnutrition 
Global Advisory Network 
Gross Domestic Product 
Green House Gases 
Government of Sudan 
Good Practice 
Hectare 
Higher Council of Environment 
Households 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project 
Individual Consultants 
International Competitive Bidding 
Integrated Pest Management 
International Public Sector Accounting Standards 
Integrated Risk Framework 
Integrated Water Resources Management 
Least cost selection 
Local Extension Network 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
Livelihood Investment Plan 
Livestock Marketing and Resilience Programme 
Letter to the Recipient 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Methodology for Assessing Procurement Systems 
Ministry of Animal Resources Fisheries and Wildlife 
Microenterprises 
Microfinance Institutions 
M&E, KM and Innovations Officer 
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning 
Ministry of Irrigation and Water Resources 
Ministry of Production and Economic Resources 
Ministry of Physical Planning and Public Works 
Native Administration 
National Audit Chamber 
National Adaptation Programme of Action 
National Competitive Bidding 
Network Executive Committees 
National Project Steering Committee 
Natural Resources 
Natural Resources Governance Framework 
Natural Resources Livelihood Groups 
Natural Resources Livelihood Investment Plans 
Natural Resources and Land-use Management Plans 
Natural Resources Management 
Project Director 
Partner Financial Institutions 
Pastoral Field Schools 
Project Implementation Manual 
Quality Based Selection 
Quality and Cost-based Selection 
Rural and Agricultural Development Officer 
Regional Policy Coordination Centre 
Regional Policy Specialist 
State Administrative and Accounts Assistant 
State Advocacy and Communications Committee 
State Accounts Officer 
State Coordinator 
Senior Gender and Community Development Expert 
State Cluster Stakeholder Platforms 
Sudanese Pounds 
Social Environmental and Climate Assessment 
Senior Internal Auditor 
Senior Knowledge Management and Communications Expert 
Senior Livelihoods Development Expert 
Senior Monitoring and Evaluation Expert 
Senior NRM expert 
Senior Programme Accountant 
State Project Coordination Unit 
Senior Procurement Expert 
State Procurement Officer 
State Policy Officer 
Stock Routes 
State Steering Committee 
Sudan Sustainable Natural resources Management Project 
Single Source Selection 
LIP 
LRMP 
LTR 
M&E 
MAPS 
MARFW 
ME 
MFI 
MKIO 
MoAF 
MOFEP 
MoIWR 
MPER 
MPPPW 
NA 
NAC 
NAPA 
NCB 
NEC 
NPSC 
NR 
NRGF 
NRLG 
NRLIP 
NRLMP 
NRM 
PD 
PFI 
PFS 
PIM 
QBS 
QCBS 
RADO 
RPCC 
RPS 
SAAA 
SACC 
SAO 
SC 
SGCE 
SCSP 
SDG 
SECAP 
SIA 
SKCE 
SLDE 
SMEE 
SNRE 
SPA 
SPCU 
SPE 
SPO 
SPoO 
SR 
SSC 
SSNRMP 
SSS 
ii 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
SUDANIP 
TA 
UNCAC 
US 
VDC 
VSCG 
VWG 
WA 
WRMO 
WSRMP 
YP 
Sudan’s National Agriculture Investment Plan 
Technical Assistance 
United Nations Convention Against Corruption 
United States of America 
Village Development Committee 
Village Savings and Credit Groups 
Vulnerable Women’s Groups 
Withdrawal Applications 
Water Resources Management Officer 
Western Sudan Resources Management Programme 
Young Professional 
hafir 
jubraka 
wadi crossing 
water storage structure 
gardens near the homestead 
bridge built over feeder roads 
iii 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
Contents 
Abbreviations and acronyms ........................................................................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Introduction .............................................................................................................................................. 14 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
Legal Framework .......................................................................................................................... 15 
The Programme ........................................................................................................................... 19 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
2.5 
Programme rationale and strategic context ........................................................................... 19 
Programme goal and development objective ......................................................................... 20 
Programme area and geographical targeting .......................................................................... 20 
Target groups and strategies ................................................................................................... 24 
Programme components ......................................................................................................... 30 
Programme implementation organisational structure and responsibilities ................................ 48 
Programme Management and Implementing Agencies.......................................................... 48 
3.1 
Other Implementing Agencies and partners ..........................................................................48 
3.2 
3.3  Programme Supervision ............................................................................................................... 51 
Cost and Financing ....................................................................................................................... 18 
4.1 
4.2 
.........................................................................................................................18 
Programme costs 
Programme Financing...............................................................................................................19
Implementation arrangements .................................................................................................... 21 
5.1 
5.2 
Programme Start-up and phasing ........................................................................................... 21 
Detailed implementation arrangements for programme components .................................. 21 
Planning and budgeting ............................................................................................................... 23 
6.1 
Purpose of the Annual Work Plan and Budget .........................................................................23
 6.2  Procedures for preparation and approval of the AWPB ............................................................. 23
 6.3  Review of the AWPB 
................................................................................................................ 23 
Outline of the AWPB ...........................................................................................................24 
6.4 
Monitoring and evaluation .......................................................................................................... 25 
7. 
7.1 
7.2 
7.3 
7.4 
7.5 
7.6 
7.7 
7.8 
7.9 
M&E plan ................................................................................................................................. 25 
M&E system and instruments ................................................................................................. 27 
The participatory M&E process ............................................................................................... 27 
IFAD cooperate core indicators (CI)......................................................................................... 28 
Reporting requirements .......................................................................................................... 28 
Baseline and impact studies .................................................................................................... 28 
Mid-term review...................................................................................................................... 29 
Programme supervision .......................................................................................................... 30 
Programme completion process and report ........................................................................... 30 
Knowledge management and communication  ........................................................................... 31 
8. 
Knowledge  management......................................................................................................32 
8.1  
8.2  Communication strategy ...............................................................................................................32 
Financial management ................................................................................................................. 33 
9. 
iv 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
Financial management risk assessment ..................................................................................33 
9.1 
9.2  Financial Management and Disbursement Arrangements 
.......................................................33
 9.3   Budgeting   ..................................................................................................................................33 
.......................................................................33
9.4  Disbursement arrangements and flow of funds 
 9.5  Internal Controls 
.......................................................................................................................33
............................................33  
............................. 
 9.6  Accounting systems, policies and procedures 
9.7   Financial  reporting......................................................................................................................33
 9.8   Internal   Audit   ..........................................................................................................................33  
9.9    External Audit...............................................................................................................................33
9.10 Anticorruption and Good Governance Framework 
................................................................. 33 
Taxation ...................................................................................................................................33 
10.  Administration of human resources ............................................................................................ 33 
9.11 
10.1 
 10.2  Evaluation of Performance 
Procedures for recruitment and contracting ...........................................................................33
...................................................................................................... 33 
Procurement and contracting ...................................................................................................... 33 
11. 
11.1 
11.2 
11.3 
11.4 
11.5 
12. 
Procurement Guidelines .......................................................................................................... 33 
Thresholds for Procurement Methods .................................................................................... 35 
Procurement Procedures for Goods (Vehicles, Equipment and Other) .................................. 36 
Procurement procedures for community-based works .......................................................... 38 
Procedures for contracting consultant services ...................................................................... 38 
Contract management ................................................................................................................. 33 
Purpose.................................................................................................................................... 40 
12.1 
12.2 
Applicability ............................................................................................................................. 40 
12.3  Overview ................................................................................................................................. 41 
12.4  Monitoring implementation .................................................................................................... 41 
Contract completion ................................................................................................................ 41 
12.5 
Contract termination ............................................................................................................... 41 
12.6 
Processing of payments ............................................................................................................... 41 
13. 
13.1 
 13.2  Processing of payments for consultants’ services 
13.3 
13.4 
General Instructions .................................................................................................................41
................................................................... 41 
Processing of payments for goods, office supplies and other operating costs........................41 
Processing of travel related expenditures 
.........................................................................41 
Environmental and social management plan (ESMP) .................................................................. 41 
14. 
14.1 
Programme related environmental risks and opportunities and management measures.......41
14.2 
Programme related social risks and opportunities and management measures .....................41
Annex 1: Programme Logical Framework  
Annex 2: Sudan poverty and malnurishment matrix 
Annex 3: Terms of references 
v 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
INTRODUCTION 
The purpose of this Programme Implementation Manual (PIM) is to guide the staff 
1. 
of the Programme lead agency (Ministry of Agriculture), the Central Programme 
Coordination Unit (CPCU), and the State Programme Coordination Units (SPCUs) in the 
implementation of the Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme 
(SNRLP). The manual establishes the Strategic and Institutional Framework and provide 
guidance for the overall planning and implementation of activities. It details the 
collaborative framework for programme implementation, the institutional and 
management arrangements; the administrative, fiduciary and contractual procedures; 
monitoring, evaluation and reporting. It establishes effective implementation procedures 
and mechanisms, which will ensure the achievement of the overall objectives as outlined 
in the programme's design document (PDR) and logframe. 
2. 
The Programme summary gives a nutshell of the Programme features but more 
importantly aspects relating to targeting and selection criteria for each activity. This is 
followed by detailed cost estimates by year and also summary cost estimates for the 
whole Programme. The detailed cost estimates are provisional and these offer a general 
guidance at the time of preparing annual work plan and budget. 
It is important to note that this manual makes references to the following key 
3. 
documents and it is therefore fundamental that the Programme staff, especially the 
Programme Coordinator, the Senior Procurement Expert and the Finance Officer, are 
familiar with these documents. The following documents were consulted in the 
preparation of the PIM:  
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
IFAD Programme Design Report including all annexes 
IFAD Guidelines for Procurement 
IFAD Handbook for Procurement 
IFAD Guidelines on Programme Audits,  
IFAD Disbursement Handbook 
IFAD Guidelines for Loans and Grants Administration, 2007 
-  Programme Finance Agreement between IFAD and GoS 
- 
IFAD General Conditions and Letter to the Borrower 
4. 
This manual will be used in conjunction with the PDR and will be updated 
regularly by the CPCU to reflect any eventual changes agreed between the Government 
of Sudan (GOS) and the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD). 
14 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
1. 
Legal Framework  
1.  The SNRLP is implemented by the Government of Sudan (GOS) and is financed by a 
grant from the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), a grant from the 
Least  Developed  Countries  Fund  (LDCF)  facilitated  by  IFAD,  and  government  and 
beneficiaries.  The  IFAD  Grant  Number  xxx  was  approved  by  the  board  on  the  xxx  and 
has been signed on the xxx and has been declared effective on the xxxx. The LDCF IFAD 
grant number xxx has been approved by the LDCF Council on the xxx. It should be noted 
that  the  Programme  closure  date  is  decided  from  the  signature  date  of  the  financing 
agreement, not the date of Board approval.  
2.  The  Government  of  Sudan  as  a  grant  recipient  as  established  in  the  Financing 
Agreement, will appoint the  Ministry  of  Finance as the implementing agency who will 
be  responsible  for  signing  the  financing  agreement  and  the  implementation  of  the 
programme  whereas  IFAD  will  be  directly  responsible  for  the  supervision  of  the 
programme. 
3.  The Financing Agreement constitutes the legal basis of the programme; it will outline 
the conditions of first disbursement.  
4.  The  Programme  is  expected  to  start  implementation  in  January,  2020,  and  be 
completed  in  six  years.    During  the  first  twelve  months  of  implementation  the 
programme would become fully prepared for components delivery with programme staff 
expected to complete intense training over this period as needed. 
5.  The  implementation  of  this  programme  should  be  in  conformity  with  the  Financier 
(IFAD) applicable rules. 
a. 
National Context 
Population and income status: Sudan is situated in northern Africa, with a 
1. 
coastline bordering the Red Sea. It sits at the crossroads of sub-Saharan Africa and the 
Middle East, with fertile lands and abundant livestock. Sudan’s  total  area is around 
1,886,000 km2 with around 61 million ha of arable land, of which 17.4 million ha are 
cultivated, 14 million ha natural pasture, and 21 million ha (11.6%) are forests. The 
population is around 42 million, with an annual growth rate of 2.5% (2018). About 65% 
of the population lives in rural areas. 
Economic conditions: Decades of civil conflicts, mismanagement, trade and 
2. 
financial sanctions and limited access to external financing have weakened the national 
economy. The secession of South Sudan in 2011 resulted in the loss of three-quarters of 
the country’s oil output, the main source of foreign currency and government income. 
The Government performed a series of reforms to stabilize the economy, such as greater 
exchange rate flexibility, reduced energy subsidies and more focus on agricultural sector 
development which contribute 35%-40% of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP), but 
suffers from low productivity. About 80% of the labor force is engaged in agriculture, a 
proportion that has increased in the last few years due to reduced revenue from oil. 
Agriculture, therefore, plays a critical role in both HH and the national economy. 
In 2017, the US lifted its sanctions against Sudan raising expectations of positive 
3. 
impact on agricultural import-export businesses. Despite these developments, 
unsustainable fiscal deficits persist, inflation and capital flight is at high levels and 
external debt amounted to US$52,4 billion or 111% of its GDP, making Sudan one of the 
poorest countries with GNI per capita at 2,380 US$ (2017) and rural poverty at 58%. 
Most at risk are small-scale farmers and livestock herders in the rainfed sector, landless 
and internally displaced people, households without assets and people in areas affected 
by drought and conflict. Of late, the increasing economic pressures within the country 
has stimulated widespread public protests and political uncertainties.  
15 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
4. 
Fragility: With a Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) score at 
2.47 Sudan is classified as a fragile country. Civil war and famine in South Sudan has 
resulted in 0.7 to 1.0 million refugees seeking safety in Sudan, putting pressure on 
already strained resources specially in the States of South and East Darfur, West and 
South Kordofan and Blue and White Nile. Most conflicts are between tribes over the 
access to natural resources (NR). Previously, conflicts related to access and use of NR 
were mitigated through traditional leadership and effective local governing bodies called 
Native Administration (NA). The Native Administration Act in 1986 attempted to reinstall 
the NA, but it was subsequently reduced again without providing the local communities 
with any alternative and effective way of conflict management and resolution. Although 
the government later made some attempts to re-institute the NA it has not regained its 
former authority. Today there are multiple and parallel systems for NR management and 
governance resulting in confused land tenure arrangements, inconsistencies in laws and 
policies and unclear institutional arrangements and responsibilities leaving user rights 
open to dispute sometimes leading to serious conflicts.  
Poverty, food insecurity, nutrition: Sudan ranked 167 out 188 on the Human 
5. 
Development Index (2015). Sudan has widespread poverty with 46% (18.5 million) of 
the population living in poverty. Rural poverty is estimated at 58%. Rural poverty and 
food insecurity are more pronounced in the rainfed sector particularly in areas affected 
by conflicts and droughts and often isolated from markets and services due to poor 
infrastructure as well as mobile livelihood (pastoralism). Households (HHs) with small 
herds and small scale rainfed crop production are impacted more are suffer from food 
security in the case of losses. Thus, there is an inherent sensitivity to rainfall amounts 
and timings, making climate change a key factor in the country’s current and future 
economy, livelihoods, and food security. The other causes of poverty and food insecurity 
includes inadequate rainfall, persistent conflicts, urban and crop bias of development, 
moderate legislation and poor enforcement, lack of employment opportunities and the 
concentration of socio‐economic development in a few geographical areas.  
Smallholder agriculture: Agriculture is predominately rain-fed and pastoralist 
6. 
oriented. Pastoralism is a key element of the Sudanese economy, contributing around 
60% of the total agriculture revenue through livestock exports. The Government of 
Sudan (GoS) has tried to diversify its cash crops; however cotton and gum Arabic 
remain its major agricultural exports. Sorghum is the principal food crop, and millet is 
grown for domestic consumption. Sesame seeds and peanuts are cultivated for domestic 
consumption and increasingly for export. Productivity in rainfed cropping systems is low 
and variable due to erratic climatic conditions, land degradation, desertification, reduced 
soil fertility, inappropriate tillage practices and lack of knowledge on improved 
sustainable farming practices.  
National strategies and policies: The Government of Sudan is placing a strong 
7. 
focus on agricultural development as a driver for the overall economic growth of the 
country and compensate for the loss of oil revenues following the independence of South 
Sudan in 2011. An Agricultural Revival Programme and an Integrated Solutions to 
Agricultural Sector Programme are currently being implemented at the national level, 
and the SNRLP will be aligned to these programmes from its inception. According to the 
2013 situation analysis of the “Pastoral Strategic Action Plan for Semi-desert and Low 
rainfall Savanna in Sudan (2014-2024) PR-325-Sudan”, prepared by the Range and 
Pasture General Directorate of the Federal Ministry of Livestock, the national institutional 
and policy framework has provided only limited support for the sustainable management 
of rangeland resources.  
The Five Year National Strategy and the Agricultural Revival Programme reflect 
8. 
the historical dominance of crop production for the Sudanese economy with little 
attention given to agropastoralism and pastoralism and the particular need to consider 
16 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
the current implications of the secession of South Sudan for rangeland management and 
mobility. However, in recognition of the importance of rangelands and livestock 
production in the rural economies and food security and the related land-use governance 
and resources management challenges, the government passed the ‘Rangelands and 
Fodder Resources Development (Rationalizations) Act in 2015. With the support of this 
Act rural communities can now obtain registration of common rangelands as part of 
reinstalling joint governance and management. Even though the Act is focused at 
rangeland there are also a few examples of it being used for registration, governance 
and management of common forest land. The GoS recognizes the need for greater 
attention to agriculture and livestock, as reflected in its Interim Poverty Reduction 
Strategy Paper (I-PRSP) and the Five-year Program for Economic Reforms approved by 
its parliament in December 2014 (WB overview, April 2017). 
b.  Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities 
Climate Change: Climate change (CC) represents a major environmental 
9. 
challenge in Sudan, with an on-going trend towards drier climatic conditions. A study 
assessing local people’s perceptions of CC impacts on browse trees/shrubs cover in the 
Butana region found that 94% of the people believed that there is significant 
deterioration of the quantity and quality of tree/shrub cover which is insufficient to feed 
their animals. They attributed this situation to the combined effect of rainfall decrease, 
overgrazing, expansion in rainfed agriculture and irrigation schemes, tree cutting for 
charcoal production, and cut-off water points due to land governance problems. There is 
also strong consistency between pastoralists’ perceptions, satellite image analyses, and 
scientific data on recent changes in climate conditions. Urgent adaptation interventions 
are needed to mitigate the CC impacts, namely rehabilitation of tree/shrub rangelands, 
the spreading of water harvesting and soil water conservation systems, the improvement 
of herd structure and management, and the diversification of livelihoods.  
Programme rationale 
Sudan continues to experience various conflicts and natural disasters, ensuing 
10. 
widespread displacement (includes both internally displaced persons and refugees from 
South), fractured infrastructure, and broken institutions.  These factors have led to the 
Sudanese population suffering from expansive hunger (ranked 7th on Global Hunger 
Index1) food insecurity and malnutrition with women, children and youth suffering 
disproportionately. Rural women and youth in Sudan form the majority of the extremely 
poor people in the country.  
11. 
Due to relatively high birth rates (estimation of population growth is 2.83 in 2008 
population census) children and young people constitute a large proportion of the poor in 
Sudan. In 2008, almost 60% of the poor were under the age of 20. Furthermore, 55% of 
youth aged 15 to 24 are classified as poor. This age category constitutes 23% of the 
entire population and makes up 21% of the total poor (2012 Interim PRSP).  Women and 
youth’s poverty is closely linked to their subordinate position and the substantial gender 
gap which has resulted in a shortage of economic opportunities and inadequate access to 
productive resources, including credit, land ownership, cattle, skills and support services.  
According to World Food Programme (WFP), approximately 5.5 million people 
12. 
were food insecure in early 2018, and estimated 80 per cent were unable to afford the 
food one needs on daily basis2. Similarly, chronic malnutrition rate is staggering 38 
1 International Food Policy Research Institute. 2017. 2017 Global Hunger Index: The inequalities of hunger. 
http://www.globalhungerindex.org/pdf/en/2017.pdf.  
2 World Food Programme (I). November 2018. Country Brief Sudan. https://docs.wfp.org/api/documents/WFP-
0000101372/download/?_ga=2.138344496.1072362816.1545707489-582698889.1489929371  
17 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
percent1. Basic health services are available to less than 50 per cent of the population, 
while only 13 per cent of the rural population has access to improved sanitation facilities. 
The country ranked 167 out 188 on the Human Development Index (2015). In 
13. 
respect to nutritional status, under-nutrition is Sudan’s most serious but least addressed 
problem2 (WFP, 2014). According to World Health Organization (WHO), the country has 
an overwhelming burden of acute malnutrition and stunting, with over 16.3 per cent of 
population falling in the critical category of global acute malnutrition (GAM) (WFP (II), 
2018). Over 2.2 million children less than five years of age are stunted (higher risk of 
dying from infectious disease) – almost one in every three children, making Sudan as 
one of the 14 countries where 80 per cent of the world’s stunted children live (WFP (I), 
2018). About one out of every six children weighs too little for her/his height. Four 
states (North Darfur, Red Sea, Blue Nile, and South Darfur) have acute malnutrition 
levels above the WHO threshold (over 15 per cent) for a critical situation and can be 
considered as being in crisis (ibid).  It is also important to note that the majority (52 per 
cent) of the acutely malnourished children live in nine non-conflict affected states - Red 
Sea, Kassala, Gezira, Khartoum, Northern, River Nile, Gedaref, Sennar and White Nile.  
Sudan is ranked 140 out of 159 countries in the UNDP Gender Inequality Index 
14. 
(GII). Women live longer than men (65 years versus 62.2 for men) but spend less time 
at school (3 mean years of schooling versus 4.1 for men) and earn less than males (1 
902 compared to 5,775 GNI per capita for men). The MICS 2014 survey shows that 
11.9% of women aged 15-49 years were married before the age of 15. About 59.8% of 
young women in Sudan are literate and the literacy status varies greatly by area (79.8% 
in urban areas and 50% in rural areas). Women’s participation in the labor market is 
24.3% compared to 72.2% for men. At the same time, women comprise 78% of the 
economically active population who work in agriculture compared to only 57% of men. 
Women's empowerment is hindered by:(i) a high rate of illiteracy (ii) deeply rooted 
patriarchal values, customary laws and practices that limit women’s freedoms and 
choices (iii) early marriages; (iv) heavy workloads among rural women (v) lack of 
financial resources, and knowledge to increase agricultural production (vi) women’s 
limited capacity and skills to embark on viable agro-based and entrepreneurial activities 
(vii) lack of ownership and control over key resources like land and modern agricultural 
equipment, capital (viii) limited access to markets (ix) limited access to off-farm 
activities. 
Pastoralists are another socially excluded  group that is facing increasing 
15. 
marginalization in Sudan due to several factors including conflicts, unregulated 
mechanized agriculture, natural resource degradation and climate change. 
In compliance with IFAD policies on Youth, Nutrition and Gender Equality the 
16. 
SNLRP has been designed to leverage the inter-linkages between rural development, the 
economic and social empowerment of women, youth and pastoralists and nutritional 
status. It will promote their economic and social empowerment by facilitating the 
inclusion of the interests and perspectives of these groups in the policy support it 
provides for sustainable NRM, in the committees and forums it constitutes and their 
active participation in project activities designed to promote sustainable climate resilient 
livelihoods based on sustainable NRM.  The project is expected to have a positive impact 
on nutrition through facilitating access to increased incomes from agricultural production 
and small businesses, increased availability of food, provision of water, labour saving 
machinery, renewable energy (solar and gas), GALS training to facilitate women’s 
empowerment and more equitable distribution of responsibilities and resources and 
nutrition awareness training. 
1 Ibid 
2 WFP & UNICEF. November 2014. The Case for Investment in Nutrition in Sudan. 
https://www.avenirhealth.org/download/OHTCountryApplications/PDF/150619%20P893_UNICEF_Investment_Case_Collated_v3.pdf  
18 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
2.  The Programme    
2.1 
Programme rationale and strategic context  
s in the remaining duration of the COSOP. The main reasons 
SNRLP addresses the main drivers of rural poverty and food insecurity: The GoS 
17. 
and IFAD held a COSOP Review Workshop in November 2017 in which Natural resources 
management (NRM) and building resilience to CC were identified as the top priorities for 
focusing pipeline  
provided for the identification of the top priority areas are well reflected by the analysis 
of the main drivers of rural poverty and food insecurity. These reasons include: Land-use 
in Sudan is dominated by grazing, high rate of degradation and conversion of parts of 
forestland into rangelands; NA systems are eroded and the legal and regulatory 
framework is insufficient for effective NRM; the livelihoods of small farmers, pastoralists 
and agro-pastoralists communities are at risk due to increased variability in rainfall and 
encroachment of pastures and forests by mining and semi-mechanized crop farming on 
rangelands and stock routes; the separation of South Sudan has restricted mobility of 
pastoralists and created increased pressure on natural resources in some areas; 
competition and conflict over land and NR is the major destabilizing factors and source of 
chronic poverty in rural areas. 
IFAD’s comparative advantage from working in other arid and semi arid regions: 
18. 
IFAD’s comparative advantage for supporting the GoS in addressing the above 
mentioned challenges comes from its solid experience in working with development 
partners and vulnerable pastoral and agropastoral communities in other semiarid and 
arid areas in the region (e.g. Ethiopia, Chad, Djibouti, Tanzania) where livelihoods are 
dependent on the sustainable use of fragile ecosystems and NR.  
19. 
Previous projects’ experience of tangible successes in NR governance and 
management at community level: SNRLP will facilitate the consolidation and scaling up 
of the community and intercommunity based approaches that were applied successfully 
by other IFAD co-financed projects for effective NR governance and management at the 
community level. Previous IFAD engagements have been generally successful in 
generating tangible successes in NR governance and management at community level. 
They have also sought to build from these community successes, take into account the 
barriers encountered and support consultations and discussions at the state and 
interstate levels for how to improve the wider NR policy frameworks. This has led to the 
development of instruments for NR governance, such as the Natural Resources 
Governance Framework for the Butana Region and the Land-use map for the Sennar 
state. SNRLP will develop on these experiences and other lessons learnt (refer next 
section) from previous IFAD projects to address the NR governance and management 
challenges at the community level in the project areas. 
20. 
Support the sustainability of the livelihood development activities of other 
ongoing IFAD co-financed projects in the project area: Other IFAD co-financed projects 
such as LMRP and IAMDP are active in the rainfed areas in the Kordofan, Butana and 
Sennar regions where SNRLP will be implemented. These projects are focused on 
livelihood improvement of target households through livestock fattening, agricultural 
production and marketing support. However, limited investments in the sustainable 
management and resilience of NR by these projects can adversely affect the 
sustainability of the livelihood development activities. Also, sustainable management of 
NR requires investments over a longer period of time. Where relevant, SRNLP will 
support the ecological clusters which includes communities supported by other IFAD 
projects, building on the investments of the earlier projects and securing the 
sustainability of the livelihoods development activities promoted by these projects. 
19 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
2.2 
Programme goal and development objective  
21. 
Programme goals and objectives 
Programme goal: The programme goal is to increase the food security, incomes 
22. 
and resilience of pastoralist, agro-pastoralist and small crop farmers engaging in joint 
natural resources governance and management and development of related businesses 
in targeted landscapes.  
Development objective: The development objective of the programme is to 
23. 
increase the adoption of NR management practices, technologies and business models 
that enhance the quality and sustainable use of NRs, secures the access to NRs for 
vulnerable users and promotes the sustainability of NR related livelihoods. The 
development objective is in line with the IFAD and Sudan RB COSOP SO1 as it focuses 
on the restoration of the ecosystem, the resilience of farming systems and communities 
to climate change impacts and target groups access to basic agricultural services. It is 
also aligned to SO2 by promoting diversification in smallholder livelihood systems, 
strengthening and capacity building of community institutions, producers, women and 
youth and promoting target groups’ access to rural financial services. 
24. 
Programme duration: The duration of the programme is six years. 
Programme outreach: SNRLP will reach at least 120,000 target HHs organised 
25. 
in 5,500 small groups across 1,000 VDCs and 150 clusters or networks. Only, one 
member per HH will be a member of a small group. At an average of 6 members per 
household, the programme will benefit 720,000 HH members.  
26. 
 Key impact indicators: The key impact indicators are;  
i.  10% decrease in severe and acute malnutrition in children in Sudan? 
ii.  84,000 HHs (70%) with increased income from access to SNRLP services.  
iii.  72,000 HHs (60%) with an increased score in the resilience scorecards. 
iv.  84,000 HHs (70%) adopting environmentally sustainable and climate resilient 
technologies and practices 
v.  72,000 HHs (60%) with improved access to land, forests and water bodies for 
production purposes 
vi.  84,000 HHs (70%) with increased milk, meat, crop or forest produce 
vii.  72,000 HHs (60%) with their ownership/user rights registered in national 
cadasters or geographic information management systems 
viii. 72,000 HHs (60%) reporting reduction in disputes over NRs 
ix.  84,000 HHs (70%) reducing time spent in collection fuelwood or water 
x.  793,972 Ha of land brought under climate resilient management practices  
xi.  20 policy-relevant NR management knowledge products/frameworks 
completed 
xii.  Nine multistakeholder platforms functioning at the State level 
xiii. 500 government staff trained on CC adaptation and NR governance 
2.3 
Programme area and geographical targeting  
27. 
Geographic area of intervention  
SNRLP will be implemented in a total of nine States across the Butana region in 
28. 
East, the Sennar Region in the South-East and the Kordofan Region in the West of 
Sudan. The nine States are the River Nile, Khartoum, Gazira, Gedaref and Kassala States 
in the Butana region; the Sennar State in the Sennar region and; the North, South and 
West Kordofan States in the Kordofan region. Additionally, SNRLP will engage with the 
White Nile and the Blue Nile States in the Sennar region regarding inter-state NR 
governance and regulatory issues. These States have high incidence of poverty ranging 
20 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
from 26-60% and malnutrition varying from 14-20% (annex 2). The rural communities 
in the rainfed parts of these States are highly vulnerable to economic shocks as the NR 
base in these areas is under pressure from increasing population, high usage for 
livelihoods, lack of regulation, mismanagement, unregulated mechanised farming, 
incursions of large herds owned by wealthy farmers and CC, leading to drier conditions. 
These factors have a particularly adverse impact on smallholder farmers, agro-
pastoralists and pastoralists whose livelihoods depend on NR. SNRLP will build on and 
upscale the positive natural resources management (NRM) related experiences of mainly 
three previous IFAD projects (BIRDP, SUSTAIN and WSRMP) that were active in these 
regions over the last decade. 
Butana region: In the Butana region1 the selected localities constitute the “open 
29. 
grazing area” to people from within and outside the Butana. Overgrazing is extensive as 
this area constitutes the main entry and exit points for the Eastern transhumant herds. 
In the sand dune zone, the dunes could in a few years time, block the northern gateway 
to the clay plain grazing by livestock. Mechanized farms are increasingly encroaching on 
pasturelands in the clay plains. In addition, large herds belonging to wealth farmers are 
sweeping through central Butana resulting in the depletion of pastures and water for 
small-holder agro-pasotralists in these areas. In addition, the selected localities face the 
challenges created by largely unregulated artisanal gold mining, influx of more private 
agribusinesses from both Sudan and outside Sudan, and the loss of access to pastoral 
lands in South Sudan2.    
Sennar region: In Sennar, the selected localities host large herds of livestock. The 
30. 
expansion of large-scale mechanized farming blocking stock routs out of the state for 
smallholder agropastoralists and pastoralists, land degradation, the loss of access to 
pastoral lands in South Sudan and the use of this area by wealthy owners with large 
herds has led to the marginalization of small holder farmers, agro-pastoralists and 
pastoralists. A key challenge is the large deficit of fodder, especially for the poor. Crop 
residue which used to be considered a common good has now been commoditized and in 
some areas where there is access to crop residue, there are no water points. The 
localities the programme will begin work in are those with concentrations of poor agro-
pastoralists and pastoralists. 
Kordofan region: The SNLRP will be implemented mainly in the rain-fed regions of 
31. 
Kordofan, Butana and Sennar.  In Kordofan, the selected localities are along the 
pastoralist’s stock routes. 
Cluster or network approach: Within the States, SNRLP will follow a cluster or 
32. 
network approach focusing programme interventions on a group of neighbouring 
communities that share and use a common ecosystem comprising rangelands, forests, 
water resources or farmland. Thus, the programme communities will be selected based 
on the shared ecosystem used by them and not according to the administrative 
boundaries of the localities in which they are situated. The cluster or network approach 
will ensure that all the communities in the cluster jointly adopt the programme 
supported measures for coordinated improvement of the status of the ecosystem of the 
cluster. In the Kordofan region, the programme clusters or networks will be developed 
mainly around the stock routes. In the Butana region, they will be defined around the 
networks already identified by the BIRDP. In the Sennar region, these will be developed 
around the existing clusters formed by LMRP around common forestland, water 
resources and other NRs.  
1 The Butana area (estimated at 65 000 km2) is located in the rectangular area that is bounded by River Atbara 
from the northeast, River Nile from the Northwest, Blue Nile from the Southwest and Gedaref-Kassala Road from 
southeast. It used to constitute one socio-economic and political unit till Sudan’s independence but now falls in 
nine localities in the states of Khartoum, Gedaref, River Nile, Gezira and Kassala.  
2 The independence of the Republic of South Sudan denied many seasonal pastoralists access to dry season grazing in the 
South; thus forcing them to stay for longer periods in the Butana. 
21 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
33. 
Cluster composition: SNRLP will develop around 150 clusters or networks 
consisting of 5-10 communities that are the main users of the common ecosystem of the 
cluster. The estimated distribution of the clusters in the three regions is presented 
below; 
Table: Distribution of clusters 
Region 
Butana 
Kordofan 
Sennar 
Total 
States 
5 
3 
1 
9 
Villages 
400 
500 
100 
1,000 
Clusters 
30 
100 
20 
150 
Av. village 
per cluster 
13 
5 
5 
23 
village per 
state 
80 
167 
100 
Cluster 
dev. teams 
8 
10 
2 
20 
o  Butana region: In the five States in the Butana region SNRLP will develop 
around 30 clusters, engaging up to 400 communities, with 7 to 20 
communities in each cluster.  
o  Kordofan region: In the 3 States in the Kordofan region, the programme 
will develop around 100 clusters, including around 500 communities with 
5-7 communities in a cluster.  
o  Sennar region: In Sennar State, SNRLP will develop around 20 clusters 
encompassing about 100 communities with 5-7 communities in a cluster. 
The distribution of the clusters across the programme regions is presented 
in the table below; 
Cluster or network selection criteria: A cluster or network selected by the 
34. 
programme must have some common area between the boundaries of the member 
communities that is shared by the communities for common use such as rangeland, 
forestland and watershed.  
Cluster or network selection process: In coordination with the CPCU, the 
35. 
SPCU in each State will carry out a cluster or network mapping exercise at the beginning 
of the programme resulting in the identification and listing of all the clusters or networks 
that can potentially benefit from programme interventions in each State. The 
identification of the clusters or networks will be based on  
land use maps to identify the natural resources under pressure;  
o 
o  maps of child malnutrition to identify areas of high poverty; 
o 
identification of previous IFAD villages/clusters  
From the listed clusters or networks, the programme supported clusters or 
36. 
networks will be selected based on specific criteria which will include:  
o  Level of poverty and vulnerability in the communities in the clusters: The 
level of poverty will be determined by using tools that have been used by 
previous IFAD projects such as the Community Capability Index and 
participatory wealth ranking.  
o  Level of support by recent IFAD projects and their preparedness to engage 
in sustainable NRM activities and act as catalysts in the selected clusters 
or networks. 
 Pressure on NRs in the cluster due to high dependence on natural 
resources, climate change, desertification and conflicts;  
o 
o  Level of degradation of the shared natural resources in the common areas;  
o  The size of the degraded common areas shared by the communities;  
o  Pressure on the common resources by the users and conflict between 
communities over shared resources;  
o  Presence, status and activities of community institutions in the clusters or 
networks and  
22 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
o  The nature and extent of investment by previous IFAD project (see next 
section). Special focus will be placed on the selection and development of 
the communities where the pastoralists originate. 
Programme phases: SNRLP will develop the clusters or networks in two phases, 
37. 
the integration phase and the scaling up phase as described below; 
38. 
Integration Phase (Years 1 and 2): In this phase SNRLP will focus on developing 
and showcasing the achievements of the programme in around 50 ‘integration clusters’ 
or networks in the nine programme States (5-6 clusters per State). SNRLP will catalyse 
rapid changes within these clusters by building on and scaling up the promising NR 
related interventions of previous projects in 1-2 communities, e.g. existence of strong 
VDCs, Community Development Committees (CDCs), Village Savings and Credit Groups 
(VSCGs), previous investments in rehabilitation of water points, strong presence of PFIs, 
etc. The integration clusters will become models of NR governance and management, 
showcasing the success stories and motivating other clusters or networks in the States 
to express interest in adopting the programme interventions.  
In general integration clusters will be characterized by the presence of suitable 
39. 
conditions to demonstrate very good results within a very short time; and ii) better 
preparedness to quickly integrate NR governance and management interventions with 
the crop and livestock production activities. The SPCUs will pre-select the integration 
category clusters or networks based on criteria including the following:  
o  presence of one or more communities with previous experience of IFAD 
co-financed projects;  
o  opportunities to build on the investments/achievements of previous IFAD 
co-financed projects, e.g. opportunities to improve the management of a 
hafir or effectiveness of a conflict resolution centre;  
o  presence of strong champions and village institutions (VDCs, groups) who 
can be easily oriented and capacitated to promote the SNRLP supported 
activities and benefits within and outside the cluster;  
o  evidence of harmony and collaborative spirit amongst the communities in 
the cluster; and  
o  appetite to quickly resolve the issues related to the use of shared natural 
resources by adopting programme supported NR governance and 
management frameworks. The achievements of the integration phase will 
be widely publicised.  
40. 
Scaling-up phase (Years 3 and 6): In this phase SNRLP will expand its outreach to 
an additional 100 clusters or networks which express interest in adopting the programme 
interventions (after witnessing the success of the integration clusters or networks) and 
fulfil a set of preconditions, demonstrating their preparedness for SNRLP implementation. 
The State Programme Coordination Units (SPCU) will start the orientation of potential 
scaling-up clusters during the integration phase itself, by exposing the representatives of 
these scaling-up clusters to the programme approach, success stories and benefits 
achieved in the integration clusters. Those clusters interested in replicating these 
success stories in their areas will be advised to adopt a set of preparatory measures to 
become eligible for programme assistance during the scaling-up phase. These measures 
will include:  
o  Voluntary formation of general assembly, VDCs and CDCs and different 
committees according to programme guidelines;  
o  Resolution by these institutions to abide by NR governance and 
management frameworks developed with programme support  
o  Development of VSCGs, Natural Resources Livelihood Groups (NRLGs) and 
Vulnerable Women’s Groups (VWGs) according to programme supported 
guidelines and achievement of basic targets by these groups such as 
23 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
savings mobilisation, adoption of bye-laws, regular meetings and group 
registration.  
Each year the programme will invite expressions of interest from potential 
41. 
scaling-up clusters, to participate in the programme. The programme will evaluate the 
results of the preparatory measures (discussed above) adopted by the clusters and 
select the ones that are better prepared to readily implement programme activities. 
The two phases described above will not operate in isolation. Showcasing the 
42. 
achievements in the integration clusters will continue even after the first two years to 
motivate other clusters and disseminate good practices. Similarly, expansion of outreach 
to the scaling-up clusters is expected to start in the second year itself while the 
integration phase is still ongoing. 
2.4 
Target groups and strategies  
43. 
Target groups and how each groups will be targeted 
SNLRP will provide services to 120,000 HHs (70 per cent of average village 
44. 
population) and 720,000 household members. SNRLP’s principal target group will be 
poor smallholder farmers (50%), agro-pastoralists (30%) and pastoralists (20%). Within 
these groups, there will be special emphasis on the inclusion of youth (30%), women 
(50%) and vulnerable women headed households (14%). However, within a given 
ecosystem, other actors who are using the natural resource, such as larger farmers or 
enterprises, will be included in institutions and networks for improved governance and 
conflict management. The institutional structures strengthened and created by the 
programme for the sustainable management of natural resources will be inclusive and 
will ensure the participation of the poor, women and youth. The investments in 
livelihoods will have a strong focus on expanding opportunities for women and youth 
across different categories of the target group. The estimated outreach to these groups 
through different types of NR related enterprises is summarised below. These figures are 
subject to changes during implementation as the actual mix of items and the quantities 
will be determined by the communities and individuals based on annual planning. 
Table: Target group outreach 
Beneficiaries 
Activities 
  Water management services 
  Crop and fodder production 
  Forestry development activities 
  Women farms, nurseries, jubrakas 
  Animal health and IPM services 
  Machinery services 
  Storage services 
  Gas stoves 
  Pastoralist enterprises 
  Youth businesses 
Small 
holder 
farmers 
2,250 
Agro 
pasto- 
ralists 
18,495  12,480 
16,600  13,600 
450 
4,875 
450 
1,500 
1,500 
10,760 
8,840 
3,570 
630 
Pasto- 
ralists 
Total 
2,250   
  30,975   
4,875   
  29,900   
900   
1,500   
1,500   
  19,600   
  24,000  24,000   
4,200   
Youth 
1,125 
14,287 
2,438 
450 
750 
750 
9,008 
1,463 
24,200 
270 
12,000 
4,200 
16,600 
7,200 
1,260 
Total 
Women 
HH 
Women 
headed 
HH 
7,200 
9,600 
Total  60,000  36,000  24,000 120,000    36,000  60,000  16,800 
14% 
20%  100%   
50% 
30% 
30% 
50% 
Percentage 
Smallholder farmers: Smallholder farmer HHs are highly dependent on NRs, 
45. 
such as cropland and water resources and their livelihoods are greatly affected by the 
deterioration in the status of these NRs. They rely on rain-fed agriculture and cultivate 
upto 15 feddans growing food and cash crops such as sorghum, millet, sesame, 
groundnut and gum Arabic in fields located both close and far from their homestead, 
generally within a radius of 10 km. Most HH have some livestock. Poor smallholder HHs 
face food insecurity during about 5-6 months a year arising from low agricultural 
productivity due to limited availability of good quality seeds, inadequate access to 
24 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
machinery services, labour shortages, erratic rainfall, pest infestations, declining soil 
fertility and limited access to extension services. They also face drought and water 
shortages during the dry season due limited water availability and high cost of 
purchasing water. Limited access to credit and lack of savings prevents these HHs from 
purchasing inputs and accessing machinery services.  
46. 
They usually receive low prices from the sale of their products due to absence of 
organized commodity markets and the need to sell their products as quickly as possible 
after harvest to gain cash which weakens their bargaining power. Lack or limited access 
to credit together with poor savings is one the main constraints that prevents HHs from 
purchasing inputs and accessing hired machinery and labour for the more expensive and 
labour intensive farming activities - weeding and harvesting. As a result, households 
leave part of their available land uncultivated and engage in off-farm casual labour, for 
example gold mining, handicrafts and petty trade, or charcoal making and sale. 
Around 50% of SNRLP target group will be smallholder farmer HHs. SNRLP will 
47. 
assist these target group to: i) adopt soil and water conserving farming techniques and 
climate resilient cropping practices; ii) improve access to water supply during the dry 
months; iii) develop savings practices, access credit and seed capital finance from the 
programme to purchase and use better quality agricultural inputs; and iv) benefit from 
extension advice. Through these activities these HHs will improve their income and also 
contribute to the improvement in the status of the NRs used by them. 
Agro-pastoralists: In addition to the farmland and water resources the agro-
48. 
pastoralist are highly dependent on rangeland and their livelihoods are greatly affected 
by the degradation and shrinking of the rangelands. They depend on farming for food 
security but rely more on livestock for income. In addition to challenges in small-holder 
farming, they face challenges in accessing grazing areas, productivity of their animals, 
access to animal feed supplementation and veterinary services. Most of their animals are 
milking cows or female lactating camel and/or small ruminants depending on the area. 
Labour, both for herding and farming is provided by family members, herding is usually 
entrusted to children and young adolescents.  
Around 30% of SNRLP target group will be agropastoralist HHs. SNRLP will assist 
49. 
the agro pastoralists with similar activities as the smallholders and additionally support 
them for better access to fodder and improved animal health services. The development 
and implementation of NR governance and regulation framework in the communities will 
improve the quality of the rangelands and the health of the livestock resources of the 
agro-pastoralists. 
Pastoralists: Pastoralists are highly mobile mostly without farming practice and 
50. 
depend on NRs such as common rangelands, agricultural residue from farmland and 
water resources. Most pastoralists move from north to south and vice-versa. In the dry 
season they migrate southwards to the higher rainfall regions and often beyond the 
programme area and during the wet season they retreat northwards to escape tsetse 
flies (for those using the far southern parts) and muddy conditions characterizing the 
clay plains, and to graze the annual forage available in the Qoz and the arid, semi-arid 
lands, covering the central, the north-eastern and the northern parts of the country. In 
normal rainfall years the nomads stay longer (about 3 months) in the north in their 
makharef (common grazing lands in the rainy season) before returning south. In poor 
rainfall years they usually limit their northwards travel and return south within four to six 
weeks. Pastoralists face challenges such as blocked stock routes and loss of open access 
grazing areas; rough conditions on the stock routes including water availability and 
primitive shelters; livestock health issues; and conflicts with agriculturalists and in some 
cases with gum arabic bush owners. Their problems have increased due to diminishing 
access to common grazing lands, conflicts with settled farmers over animals entering 
cultivated fields and highly limited access to social services. The semi-nomadic 
25 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
pastoralists live typically in ‘fariqs’ settlements of 20 to 45 households. They are 
increasingly under pressure as populations grow, commercialization increases, 
rangelands become privatized and social support is reduced. They rely on more 
diversified activities for income generation.  
Around 30% of SNRLP target group will be pastoralist HHs. SNRLP will support 
51. 
the pastoralists to diversify their livelihoods by adopting a range of pastoralists’ 
enterprises such as milk production, processing and handicrafts making and selling. The 
development of the ‘fariqs’ will be supported to assist income diversification and access 
to social services. Stock route development activities will provide the pastoralists with 
better access to animal, health care and other services along the way. Their engagement 
in with programme supported rural institutions and access to conflict resolution centers 
will reduce conflict with settled communities. 
52.  Women: In smallholder farmer HHs, women are deeply involved in the use of 
NRs through their involvement in crop production, livestock care and regular household 
activities. They carry out farming activities in the household fields (jubraka, 2 feddans) 
growing tomatoes, cowpeas, okra, millet, maize, etc. for both consumption and sale. In 
the Butana region women’s participation in agriculture is relatively limited as farming 
land can be far from the house. Women also collect and sell of forest produce, make 
handicrafts and carry out petty trading activities.  
In agro pastoralist HHs women are more involved in livestock related activities 
53. 
taking care of the young animals, milking and dairy processing. In addition to these 
tasks women carry out other HH tasks such as cooking, child care, carrying water, 
gathering fuelwood and fodder. Despite their heavy work burdens, women face 
discriminatory social norms leading to early marriage, domestic violence and low levels 
of participation in decision-making at the HH and community level.  
54.  Women pastoralists are vulnerable due to fewer livelihood alternatives and limited 
healthcare services. In certain areas, due to security concerns women are no longer able 
travel with the herds, resulting in loss of income from selling milk and clarified butter 
and exposure to conflicts with settled farmers over animals.  The situation that the 
pastoralists are confronted with and their strategies for dealing with the challenges are 
in transition over the last few years. A more detailed and State-specific description of 
this target group will be developed at the stage of programme implementation to identify 
the specific constraints facing them in different regions and fine-tune the programme’s 
strategies.   
55.  Women will constitute 50% of SNRLP target group. SNRLP will support the 
involvement of women in a range of NR related livelihood activities including jubraka 
farming, home gardens, and nurseries. They will be involved in savings groups and will 
have access to seed capital and credit to engage in a range of youth and pastoralist 
enterprises. Their access to gas stoves will replace dependence on firewood and will ease 
their work and also reduce the pressure on the NRs. 
Vulnerable women headed households: Women-headed households include 
56. 
women left by/divorced from the husband, women in polygamous households who are 
no longer supported, widows, single women responsible for dependents, married women 
whose husband is incapable of functioning as an income earner, married women who 
have been abandoned by their husbands for any reason. In Sudan, these households are 
still under the nominal supervision of a male head, although it is up to the women to 
earn a livelihood and look after the children which makes them particularly vulnerable. 
Out of the 50% outreach to women, around 14% will be vulnerable women 
57. 
headed households. SNRLP will support vulnerable women by providing them with access 
to revolving funds for supporting gas stove financing and jubraka farming. 
26 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
58. 
Rural youth, particularly unemployed young women and men: Youth 
oriented NR related livelihood activities can greatly assist the development of the NRs in 
the programme area. The majority of the young people live in rural areas with limited 
access to basic services and livelihood opportunities. Most of the opportunities for 
earning a living for young women and men in rural areas are linked to agriculture. 
Unemployment is largely due to limited education and skills, lack of capital to start any 
kind of business and lack of employment opportunities in rural areas. The kinds of 
livelihoods young men aspire to engage in include mechanized agriculture, animal 
fattening, shops and trades, hotels etc. Young women face the challenge of early 
marriage, double burdens of household and agricultural work as well as restrictions on 
trades considered unsuitable for women. Their aspirations include teaching, tailoring, 
arts and crafts, restaurants, food processing, poultry keeping, livestock fattening. The 
key coping strategy for young women and men is to migrate to cities to find 
employment. The programme will promote youth involvement crop, fodder and forestry 
development activities. Youth groups’ partnerships with the Village Development 
Committees will be supported for youth engagement in community water management 
services, machinery services and storage services. Access to seed capital financing and 
credit will support youth engagement in a range of youth enterprises which will develop 
youth livelihoods and also promote the sustainable use of the NRs. 
Targeting strategy: In order to ensure the inclusion of the target households, 
59. 
specially the social inclusion and empowerment in particular of women, youth (18-35 
years) and pastoralists SNRLP will adopt geographic targeting, self-targeting and direct 
targeting measures. The targeting matrix summarising the targeting strategy is 
presented below;  
Target households (smallholders, 
agro-pastoralists, pastoralists)  
Women 
Youth 
Geographical 
targeting 
Programme areas selected with  
- high incidence of poverty ranging from 26-60%; Acute malnutrition ranging from 14-20%;  
- high dependence of small-holder farmers, agro-pastoralists and pastoralists on NR; 
- vulnerable NRs due to  increasing population, high dependence on NR for livelihoods, lack of regulation, 
mismanagement , etc.  
Self 
targeting 
- Programme activities focused on NR 
related  actions  will  be  adopted  by 
target  groups  due  to  their  high 
dependence on NRs. 
- Participatory development of NRLMP 
and  NRLIP  will  tailor  programme 
activities  according  to  the  needs  of 
the target group  
to 
- Support 
jubraka,  home 
gardens  and  nurseries  favours 
the involvement of women. 
- Support  to  village  savings  and 
credit  groups  favours  women’s 
inclusion 
- Introduction  of  microirrigation, 
domestic  water  supply  etc,  will 
reduce drudgery of women 
Direct 
targeting 
- 50% smallholders  
- 30% agro pastoralists  
- 20% pastoralists,   
- 50%  women  quota  for  seed 
capital  financing  of  NR  related 
enterprises 
- 100%  support  to  women  for 
home  gardens,  nurseries  and 
jubrakas 
- 100% revolving fund support to 
vulnerable  women  for  jubrakas 
and gas stoves 
- 30% youth quota for seed capital 
related 
NR 
of 
financing 
enterprises 
- 100%  support  to  youth  for  4,200 
youth enterprises 
- 50% youth groups involvement in 
management  of  water  supply, 
and 
machinery 
community storage services 
services 
- Savings  and  credit  groups, 
nutrition awareness training  
Geographical targeting measures will be adopted to reach those areas with higher 
60. 
concentration of target households. The details are already described in the section on 
geographic area of intervention;  
Self-targeting measures offering activities suitable enough and of interest to the 
61. 
target households will be ensured through participatory formulation of Natural Resources 
27 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
and Land-use Management Plans (NRLMP) and Livelihood Investment Plans (LIP) the two 
key planning and investment tools for the clusters or networks and the communities. 
Participatory development of these planning and investment tools will ensure that the 
activities which are identified correspond to the priorities and capacities of the 
programme’s target group; Self-targeting will be facilitated through use of gender-
sensitive delivery systems (e.g. delivering training at village level), capacity-building 
tailored to the needs of women, youth and pastoralists and an on-going consultative 
process with beneficiaries through committees and forums; 
Direct targeting of the target households will aim at programme outreach to 50% 
62. 
small-holder farmers, 30% agro-pastoralists and 20% pastoralists. Overall 50% 
outreach to women and 30% outreach to women will be accomplished. The nature of the 
activities that will be supported through direct targeting has already been highlighted in 
the earlier section on target groups. Direct targeting will start with the development of 
the NRLMP and LIPs wherein programme resources will be allocated to achieve the above 
mentioned outreach targets through different programme supported activities.  
The detailed list of programme activities for direct targeting of women and youth 
63. 
is presented in the below.  
o  50% of enterprises supported with matching grant will be for women  
o  50% of enterprises supported by the programme will be for youth  
o  skill training will be reserved for women and youth  
o  women’s access to training offered by the programme will be ensured by 
offering trainings at the village level, with the exception of some technical 
training like those for para-vets that require a facility 
o  women and men will be both involved in the technical subjects of 
extension as well as community mobilization and group organization  
o  well-being and nutrition of women and children in particular will be 
improved through support to jubrakas (kitchen gardens) and nutrition 
awareness training by a nutrition teacher who will reside in the village for 
3 months  
o  women groups (80% women headed-households) will receive support for 
setting up farms to generate  - income and support food availability in 
villages which have the highest rates of malnutrition  
o  women groups will be supported to set up nurseries  
o  women and youth groups will be supported to set up businesses through 
matching grants with priority given to businesses that reduce pressure on 
natural resources such as production of green charcoal, manufacturing 
bricks, LPG refilling stations, etc.  
o  access to LPG and Gas stoves will to facilitated through linkages with MFIs 
for the poor and Community Investment Funds for women-headed and 
very poor households– this will save women’s labour and conserve trees.  
o  asset transfer to support livelihoods for women-headed households and 
the very poor will be provided through CIF  
o  women will be facilitated to form and where possible formalize Savings 
o 
and Credit Groups  
the inclusion of women and youth in forums formed for discussion on NRM 
will be ensured 
o  Women and men will receive GALS training to build confidence through 
developing a vision for their lives, increase awareness of gender roles in 
the households and communities, improve their capacity to negotiate 
needs and interests as well as to find innovative, gender-equitable 
solutions in livelihoods planning and value chain development. All 
programme staff will receive an orientation on GALS at the beginning of 
the programme to support the implementation of GALS and sensitize the 
staff to gender issues. 
28 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
o  The staff members trained on GALS will include the community 
development officers who will be responsible for disseminating these 
inputs at the community level, both directly and indirectly through young 
professionals and young extension agents. 
64. 
Implementation of the targeting strategies: SNRLP will conduct sensitization 
of implementers and policy makers to the strategic interests and needs of women, youth 
and pastoralists, quotas to ensure their representation of on programme-related 
decision-making bodies and committees and in programme–related activities. The M&E 
system will incorporate smallholder HH, agropastoralist, pastoralist, gender, youth 
disaggregated indicators. The NRLMPs will include socio economic details of each HH 
which will be used to determine their eligibility for programme support and also for 
tracking the changes in their socio-economic standards over the programme lifetime. 
The socio economic details in the NRLMP will include  
o  community capability index and participatory wealth ranking of all the 
households in the cluster;  
o  categorization of the households into the smallholder, agro pastoralist and 
o 
pastoralist categories;  
identification of women headed households and unemployed youth in the 
clusters; and  
o  outreach targets of the potential programme activities in the clusters 
according to the different target groups based on the PDR guidelines.  
o  The CDC/VDCs will ensure that the NRLIPs recommended by them for 
seed capital financing from SNRLP, comply with the targets set in the 
NRLMPs for inclusion of different target groups.  
o  The Community Development Teams will be responsible for monitoring the 
compliance of actual outreach to the targeted outreach to the different 
target groups.  
65.  Women and youth participation in community institutions will be improved 
through quotas for their participation in VDC and CDCs, NRM forums at different levels 
and different committees formed by these institutions. The range of measures for this 
purpose are as follows 
o  Women will constitute a minimum of 30% and youth will constitute a 
minimum of 30% of members of VDCs, interest groups and clusters. In 
addition women and youth sub-committees will support women and youth 
representatives in the clusters  
in case of under-representation in any forum or activity, concerned 
programme staff will be responsible for determining the causes and taking 
corrective measures  
the participation of women and youth in the development of the NRLMP 
and the reflection of their priorities will be ensured by programme staff  
the representation of women (50 % and youth (30 %) in NRM forums at 
locality, State and National level will be ensured.  
o 
o 
o 
o  15 % of committees will be women-led. 
Similarly, gender representation in programme management will be ensured 
66. 
through the following steps;  
o  Attempt to have 50 percent of programme staff as women  
o 
Include A Gender and Community Expert will at the CPCU to direct and 
support the mainstreaming of gender in the programme  
o 
(iii) Gender Specialists will be placed in each State Coordination Unit  
o  The TOR of all Staff will include responsibility for mainstreaming gender  
o  Community mobilization teams will comprise of one man and one woman  
o  Community Extension Workers will be 50 percent youth and 50 percent 
women   
29 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
o  50% of Young Professionals recruited by the programme to support 
community mobilization and women’s empowerment in the village will be 
women, 100 percent will be youth  
o  a Gender, Targeting & GALS orientation workshop will be held for all 
programme staff in Year 1 of the programme with the objective of kick-
starting the  development of Gender & Targeting Action Plans for each 
State  
Nutrition and food security strategy: Malnutrition in the project areas is firstly 
67. 
due to food insecurity and periods of hunger among the target population which needs to 
be addresses as a priority and then combined with nutrition awareness raising. The 
project’s nutrition and food security strategy is therefore foremost focused at increasing 
food production and income generation from sustainably managed and equitably 
governed natural resources securing access for more vulnerable groups. In addition to 
income generating activities, the project will increase food production and also bust the 
nutrition value of available food through: 
o  Mainstreaming a participatory diagnostic of food and nutrition security 
issues in the development process of NRLMP, including: 1) mapping of 
sources of food and the periodic/seasonal availability disaggregated by 
different food groups needed in a complete healthy family diet; and 2) 
identification of strategies for improving the food system in terms of 
availability and access to food including for vulnerable groups. These 
strategies and activities can be linked to the use of the landscape 
managed by the clusters/networks, improving local market exchange and 
the exchange between the different communities using the landscape.  
o  Securing access to dry season fodder, which has already been proven by 
BIRDP and SUSTAINs to expand animal milk production into the dry 
season and increase meet production. This will improve the access to 
animal proteins 
Increasing yields from field crops through improved cultivation techniques 
and land and water conservation structures and practices   
Improving access to water and technical assistance for crop production in 
particular for women's vegetable gardens (jubraka, where also some field 
crops and animal fodder will be produced), which combined with nutrition 
awareness raising contribute to the improvement of family diets.  
o 
o 
o  Providing support to women saving and credit clubs to build capacities to 
buffer against periods with food shortage and engage in small production 
and income generating activities such as small animal production (poultry, 
goats and picks) 
Programme components 
The programme has been designed with two technical components, each with two 
2.5 
68. 
subcomponents, and a programme management component.   
Component 1: Scaling up community based NR management and businesses  
Component 1 will focus at consolidating and upscaling good practices for 
69. 
empowering communities and networks or clusters of communities and build their 
capacities in land-use planning and NR governance and management, that takes into 
account climate change risks. The communities targeted will include mobile 
(pastoralists), semi-mobile (agro-pastoralists) as well as settled communities of small 
crop farmers. Subcomponent 1.1 will support communities in the creation of a 
strengthened village and inter-village framework for land-use planning, negotiation of 
resources governance arrangements and joint resources management. Within this 
framework subcomponent 1.2 will support NRM and interest groups in implementing 
30 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
livelihood investment plans to increase their resilience and benefit streams derived from 
NRs, production systems and related small businesses. 
Subcomponent 1.1: Community mobilization and NR and land-use management 
planning 
70. 
This subcomponent will support an estimated 1,000 Village Development 
Committees (VDCs), other relevant community organizations and networks or clusters of 
VDCs. The objective is to strengthen their organisation in Cluster Development 
Committees or Network Executive Committees (CDC/NECs) and their land and NR 
governance systems and institutions. Support will be provided for: mobilizing VDCs and 
CDC/NECs sharing NRs in common ecosystems and with common interests in addressing 
governance and management issues; participatory development of NR and land-use 
management plans (NRLMPs) for village networks or clusters; development of co-
management arrangement for the "open access" common areas outside traditional 
village managed land (hema); land registration; mitigation and resolution of conflict over 
access to and use of NR; and the formulation of livelihoods investment plans (LIPs).  
71.  Mobilizing VDCs and CDC/NECs: This activity will consolidate and scale up the 
development of community institutions already started in previous and on-going IFAD 
projects. Communities already supported would have VDCs and some have been 
organized in clusters for the development and implementation of Community Livelihood 
Adaptation and Sustainability Plans (CLASP – IAMDP) and Cluster Adaptation Plans (CAP 
- LMRP). These clusters, however, tend to be project driven in their formation and need 
consolidation and formalisation and there is a need to revisit if they adequately cover 
common ecosystems and needs for addressing NR governance and management issues. 
To strengthen these clusters, there is much to learn from the good practice developed 
and implemented under the Butana BIRD Project, where NECs have been formed as a 
bottom up process defined by the communities and starting with a few pilots. These 
have now been scaled both in size of each network, including new villages and hamlets 
allowing for a comprehensive landscape approach, and in new networks formed. The 
activities and actions they take on to solve common issues go well beyond what the 
project initially supported (which included Climate Resilience Village Adaptation Plans). 
This shows their empowerment and that they are fully embracing that by working 
together they can more effectively pursue their common development aspirations. 
 In order to facilitate the development of VDCs for new communities and 
72. 
consolidate existing VDCs and initiate familiarisation and discussions on the programme’s 
objectives and interventions, the programme (Gender Officers at state level backed by 
the Senior Community Mobilisation and Gender Expert at the CPU) will mobilise a general 
assembly comprising all households in the community. The assembly will decide on (or 
reconfirm/adjust) general functions, number of members (around 10-12), and elect or 
reconfirm the VDC members including youth and at least 30% women. The VDC will in 
consultation with the assembly form subcommittees as needed and as the VDC activities 
evolve. These could among others be on water, forest, rangeland and livestock/pastoral 
groups, farmland and crop production, innovative technologies and small businesses, or 
women, youth and vulnerable groups subcommittees.      
Departing from an initial regional/State-level mapping of socio-ecological units 
73. 
(such as wadis), assessments of NR governance issues and identification of intervention 
strategies, the programme will facilitate consultations with VDCs for the development or 
consolidation of CDC/NECs. Already existing CDC/NECs will be taken into account as well 
as success factors from the Butana best practice. The programme will mobilise a general 
assembly at the socio-ecological unit level comprising all members of the concerned 
VDCs. The assembly will decide on (or reconfirm/adjust) general functions of the 
CDC/NECs, representation of VDCs and different groups (elder, youth, women, nomadic 
pastoralist communities) in the CDC/NEC, and elect or reconfirm CDC/NEC members 
31 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
including youth, elderly, at least 30% women and when relevant representatives for 
mobile pastoralist communities. The members of the CDC/NECs will elect a three 
member leadership team comprising a Chairperson, a secretary and a treasurer. The 
CDC/NEC will in consultation with the cluster or network assembly form subcommittees 
as needed and as the cluster/network activities evolve. These could in addition to the 
ones mentioned for the village level be on land-use mapping, resources governance and 
registration of community rangeland and forest land, and conflict resolution. In addition 
the CDC/NECs should establish two more crosscutting committees namely a cluster 
advocacy and communications committee (CACC - see component 2) and a Cluster 
Procurement Committee.. The programme will aim to meet the target for VDC and 
CDC/NEC development during the first four years of implement to allow sufficient time 
for capacitating these institutions before the end of the programme. The broad targets 
for the development of VDC, CDC/NECs is presented below;  
Details 
Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  Year 6 
Table XX – Outreach of VDC and CDC/NECs 
- No of CDCs/NECs 
- No of VDCs 
- No of groups (details follow) 
30 
200 
500 
45 
300 
1,000 
60 
400 
2,500 
15 
100 
1,000 
500 
Total 
150 
1,000 
5,500 
The VDCs and CDC/NEC will be supported in their formalisation by registering as 
74. 
voluntary organisations and opening a bank account. The members will be trained on the 
principles of land-use planning, NR governance and integrated NRM practices, 
transparency, accountability and organisational management, resource mobilisation and 
reporting, and investment in cluster/network and community development activities. 
Facilitation will also be provided to raise awareness, and apply tools for implementing 
specific targeting strategies that ensures representation and participation of youth, 
women, vulnerable households and nomadic pastoralist communities in subcommittees, 
interest groups.  
The Senior Community Mob and Gender Expert at the CPCU will anchor the 
75. 
development of the community development manual including inputs from other experts 
in the CPCU and the SPCU teams. The inputs from the states will be sourced through 
written contributions as well as through a series of community development manual 
development discussion sessions during the formulation stage. The manual will highlight 
the variation in the community development approach in the different regions if any. At 
the State level the Gender officer will anchor the community mobilisation activities. The 
State technical teams will train the CDTs on the community mobilisation manual and the 
CDTs will further train the YPs. The CDTs will initiate the VDC development in the 
community level and the YPs will follow up on the process in coordination the CDTs. The 
State technical teams will oversee undertake regular monitoring visits to ensure effective 
mobilisation of the VDCs. 
76. 
Development of NRLMPs: The programme will support the CDC/NECs in 
conducting a participatory community and inter community planning process leading to 
the formulation and ownership of a NRLMP. The NRMLP will provide a framework for the 
communities to address NR governance issues, invest in their NR and derived 
livelihoods, and enhance their food and nutrition security and resilience. In addition to 
village assemblies and VDCs, representatives of Locality governments, native 
administrations and NGOs covering the target communities should be involved in the 
process. The process will aim at addressing governance and land-use issues related to 
forest, range and crop land as well as areas important for protection of water resources, 
areas adequate for rainwater harvesting and related catchments. Special attention will 
be given to livestock routs, where relevant, in order to increase mutual benefits and 
avoid conflicts between the cluster or network communities and pastoralists and agro-
pastoralists passing through their area. 
32 
77. 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
The NRLMP formulation process will include:  
o 
review of eventual existing CLASP or CAPs and progress in their 
implementation and identify gaps to be addressed in inclusiveness, 
sustainability of interventions, landscape and NR governance coverage, and 
mainstreaming food and nutrition security and climate change resilience in NR 
management and livelihood investment activities;  
o  mapping existing land and NR uses and users including women, youth and 
mobile pastoralists and ensure all are included in the process;  
o  assessing climate change risks and livelihood vulnerabilities combining 
analysis of historical trends and future scenarios with local knowledge;  
o  analysing the main degradation risks, related drivers, and access limitations 
for vulnerable groups associated with current land-uses; 
o  mapping of sources of food and the periodic/seasonal availability 
o 
o 
disaggregated by different food groups needed in a complete healthy family 
diet and analysis of causes of food shortage;  
formulation of a vision for future land-uses and NR governance and 
management at the cluster/network and community levels;  
identifying and prioritizing interventions and investments for improving 
productive and sustainable use of NRs, improving food and nutrition security 
and livelihood resilience and exploring new opportunities for small businesses 
and linking the different land-uses in integrated farming, food and NR use 
systems;  
o  mapping of existing native administration practices and formulation of by-laws 
and regulations for community land and NR use, that will support the 
implementation of the vision of the NRLMP and guide investments;  
formulation of indicators, targets and timelines and monitoring and follow up 
mechanism for the implementation of the NRLMP;  
o 
o  Detailed socio-economic profiling of the cluster/network including  
o  community capability index and participatory wealth ranking of all the 
households in the cluster;  
o  categorization of the households into the smallholder, agro pastoralist 
o 
and pastoralist categories;  
identification of women headed households and unemployed youth in 
the clusters; and  
o  outreach targets of the potential programme activities in the clusters 
according to the different target groups based on the PDR guidelines.  
o  adoption of the NRLMP as a live document by the village and VDC assemblies. 
SNRLP will use LDCF/GEF funds to support the participatory climate change 
vulnerability assessment, capacity building in managing climate change risks and 
identification of adaptation and resilience enhancing activities as part of the NRLMP 
formulations.  
In the formulation and implementation process of the NRLMPs attention will be 
78. 
given to strengthening linkages between local community institutions and native 
administration and local and state government institutions that should have a role in 
facilitating land-use governance and NRM at a more macro level. For local governments 
(Localities) the focus will be on strengthening their role in facilitating linkages between 
communities and the State governments around land and NR policy issues and 
development services but also in facilitating linkages between communities across 
Localities.  
Development of co-management arrangement for "open access" common 
79. 
areas: These linkages and involvement of the macro level is particular relevant in 
regulating access and use of natural resources in the "open access" common areas 
including part of livestock corridors, rangeland and forest areas outside traditional village 
managed land (Hema). These areas will not be captured by the NRLMPs and are highly 
33 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
complex because of the many different users and may require conflict resolution centers. 
There are a few initial experiences with rehabilitation and establishment of co-
management arrangements with surrounding villages of some of these areas, but 
institutionalised governance systems does not exist.  
The programme will facilitate that the capacities build in the clusters/networks on 
80. 
NR governance and management are used to further develop and implement co-
management  of common “open access” areas. Joint land and NR use governance and 
management plans will be developed between CDC/NECs and other mobile users of the 
areas and clear management responsibilities will be identified and assigned by the 
relevant State governments. These responsibilities could either be assigned to 
community networks or clusters or to Localities, native administrations or the State 
government. The programme will also support a mechanism for monitoring the 
adherence to the plan and a revenue collection and reinvestment plan for ensuring the 
long term sustainable use. At the same time the programme will under component 2 
support that these arrangements are institutionalized at higher levels of governance and 
the functionality of the conflict resolution centres will be supported and strengthened. 
81. 
Land registration: To support the institutionalisation of the NRLMPs the 
programme will support the CDC/NECs in having them authorized and registered by the 
respective State governments and incorporated into State-level land use zoning and 
planning frameworks (see component 2). Capitalizing on the 2015 Range and Pastures 
law, where appropriate, the pastoral communities and CDC/NECs will be supported in the 
demarcation and registration of livestock routes, village hema, communal rangelands 
and community forest land. This will secure their assigned user rights by the State 
government. SNRLP will use LDCF/GEF funds to partly support land registration 
activities. 
NR Conflict resolution mechanism: In the formulation of the NRLMP attention 
82. 
will be given to identify the traditional and existing roles of native administration in 
supporting the governance of land and NRM in particular in dispute and conflict 
resolution. Needs for adjusting and strengthening this framework in order to implement 
the NRLMPs will be identified. On this basis the programme will support the 
strengthening of rules and bylaws and conflict resolution procedures and institutions 
including escalation steps, roles and responsibilities, and training of mediators and 
community institution members so they can fulfil their roles. The programme will also 
support reinforcement of conflict resolution centers established by the previous WSRM 
programme along three stock routes in Kordofan and eventually support the 
establishment of new centers in relation to the co-management of "open access" 
common areas which may include other stock routes.    
Formulation of livelihoods investment plans (LIPs): Based on the land-use 
83. 
and NR governance and management framework and priority interventions identified in 
the NRLMP different NRM and interest groups will be formed at village and cross village 
level who would like to come forward and propose ideas for LIPs. Depending on the area 
of investment and in order to increase the involvement and benefits to women, youth 
and vulnerable households, the groups may be characterized as the following types: i) 
Village Savings and Credit Groups (VSCGs); ii) NR Livelihood groups (NRLGs); and iii) 
Vulnerable Women’s Groups (VWGs). They will start as informal groups but as they 
evolve the programme may support them in registering as voluntary organisations or 
producer associations and opening bank accounts. According to needs and interests they 
will all be offered training in: simple financial literacy including number record keeping, 
budgeting and financial planning and management of cash flows; and organisation 
management. They will also be offered additional training on topics of general relevance 
such as climate change risks and measures to build community and household resilience; 
healthy diets and nutrition also supporting family resilience on which basic training has 
already been conducted during the development of the NRLMPs.  
34 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
VSCGs: Around 3000 VSCGs will be supported building on the positive experience 
84. 
from previous and current IFAD projects and involving 70% women. The groups will be 
supported from the beginning of the engagement with communities in parallel to the 
formulation of the NRLMPs. In addition to the training already mentioned they will be 
trained in saving and credit management, and (when maturity and willingness allows) 
how to organise into VSCGs associations and access and manage capital from micro 
finance institutions (MFI). When the VSCGs have built sufficient capital, they will be 
supported in the development of LIPs for small investments in individual or collective 
businesses related to the sustainable use of NR and increasing the resilience of their 
livelihoods by diversifying and increasing productivity. 
The VSCGs will be neighbourhood groups with an average of 20 members from 
85. 
the same neighbourhood joining voluntarily based on group formation guidelines. Only 
one member per household can be a member. In the first year, only women’s VSCGs will 
be developed in a community as there is more community support for women’s VSCGs 
during the initial period. Men’s groups will be developed from the second year depending 
on interest. 
NRLGs: Around 3000 NRLGs will be supported expected to involve at least 30% 
86. 
women and coming together around common NR management and production interests. 
These groups may be business or non-business oriented and include VDC/CDC/NEC 
subcommittees, youth groups, mobile pastoralist groups and groups for forestry 
development, water management, provision of machinery services, livestock or crop 
production. Under the leadership of the VDCs and CDC/NECs initial ideas for proposals 
will be prioritised and the programme will support the groups in the development of 
LIPs.  
VWGs: Based on participatory wealth and vulnerability ranking exercises, the 
87. 
programme will support VDCs in reaching out to women heading households or women 
from other vulnerable households with limited capacities to be economically productive 
and encourage them to form VWGs. An effort will also be done to reach out to mobile 
pastoralist and where relevant internal and cross boarder displaced communities to 
facilitate the formation of VWGs. Around 840 VWGs will be supported in developing LIP 
proposals for micro businesses and activities that will improve their nutrition security and 
resilience of their livelihoods.   
The Senior Community Development and Gender Officer in the CPCU will develop 
88. 
a VSCG development manual based on inputs from the states and other projects. The 
Gender expert in the SPCU will oversee VSCG development in the States. The CDTs will 
sensitise, present the VSCG formation guidelines and initiate the group formation 
process in the communities. The YPs will provide practical guidance to the community 
during the group formation process.  In coordination with the CDTs the YPs will identify, 
train and mentor two NR livelihood facilitators (NLF) – one male and one female, in each 
community. The NLFs will be a part of the cluster local extension network. One of their 
responsibilities will be institutional support to the VSCGs (and others) by facilitating 
group level financial transactions, assisting VSCGs bookkeeping and reporting and 
providing linkages to input suppliers and markets where relevant.   
Livelihood investment plans: All LIPs should demonstrate that the proposed 
89. 
activities and investments comply with the following eligibility criteria: alignment with 
the NRLMP including its NR governance and management framework assigning land-
uses; beneficiary co-financing; social inclusiveness (generation of benefits to women, 
youth or vulnerable households); no duplication of previous similar support to the same 
group; supporting sustainable use of NR; increasing livelihood resilience and nutrition 
security for vulnerable groups; and biophysical, engineering, economic, and 
organisational feasibility.  
35 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
The targets for NRLIP and LIP development is presented below. SNRLP will aim to 
90. 
meet the target NRLMP and LIP development during the first four years of 
implementation to allow sufficient time for their full implementation before the end of the 
programme.;  
Table XX: Breakdown of NRLMPs and LIPs to be financed 
Details 
- No of groups 
- No of NRLMPs 
- No of LIPs 
Year 1  Year 2  Year 3 
2,500 
1,000 
80 
40 
2,500 
1,000 
500 
20 
250 
Year 4  Year 5  Year 6 
1,000 
500 
10 
1,250 
500 
Total 
5,500 
150 
5,500 
Mobilisation of LIPs: The NR related enterprises activities identified in the NRLMPs 
91. 
will be widely announced in the clusters or networks and LIPs will be invited requesting 
financial support (TA, seed capital, etc) for adopting these enterprises. The programme 
will provide technical support to the groups to prepare and submit LIPs.  
92. 
LIP contents: The LIPs will describe the proposed enterprise and will explain:  
  how the activity will address specific NR related challenges in the cluster; ii) 
 
how the activity will be managed;  
steps to be taken for compliance with the cluster level NR governance and 
management framework set up in the NRLMPs;  
  benefits from the activity including expected financial returns and plans for 
distribution and reinvestment of the profits  
schedule for the recovery of the seed capital at the level of the eligible entity.  
 
LIP screening at cluster and community level: Groups will prepare and submit the 
93. 
LIPs to the VDC. The VDC in coordination the CDC will screen and submit the LIPs to 
SNRLP along with a recommendation letter requesting SNRLP to provide seed capital 
support to the enterprise. Screening criteria will include:  
  quality and character of the group and the commitment of the members to 
the success of the enterprise;  
  preparedness of the group to implement the enterprise successfully;  
  practicality of the enterprise, risks involved, mitigation steps, market potential 
and marketing arrangements; 
institutional and technical training and capacity building needs of the group;  
 
  adherence to the enterprise list and the enterprise outreach plans of the CDC;  
  nature of steps proposed for using NR in compliance of with the NR 
governance and management framework of the cluster;  
  quality of plans and arrangements in place for the reinvestment of a part of 
the returns from the enterprise in NR improvement activities;  
  verification of the availability of co-financing funds;  
  need for linkages with partner financial institutions.  
LIP verification by Community Development Officers (CDOs): The CDCs will 
94. 
submit all the screened LIPs in a cluster to the relevant CDOs with a recommendation 
letter requesting SNRLP for seed capital financing for the enterprise. The CDOs will carry 
out verification visit to the community and validate the recommendation of the CDCs. 
The CDOs will forward the verified NRLIPs along with a validation report to the SPCU. 
LIP approval by review committees at SPCU and CPCU: The SPCUs will constitute 
95. 
a LIP review committee to assess and screen the verified LIPs at the State level. The 
review committee will comprise the  
  SPCU coordinator,  
  The members of the SPCU technical team  
  Representatives of partner financial institutions 
  One technical expert as external reviewer 
36 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
The committee will initially meet every month for final screening and approval of 
96. 
seed capital financing for the LIPs. LIPs which are not selected will be referred back to 
the clusters through the CDOs for resubmission after fine tuning. The review committee 
will submit the approved LIPs to the SPCU and the SPCU will forward the approved LIPs 
to the CPCU. The CPCU will also constitute a central LIP review committee which will 
review and provide final approval to LIPs for seed capital financing. The members of the 
CPCU will comprise the following 
  CPCU coordinator,  
  The members of the CPCU technical team  
  Representatives of partner financial institutions 
  1-2 technical expert as external reviewers 
The central review committee will meet monthly and provide final approval to 
97. 
LIPs for seed capital financing.  
98. 
Procurement of assets: The approved LIPs will be directed to the procurement 
teams in the CPCU or the SPCUs based on amount of seed financing and procurement 
method involved. As much as possible the Cluster Procurement Committee will be 
involved in the procurement process with strong oversight from procurement team in the 
SPCU. 
Subcomponent 1.2: Implementation of NR-based Livelihood Investment Plans.  
99. 
This subcomponent will support different interest and NRM groups in 
implementing their LIPs developed under subcomponent 1.1 and contributing to the 
implementation of the NRLMP. LIPs activities will be eligible within the following NR 
related investment areas, and cover replication of successful business models and NR 
management arrangements from previous and on-going projects as well as new 
innovations:  
100.  Rangeland and livestock rearing: This will include: training of community 
rangeland guards and other community members in sustainable rangeland management 
and rehabilitation and protection of buffer areas for particular dry years; fencing of areas 
for seed production and collection; rangeland demarcation and rehabilitation through 
seed broadcasting, planting or seeding of native fodder shrub trees, and small rainwater 
harvesting structures including earth bunds and pits; introduction of hay baling and 
construction of storage facilities for dry season fodder; livestock rearing and training of 
youth in community para veterinary services and provision of start-up vet kits; small 
businesses related to processing and selling of livestock products. 
101.  Forestland conservation and related businesses: This will include: supporting 
VDCs and CDC/NECs in awareness raising on community forest conservation and 
management for community and individual benefits (forest fruits and medicine plants 
and dry season fodder availability); organisation and training of youth forest guards 
combined with establishment of brick making or gas refilling micro businesses reducing 
pressure on forest wood and generating economic incentives for forest guarding in terms 
of incomes from brick making and gas refilling services; Facilitating access to gas stoves 
via revolving or micro finance schemes managed or facilitated by the CDC/NECs; 
Training, establishment and operation of community or individual tree nurseries; small 
businesses related to processing and marketing of non-timber forest products. 
102.  The LPG stoves and the cylinders will be sourced from LPG dealers/agencies in 
the nearby towns. Micro finance schemes for cylinders have already shown to be 
successful and are offered by MFIs. In the case of more vulnerable women and their 
families who cannot access credits a cimmunity manged revolving fund will support their 
adoption (see para 106 iv) The community procurement committee will select the dealer. 
Partnerships will be developed between the LPG dealers and local youth as agents (youth 
37 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
enterprise) in the clusters, to supply refilled cylinders and after sales services to the gas 
users.  
103.  Catchment and water point management: This will include: developing a cluster 
or network level framework for Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) 
including a hydrological model with current and future water supply and demand 
scenarios for wadis, instalment of rain gauges and streamflow monitoring for 
community-based water resources monitoring and periodic calibration of the hydrological 
model, and identification of topographical optimal placements and types of water 
harvesting structures; feasibility studies and construction of water yards and hafirs 
(include fencing and inlets and outlets structures/pipes, wells, solar panel pumps and 
drinking troughs for animals away from the water points) or other community water 
harvesting infrastructures including water spreading and diversion along selected wadi 
systems; training of youth as water guards for management of water points and 
protection of the catchment area/buffer zone; training and facilitation for the 
establishment of water management committees and governance and operation schemes 
under VDCs or CDC/NECs including fee collection and reinvestment in further expanding 
water harvesting and distribution infrastructure (e.g. pipes and solar pumps) and 
coverage of labour, O&M and depreciation costs; development of water management 
manual with detailed guidelines and rules.  
104.  Cropland development and climate adaptation in farming practices: This will 
include: organisation of women in farmer field schools (FFS) groups for experimental 
learning in jubrakas cultivation of vegetable, fodder and other crops, the use of climate 
adapted soil and water management techniques, intercropping, tree windbreaks with 
nitrogen fixing fodder trees species or other species with food or economic value, and 
integrated pest management (IPM); investment in the establishment of community 
jubrakas including fencing and water source using solar pumps (partly financed from 
LDCF/GEF resources) and complementing with nutrition training and exchange of 
nutritious recipes using locally produced food; training crop producer groups in the 
introduction of trees, soil and water management practices, IPM and drought resilient 
varieties in open field farming; and construction of small soil management and water 
harvesting structures e.g. stone or earth bunds and planting terraces; small businesses 
related to processing and marketing of crop products and provision of quality seeds 
inputs, bio pesticides and machinery services.      
105.  Stock routes management and livelihoods of pastoralists: This will include: 
Training of conflict mediators and establishment of conflict resolution centers in conflight 
prone areas along the stock routs (SR); establishment and management of water points 
outside Hemas including water management committees with representation of all SR 
users; training of young community para veterinarians and establishment of veterinary 
services centers with access for mobile pastoralists; organisation of Pastoral Field 
Schools (PFS) for capacity building and investments with pastoralists in their livelihoods; 
and nutrition training for pastoralist women and facilitation of exchange of food and 
recipe among pastoralist, agropastoralist and smallholder farmers along the routes. 
106.  Financing for LIP implementation: The funding provided by the programme 
for the implementation of LIPs will be determined under the following four ownership and 
investment types:  
i. 
100% programme financing of technical assistance (TA) and 80% seed 
investment capital for public or common good investments managed by 
CDC/NECs or VDCs in partnership with NRLGs covering fixed assets, tools, 
machinery and equipment, essential civil work (e.g. hafirs or water yards, 
community storage facilities, forestry related enterprises). Beneficiaries will 
contribute with assignment of land, their time, labour and initial operation and 
maintenance costs until fee cost recovery is operational;  
38 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Up to 80% programme financing of TA, and 70% seed investment capital (100% 
for pastoralist enterprises) for common good investments for group enterprises 
managed by NRLGs, VSCGs or VWGs covering fixed assets, tools, machinery and 
equipment, essential civil work (e.g. brick making machines for youth groups, soil 
and water management and terraces works for crop producer groups, women's 
groups community jubrakas receiving for investments in fencing and water supply 
system). Beneficiaries will contribute with the remaining 30% investment cost, 
assignment of land, their time, labour and operation costs;      
Programme financing of TA and 70% of seed investment capital for small start-up 
inputs for individual household owned production activities supported through 
NRLGs or VSCGs groups, where beneficiaries will cover the investment cost (e.g. 
individual jubrakas where women receives training and seeds for the first year 
but no fencing or water supply system); and  
Seed capital of 100% to establish Community Investment Funds (CIF) managed 
by VDCs as revolving funds in particular supporting vulnerable women organized 
in VWGs who cannot meet requirements for accessing micro finance institutions 
(e.g. gas stoves and cylinders given to women in a VWG, who repay to the VDC, 
who revolves the funds to benefit women in another VWG, small livestock which 
will be repaid in livestock offspring revolved to other women). Seed capital 
investment planned over the programme life is presented below. These figures 
are subject to changes during implementation as the actual mix of items and the 
quantities will be determined by the communities and individuals based on annual 
planning. 
107.  The beneficiary contribution for remaining investment costs and working capital 
can be from own savings, borrowings from the internal capital of VSCGs and other 
sources of finance mobilized by the beneficiary. Building on experiences and partnerships 
achieved in other IFAD supported projects, SNRLP will select partnering financial 
institutions (PFI) and facilitate beneficiaries’ linkages to them so they can eventually 
meet their beneficiary contribution through access to credit. The SNRLP will provide 
training and capacity building support to the PFIs as well as support to develop their 
infrastructure and reduce the cost of delivery in the programme villages. 
108.  The PFIs will provide the full range of their services in the programme supported 
communities including support to other non-SNRLP related activities. They will provide 
savings deposit services enabling the programme supported groups to deposit their 
surplus funds in savings accounts. The PFIs will be involved in the appraisal of relevant 
LIPs and will be encouraged to partner with the beneficiaries from the beginning to 
39 
No of No ofAv. totalSeedBeneficiaryOwnershipEnterprise typegroupsHHinvestmentcapitalcontributionEligible activitiesCDC/VDC- Water supply from hafirs100        1,500       80,000       80%20%earthworks, water point- Water yard management50           750          65,000       80%20%borehole, solar pump, water point, - Storage facility management300        1,500       3,000          80%20%small storage construction- Forestry enterprises 195        4,875       3,000          80%20%agroforestry, plantations in common areas- Machinery services150        1,500       10,000       80%20%tractor, chisel, conservation agriculture toolsNRLG/hh- Crop production785        17,475    3,750          70%30%cons. tillage, tolerant seeds, bunds, shelter belts- IPM services150        450          150             70%30%sprayer, gloves, protective suit, etc.- Animal health services150        450          200             70%30%drugs, syringe and vet equipment- Fodder production450        13,500    3,750          70%30%seeds, inputs, fencing, land prep, irrigation- Pastoralist enterprises400        24,000    5,000          100%0%tools and equipment- Youth group enterprises280        4,200       3,000          70%30%tools, equipment, business premises dev.VSCG/hh- Women group farms 150        3,000       2,000          70%30%seeds, inputs, fencing, land prep, irrigation- Jubraka production 1,000     20,000    120             70%30%seeds, inputs, fencing, land prep, irrigation- Gas stoves 500        10,000    55               0%0%gas cylinders; financed by PFIsWIG- Gas stoves to WIG480        9,600       55               100%100%gas cylinders- Jubraka production by WIG360        7,200       120             100%100%seeds, inputs, fencing, land prep, irrigationTotal5,500     120,000   
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
finance the implementation of the LIPs. The successful NR based enterprises initiated 
through seed capital support will meet their additional financing needs for growth and 
scaling up through the PFIs and beneficiary savings. SNRLP will provide cash flow 
management training to the beneficiaries focusing on reinvestment of returns from 
microenterprises for grow the enterprises. 
109.  Partnership with MFIs: SNRLP will select partnering financial institutions (PFI) 
that are ready to provide access to credit to beneficiaries to help them meet the 
beneficiary contribution needed to access seed capital financing.  
110.  Selection of PFIs: Two broad approaches will be explored for developing 
partnerships with the financial institutions.  
-  The first approach will consist of selection of PFIs in coordination with the CBS-
MFU and SMDC, which serve as apex institutions involved in the refinancing and 
providing technical assistance to MFIs. These institutions are also responsible for 
following up on commercial banks to devote 12% of their portfolio to microfinance 
activities. In this approach, SNRLP will select the partner MFIs jointly with the 
apex institution with the commitment of a dedicated refinancing package from the 
apex institutions for supporting NR related activities by the MFIs in the 
programme villages. This approach will be followed particularly if the SPCUs face 
difficulty in mobilizing partnering financial institutions at the state level either due 
to the refinancing uncertainties or the risks involved lending.  
- 
In the second approach SNRLP will directly partnered with specific MFIs operating 
in the programme States based on the willingness of these MFIs to support the 
programme related activities, their past history of partnering with other IFAD co-
financed projects, financial capabilities and reputation. 
111.  At least two PFIs will be selected in each programme State. Priority will be given 
to developing partnership with ABSUMI given the history of partnership and investments 
of other IFAD projects in the development of ABSUMI and its presence in seven out of 
the nine states. Partnerships are also expected to develop with other MFIs such as the 
Sudanese Rural Development Company, Ibdaa microfinance company and different State 
MFIs. MFIs interested in partnering with the programme will submit partnership 
proposals to the programme, presented along the following outline;   
  overall background information about the ownership, management structure, 
products and delivery methodology, implementation arrangements, 
partnerships, external funds flows and financial performance of the MFI 
 
the products and the methodology that will be offered by these MFI. The 
nature of contractual arrangements to be supported in order to finance the 
clients should be clearly defined along with the profit margins and profit-
sharing arrangements. 
  The overall engagement plans of the shortlisted MFIs in the programme 
villages including NR-related enterprise co-financing loans, crop production 
loans, other credit products, potential saving services and insurance service 
facilitation.  
  Service delivery arrangements including the details of the branch structures, 
field visits and village level service delivery, monitoring and repayment 
collection methodology that will be adopted.  
  Projections of the growth in outreach of the services of the MFI in and around 
the programme villages over the next 3 to 5 years.  
40 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
  Financial plan with projections of growth in the portfolio, operations costs, 
revenue and profitability and credit performance in terms of repayment rate 
and portfolio at risk to be achieved over 3-5 years.  
  Volume of portfolio and operations financing that will be required in order to 
fund the growth in outreach, the sources of such financing, infrastructure 
requirements and human resource additions and nature of technical 
assistance, training and capacity building required for achieving the outreach 
targets. 
112.  SNRLP in coordination with CBS-MFU and SMDC will review the proposals and 
select the PFIs based on the following criteria  
  wide geographical presence across different states and across multiple 
programme localities  
 
implementation the full range of savings and credit services in the programme 
villages as relevant and not confining these services only to the programme 
supported NR related activities  
  prior experience in successfully delivering loans in rural areas,  
  high levels of internal liquidity or existing partnership with refinancing sources 
such as CBS and SMDC that can generate funds for financing target group 
farmers 
  Flexible and less bureaucratic decision-making process regarding the adoption 
and implementation of fine-tuned crop production loan products and 
methodologies  
  Experience of partnerships with IFAD projects and understanding of IFAD 
project policies and procedures  
  Expanding rural portfolio with strong financial performance 
  Presence of clear organisational strategy and commitment to developing crop 
production financing portfolio 
  Availability of sufficient infrastructure and staff resources to reach between 
500-1,000 clients in select programme target villages without any 
infrastructure or operations support from the programme  
  Low interest rate relative to other potential partners 
113.  The services of the PFIs in the programme clusters will not be confined to the 
programme supported enterprises. The PFIs will offer the full range of their savings and 
credit products to the communities. These activities will be carried out directly by the 
PFIs through their credit officers without the involvement of the programme. The groups 
developed by the programme can access the other credit services of the PFIs either 
before or after the seed capital financed programme. Most of the other activities 
financed by the PFIs are expected to be in the area of financing small trading activities, 
crop production and other household enterprises. 
114.  Support to the PFIs: SNRLP will provide training and capacity building support to 
the MFIs as well as support to develop their infrastructure and reduce the cost of 
delivery in the programme villages. Training and capacity building will be in the form of 
enterprise development training, exposure trips and technical support to develop specific 
41 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
products to support the NR-related enterprise loans. Infrastructure support will cover 
cost of establishing of rural branch/unit e.g. development of branch premises, furnishing 
the offices, procuring office furniture and equipment, etc. It will also include technology 
support such as strengthening the MIS and loan tracking systems, adoption of payment 
systems, mobile banking and agent banking services as promoted by CBS. In rare cases, 
for high performance PFIs, SNRLP may consider the supply of vehicles and motorbikes to 
help expand their rural outreach. Their business plans should clearly indicate that the 
revenue generated from the rural loans over 5 to 6 year period can bear the costs of 
replacement of the vehicle at the end of its life. SNRLP will consider reducing the cost of 
delivery of MFIs by providing operations support to cover upto 20% of the operations 
costs (fuel, salaries, stationery, communication, etc) of the MFIs for delivering their 
services in the programme villages. The development of the small groups by the 
programme to which the MFIs are linked, will also be considered as a part of the 
operations cost support to the MFIs. 
115.  Linking groups to the PFIs: The SPCU will forward the LIPs which require credit 
support from PFIs (upto 30% of project costs) for credit appraisal and approval. The PFIs 
will mostly follow Islamic lending practices, mainly murabaha methodology for disbursing 
the loans. In this methodology the PFI will buy the items financed by the loan and sell 
these to the clients after adding a mark-up referred to as the profit margin. To execute 
this modality the cluster procurement committee will inform the PFI about the vendor 
selected by it to supply the items that are financed by the loan. The profit margin for 
these loans is expected to range between 20 to 24% per annum repayable over 1 to 2 
years. However, since the loans from the PFIs will not exceed 30% of the cost of 
investment of the seed capital financed enterprises, the effective rate of interest for the 
borrower is expected to be around 5-7%. The PFI can choose to sign the loan agreement 
either with the group or directly with the individual beneficiaries. All loans will be 
delivered against group guarantee mechanism whereby in the failure of an individual to 
repay the other members will collectively repay the loan. 
116.  Business development support to NR related enterprises: SNRLP will 
support enterprise training and business development activities in the clusters or 
networks in order to develop the capacity of the groups and individuals to implement the 
enterprises successfully. SNRLP will engage consultants and partner with other 
development partners e.g. ILO and UNIDO, and NGOs, to conduct training of trainers 
targeting the members for the Community Development Teams (CDT) comprising  
the Community Development Officers (CDO),  
 
  Young professionals (YPs),  
  Extension resource persons in the communities 
  The credit officers of the PFIs  
117.  Where necessary, the private sector input suppliers and marketing partners will 
also be capacitated to offer business development services to the target group. 
118.  The CDTs will then cascade these training by training the groups. The YPs 
stationed in the clusters will be the focal points for follow-up and in consultation. They 
will  
 
facilitate partnership development between the CDC/NEC/VDC and the 
small groups 
  assist the CDC/VDCs and groups to adequately plan and reinvest the 
returns from NR improvement activities 
  provide technical assistance to the groups on subjects such as savings 
mobilization, business planning, cash flow management, technical aspects 
of the enterprise, market linkages, book keeping and reporting.  
link the programme supported enterprises to the private sector driven 
inputs supply and crop and livestock marketing services of IAMDP and 
LMRP as relevant.  
 
42 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
119.  Supervision and reporting: The YPs and extension resource persons will assist the 
VDCs to prepare quarterly reports on the progress of the enterprises supported through 
seed capital financing. Based on the details of these reports the CDOs conduct regular 
monitoring of the programme supported enterprises. The technical team in the SPCU will 
also be responsible for monitoring these enterprises during the field visits. 
120.  Engagement of village youth and young professionals: To support extension 
services to VDCs, CDC/NECs and the various NR and common interest groups and to 
increase opportunities for youth, the SNRLP will scale up the good experiences of the 
BIRDP in engaging youth in supporting programme activities. Two different groups of 
youth will be engaged. One group will be young people from the programme supported 
villages selected by the village assembly who will be trained as extension resource 
persons in the different activities prioritized in their NRLMPs and LIPs.  
121.  Another group will be young professional (YPs), who will go through a practical 
learning-by-doing training YP programme backed by locality and state extension staff. 
They will be paid a small allowance and be housed in and by the communities. Their 
continuous presence will facilitate their rapid learning and understanding of village 
challenges, dynamics and aspirations and create strong confidence with the people. This 
will allow them to effectively support social mobilization and organisation, investment 
and management planning, day-to-day capacity building and technical assistance, and 
overall catalyse sustainable change processes within the communities related to NR 
governance, management and livelihood issues.  
122.  Experience from the BIRDP shows that the vast majority interested and 
embarking on the YP programme are women. With their presence as articulated and 
supporting professionals in the villages the YP programme also has a strong impact on 
the mobilization of women in the villages, change in culture to more openness towards 
women participation, and accepting women speaking in meetings.  
123.  An average of three YPs will be engaged per cluster/network for 2-3 years 
resulting in around 450 YPs engaged over the programme life. At least 50% but more 
probably 80% of them will be women. The YP programme will be published through 
announcements in graduate school, student networks, newspapers and radio. After 
completing 2 years of service in the programme communities they will have increased 
their employability and the SNRLP will promote their employment in government 
technical departments, NGOs, and other civil society organisations   
Component 2 Improving the institutional framework for upscaling community 
based NRM  
124.  This component will support institutional capacity strengthening and policy 
engagement from local to State and Federal levels in order to institutionalise and scale 
up proven community and inter-community land and NR governance and management 
models. It will build on models proven to secure access and benefits to poorer rural 
communities from previous IFAD projects and build on and complement the activities 
supported under sub-component 1.1. It will create an enabling environment for 
community institutions, native administrations, Locality governments and civil society 
organizations to better engage in policy formulation and implementation processes at 
State and Federal level. At the same time it will strengthen the capacity of the latter 
levels for facilitating these processes. The component will also complement and support 
ongoing or proposed policy engagement processes supported by Federal and State 
government and other development partners, including in particular those of other IFAD 
supported projects, FAO, UNEP, UNDP, and the World Bank and national and 
international research institutions. Particular attention will be given to generating and 
disseminating knowledge products, fostering dialogue and establishing or supporting 
multi-stakeholder platforms.  
43 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
Subcomponent 2.1: Strengthening of legal and policy frameworks 
125.  This subcomponent will support a participatory review of land and NR governance 
policies and frameworks, establish an institutional structure for a comprehensive 
multisector and multilevel consultation and discussion process which will lead to the 
formulation of focused strategies and revision of policies and regulations.  
126.  Reviews of land and NR governance frameworks: As a first activity this sub-
component will support four systematic reviews (one federal and three regional) by 
independent consultants of existing studies and other knowledge products on the status 
of land and NR governance frameworks. They will include mapping of existing inter-
sectoral and interstate and multi-level land and NR related policy and legislation and 
analyse key NR degradation and exclusion drivers, gaps, inconsistencies, strengths and 
complementarities between the different policy and legislative frameworks. Important 
inputs will be: the three initial regional/State-level mapping of socio-ecological units, 
assessment of NR governance issues and identification of intervention strategies 
supported by subcomponent 1.1; the Natural Resources Governance Framework for 
Butana (NRGF) developed with support from the BIRDP; the Land-Use Map for Sennar 
identifying unsustainable land-use trends and sustainable desired scenarios developed 
with support from the SUSTAIN project; and the governance and management 
frameworks developed for three stock routs in Kordofan supported by the WSRMP and 
status and lessons learned from their implementation.   
127.  NR consultation fora for policy formulation and implementation: The 
findings from the reviews will be presented and analysed in a series of NR consultative 
forums/multi-stakeholder platforms at Locality, State, Inter-state and Federal levels. The 
CACCs created under each CDC/NEC facilitated by subcomponent 1.1 will be the voice of 
the communities in this consultation process. The CACC will have representatives from 
the CDC/NECs technical committees, women, youth and native administration 
authorities. They will be responsible for lobbying, advocacy and communicating cluster 
level NR governance and management issues (identified in the NRLMP formulation and 
implementation process) with the local authorities, different levels of government and 
the private sector. The programme will also support Locality level fora with 
representatives from the relevant CACCs, mobile communities and the Locality 
government as well as workshops, exchange visits and other mechanisms for sharing 
lessons and for formulating joint actions and proposals between Localities. 
128.  At the state level the programme will facilitate the establishment of a State 
Cluster Stakeholder Platform (SCSP) with representation from: all concerned CACCs and 
CDC/NECs; mobile pastoralists communities; Localities; NR related technical 
departments of ministries at the State level; NGOs supporting NR issues in the state; 
parliamentarians; private sector; and experts from research institutions and other 
development partners. The SCSPs will serve as a consultation fora and engage and 
follow-up with the State Government on NR policy, governance and management issues 
based on evidence and results from programme implementation at the cluster/network 
level. The SCSPs will enable the clusters/networks to increase their engagement with the 
government and participate in consultation processes to have favourable influence on NR 
policy, governance and management frameworks and to strengthen the institutional 
setup for implementing these frameworks.  
129.  Development of SCSPs: To develop the SCSPs the programme will mobilise the 
general assembly comprising all the members of the CDCs. The board of the SCSP will 
comprise: i) 10 to 12 cluster representatives selected by the general assembly; ii) 6 to 8 
representatives of the NR related technical departments in the relevant ministries at the 
State level; iii) project representatives and experts from other development partners; 
and iv) private sector representatives. The board can constitute thematic sub-
committees namely: i) Water, forest and rangeland subcommittee; ii) farmland, livestock 
44 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
and pastoral group sub-committee; iii) Innovations sub-committee; and iv) Women, 
youth and vulnerable groups sub-committee. Additionally, the board can form a 5-7 
members State Advocacy and Communications Committee (SACC) with representatives 
from each of the four technical subcommittees. The SACC will be responsible for 
lobbying, advocacy, communication and follow up of state level issues, emerging from 
project implementation, with relevant state institutions.  
130.  SNRLP will support the formalisation of the SCSPs by registering them as 
voluntary organisations and opening their bank accounts. The members will be trained 
on a range of institutional development topics such as governance, transparency, 
accountability, organisational management, communications, reporting and resource 
mobilisation. SNRLP will designate office space within the SPCU premises to serve as the 
secretariat of the SCSPs for the first two years. Thereafter, depending on performance, 
SNRLP will develop a small secretariat for the SCSPs in land contributed by the 
government. SNRLP will assist the SCSPs to earn membership fees from the CDCs, 
benefit from budgetary contributions from the government and generate minor revenue 
from services to the CDCs, in order to sustain their operations after the project. 
131. 
Interstate platforms will be supported for further consultations at interstate and 
between the state and federal levels. These platforms may form an interstate task force 
to follow up on the implementation of reforms and coordinate various initiatives to 
strengthen NR governance and management. The programme will encourage the SCSPs 
to create State Advocacy and Communications Committee (SACC). The SACCs will take 
the lead on representing issues related to state and interstate and state-federal NR 
governance and management in the interstate platforms. Finally, at federal level it is 
anticipated that the GoS will confirm the roles and responsibilities of different sector 
ministries in convening and participating in relevant Federal level platforms that can 
identify and resolve blockages and monitor and assess progress being made. 
Consideration will be given to how their participation can be formalized, for example, 
through the establishment of (or support to already existing but not active) inter-
ministerial committee.  
132.  Strategies for NR governance and management and revision of policies 
and regulations: Based on the four reviews of NR governance frameworks widely 
discussed and enhanced in the multilevel and multisectoral consultation process, 
recommendations will be made for revising policies and legislation, developing 
guidelines, and strengthening associated implementation strategies. Two key areas, 
which requires interstate collaboration and the involvement of the federal level, are 
expected to be addressed: 1) the regulation of land and NR use in livestock routes and 
open access rangeland and forest areas, including strengthening provisions for the 
assignment of user rights to communities; and 2) how to harmonise and strengthen the 
sustainability and inclusiveness of institutions and investments in land and NR 
management.    
133.  The relevant State and Federal agencies are expected to be key partners in the 
review process and agreements reached on the recommendations. Based on the 
agreements, the programme will support processes for revising policy and legislation at 
State level in the targeted regions and at Federal level. The systematic reviews will also 
identify other ongoing or planned initiatives aimed at supporting the revision of policy 
and legislative frameworks and agreements will be reached on how the programme will 
complement these. Information on revised or new legislation will be disseminated widely 
at community and Locality levels through various media, including radio, plays, and 
written materials (in Arabic). Information will also be disseminated at higher levels and 
in other States and nationally through policy briefs, information notes, workshops and 
other relevant media. 
45 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
134.  An important activity in the revision of policy and legislative frameworks will be a 
revision of locality level land-use zoning plans and related regulations to incorporate 
community cluster/network NRLMPs. Likewise state level land use zoning plans and 
related regulations will be revised with particular attention given to identifying ‘open 
access’ common rangeland and forest areas and livestock routes, especially those that 
are being encroached on by semi-mechanized or mechanized crop farming or urban 
expansion. The programme will support an appropriately costed (affordable) updating or 
revision of these plans. Information from cluster/network and Locality NR governance 
and spatial planning processes will also be incorporated. A priority state for this activity 
will be the Gedari state where mechanised farming is causing rapid land-use changes, 
exclusion and potential conflicts. Maps and information on the revised associated land 
use regulatory frameworks will be disseminated widely, including at Locality and 
community levels. Mechanisms will be set up for monitoring and providing feedback on 
any further encroachment of livestock routes and ‘open access’ rangeland or forest 
areas. This will link to the institutional strengthening described in subcomponent 2.2. 
135.  Expansion of existing early warning systems to SNRLP communities: 
SNRLP will use LDCF/GEF funds to strengthen the existing Early Warning System (EWS) 
infrastructure in Sudan as a major element of disaster risk reduction. The aim of the 
drought and flood monitoring system is to prevent the loss of life and reduce the 
economic impact of disasters by warning local communities of drought and flood risks, 
improving their preparedness and decreasing risks associated with crop and food loss. To 
this end, the SNRLP will build on the early warning infrastructure built by the GEF-funded 
Climate Risk Finance for Sustainable and Climate Resilient Rain-fed Farming and Pastoral 
Systems Project as well as LMRP's Drought Monitoring, Preparedness and Early Response 
System (DMPERS), strengthen its capacities and expand it to the whole SNRLP  area. In 
a first step, a thorough needs assessment will identify existing gaps and potential 
interventions to improve the existing infrastructure built by the two mentioned projects, 
focusing on  the four inter-related elements: risk knowledge (data should be 
systematically collected and analyzed and risk assessments performed), monitoring and 
warning service (the system should be in place to monitor hazards and provide early 
warning services), dissemination and communication, and response capability.  
136.  A functioning Geographic Information System (GIS) is an important part of any 
early warning system to help local institutions and communities to base their decisions 
for land-use on sound and accurate information. Therefore, SNRLP will address the gaps 
in existing efforts to establish an integrated GIS system for early warning purposes and 
support the mapping of ecosystems in the targeted area, showing agroecological zones, 
livestock routes, climate change and environmental vulnerability. Such tools, besides the 
obvious usefulness for planners, will allow inserting the local actions within an integrated 
and ecosystem vision of natural resources management and adaptation to climate 
change.  A special attention will be given to mapping the livestock routes, pastoralists 
being one of the most vulnerable groups.  Indeed, the region targeted by the 
programme is crossed by many livestock routes, which pass through vulnerable areas 
which have been affected by drought and rainfall reduction, negatively impacting the 
quantity and quality of livestock production. It is thus important to get a clear picture of 
the vulnerability of the different zones traversed by the livestock routes, as a tool for 
negotiation and sustainable solutions. This will lead to enhance climate resilience of 
livestock routes and pastoralists through sustainable rangeland and water management 
investments.  
137.  Depending on the outcomes of the needs assessment, other potential 
interventions to strengthen the capacities of existing early warning systems in Sudan, 
could focus, inter alia, on improving the data collection infrastructure (e.g. by purchasing 
and installing additional weather stations, etc.), the data analysis and forecasting 
capacities (e.g. by providing better or additional hardware and software components, 
capacity building measures for the Meteorological Authority and other institutions, etc.) 
46 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
and/or existing communication and response capacities (e.g. by providing better 
infrastructure, capacity-building measures, international exchange visits, etc.). 
138.  SNRLP will partner with both of the above mentioned initiatives as well as the 
Meteorological Authority, the Remote Sensing Authority, the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Ministry of Irrigation and the Agricultural Research Corporation to identify and address 
the needs in the existing early warning infrastructure. Further, the SNRLP will partner 
with ICRAF, which is undertaking the same exercise in Chad in two IFAD funded projects 
(PARSAT and RePER), and other potentially relevant institutions active in the targeted 
areas and involved in early warning activities, such as FAO and UNEP. 
Subcomponent 2.2: Building institutional capacities 
139.  Training for extension and research service providers: Training will be 
provided to public and private extension service providers and Locality, State and 
Federal government staff in: community-based NR governance and management and the 
related roles of the Native Administrations, Localities and States; appropriate 
investments in sustainable land and NR use; climate risk reduction and climate change 
adaptation strategies; Development of Land-use zoning maps and related regulations 
incorporating native administration; GIS; etc. A full list of possible trainings will be 
developed following a needs assessment to be done during the start-up of the 
programme and will be updated as new needs are identified. Focus should be at 
addressing capacity gaps currently limiting the implementation and enforcement of 
existing NR policies and legislation. The trainings will be accompanied with exchange 
visits and learning routes between States and other programmes as well as to other 
countries.  
140.  Training will also be provided in knowledge management, communication, 
monitoring and impact evaluation for documenting and disseminating lessons from 
programme interventions. Linkages will be made to both national and international 
universities and research institutions to strengthen the capturing and analysis of lessons 
learnt. The programme will also facilitate linkage to international research institutions 
and in particular the research being done by the CG centres involved in land and NR 
governance, namely ICARDA, ILRI, IWMI, CIFOR, ICRAF and IFPRI.  
141.  Consolidating capacities for implementation of existing instruments: The 
three different programme regions have different challenges linked to NR governance 
and management and have developed different instruments, that needs further support 
for consolidation and implementation. The NRGF for Butana is in a final draft stage and is 
expected to have been endorsed by all partners in the 5 states at the time of the start-
up of SNRLP. The SNRLP will support its implementation including the needed 
strengthening of involved institutions, development of regulations and procedures, and 
the harmonisation in the implementation across the five states. The key instrument 
developed for Sennar is the Land-use map which identifies current unsustainable land-
uses causing degradation of NRs, exclusion of vulnerable groups and potential conflicts 
including from blocking of stock routs. It also proposes possible sustainable future 
scenarios for land uses. The programme will support with training, materials and 
equipment for the effective use of the land-use map for decision making in reforming 
policies and regulations and for follow-up monitoring. In the case of Kordofan, stock 
routes have been demarcated, conflict resolution centers have been established, and co-
management arrangements with pastoralists communities have been initiated. The 
SNRLP will further the institutionalisation of these routs by supporting their registration, 
re-demarcation and consolidate co-management arrangements which were implemented 
with insufficient support at the end of the WSRMP.     
142.  Another important new instrument that can contribute to more inclusive and 
sustainable NR governance frameworks in all regions is the 2015 Range and Pasture 
47 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
Law, which provides for the registration of common pasture and forestland. The 
programme will support its regularization and piloting for registration of not only 
community forest and pasture land, but also for registration of ‘open access’ common 
land and stock routes. Finally, as part of strengthening NR governance and management 
frameworks and capacities at inter-community level, the programme will support the 
construction of cluster/network level integrated community development centers.      
143.  Establishing a framework for revenue generation and reinvestment: 
Various interventions, including previous and current IFAD projects, investing in water 
infrastructures in rural areas have built community-based models for water management 
and revenue generation for O&M costs, depreciation costs and reinvestment in further 
expanding water distribution infrastructures. Likewise, different models have also been 
developed and implemented for the management of other NRs including rangeland and 
forest. To capitalize on these experiences and in order to facilitate their scaling up, the 
programme will support the relevant government institutions in each region in the 
establishment of a framework and guidelines for revenue generation for O&M and 
depreciation costs but also for reinvestment in land and NR use and management by 
communities. This could include collecting of fees and tariffs for water use, harvesting of 
non-timber forest products, sustainable harvesting of wood from community forests, 
access to grazing and community forest fodder buffer, etc. Guidance would include 
percentage allocation of revenue generated to community, cluster/network, Locality and 
higher levels and safeguards for ensuring that an adequate proportion is re-invested in 
measures for improving sustainable land and NR use. 
3.  Programme implementation organisational structure 
and responsibilities  
3.1  Programme Management and Implementing Agencies 
144.  Lead Programme Agency 
145.  The Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MoAF) is the lead agency. It is a 
member of the Inter-Ministerial Steering Committee of the IFAD co-financed projects 
and the chair of the SNRLP steering committee. Through these organs, it is responsible 
for programme and project oversight, strategic guidance and facilitation of the 
implementation of necessary strategic and policy decisions to enable the sustainability of 
the outcome of the project.  
3.2  Programme management and coordination 
146.  The Inter-Ministerial Steering Committee: An Inter-Ministerial Steering 
Committee, is already in place and meets two times a year to oversee all IFAD co-
financed projects in Sudan. The Minister of Agriculture and Forestry (MoAF) chairs the 
committee. Other representatives are from the Ministry of Finance and Economic 
Planning (MOFEP), Ministry of Irrigation and Water Resources (MoIWR), Ministry of 
Animal Resources, Fisheries and Wildlife (MARFW) and the State Ministries of Production 
and Economic Resources (MPER) in the programme supported States. The Central 
Coordination Unit (CCU) for IFAD co-financed projects is included in the committee. 
Specifically for SNRLP, the committee will provide an enabling environment, remove 
bottlenecks in the policy engagement activities at the National and State levels; review 
and approve NR governance and management related policy and best practice 
recommendations emerging from the CPCU and champion the adoption of these 
recommendations by National and State level agencies.  
147.  National Programme Steering Committee (NPSC): The NPSC will be 
constituted to meet every quarter to oversee programme planning, review progress, 
48 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
provide strategic guidance and facilitate linkages to government services and private 
sector stakeholders. The undersecretary of the MoAF will chair the NPSC. Other members 
will be the undersecretaries of the MOFEP; MARFW; MoIWR; Higher Council of 
Environment (HCE) and the Forestry National Corporation (FNC). Also, the Director 
Generals (DG) of the MPER of the nine programme States and the senior coordinatior of 
the CCU will be members. The NPSC will constitute a NPSC Technical Committee from 
within the NPSC members to serve as a standing committee empowered to meet 
whenever needed to resolve implementation bottlenecks that cannot be settled at the 
State level. 
148.  State Steering Committee (SSC): A SSC in each State will oversee planning, 
review progress, facilitate linkages between programme stakeholders and removing 
bottlenecks affecting smooth implementation. The Director General of the MPER will 
Chair the SSC in each State. Other members will include representatives of the technical 
departments of the MPER, FNC, and the Ministry of Physical Planning and Public Works 
(MPPPW). The SSC will also include relevant Localty commissioners, cluster 
representatives and representatives from the Women’s Association, Pastoralists’ 
Association and Farmers’ Association. The SSC will meet on a quarterly basis. It will 
constitute a SSC Technical Committee from within the SSC members to meet whenever 
needed to resolve any programme implementation bottlenecks encountered within the 
State. 
149.  Implementation structure 
150.  SNRLP implementation will be headed by a central programme coordination unit 
(CPCU) in Sennar assisted by a State programme coordination Unit in each of the 9 
states. 
151.  Central Programme Coordination Unit (CPCU): The CPCU, located in the 
former premises of the SUSTAIN project in the Singa town (Sennar State), will serve as 
the programme headquarters and will lead overall programme implementation. The 
Programme Director (PD) will head the CPCU and will implement the programme through 
a central technical support team and a central operations support team. An internal audit 
team will also be located in the CPCU. 
  Central technical support team: The central technical support team will be 
responsible for overall technical planning, implementation oversight, technical 
guidance to the SPCUs. It will comprise the Senior NRM Expert (SNRE); Senior 
Livelihoods Development Expert (SLDE); Senior Gender and Community 
Development Expert (SGCE); Senior M&E Expert (SMEE) and a Senior KM and 
Communications Expert (SKCE); The Senior NRM Expert will be the Deputy 
Programme Director. Any other member of the technical team can function as 
the Deputy Programme Director in the absence of the SNRE.  
  Central operations support team: This team will be responsible for programme 
financial planning, management and control; overseeing programme 
procurement, contracting and contract management and staff evaluation. 
Also, it will develop an internal system to monitor, record and report in detail 
all types of contributions from community, locality and state levels. It will 
consist of the Financial Manager (FM), Senior Central Programme Accountant 
(SCPA), Senior Central Procurement Expert (SCPE) Central Procurement 
Assistant (CPA), Central Programme Accountant (CPA), and the Central 
Administrative Assistant (CAA). 
  The CPCU will also deploy 3 regional programme accountants (RPA) to 
strengthen the capacity at SPCUs. Each regional position will be responsible 
for 3 SPCUs and will be based in one of these SPCUs. The allocation of SPCUs 
49 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
to regional staff and the SPCU where they will be based will be finalised by the 
Financial Manager during programme start-up. The regional staff will be paid 
from the CPCU programme budget, which will be responsible for oversight and 
support of their allocated states. The regional programme accountants will 
report to the Financial Manager based at the CPCU.   
  The internal audit team: A qualified Senior Internal Auditor (SIA) will be 
sourced from the open market and based at the CPCU. Given the large 
organisational structure and geographical spread of SPCUs, the services of an 
internal audit firm will be procured at midterm to support the SIA. The internal 
audit plan will cover the CPCU and SPCUs. Both the internal auditor and firm 
will maintain independence by reporting directly to the NPSC. 
152.  State Programme Coordination Units (SPCU): Nine SPCUs, one in each 
State, will lead programme implementation in the States. The nine SPCUs will be in 
Kassala (Kassala State), Rufaa (Gezira State), Subagh (Gadaref State), Abu Dileg 
(Khartoum State); Al Damir (River Nile State); Singa (Sennar State); El Obeid (North 
Kordofan State), Al Foula (West Kordofan State) and Al Abbassiya(South Kordofan 
State). The State Coordinator (SC) heading an SPCU will be assisted by a State technical 
support team, a State operations support team and a set of Cluster Development Teams 
(CDT). The composition and functions of these teams are given below; 
  State technical support team: This team will be based in the SPCU and will be 
responsible for technical planning, implementation, monitoring, follow-up and 
reporting of all State level programme activities. It will also train, guide and 
backstop the CDTs, YPs and LEN volunteers during programme 
implementation. This team will comprise the Water Resources Management 
Officer (WRMO); Forestry Management Officer (FMO); Rural and Agricultural 
Development Officer (RADO); Community Development and Gender Officer 
(CDGO); and the M&E, KM and Innovations Officer (MKIO).  
  State operations support team: This team will be based in the SPCU and will 
be responsible for all State level financial, procurement and administrative 
aspects of the programme. It will comprise the State Accounts Officer (SAO); 
State Procurement Officer (SPO) and State Administrative and Accounts 
Assistant (SAAA).  
  The Programme Accountants at SPCU level will report directly to the 

respective state coordinators and via matrix management to regional 
accountants The proposed structure will allow for adequate segregation of 
duties.  
. 
  Cluster development teams: Each State will have 2-4 cluster development 
teams. Ten Cluster Development Teams (CDT) will be deployed to the 
Kordofan region, 8 to the Butana Region and 2 to the Sennar region according 
estimated number of ecosystem-based clusters in the States. The CPCU can 
fine tune this distribution as the time of implementation based on the actual 
number of clusters selected in each state. The CDTs will carry out cluster 
mobilisation activities through training and capacity building of groups, VDCs 
and CDCs; follow-up programme activities implemented at the community 
level; ensure inclusion of vulnerable groups, (women,youth and pastoralists) 
in the programme activities; mentor YPs and young extension agents and 
prepare and submit cluster reports to the SPCUs. Each CDT will consist of two 
Cluster Development Officers (CDO), one male and one female. The CDTs will 
be based in the Localities close to the programme clusters. The YPs and young 
extension agents, will be considered as informal part of the CDTs based in the 
clusters or networks on voluntary basis.  
50 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
  Cluster or network procurement committee (CPC): Each cluster or network 
will form a cluster procurement committee consisting about 5-8 members 
drawn in a manner that all the communities are represented. The CPC will be 
trained in procurement and carry out all cluster or network level procurement 
activities with supervision from the SPCU. The CPC members will be 
volunteers and not paid by the programme.  
153.  Regional Policy Coordination Centers: SNRLP will establish three Regional 
Policy Coordination Centers (RPCC), one in each sector, to anchor the programme 
activities related to NR policy, laws, governance and regulations in the sector. The 
Gazera SPCU in Rufaa, the Sennar SPCU in Singa and the North Kordofan SPCU in El 
Obeid will host the SPCCs in the Butana, Sennar and Kordofan regions respectively. A 
Regional Policy Specialist (RPS) will lead each SPCC supported by a team of State Policy 
Officers (SPoO) one from each State in the sector. However, the Sennar SPCC will have 
a slightly different configuration with one SPO from the Sennar State and two SPOs from 
the neighbouring Blue Nile and White Nile States in order to ensure coordination and 
harmonisation of inter-state policies, laws and regulations mainly targeting pastoralists 
using the same stock-routes running across the three states. 
154.  Recruitment of staff: All staff members in the CPCU will be recruited 
competitively from the open market. All SPCU staff will also be recruited competitively. 
Interested Government staff can apply and get selected through the competitive 
recruitment process.  Since project management and technical capacity staff members 
have remained a challenge in the Sudan country programme, SNRLP will mitigate the 
risk by retaining the qualified staff on the ground from previous projects. Supervision 
missions will assess staff capacity on a regular basis and recommend steps to address 
capacity gaps. IFAD has a Complaints Procedure to receive and facilitate resolution of 
concerns and complaints with respect to alleged sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA). 
For more information, visit the IFAD webpage: https://www.ifad.org/en/document-
detail/asset/40738506.  
155.  The Central Coordination Unit of the MoAF (CCU) 
156.  The CCU is based in Khartoum. It is an autonomous unit that reports to the 
Federal MoAF, and fulfils support services to the Programmes. The CPCU contract the 
CCU to undertake the following;  
  Technical assistance during the start-up as needed; 
  National and international procurement of goods, works and services; 
  Follow-up  on  the  budgeting  of  counterpart  funds  in  the  Government 
development budget for the year and release of funds from the MOFEP to the 
Programme. 
3.3  Programme Supervision  
6. 
IFAD will carry out the following: 
  Assessment  of  the  adherence  of  the  Borrower  and  Programme  management  to 
the fiduciary requirements;  
  Carry out annual supervision mission and follow up mission; 
  Provision  of  implementation  support,  based  on  assessment  of  progress  against 
 
agreed indicators (Programme logframe and AWPB);  
Identification  of  problems  and  reaching  agreement  on  suitable  actions  with  the 
Government for improved results on the ground;  
  Assessment  of  Programme  poverty  targeting  and  mainstreaming  of  gender  and 
youth issues with special attention to poor women. 
51 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
  Facilitating  self-evaluation  by  Programme  management  on  their  experiences  in 
the implementation of community-based governance and management of natural 
resources,  poverty  targeting  and  women  and  youth  development,  and  achieving 
sustainability  and  up-scaling  of  good  practices  through  institutionalisation  and 
policy adjustments and enforcement/implementation;  
  Documentation of lessons learned from Programme implementation; 
  Dissemination of lessons learned 
The Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning 
7.  The Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (MoFEP) is the recipient of the IFAD 
and  LDCF  grants.  It  carries  out  joint  supervision  missions  with  IFAD  according  to  the 
supervision plan to assess the performance and the fiduciary aspects of the Programme. 
It  allocates  annually  the  Government  contribution  to  the  Programme  and  facilitates  the 
exemption of duties and taxes on goods, works and services procured by the Programme 
8.  The MoFEP will focus on the following aspects of Programme implementation: 
  Progress in implementation according to the physical and result targets; 
  Cost efficiency of Programme service delivery to the communities; 
  Sustainability of Programme activities by assessing effectiveness of cost recovery 
mechanisms in place,  
  Sharing  and  discussion  of  findings  with  the  supervision  missions  undertaken  by 
the Cooperating Institution. 
52 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
Figure 1: SNRLP – Overall Programme Implementation Set up 
Central 
Programme 
Coordination 
Unit 
Singa 
State 
Programme 
Coordination 
Unit 
State 
Programme 
Coordination 
Unit 
State 
Programme 
Coordination 
Unit 
State 
Programme 
Coordination 
Unit 
State 
Programme 
Coordination 
Unit 
Regional 
Policy 
Coordination 
Centre 
State 
Programme 
Coordination 
Unit 
State 
Programme 
Coordination 
Unit 
State 
Programme 
Coordination 
Unit 
Regional 
Policy 
Coordination 
Centre 
State 
Programme 
Coordination 
Unit 
Regional 
Policy 
Coordination 
Centre 
Kassala 
Rufaa 
Subagh 
Abu Dileg 
El Damir 
Rufaa 
Al Foula 
Al Abassiya 
El Obeid 
El Obeid 
Singa 
Singa 
Butana 
Kordofan 
Sennar 
14 
Figure 2: Detailed representation of the CPCU 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
National Programme Steering Committee (NPSC) 
Central Programme Coordination Unit (CPCU) 
Programme Director (PD) 
‘ 
Central  
technical  
support  
team 
Senior NRM 
Expert 
(SNRE) 
Dy director 
Central  
operations  
support  
team 
Financial 
Manager 
(FM) 
Internal 
Auditor 
Senior 
M&E 
Expert 
(SMEE) 
Senior 
Gender and 
Community 
Development 
Expert 
(SGCE) 
Senior 
Livelihood 
Development 
Expert (SLDE) 
Senior KM 
and 
Communicati
ons Expert 
(SKCE); 
Senior Central 
Programme 
Accountant 
(SCPA) 
Senior Central 
Procurement 
Expert (SCPE) 
Central 
Programme 
Accountant 
(CPA) 
Central 
Administrative 
Assistant 
(CAA) 
Regional 
accounts 
team* 
Central 
Procurement 
Assistant 
(CPA) 
15 
*Note – the Regional accountant team will report to the CPCU but will be based in the State offices 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
Figure 3: Detailed representation of SPCU 
State Steering Committee (SSC) 
State Programme Coordination Units (SPCU) 
‘ 
State  
technical  
support  
team  
State Coordinator (SC) 
CPCU 
State 
Operations  
support  
team 
Water 
Resources 
Manageme
nt Officer 
(WRMO) 
Forestry 
Manageme
nt Officer 
(FMO) 
Rural and 
Agricultural 
Developme
nt Officer 
(RADO) 
Community 
Developme
nt and 
Gender 
Officer 
(CDGO) 
M&E, KM 
and 
Innovations 
Officer 
(MKIO) 
Community Development Team 
- 
- 
Community Development Officer – Male 
Community Development Officer – Female 
16 
Volunteers in cluster or networks 
- 
- 
Young professionals 
Young extension agents 
State 
Accounts 
Officer 
(SAO) 
State 
Procurement 
Officer (SPO) 
State 
Administrati
ve and 
Accounts 
Assistant 
(SAAA) 
Regional 
Programme
Accountant 
reporting to 
the CPCU 
Cluster or Network Procurement Committee 
- 
5-8 members from the CDCs/NECs 
Sudan – SNRLP – Implementation Manual 
Figure 4: Detailed representation of Regional Policy Coordination Centers 
Central Programme Coordination Units (CPCU) 
Regional Policy Coordination Centers 
Regional 
Policy 
Specialist(
RPS) 
State 
Policy 
Officer 
(SPoO) 
State  
Policy  
Officer 
(SPoO) 
State 
Policy 
Officer 
(SPoO) 
‘ 
17 
4.  Cost and Financing  
157.  Costs and financing. Out of the total programme cost of EUR 77.7 million, IFAD
 contribution will be EUR 56.5 million (72.6%), of which EUR 45.2 million is grant and 
EUR 11.3 million is loan. GEF/LCDF grant will be EUR 1.8 million (2.3%). The remaining 
19.5 million (25.1%) will be financed from domestic resources comprising Government 
contributions of EUR 11.7 million (15.1%), beneficiaries’ contribution of EUR 4.5 million 
(5.7%) and private sector in the form of credit support from MFIs EUR 3.3 million 
(4.3%).  The base costs are calculated at December 2018 prices and include estimated 
duties and taxes. Total contingencies are respectively at 16% of total costs, or 19% of 
total base costs.  
158.  Total Cost. Total Programme Cost including physical and price contingencies are 
estimated at EUR 77.7  million over a 6-year period. Component 1 on ‘Up scaling 
community based natural resources management and businesses’ is the main 
investment and represents 72.1% of the total programme costs, while Component 2 on 
‘Improving the institutional framework for up scaling community based NRM’ component 
representing 14.4% of total programme costs. ‘Programme Management and 
Coordination Unit’, represent 13.5% of the total programme costs.  
Investment costs are EUR 70.2 million and represent 90.4% of total costs. Taxes 
159. 
amount to EUR 11.7 million, that is 15% of total costs and the foreign exchange 
component is at EUR 8.8 million or 11.3% of the total programme costs. The recurrent 
cost accounts for EUR 7.5 million or equivalent to 9.6% of the total costs. The exchange 
rate used is EUR 1.0 = SDG 53.9. Foreign currency costs have been estimated at 11% 
and those for local currency costs have been estimated at 89%. The cost per direct 
beneficiary household amounts to about EUR 648 or EUR 108 per beneficiary.  
Table 1:  Program Costs by Component (EUR’000) 
A. Upscaling community based natural resources management and businesses
Community mobilization and NRM planning.
Implementation of Community NRM and Livelihood Investment Plan.
Subtotal
B. Improving the institutional framework for upscaling community based NRM.
999
4.053
5.052
2.015
18.989
21.004
2.372
17.642
20.014
1.078
6.826
7.904
254
1.646
1.900
91
98
6.808
49.254
189         56.061
Subtotal
C. Project Management & Coordination Unit
Total PROJECT COSTS
1.073
3.857
9.982
2.506
1.325
24.835
3.345
1.380
24.739
2.648
1.315
11.867
1.164
1.285
4.349
443
1.301
1.933
11.179
10.465
77.705
160.  Economic analysis. The Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) on the 
investments in the Programme area over 15 years is estimated at 24% and the Net 
present value (NPV) of the programme is positive (EUR 13.8 Million). The economic 
analysis suggests that the SNRLP Programme is feasible. All these worthiness indicators 
establish the economic feasibility of the programme. 
Benefits, costs and financing 
161.  Project Costs. Total Programme Cost including physical and price contingencies 
are estimated at EUR 77.7  million over a 6-year period. Component 1 on ‘Up scaling 
community based natural resources management and businesses’ is the main 
investment and represents 72.1% of the total programme costs, while Component 2 on 
‘Improving the institutional framework for up scaling community based NRM’ component 
Page  
18 
Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme [SNRLP]Project Components by Year -- Totals Including ContingenciesTotals Including Contingencies (EUR '000)201920202021202220232024TotalStrengthening of the NR legal and policy framework 3451.3112.0451.415542585.717Building of institutional capacities 7271.1951.3001.2336223855.462 
representing 14.4% of total programme costs. ‘Programme Management and 
Coordination Unit’, represent 13.5% of the total programme costs. 
Project Financing, co-financing strategy and Plan 
162.  SNRLP will be co-financed by IFAD grant, GEF/LDCF grant, GoS, private sector 
and the direct beneficiaries’ contribution. IFAD has shown commitment to contribute 
about EUR 56.5 million, which accounts for 72.6 per cent of total project costs of which 
EUR 45.2 million is grant and EUR 11.3 million is loan. The GEF/LDCF will contribute EUR 
1.8 million representing 2.3 per cent of total costs, and Private Sector in the form of 
credit support from MFI EUR 3.3 million representing 4.3 per cent of the total project 
costs respectively. Beneficiaries are also expected to make in-kind contribution of about 
EUR 4.5 million or 5.7 per cent of total costs. The Government will finance the taxes and 
duties (EUR 11.7 million, representing 15.1 per cent of total costs). Table 2 shows the 
summary financing arrangements.  
Table 2. Components by Financiers (EUR’000) 
Community mobilization and NRM planning.
Implementation of Community NRM and Livelihood Investment Plan.
Subtotal
B. Improving the institutional framework for upscaling community based NRM. 
businesses
Strengthening of the NR legal and policy framework
Buil
ding of institutional capacities
Subtotal
C. Project Management & Coordination Unit
Total PROJECT COSTS
4.087
26.118
30.205
3.486
3.575
7.061
7.891
45.157
60,0
53,0
53,9
61,0
65,4
63,2
75,4
58,1
1.079
6.474
7.553
872
894
1.766
1.973
11.291
15,9
13,1
13,5
15,2
16,4
15,8
18,9
14,5
306
1.065
1.371
387
-
387
-
1.758
4,5
2,2
2,4
6,8
-
3,5
-
2,3
275
4.094
4.370
-
78
78
-
4.448
4,0
8,3
7,8
-
1,4
0,7
-
5,7
-
3.315
3.315
-
-
-
-
3.315
-
6,7
5,9
-
-
-
-
4,3
1.060
8.188
9.248
972
915
1.887
601
11.736
15,6
16,6
16,5
17,0
16,8
16,9
5,7
15,1
6.808
49.254
56.061
5.717
5.462
11.179
10.465
77.705
8,8
63,4
72,1
7,4
7,0
14,4
13,5
100,0
Disbursement profile and plan 
163.  The below graph forecast the expected disbursement per year. This will allow 
continuously tracking progress during supervisor and following up mission. 
19 
Republic of Sudan Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme [SNRLP] Components by Financiers Beneficiaries(EUR '000) IFAD GrantIFAD LoanGEF(cash & in kind)Private SectorThe GovernmentTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Upscaling community based natural resources management and  
164.  Summary benefits and economic analysis  
165.  The programme is expected to benefit about 720 000 direct and indirect 
beneficiaries or 120 000 households. The programme has an expected adoption rate of 
85%. The project is expected to lead to increase in income and production and for at 
least 70% (equivalent to 84 000 households) as a result of services provided by the 
project. The project is aiming to provide improved access to land, forest and water for 
production services for at least 60%. Particular attention will be given to support climate 
change resilience, by favouring and promoting environmental friendly technological 
investments. 
166.  Financial analysis. Twelve financial models were developed: (i) Agroforestry 
existing community (25 fed) with vegetables intercropping;(ii) Agroforestry new 
community (25fed) with vegetables intercropping; (iii) Hafir (32 000m3 capacity); (iv) 
Electric brick machinery; (v) Fodder production (guar) (5 fed); (vi) Home garden 
(Jubraka) (0,25 fed); (vii) Home nurseries (0,2 fed); (viii) Agroforestry existing 
individual plantation with intercropping mechanism and gradual rotational practices (5 
fed); (ix) Gum Arabic (1 fed); (x) Community mix crop production with tree belt (5 fed); 
(xi) Community nurseries (5 fed) and (xii) Gas stove model ( not income generating 
activity, but income savings). The analysis compares a “without project” and “with 
project” situation. “Without project” scenario has been calculated based on the prevailing 
traditional average production, where applicable.  
167.  Overall, the financial models are based on information collected by the ongoing 
IFAD project and the design team in December 2018. The yield assumptions are based 
on information from other projects in Sudan and the field trips within region. Detailed 
description and analysis of the models and their profitability are presented in Appendix 
4. 
168.  All these twelve models present a higher financial efficiency in terms of financial 
Net Present Value (NPV), financial internal rate of return (IRR), and the financial 
benefits-cost ratio (BCR). For instance, NPV is positive for the all eleven models (EUR 
143 314 for model 1, EUR 145 494 for model 2, EUR 33 416  for model 3, EUR 38 884 
for model 4, EUR 7 285 for model 5, EUR 39 for model 6, EUR 378 for model 7, EUR 28 
886 for model 8, EUR 370 for model 9, EUR 332 for model 10 and EUR 53 738 for model 
11). Changes in financial indicators illustrate the predicted transformation in agricultural 
practices in the project area. Analyses of the farm models confirm that the impact of the 
project at the farm level is financially attractive for family households and net farm 
incomes are expected to increase. For more details, refer to table 3. 
Table 3. Financial analysis models (EUR) 
No. 
Model  
NPV 
B/C 
IRR 
Average Incremental income 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
AF Existing Community, 25 fed 
143,314 
9.1 
AF New Community, 25 fed  
145,494 
8.1 
- 
- 
Hafir, 32000 m3 
33,416 
1.2 
29% 
Brick Model /1 machinery 
38,884 
1.9 
Fodder Production, 5 fed 
7,285 
- 
- 
- 
Home Garden (Jubraka) 0, 25 fed 
39 
1.2 
20% 
20 
26,793 
30,360 
11,276 
7,365 
1,365 
23 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
Home Nursery 0,2 fed 
378 
1.9 
AF Existing Individual, 5 fed 
28,886 
9.1 
- 
- 
Gum Arabic/1 fed 
370 
3.9 
41% 
Community Crop Production + Tree belt, 5 fed 
332 
0.8 
21% 
Comm. Nursery/ 5 fed 
53,738 
3.1 
- 
99 
5,229 
107 
163 
10,824 
169.  Total net income for all beneficiaries including 6 years after inclusion into the 
project is estimated at value of EUR 63.1 million. The values are in the absolute amounts 
(i.e. time value of the money is not taken into consideration). For more details please 
refer to the Annex 4; Table 2. Discounted values are reflected in the financial and 
economic analysis (i.e. table 3 and 5 at Appendix 4).  
170.  Economic analysis. The economic analysis shows that the project has the 
capacity to generate an economic rate of return (ERR) of 24% over 15-year period, with 
a net present value  (approximately EUR 13.8 million). Given the many un-quantifiable 
benefits, the actual ERR will likely be higher than this. 
171.  Sensitivity Analysis.  In order to test the robustness of the above results, 
sensitivity analysis was been carried out and the results are presented below. The 
sensitivity analysis investigates the effect of fluctuations in Project costs, benefits and 
delays in implementation on the NPV and ERR. The results show that the EIRR drops to 
22% with an increase in costs of 10%. With an increase of costs by 20%, the project is 
still worthy (EIRR of 20%). However, with an increase of the aggregate costs by 50%, 
the EIRR with 16%.  A decrease of benefits by 10% to 50% still yields an EIRR greater 
than the 11%. 
5.  Programme Start up and Phasing  
5.1  Programme Start-up and phasing  
172.  SNRLP will improve the status of the NR used by the communities in the project 
areas by: i) enabling the project supported communities to develop strong NR 
governance framework for conflict reduction and sustainable management of NR owned 
and shared by communities, including pastoralist communities; ii) strengthening the 
community level institutional setup for effective implementation of the NR governance 
framework; iii) supporting the engagement between civil society (communities) and 
different levels of the Government for developing evidence based enabling policies, laws 
and regulations for sustainable NR management; and iv) demonstrating and promoting 
the adoption of NR improvement technologies and practices that enhances the income 
from the livelihood activities practiced by the target households.  
173.  Cluster approach: SNRLP will follow a cluster approach for implementing project 
activities in order to ensure that all the communities in the cluster jointly adopt the 
project supported measures for improving the status of the common ecosystem of the 
cluster comprising rangeland, forestland, water resources and farmland.  
174.  Cluster composition: SNRLP will develop around 150 clusters consisting of 5-10 
communities that are the main users of the common ecosystem of the cluster. To be 
eligible each cluster must have some common area between the boundaries of the 
member communities that is shared by the communities for common use such as 
rangeland, forestland and watershed. The criteria for cluster selection will include: i) the 
21 
level of degradation of the shared natural resources in the common areas; ii) the size of 
the degraded common areas shared by the communities; iii) the level of pressure 
exerted on the common resources by the users and conflict between communities over 
shared resources; iv) the proportion and scale of poor households in the cluster; v) 
presence, status and activities of community institutions in the clusters and vi) the 
nature and extent of investment by previous IFAD project (see next section). After 1-2 
years new communities can join the clusters. In a State the clusters will be selected 
based on the common ecosystems and not according to the administrative boundaries of 
the localities. 
Table: Distribution of clusters 
Region 
Butana 
Kordofan 
Sennar 
Total 
States 
5 
3 
1 
9 
Villages 
400 
500 
100 
1,000 
Clusters 
30 
100 
20 
150 
Av. village 
per cluster 
13 
5 
5 
23 
village per 
state 
80 
167 
100 
 In the Kordofan region most of these clusters will be defined around the stock 
175. 
routes. In the Butana region they will be formed around the networks already identified 
by the BIRDP. In the Sennar region these will be around forest land and other resources 
around which the LMRP has already developed clusters. 
176. 
Inclusion of previous IFAD co financed communities: Most clusters will developed 
around 1-2 nucleus communities which have already received support from recent IFAD 
projects related to livestock and crop production. Consequently, 40% of the 1,000 
project communities will be previously supported IFAD project communities and the 
remaining will be new. SNRLP will not duplicate the past investments in the previous 
IFAD project supported communities. Instead it will capitalise on previous project 
investments on social infrastructure development and strengthen the NR governance and 
management mechanisms to enhance the benefits and sustainability of previous projects 
interventions.  
177.  Cluster identification: In coordination with the CPCU, the SPCU in each State will 
carry out a cluster mapping exercise at the beginning of the project resulting in the 
identification and listing of all the clusters that can potentially benefit from project 
interventions in each State. The SPCUs will divide the listed clusters into two categories, 
integration category and scaling up category, to be developed by two phases of the 
project, the integration phase and the scaling up phase. 
178.  Integration Phase (Years 1 and 2): In this phase SNRLP will focus on 
developing and showcasing the results in around 50 ‘integration category’ clusters in the 
nine project States (5-6 clusters per State). These clusters will become models of NR 
governance and management, showcasing the sustainability of previous investments 
where relevant and acting as catalysts for change for other clusters. These clusters will 
be characterised by: i) presence of suitable conditions to demonstrate very good results 
within a very short time from the project interventions; and ii) better preparedness to 
quickly integrate NR governance and management interventions with the crop and 
livestock production activities.  
179.  The SPCUs will pre-select the integration category clusters based on criteria 
including the following: i) presence of one or more communities with previous 
experience of IFAD co-financed projects; ii) opportunities to build on the 
investments/achievements of previous IFAD co-financed projects, e.g. opportunities to 
improve the management of a hafir or effectiveness of a conflict resolution centre; iii) 
presence of strong champions and village institutions (VDCs, groups) who can be easily 
oriented and capacitated to promote the SNRLP supported activities and benefits within 
and outside the cluster; iv) evidence of harmony and collaborative spirit amongst the 
22 
communities in the cluster; and v) appetite to quickly resolve the issues related to the 
use of shared natural resources by adopting project supported NR governance and 
management frameworks. The achievements of the integration phase will be widely 
publicised.  
180.  Scaling-up phase (Years 3 and 6): In this phase SNRLP will expand its 
outreach to an additional 100 clusters which qualify for project support from the list of 
‘scaling-up category’ clusters. During the integration phase the SPCUs will provide 
exposure to the representatives of other clusters (from the scaling up category) to the 
project approach, success stories and benefits achieved in the integration clusters. Those 
clusters interested in replicating these success stories in their areas will be oriented to 
adopt a set of preparatory measures to become eligible for project assistance in the 
scaling up phase. These measures will include: i) voluntary formation of general 
assembly, VDCs and CDCs and different committees according to project guidelines; ii) 
resolution by these institutions to abide by NR governance and management frameworks 
developed with project support iii) development of VSCGs, NRLGs and VWGs according 
to project supported guidelines and achievement of basic targets by these groups such 
as savings mobilisation, adoption of bye-laws, regular meetings and registration. Each 
year the project will invite expressions of interest from the clusters listed under scaling-
up category, to participate in the project. The project will evaluate the results of the 
preparatory measures (discussed above) adopted by the clusters and new clusters will 
be selected based on their preparedness to readily implement project activities. 
181.  The two phases will not operate in isolation. Showcasing the achievements in the 
integration clusters will continue even after the first two years to motivate other clusters 
and disseminate good practices. Similarly, expansion of outreach to the scaling-up 
clusters is expected to start in the second year itself while the integration phase is still 
ongoing.   
6.  Planning and budgeting  
6.1  Procedures for preparation and approval of the AWPB 
182.  The Annual Work Programme and Budget (AWPB) coincides with the GoS annual 
budget period from January to december. Since the programme is adopting a 
participatory approach also in relation to planning, arrangements for a timely and 
preliminary groundwork should be made so as to allow all the stakeholders to actively 
participate in this process. 
183.  Step 1: Preparation of common template for AWPB: The Central Project 
Coordination Unit (CPCU) will prepare in consultation with the States a common AWPB 
template for all SPCUs along with  guidelines on how to compile it. Then, an ad hoc 
training sessions for all the SPCUs on how to use the template will be held.  
184.  Step 2: Consultation with the SPCUs technical officers and other 
stakeholders: The first AWPB will be prepared by the States by using a participatory 
approach. The SPCU M&E KM and Innovation officer, assisted by the Water Resources 
Management Officer, Forestry Management Officer, Rural and Agriculture development 
officer, Community Development and Gender Officer, the Finance Officer and the 
Procurement Officer,  will organize consultation sessions with the  respective CM teams 
to discuss ongoing activities, challenges being faced (including potential solutions) in the 
implementation and the outlook for activities to be implemented during the upcoming 
Programme year.7  This information, along with the overall Programme targets, is used 
7 It is worth mentioning here that a monthly meeting between the M&E, KM and innovation officer and the CMs 
will be held over the whole implementation period so as to allow : i) the identification of main issues arisen 
during the period taken into consideration, ii) the performance of eventual corrective actions (to be written up 
23 
to identify the outputs to be achieved, the activities to be implemented and the 
resources (financial, technical assistance and other) that are required to achieve the 
planned outputs during the new work plan period.  To the extent possible, 
representatives of the programme main target groups should be involved in this exercise 
as well. The reason for this being the necessity to  ensure that the planned activities  not 
only effectively  address the issues being faced in the field but also foster stakeholders' 
ownership.   
185.  Step 3:  The SPCUs technical officers develop a Technical Working Plan: 
The Water Resources Management Officer, Forestry Management Officer, Rural and 
Agriculture development officer, Community Development and Gender Officer, using the 
information gathered during the first two steps, will start drafting the Technical Working 
Plan. This document will include: i) targets to be achieved during the course of the year, 
ii) the activities whereby this will be done; iii) the physical resources needed to reach 
these objectives (financial resources are not taken into consideration at this stage yet). 
186.  Step 4: Develop the first draft of the Annual Work Plan: Each SPCU will 
organize a two or three-day training session, involving the entire staff. During this 
meeting, the technical document (see step 3) will be presented and the proposed 
technical activities in it will be discussed. Based on this discussion, the first draft of the 
Annual Work Plan and Budget will be prepared using the pre-defined AWPB template. 
This document will give full information about the expected outputs to be produced. The 
latter will need to be fully aligned with the targets established in the main log frame. A 
brief written explanation on how these outputs will contribute to the achievement of the 
log frame targets has to be provided. In connection to this, the SPCUs will be required 
also to discuss potential additional activities that could be carried out  to reinforce the 
impact of the initiatives proposed by the technical officers. These may include: training, 
consultation, procurement that would be organised by the SPCU and which will have to 
be also included in the AWPB.  
187.  Based on the above information, the State coordinator/director will prepare the 
first draft of the AWPB schedule, including the technical activities to be carried out to 
achieve the established targets, the supporting tasks to be performed, the person/s 
responsible to ensure the completion of the activities, the timeframe for the completion 
of each activities and the required resources.  
Step 5: Preparation of the first draft of the Budget and the AWPB Narrative: The 
Finance Officer prepares an initial budget for all the activities (the main technical ones 
and complementing ones) to be implemented during the programme year, along with an 
operational budget of the SPCU. The budget will be reviewed by the State coordinator . 
Next, a specific review session will be organized. At the same time, the M&E, KM and 
Innovation officer will prepare the annual monitoring and evaluation plan and the first 
draft of the narrative that will accompany the AWPB.  The narrative is required to 
provide a quick overview of the key results achieved in the previous 12 months and of  
the cumulative progress to date. It will also provide the rationale behind the key 
activities and targets established for the next annual work plan period.8  Additionally, 
the Finance Officer will work with the M&E, KM and Innovation officer to determine the 
in a specific Action Plan) on both findings reported by the M&E system and on eventual obstacles encountered 
in the running of the M&E system itself. This report will be consolidated at the State level and then at the 
project level. The overall objective of this exercise is the assurance of the readiness of the SCUs (and of the 
CPCU, at large) in the provision of  the updated status of the main implementation issues at any time this 
could be requested by IFAD. The M&E officer is responsible for the robustness of the information provided: 
she/he will cross check the data collected in the field to ensure their accuracy. In addition, she/he will organize 
monthly monitoring field visits to be carried out with the CM teams. During this field participant observation 
and focus groups will be used as main research tool for data collection along with any other research methods 
deemed suitable to analyse the status of implementation. 
8 The narrative will also explain in which manner the planned activities will contribute to the progress towards 
the achievement of the outcomes included in the Programme Logframe Indicators. 
24 
resources that will be required to ensure the effective tracking and monitoring of the 
AWP activities. Finally, based on the activities to be implemented and on the resources 
needed to do this, the Procurement Officer will prepare the Annual Procurement Plan 
(APP) providing details of the procurement (consultancy services, works and goods) 
necessary to carry out the planned activities. Once the first draft of the document is 
ready, it will sent to the Central Project Coordination Unit (CPCU).  
188.  Step 6: Review and consolidation of the first draft of AWPB by the CPCU: 
The CPCU will receive AWPBs from all the nine States. The CPCU Director will be in 
charge of consolidating all the planned activities written down in the SPCUs AWPBs and 
their related estimated costs into single document. The latter will be sent to IFAD for an 
initial review. In the preparation of single programme AWPB, the CPCU director will 
closely work with the CPCU M&E and KM officer, the key technical officers and the 
procurement officer. The latter will be also  in charge of the elaboration on the single 
Procurement Plan (PP) for the whole programme. 
189.  Step 7: Submission of the AWPB and the Procurement Plan for SNRLMP 
to IFAD for the initial review 
190.  Step 8 Review and Modification of the AWPB: and of the single Procurement 
Plan (PP) for SNRLM based on IFAD feedback After receiving feedback on the initial 
AWPB and the PP, the CPCU director will organize a staff meeting to review feedback 
received from IFAD. If some specific activities and budget items referring to the 
initiatives to be implemented in a specific State are called into question by the Fund, the 
CPCU will revert to the concerned SPCU. The latter will be required to hold a specific 
internal review session to address the issues raised by the Fund. The SPCU will then 
provide the CPCU with suggested written modifications to be made in order to fulfil 
IFAD’s requirements. This will be then transmitted to the CPCU which will incorporate 
and consolidate the latter into one document to be sent back to IFAD again. 
191.  Step 9 Submission of the AWPB and the Procurement Plan to IFAD for non-
objection: Once approved, the AWPB and PP are submitted to IFAD for its no-objection.  
If IFAD does not provide comments after thirty (30) days of receipt of the AWPB and PP, 
the AWPB shall be deemed acceptable. 
7.  Monitoring and evaluation  
192.  Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of programme activities, outputs, outcomes and 
achievements is the most important function for providing the basis for results based 
and adaptive programme management. At the same time it is the most important 
function for providing evidence for up-scaling further facilitated by the programme’s 
Knowledge Management, outreach and communication activities.  
7.1  M&E Strategy 
193.  As already mentioned, M&E activities will employ a participatory approach in 
which Programme participants are fully engaged in the collection of field data as well as 
in the discussion and analysis of this data. At the same time, they will also take part to 
the decision-making regarding changes that may be required for more effective 
Programme implementation.  
194.  This means that not only the Implementing Partners such as the Federal Ministry 
of Agriculture and Forestry  (MoAF) and the equivalent structures at the State level, but 
also the CM teams at the community level must play an active role in data collection and 
in its submission to the CPCU for consolidation. Each SCU will lead this process in the 
territory which it is responsible for. The SCUs M&E, KM and Innovation Officer will be in 
25 
charge of the collection, gathering and analysis the data against the activities and 
targets set out in the AWPBs but also against the overall Programme targets. She/he will 
assess Programme implementation progress and effectiveness and will be reporting the 
results to the CPCU. 
195.  The CPCU M&E, KM and Innovation Officer will ensure that information flow will 
be multi-directional; information will have to flow upward to IFAD, horizontally to the 
SCUs and downward to Programme beneficiaries.  The latter participate in data 
collection. At the governance level, the results of data analyses are to be used for 
discussion on implementation progress and to make decisions on improvements and/or 
corrective measures on programme implementation strategies, where necessary. 
196.  At the implementation level, the information is used as a learning mechanism to 
guide the CPCU, the SCUs and Programme beneficiaries on the implementation  of 
Programme activities in achieving concrete and positive results.  For this reason, the 
information must provide sufficient details to allow the improvement in implementation: 
matching results to activities and evaluating those results against targets will be 
instrumental in assisting the SCUs with timely decision-making for corrections to 
programme intervention, where necessary, in keeping the programme on track, in 
assisting beneficiaries in understanding how changes in natural resource management 
and governance practices and capacity building are crucial factors in the improvement of 
their productivity and ultimately of their livelihoods. 
7.2  M&E plan 
197.  Development and the continuous update of the M&E Plan is the responsibility of 
the CPCU M&E, KM and Innovation Officer in close liaise with the SCUs M&E, KM and 
Innovation Officers.  The plan must provide, as a minimum: i) information on the 
programme’s objectives, ii) the activities that will be carried out to achieve these 
objectives and the procedures that will be implemented to determine whether or not the 
objectives are met. The plan must show how the expected results of the programme 
relate to its goals and objectives, to the Logframe Indicators and to the Theory of 
Change. It  must identify: i) which type of data is needed; ii) how this will be collected 
and analyzed; iii) how this information will be used; iv) the resources that will be needed 
for M&E and; v) how the programme will be accountable to stakeholders. 
198.  Outputs from M&E activities must inform the CPU, the International Fund for 
Agricultural Development (IFAD), the Government of Sudan (GoS), and all key 
stakeholders on programme progress towards achieving the development objectives as 
well as indicate the impact that the project is having on the target groups. 
199.  The corn stone of the M&E is the log frame. The latter articulates the Theory of 
Change (ToC) of the project. The Theory of Change is a roadmap, providing a pathway of 
outputs and outcomes leading to the achievement of the programme development 
objectives.  Any M&E arrangement made should be in line with the main log frame 
requirements.  
In accordance with the participatory approach adopted by the programme, also 
200. 
M&E system (understood as a coherent set of IT tools, M&E methods, key M&E staff) will 
foster the participation of stakeholders, not just as sources of information, but as active 
participants in checking the progress over the attainment of SNRLM development 
objectives. 
201.  The M&E system is supposed to provide at any time of the implementation the 
following information:  
 
the use of Programme resources  
26 
 
 
the eventual  problems in achieving Programme objectives, expected outcomes 
and targets; 
the compliance during the implementation with the Programme's targeting 
strategy. 
202.  The ultimate responsible for the proper functioning of the overall M&E system of 
the SNRLMP is the M&E, KM and Innovation Officer at CPCU. She/he will be the main 
responsible for: a) the monthly and the semi annual Progress Reports, ii) the compliance 
with the ORMS indicators, and iii) the consolidation of the data transmitted from the 
SCUs into the main logframe. She/he will also responsible for ensuring the quality of 
these data by: i) checking the sources of information used, ii) the appropriateness and 
the trustworthiness  of the data collection methods employed; iii) the adherence and 
consistency with the indicators proposed in the main logframe. She/he will be also the 
main responsible for the continuous entry and update of the logframe information in the 
ORMS. 
203.  At the start up, she/he will meet with all the M&E, KM and Innovation officers to 
establish the Participatory Monitoring and Evaluation system (PM&E). She/he will explain 
the log frame results hierarchy and Theory of Change, the indicators used and their main 
disaggregation dimensions. She/he will devote particular attention to clarify the role of 
the CIs and the necessity to have sound information to report against the latter.  
204.  After this meeting, each M&E, KM and Innovation Officers at the SCU will organize 
a meeting with the respective CM teams. During latter the reason why the M&E system 
is a key tool to achieve the established targets and  to ensure the regular and the 
detailed reporting against the selected indicators will be set out . Moreover, the M&E, KM 
and Innovation Officers will stimulate an in depth discussion about the most effective  
data collection methods to be used within the communities. On the basis of the outcome 
of this discussion, she/he will identify - in close connection with CM teams- the most 
appropriate tools and techniques for data collection (e.g focus groups, community 
surveys, interviews, observations) at the field level which will be employed in the 
framework of the programme. Such a participatory approach will be used to maximum 
extent possible also in the phase of data analysis: the latter should be an opportunity to 
actively involve various categories of programme stakeholders in the critical examination 
of successes and constraints and, wherever, possible in the formulation of conclusions 
and lessons learned.  
205.  The SCU M&E, KM and Innovation officer will be responsible to consolidate 
information gathered during this phase  (data collection and analysis)  and to send it to 
the CPCU, where the M&E, KM and Innovation officer will analyze and use it to report 
against the main logframe indicators as well as to inform the monthly and semi annual 
reports to be submitted to IFAD.   
206.  As already mentioned in the chapter devoted to planning, the SCU M&E officers 
will constantly backstop the CM teams in their monitoring activities by undertaking 
monthly field visits aimed to identify the main issues arising during the implementation 
(see footnote 1). 
7.3  M&E system and instruments 
207.  Within the first three months of the Programme, the CPCU M&E, KM and 
Innovation Officer must develop the required specifications for a Management 
Information System (MIS), which will be instrumental in the data collection and analysis 
as well as in their reporting. The MIS must incorporate mobile and internet technologies 
which can make  the data  collection and the  dissemination of results easy and readily 
accessible. The MIS must have sufficient tools (information dashboards, charting tools, 
and custom reports) for data review, analysis and dissemination. The CPCU Director will 
27 
closely work with the M&E, KM and Innovation Officer to procure a consultant/firm to 
develop and implement the MIS. 
7.4  IFAD cooperate core indicators (CI) 
208.  The Logframe includes a number of Core Indicators (CIs) which are used by IFAD 
for the purpose of corporate performance monitoring and reporting to donors.  The 
purpose of CIs is to continuously monitor the progress towards achieving the intended 
results: The CIs along with all Logframe indicators, expressing the cause/effect links of 
the Theory of Change, should guide the overall management strategy and 
theimplementation of activities. Lessons based on experiences must be applied to 
address shortcomings and to increase the likelihood that the intended results will be 
achieved.  The M&E will incorporate IFAD's CIs as well as progress achieved and 
expected results of the programme as defined in the Log frame and Theory of Change. 
7.5  Evaluation  
209.  Evaluation aims to determine the relevance, effectiveness and efficiency of the 
activities and the rural poverty impact of the interventions on the beneficiaries. 
Specifically, evaluation points to assess the changes in the well-being of the 
beneficiaries, while trying to compare the situation ex-ante (from baseline information) 
with the ex-post (after programme completion) situation. During this process, external 
factors that can affect the achievement of the desired impact on the target group are 
also taken into consideration. The CPCU M&E, KM and Innovation Officer and the nine 
SCU M&E, KM and Innovation Officers are responsible for the assessment of changes 
generated by the interventions in the target population, as well as of the progress 
toward objectives and goals.  
210.  After Programme completion, a more comprehensive evaluation of the 
programme will be carried out by an external consultant and will be closed with the 
preparation of the Programme Completion Report. Accordingly, from the beginning of 
programme activities, the M&E system must be organized so as to be able to timely  
provide all the necessary information for the satisfactory performance of this task. 
7.6  Reporting requirements 
211.  The CPCU M&E, KM and Innovation officer is responsible for preparing Monthly 
Status Reports, which will provide quantitative information on progress being made 
towards the achievement of the planned annual targets. The Monthly Staturs Reports will 
also contain of qualitative information about the general progress of the annual 
programme implementation activities.  These reports will be prepared based on the data 
collected via the M&E system and through field visits made to the programme areas, if 
need be9. 
212. 
In addition, each Technical Officer must prepare monthly status reports for their 
respective technical areas, which shall provide information on: i) the status of ongoing 
activities, ii) results of completed activities, including the outputs from activities, and: iii) 
challenges being faced during implementation.  Status reports will be prepared based on 
data collected via the M&E system and field visits to the programme areas. 
213.  Monthly status reports are to be submitted to the CPCU Director for review no 
later than five (5) working days after the end of the month.   
9 Field visits (to be always carried out jointly  with SCU M&E officers) are to be made at least quarterly. They 
can take place  more often than this, particularly , in case  some main drawbacks (requiring stronger support to 
be overcome) are identified during SCU M&E officers’ monthly field visits. 
28 
Semi-annual Progress Reports 
214.  The Semi-annual Progress Report is a requirement of the Financing Agreement 
and must be submitted to IFAD no later than forty-five (45) days after the end of the 
period.  The CPCU M&E, KM and Innovation Officer is responsible for the preparation of 
the semi-annual reports, which will include technical contributions from all CPCUs 
Technical Officers and will be based on the information provided on a monthly base by all 
SCUs.  The report will, as a minimum, discuss: i) quantitative and qualitative progress 
made in implementing the Programme and in the achievement of its objectives, (ii) 
problems encountered during the reporting period, (iii) steps taken or proposed to be 
taken to remedy these problems, and (iv) the proposed programme of activities and the 
progress expected during the following reporting period. The report will be discussed 
with the CPCU under the leadership of the Director  and will be accompanied by progress 
reports for the operational areas of the Programme, including financial, procurement and 
governance.   
215.  Updates on the semi-annual M&E reports will be required prior to IFAD 
supervision missions.  Updates to the progress on Logframe Core Indicators will be 
provided during supervision missions and at any other time IFAD may request them. The 
mentioned task are under the responsibility of the CPCU M&E, KM and Innovation officer.  
7.7  Baseline and impact studies 
216.  Baselines will be carried out only in those areas which were not previously 
covered by IFAD-funded interventions. For all the other areas, data available from 
impact studies and PCRs will be used and, if needed, partially integrated through ad hoc 
researches aiming to investigate aspects relating to the target group livelihoods which 
are relevant for the project being implemented, but that are not reported on by previous 
IFAD interventions documentation. 
217.  At the start of the intervention activities, baseline data will be generated on each 
beneficiary group (pastoralist, agro-pastoralists and smallholder farmers, with a specific 
focus for each of this category on women and youth) . This information will be used to 
track changes in the key indicators as programme implementation progresses and 
results are achieved. The information will be also used to make improvements and/or 
take corrective actions on the  development interventions 
218.  The SCUs M&E KM and Innovation Officers, working with the technical officers, 
are responsible for defining the indicators that will be used for establishing the baseline 
at the beneficiary level in close liaise with the CPCU M&E KM and Innovation Officer who 
is in charge of consolidating this information at the project level. The minimum 
requirement of the baseline data is that it needs to provide the information needed to 
measure the indicators defined in the LF as well as the  Core Indicators. Each SCUs is 
responsible for data collection and analysis, while the responsibility for the aggregate 
analysis of data at the project level (particularly against the main log frame indicators 
and the CIs) is attributed to the CPCU M&E KM and Innovation Officer. 
In close liaise with the SCUs M&E, KM and Innovation officers, the CPCU M&E, KM 
219. 
and Innovation Officer is responsibles for developing the Terms of Reference for the 
conduct of the Baseline Studies.  Then , bidding processes will be launched to select the 
subject (academic institution, external consultancy firm, etc) which will undertake the 
research. 
220.  The final Impact Study will be conducted as close to the Programme Completion 
Date as is possible, to provide the necessary information for the evaluation of the 
Programme and the preparation of the Programme Completion Report. 
29 
7.8  Mid-term review 
221.  A Mid-Term Review (MTR) will be carried out three years after programme start-
up. This will be an external review led by IFAD. It will assess implementation progress 
and likelihood of the achievement of the programme development objectives trough the 
evaluation of results reported up to that moment against the Log frame indicators 
(particularly, the IFAD CIs.) The MTR will also pinpoint (if need be) corrective actions  to 
be put in place in the remaining implementation period before completion. The MTR will 
also assess the effectiveness of the targeting approach and of the gender equality 
actions. Other aspects that will be taken into consideration in the framework of this 
exercise are  the delivery of intervention activities and  the performance of the CPCU and 
of the nine SCUs. 
222.  The CPCU Director is responsible for coordinating the activities of the MTR, 
including developing the schedule for field visits, meetings with stakeholders and 
meetings with the PMU Staff Members.  Each SCU will be responsible for preparing 
progress reports on their respective areas and to make themselves available to the MTR 
Mission to ensure that MTR achieves its objectives.  
7.9  Programme supervision 
223. 
IFAD's supervisory function will be ongoing and support will be provided to 
resolve issues that may arise during implementation. Supervision Missions will take place 
at least once per year and will be organized by IFAD´s Country Programme Manager 
(CPM) in coordination with the Borrower, the Lead Programme Ministry and the CPCU. 
The Supervision Missions will pay particular attention to smooth and timely 
implementation of the programme and to the achievement of its intended objectives and 
outcomes, and to the progress made on achieving the LF and CIs.  
224.  The supervision missions will monitor the programme feasibility and capacity to 
deliver on an annual basis based on the following high level triggers: 
Triggers 
Number of SPCUs established and fully staffed 
Progress in implementation of AWPB 
No of NRLMPs developed and approved 
No of groups formed, capacitated and developing 
their LIP 
Year 1 
9 
At least 
80 
percent 
achieved 
20 
500 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year 5 
Year 6 
At least 
80 
percent 
achieved 
40 
1,000 
At least 
80 
percent 
achieved 
80 
2,500 
At least 
80 
percent 
achieved 
10 
1,000 
At least 
80 
percent 
achieved 
At least 
80 
percent 
achieved 
500 
225.  The following key tasks will be undertaken by the supervision missions: 
  Assisting in identifying and discussing actual and potential/emerging problems 
and constraints, and agreeing on solutions, changes or improvements needed 
and the responsibilities for their implementation. 
  Assessing the appropriateness of the targeting strategy and its effective 
implementation by the PMU and IPs, suggesting the necessary adjustments to 
increase outreach and impact, and reviewing programme performance in 
terms of youth and gender-equity considerations. 
  Reviewing the programme's implementation progress against Final Design 
Report targets and the AWPB, using the key indicators as defined in the LF. 
30 
  Discussing the perception of the programme and their participation in its 
implementation with the SCUs and representatives of Implementing Partners 
and actively seeking their opinion on improving programme performance. 
  Discussing with beneficiaries the level of their participation and access to 
programme services and results achieved to date, and actively seek their 
opinion on improving programme performance. 
 
\Undertaking field visits to the targeted areas to spot check and verify 
reported physical progress. 
  Exploring the adequacy of the M&E and the MIS and its use by different 
stakeholders and assessing whether the system satisfies the information 
needs of programme stakeholders, and providing on-going monitoring 
information of programme activities (AWPB), LF and CIs output and higher-
level results, including targeting performance and gender equity. 
  Examining programme expenditures and making realistic estimates as to 
whether the programme can be completed within the original cost estimates 
(foreign currency and local currency). 
 
Identifying possible cost overruns/savings on IFAD's categories of 
expenditures and ascertaining the need for a reallocation of funding resources 
between categories, or cancellation due to savings. 
  Reviewing the progress of procurement and disbursements based on 
comparisons of the records of IFAD and the Programme, verifying the terms 
of the contracts awarded and the commitments and disbursements made, and 
obtaining copies of approved contracts not yet submitted to IFAD. 
  Checking a sample of Statements of Expenditure (SOEs) to verify their 
accuracy against IFAD's records. 
  Reviewing the financial and accounting systems of the programme and 
implementing partners (if applicable) and ensuring that these systems are 
adequate for IFAD's reporting requirements. 
  Reviewing compliance by the Borrower with the loan agreement.  
  Exploring such other matters related to the programme that may delay or 
adversely affect programme implementation and that would impact the 
achievement of the expected results.  
7.10  Programme completion process and report 
226.  The programme completion review is a process undertaken by the Government of 
Sudan in close coordination with IFAD at the end of the implementation cycle in order to 
report on the results achieved through programme interventions. The main purposes of 
the review process are to promote accountability, reflect on programme performance, 
produce lessons learnt to inform new programme/project designs, define an exit strategy 
for sustainability. The learning dimension of the completion process should be 
emphasized since it provides useful information for improvements in future 
programme/project designs and programming. The completion review process is also 
critical for identifying opportunities for scaling-up of best practices. As already 
mentioned, this phase is crucial particularly to enhance the sustainability of programme 
interventions. The Completion exercise provides all stakeholders with a unique 
opportunity to reflect on overall programme design and performance, and generate 
31 
useful lessons learnt from implementation.  Key findings of the completion review will be 
reported and analysed in the Programme Completion Report (PCR). The Government of 
Sudan through the CPCU is in charge of carrying out  the completion review and of the 
writing up of the Completion Report.  IFAD will support the process, including provision 
of technical assistance, if required. 
227.  At the end of the Programme, the CPCU will organize and implement a Closing 
Workshop with the all the programme stakeholders. The objective of the workshop is to 
discuss programme experiences and results, identify best practices and success stories 
and obstacles encountered during implementation so as to provide inputs to the 
Programme Completion Report (PCR). 
8.  Knowledge management and communication 
[Marina] 
228.  The overall purpose of KM is to enable the country programme to build a credible  
knowledge base of practical and actionable know-how that can be used to better address  
challenges related to the community governance of natural resources in Sudan. 
229.  CM teams will then play a crucial role in liaising with VDCs to identify lessons 
learned and best practices from the field. This can be collected in the form of stories 
from the field and/or cases studies. In order to produce knowledge which is demand-
driven, it is highly recommended to explore the knowledge needs also of IFAD’s target 
groups with a specific focus on women, youth and pastoralists. Such an analysis will be  
carried out by promoting broad consultation process  aimed to identify and address 
knowledge and capacity priorities, needs, gaps and solutions. On the basis of this 
information, ad hoc information materials and training for target groups based on needs 
assessments should be produced always counting on the support of the SCUs M&E, KM 
and Innovation officer. 
230.  The lessons learned and best practices collected at the field level  will be 
transmitted to the state level, through the SCUs M&E, KM and Innovation officers.  The 
latter will have to identify those experiences or innovations that can be potentially useful 
to broader audiences and use it as inputs for the preparation of Knowledge Products 
(KPs). In the case of case studies, she/he will provide support to the CM teams in writing 
them up (by corroborating the case studies with key data and evidence from the M&E 
system and by linking them to the wider framework of the development objectives 
pursued by the programme). 
231.  SCUs will regularly provide the CCPU with KPs. The CPCU M&E, KM and 
Innovation Officer will arrange and prepare these products for a wider sharing among all 
the stakeholders of current IFAD funded interventions in Sudan.  The reason for the 
choice of the CPCU as the main collector of KPs being the reliance on the dissemination 
tools already developed by the CPCU during the implementation of the previous IFAD-
funded interventions. Among this, it is worth mentioning  the CCU web page already 
containing all the relevant information of all IFAD projects in the country (both ongoing 
and closed). The web page is in Arabic but includes a tab  in English. It provides detailed 
information about IFAD funded programmes, it holds studies and reports on topics which 
are relevant to IFAD programmes domains of intervention and includes a special section 
on procurement. Finally, a further page is fully dedicated to videos and stories form the 
field.  
232.  Therefore, it is highly recommended to continue to build on this tool as the main 
dissemination instrument also for SNRLMP. To increase the visibility, a specific hyperlink 
to this web should be added in the IFAD intranet page covering operations in Sudan. This 
32 
action should be carried out in close liaise with NEN KM focal point in Rome by the first 
of year of implementation. Also, an online forum linked to this web page should be set 
up: access to it by potential members should be granted by the CPCU M&E, KM and 
Innovation officer. The forum has to promote the exchange of ideas and comments on 
NRM related issues and attempt to establish a thematic network involving a broad 
audience of stakeholders dealing with/interested in community management of natural 
resources.  These stakeholders can be based not in Sudan, but also in other countries. 
This will allow the promotion of a lively debate and a wider sharing of experience 
referring to this domain. The idea is to gradually capture the attention not only  of IFAD 
projects traditional stakeholders but also of any professional engaged and active  in this 
sector.  
233.  The forum should be regularly monitored by the CPCU M&E, KM and Innovation 
Officer who should also promote the debate over specific issues at least twice a month 
and who will be the moderator of the network. 
 Also, the possibility to open a specific Facebook page for SNRML should be 
234. 
explored in the first phase of programme implementation. Access to the page will be 
granted by the CPCU M&E, KM and Innovation Officer after a careful check of the identity 
and of the genuine interest  in the topic by the person asking to join the community. 
Also in this case, a close collaboration with the NEN KM officer based in Rome should be 
envisaged. The latter could advise the CPCU M&E, KM and Innovation officer also about 
the possibility to establish linkages with other ongoing knowledge platforms such as 
FIDAfrique-IFADAfrica and IFADAsia. 
235.  Another task which should be regularly performed by the CPCU  M&E, KM and 
Innovation officer refers to the promotion of specific learning events to the benefit of the 
project teams in the nine States such as project learning days: this will allow all the 
participants to get training on specific issues, but also to have the possibility to interact 
and exchange ideas and experiences on a regular basis. Documentation containing the 
main points arisen during these events should be produced shorty after their 
implementation, distributed among participants and but also shared at a wider level with 
all relevant stakeholders. 
9.  Financial management  
236.  Refer financial manual presented separately 
10.  Administration of human resources  
237.  The selection of project staff will follow competitive procedures in order to ensure 
recruitment of competent personnel for the project service. The project will need to 
obtain IFAD approval for recruitment of project staff at the CPMU as well as at SPIUs.  
238.  The contracts for project recruited staff will be performance based and extension 
thereof will based on satisfactory performance. 
10.1  Evaluation of Performance 
239.  performance evaluation for all project staff, will be conducted annually, before 
expiry their respective contract terms. Evaluation will be based on individual employees' 
TOR and satisfactory delivery thereof.   
11.  Procurement and contracting 
11.1  Overview 
240. 
the Procurement, Contracting and Disposal of Public Assets Act (the Act) which was  
issued by Government of Sudan in year 2010, drawing on experiences of regional 
In the process of Public Procurement Reform, The Sudan Republic has enacted 
33 
countries, such as Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Tanzania and Uganda. The act also benefited 
from studies and remarks made by the World Bank and the Common Market for Eastern 
and South Africa. In support of implementation of the Act, The Sudan Government has 
also issued the Regulations/Procedures for Public Procurement, Contracting and Disposal 
of Public Assets in March 2011 and the Comprehensive Manual for Procurement and 
Contracting Procedures, to guide the procurement process. 
241.  The process of Public Procurement Reform is mandated to the General Directorate 
of Public Procurement, Contracting and Disposal of Public Assets (“the Directorate”). The 
Directorate is an autonomous unit under the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning 
(MoFEP), reporting to the Minister of Finance. The Directorate is staffed with 
approximately fifty procurement and administrative personnel who are currently 
undergoing training.  At present, the directorate is focusing on implementing the Act, 
public procurement methods and procedures, formation of procurement committees in 
the major Governmental units, prohibited actions, review and appeal procedures, ethical 
behaviour, offences, penalties, capacity building and a chapter regulating the disposal of 
public assets.  (The Act contains fifteen chapters and eighty three articles.)  So far, 
procurement guidelines and standard bidding documents in Arabic (drawing very much 
on WB documents) have been prepared and distributed to Government Agencies.  In 
future, it is expected that this directorate will shift its focus from implementer of the law 
to monitoring and oversight. 
242.  Procurement in donor supported projects is currently governed by the regulations 
of the donors. However, for IFAD co-financed projects, procurement is agreed to be 
carried following Government Guidelines as far as they are in line with the Donors 
Guidelines.  It is also the practice under the above agreement that IFAD co-financed 
projects carry out procurement transactions under local shopping and local competitive 
bidding. Procurement at levels of national competitive bidding (NCB) and international 
competitive bidding (ICB) methods will be carried out by the Central Coordination Unit 
for IFAD co-financed projects (CCU) on behalf of the projects. However, the procurement 
function at CCU will require further streamlining/strengthening of its capacity. Recently, 
CCU has recruited a procurement assistant, assigned from the Government, how will 
need further training particularly on IFAD Procurement Guidelines and knowledge of 
IFAD Procurement Handbook. 
243. 
In terms of Sudan’s overall capacity, procurement capacity is still extremely weak 
as indicated by recent assessments by IFAD. This is particularly in the areas of managing 
the bidding process, procurement planning and contract management.  A fact which is 
being confirmed by reviews during supervision missions to different IFAD funded 
projects. There is no evidence of recent assessments undertaken for The Sudan by other 
donors. Although it was brought to the information of an earlier mission that training 
has/is being delivered to the staff of procurement units at the state ministries on the 
Act, the Regulations, the Manual and the standard documents, it was also observed the 
procurement at state level is only at small on scale. The continuous shuffling of staff of 
ministries bear an adverse effect on availability of trained staff. Additionally, It is also 
noticed that, similar training was not provided to procurement committees at the line 
department levels.  
244.  Coupled with the interviews, IFAD’s new procurement assessment tool was the 
main instrument utilised in this validation exercise.  This assessment covered the various 
phases of the procurement cycle, including planning, soliciting and bidding, evaluation 
and contract management, documentation and staffing. 
245.  Under the Act, investment projects financed by an international agency are not 
required to follow the national procurement procedures.  But as indicated above, the 
Project procurement will follow Government Guidelines as far as they are in line with the 
34 
IFAD Guidelines. Also considering capacity gaps indicated, close monitoring from the ICO 
will be made to ensure no deviation occurs. 
11.2  Procurement Guidelines 
246.  Procurement of goods, works and consulting services financed by the Grant shall 
be subject to the provisions of the Borrower’s national procurement regulations, to the 
extent consistent with the IFAD “Procurement Guidelines” approved by the Executive 
Board in December 2004, (the “Procurement Guidelines”) as such guidelines may be 
amended from time to time by the Fund. If any provision of the Borrower’s national 
regulations is inconsistent with a provision of this Schedule, then the latter shall govern. 
247.  As set out above and depending on procurement volume and value, SNRLP 
procurement activities will be carried out at CCU level, CPMU level, SPIU and community. 
Considering the relatively weak capacity at present, close monitoring by ICO will be 
exercised to guide the process.  The Project will follow the procurement thresholds as set 
out in the Letter to the Borrower/Recipient and in the approved Procurement Plan. 
248.  Whenever possible, procurement of goods and works will be bulked into sizeable 
bid packages to attract adequate competition thus resulting in cost-effective and efficient 
procurement. 
249.  At community level, procurement with community participation, is expected to 
receive more oversight from the state level procurement and state coordination unit to 
ensure adherence to required procedures and processes. 
250.  The project will prepare an 18 months procurement plan at starting of the project 
to be approved by IFAD and thereafter prepare an annual which will stipulate among 
other things, description of procurement, quantity/cost, method of procurement, review 
requirement and the timeframe for the procurement process, through to award of 
contract.  
11.3  Procurement Methods and Thresholds 
251.  Depending on procurement volume and value, SNRLP procurement of works and 
goods will be carried out under the following procurement methods: (i) international 
competitive bidding (ICB); (ii) limited international bidding (LIB) or restricted tendering; 
(iii) national competitive bidding (NCB); (iv) international or national shopping or 
requests for quotations; (v) direct contracting; and (vi) in very limited/justifiable cases 
single source selection (SSS). Procurement with community participation will usually be 
national shopping method. 
252.  Thresholds applicable to different methods of procurement will be set in the Letter 
to Recipient (LTR) after signing the Grant Agreement. However, at this stage proposed 
thresholds will be as follows: 
Type of procurement 
Thresholds 
Procurement method 
1  Works 
2 
Goods 
3a  Consulting services (firms) 
-  More than EUR 300,000 
-  EUR 50,000-300,000 
-  Less than EUR 50,000 
-  More than EUR 200,000 
-  EUR 25,000-200,000 
-  Less than EUR 25,000 
-  More than EUR 100,000 
-  Less than EUR 100,000 
3b  Consulting services (individual)**   
-  ICB* 
-  NCB 
-  National shopping & community participation 
-  ICB* 
-  NCB 
-  National shopping 
-  QCBS 
-  CQS 
-  Individual consultant selection procedures 
253.  Works estimated to cost more than EUR 300,000 equivalent will be procured 
through International Competitive Bidding (ICB) method using the WB’s applicable 
Standard Bidding Documents (SBD).  Works estimated between EUR 50,000 and 
35 
EUR 300,000 equivalent will be procured through the National Competitive Bidding 
(NCB).  While works estimated below EUR 50,000 will be procured through National 
Shopping or Community Participation.  Direct contracting will have to be identified and 
approved by IFAD in advance for those cases which justify use of such method. 
254.  Goods estimated to cost more than EUR 200,000 equivalent per contract will be 
procured through the International Competitive Bidding (ICB) method using the WB’s 
applicable SBDs.  Goods estimated to cost between EUR 25,000 and EUR 200,000 
equivalent per contract will be procured through National Competitive Bidding (NCB).  
Goods estimated to cost less than EUR 25,000 equivalent per contract will be procured 
through the Shopping method.  Direct contracting will have to be identified and approved 
by IFAD in advance for those cases which justify use of such method. Same thresholds 
will apply for procurement of non-consulting services. 
255.  Consulting services estimated to cost more than EUR 100,000 equivalent for 
firms, will be on the basis of Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS) and for services 
costing less than EUR 100,000 may be on the basis of Consultants’ Qualifications (QCS).  
For individuals, it will be on the basis of Individual Consultants (IC) selection procedures.  
However, the specific nature of the assignment will finally determine the method of 
procurement to be followed and will be pre-determined in each approved annual 
procurement plan.   
11.4  Thresholds for Prior Review 
256.  As indicated in paragraph 69. above, also thresholds applicable to prior IFAD 
review will be set out in the Letter to Recipient (LTR) after signing the Grant Agreement. 
However, at this stage proposed thresholds will be as follows: 
  Award of any contract for goods and equipment estimated to cost EUR 50,000 
equivalent or more; 
  Award of any contract for works estimated to cost EUR 100,000 equivalent or 
more; 
  Award to a firm of any contract for consultancy services estimated to cost 
EUR 100,000 equivalent or more; 
  Award to an individual of any contract for consulting services estimated to cost 
EUR 25,000 equivalent or more; and 
  Award of any contract through direct contracting, single source selection, 
including selection of United Nations agencies, irrespective of the amount.  
Furthermore, for consultancy services, all Terms of Reference, Short-listing (if 
applicable) and draft contracts will be subject to IFAD prior review. 
257.  The aforementioned thresholds may be modified by the Fund during the course of 
Project implementation. 
11.5  Procurement Procedures for Goods (Vehicles, Equipment and Other) 
258.  The procurement procedures to be followed in procurement of goods is GOS 
procedures for national shopping (NS) and national competitive bidding (NCB) and World 
Bank procedures for international competitive bidding (ICB). Accordingly, the format and 
templates to be used will GOS and World Bank format and templates respectively. 
259.  The procurement process starts by preparing the project annual procurement 
plan (PP), starting at community, state and CPMU level, all of them are subsequently 
consolidated at the CPMU level for approval by the Project Manager (PM), endorsed by 
project steering committee (along with Project annual work plan and budget) and 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning. After the project PP is being approved by 
IFAD then procurement activities are ready for implementation in line with planned 
36 
methods and time line. Annex 7. to the PDR providing 18 months procurement plan in 
the format adopted by IFAD financed projects. 
260.  Based on the approved PP, processing individual procurement activities is 
initiated by the concerned requesting party for approval at the appropriate different 
levels of approval (Community, SPIU, CPMU). 
261.  Upon approval of individual activities, procurement documents (RFQ, BD) should 
be prepared by respective procurement officer, in collaboration with requesting party 
and required technical assistance, as may be needed for drafting technical specifications 
(specs). Should the required expertise for drafting the specs not be available at the 
project, such expertise should be outsourced.  
262.  For procurement under ICB and NCB, where this is entrusted with CCU, 
preparation of the procurement documents should be carried out in collaboration 
between the project procurement officer and CCU. 
263.  Procurement under ICB will follow the World Bank procedures and use the World 
Bank standard bidding documents described below: 
a.  Invitation for Bids 
b.  Instructions to Bidders 
c.  General Conditions of Contract 
d.  Special Conditions of Contract 
e.  Schedule of Requirements  
f. 
 Technical Specifications 
g.  Bid Form and Price Schedules 
h.  Bid Security Form 
i.  Contract Form and 
j.  Performance Security Form 
264.  Responsibilities for the process will be; (i) CPMU to draft technical specifications 
(outsource expertise if needed), (ii) CCU is responsible for preparing BD in collaboration 
with CPMU, (iii) CPMU will seek approval from IFAD, (iv) CCU is to proceed with 
advertising (advertisement 45 days), bid opening and bid evaluation/reporting is the 
responsibility of CCU and CPMU, (vi) the approval of evaluation report will be done by 
CPMU/CCU/MoFEP/IFAD, (vii) CPMU and CCU will conduct negotiation with suppliers, as 
appropriate, (viii) CPMU/CCU will seek approval of negotiated contract from IFAD, (ix) 
CPMU will sign the contract with supplier/provider and (x) inspection/receipt of 
deliverables payment for goods/services is the responsibility of CPMU. 
265.  As stated above procedures to be adopted for NS and NCB are the GOS 
procedures, detailed in the Sudan Comprehensive Manual for Procurement and 
Contracting Procedures (the Manual) in Arabic language. The project should obtain 
enough copies of the Manual -at CPMU, SPIU and community levels- for guidance and as 
well for training on procurement procedures. It is however, worth-mentioning that 
documents for NCB have the same format and follow the same procedures of ICB except 
that the duration for advertisement is shorter and the language for advertisement may 
be in Arabic or English language and in the national/local newspapers.  
37 
11.6  Procurement procedures works 
266.  Procedures for procurement for works -drawing on provisions of project LTR- will 
be carried out under national competitive bidding (NCB) or national/local shopping (NS), 
depending on the estimate value of contract, as none of the planned works is expected 
to attract international firms. Estimate value being small and works locations are 
dispersed. 
267.  The procedures for procurement of works is the same as that of procurement of 
goods, except where procurement is undertaken with community participation, 
community will be directly involved in the process. 
11.7  Procurement procedures for community-based works 
268.  The methods to be applied for procurement with community participation for 
works as well for goods will local competitive bidding and national shopping.  
269.  Steps and responsibilities associated with procurement with community 
participation and depicted in the table below: 
Step 
Task 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
Preparation of works specifications 
Advertisement of bids 
Advertise for bids for materials supply 
Bid opening 
Price comparison and bid evaluation 
Negotiation and finalisation of 
contract 
Execution 
Payments 
Organisation/Responsibility 
Beneficiary 
group 
Approve 
Inform 
Inform 
Inform 
Conduct 
Consult 
Conduct 
Approve 
CBO/cluster 
Approve 
Approve 
Approve 
conduct 
Conduct 
conduct 
Conduct 
Approve 
Locality 
Team/Engineer 
provide 
Inform 
Inform 
Inform 
Consult 
SPIU/CPMU 
Approve 
Advertise 
Advertise 
Overview 
Oversight/approve 
Consult 
Consult 
Consult 
Review/approve 
Overview 
Review/process 
11.8  Procedures for contracting consultant services 
270.  The methods which are permitted for the procurement of consulting services are: 
(i) quality and cost-based selection (QCBS); (ii) quality based selection (QBS); 
(iii) selection under a fixed budget (FBS); (iv) selection based on consultants’ 
qualifications (CQS); (v) least cost selection (LCS); (vi) single-source selection (SSS); 
and (vii) selection of individual consultants (IC). 
271.  Procurement of consulting services under RFP is carried out by CCU in 
collaboration with the project management. Division of work will be: (i) the project 
management (CPMU) will be responsible for preparing the ToR and scope of work for the 
assignment and seek approval of IFAD as required, (ii) CCU will review ToR and scope of 
work and prepare bid documents, in collaboration with the project, (iii) CPMU/CCU will 
seek IFAD approval of the bid documents as required, (iv) upon approval CCU will 
advertise/disseminate bid documents, (v) CCU will receive proposals from potential 
service providers, form the evaluation committee and arrange for bid opening as 
appropriate, (vi) with participation of the project the evaluation committee will conduct 
evaluation and recommend to CCU -at different stages- the successful bidder/provider, 
(viii) CPMU/CCU will seek/obtain IFAD approval as appropriate, (ix) CPMU/CCU will 
conduct negotiations with successful bidder/provider and seek IFAD approval of the 
negotiated contract, (x) CPMU will sign contract with the successful bidder/provider and 
(xi) CPMU will undertake follow on contract implementation process payment to the 
contractor accordingly. 
38 
11.9  Other details 
272.  Post-review:  All other contracts will be subject to post-review and may be 
subject to procurement audit by the Fund.  The Project staff will maintain accurate 
records of all procurement activities and documents related to the Project.  The 
procurement files will be maintained for review by IFAD supervision missions and 
independent audits.  Staff will also consolidate procurement activities into quarterly and 
annual progress reports. 
273.  Ex post review:  The Project will retain all documentation up to five years after 
the closing date of the financing for examination by IFAD or by independent auditors.  
This documentation includes, but is not be limited to, the signed original contract, the 
evaluation of the respective proposals and recommendation of award.  IFAD does not 
finance expenditures for goods, works or consulting services that have not been 
procured in accordance with the procedures specified in the financing agreement.  In 
such cases, IFAD may, in addition, exercise other remedies under the financing 
agreement, including cancellation of the amount in question from the financing.  Even if 
the contract was awarded after obtaining a “no objection” from IFAD, IFAD may still 
declare miss-procurement if it concludes that the “no objection” was issued on the basis 
of incomplete, inaccurate or misleading information furnished by the Project or the terms 
and conditions of the contract had been modified without IFAD’s approval. 
274.  Register of Contracts: Procurement carried out by the Project is to be recorded 
and registered against the Procurement Plan.  In addition, all contracts, with or without 
prior IFAD approval will be listed in the Register of Contracts maintained by the 
procuring entity with the dates of approval as provided by IFAD.  When a contract is 
amended, the amendment will be recorded in the Register of Contracts.  If a contract is 
cancelled or declared ineligible for financing by IFAD, this information will be written in 
the Register of Contracts.  The register contracts, it is to be updated and submitted to 
the IFAD Country Programme Manager (CPM)/Country Director (CD) on a quarterly 
basis.  The sample form to be used and instructions are detailed in Annex 6 of IFAD’s 
Loan Disbursement Handbook and the Project Implementation Manual (PIM).  It will also 
be necessary that the Central Project Management Unit (CPMU) prepares annual 
statistics disaggregated by type and methods of procurement, for the overall 
procurement transactions carried out. 
275.  Staffing and Capacity Development:  The staffing of the procurement function 
in the Project will comprise one procurement officer with a procurement assistant at the 
CPMU and one procurement assistant at each of the nine SPIU offices.  It is highly 
recommended that these positions are to be filled competitively, at the CPMU and SPIU 
levels and their contracts will be performance-based contracts.  Competent GoS staff will 
be eligible to compete and if selected, will be hired as Project staff and it will be their 
responsibility to take all necessary arrangements in accordance with the labour laws of 
the country.  In order to establish sound procurement management system in the 
Project and given the current assessment, there will be a need for intensive capacity 
development of these staffs, as well as for community procurement committees 
entrusted with procurement at community and cluster levels.   
276.  Governance aspects: While there is still room for improvement in the 
implementation of the Anti-Corruption Law in Sudan, measures have been taken to 
reinforce the compliance with the law.  The Act provides for provisions on probity and 
anti-corruption.  It provides for sanctions and penalties in the event of discovery, which 
applies to both individuals and companies and can lead to temporary or permanent 
debarment, depending on the severity or frequency of the crimes.  In the event of 
criminal activity, the Act provides for action by the public prosecutor and the criminal 
authorities. 
39 
In accordance with the Business Anti-Corruption Portal of the Global Advisory 
277. 
Network (GAN) Integrity Solutions, Legislation, Corruption in the form of active and 
passive bribery is covered by the Sudan Penal Code 2003.  Additionally, the major forms 
of corrupt activity, including attempted corruption, extortion, bribing a foreign official, 
and money laundering are criminalised.  Moreover, Sudan signed the United Nations 
Convention Against Corruption (UNCAC) in 2005 and the African Union Convention on 
Preventing and Combating Corruption in 2008, but has not yet ratified either of them.  
Overall, the institutional setup for countering corruption remains weak in Sudan. 
278. 
In a positive light though, an Anti-Corruption Agency was established in January 
2012.  A former Under-Secretary of Sudan’s Ministry of Finance and National Economy, 
was appointed to Head the agency.  As of August 2013, it is still at too early to evaluate 
the effectiveness of the newly established anti-corruption agency.  However, a December 
2012 article published by Sudan Tribune points out that nothing has yet emerged from 
the agency on its corruption investigation.  President Bashir recently sacked the head of 
the agency because of this, according to All Africa in August 2013. Up to date, there is 
no public/clear outcome of work done by the agency. 
279.  Public Procurement:  According to Global Integrity 2006, Sudan drafted and 
passed a Public Procurement Law in 2006 and the Act was revised in 2010.  The law 
demands that major public procurement projects go through a competitive bidding 
process.  According to the law, companies that violate procurement rules can be barred 
from participating in future tenders.  Unsuccessful bidders may challenge the 
procurement decision in court.  However, the enforcement is very weak, according to the 
U4 Anti-Corruption Resource Centre 2017.  The public procurement law also covers 
conflicts of interest for procurement officials.  According to Global Integrity 2006, major 
public procurements are typically advertised in Khartoum daily newspapers, but in most 
cases not for more than a week due to the cost of advertisement. 
In particular, good governance measures built in to the Project will include: 
280. 
(i) undertaking all necessary measures to create and sustain a corruption-free 
environment for activities under the Project; (ii) instituting, maintaining and ensuring 
compliance with internal procedures and controls for activities under the Project, 
following international best practice standards for the purpose of preventing corruption, 
and shall require all relevant ministries, agents and contractors to refrain from engaging 
in any such activities; (iii) complying with the requirements of IFAD’s Policy on 
Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities and Operations; and (iv) ensuring that 
the Good Governance Framework is implemented in a timely manner. 
12.  Contract management  
12.1  Purpose 
281.  Since management of contracts is largely stipulated by terms and conditions of 
individual contract, section of the manual will provide guidelines, general principles 
applicable to all types of contractual relationships concluded/entered into by the project.  
12.2  Applicability 
282.  The principles of contract management is applicable to all types of contracts 
including purchase orders for supply of goods and contracts for provision of non-
consulting and consulting services.  
40 
12.3  Overview 
283.  All contracts concluded by the project will be executed by the project 
management at CPMU and SPIUs levels, as appropriate. Contract management and 
administration starts at contract negotiation and signing, through to follow up on 
contract implementation, amendments and extensions as needed and contract 
completion or termination, should such an unwanted situation be unavoidable.  
12.4  Monitoring implementation 
284.  Once a contract is signed, a focal person (an engineer or another technical 
person) should be assigned to monitor implementation of the contract reporting to the 
project coordinator. This focal personal is mandated to make sure the implementation is 
on track and as well help dealing with/solving any problems that may arise in the 
implementation process. In this he/she is to follow up on physical implementation, 
review/document deliverables/milestones, identify and resolve problems facing contract 
implementation and review and certify payment claims/invoices. He/she will also in 
collaboration with procurement section keep record of all contract documentation, 
including contract agreement/amendments, implementation progress/payments, 
guarantees/warranties and interim and final completion certificates. 
12.5  Contract completion 
285.  The completion of contract is the responsibility of the contract focal person and 
procurement section. At this stage the project should ensure that, (i) goods are 
received, works completed or services are rendered, (ii) all outstanding claims are 
settled, (iii) there are no warranties still in place, (iv) claims for missing or damaged 
items are settled, (v) guarantees and securities have been returned and (vi) all 
necessary documentation is in place and correct.     
12.6  Contract termination 
286.  Termination of a contract is usually seen as an ultimate resort and is tapped only 
if it is unavoidable. Conditions for termination of a contract is usually specified in the 
contract agreement or otherwise, termination comes in compliance with an agreement 
reached through arbitration or any other dispute resolution mechanism. A contract may 
be terminated for; (i) engagement in corrupt practices, (i) insolvency or (iii) a situation 
of force majeure. 
13.  Processing of payments  
287.  Refer financial manual presented separately 
14.  Environmental and social management plan (ESMP)  
288.  The project is applying a resilience model to identify adaptation actions to be 
supported and develop a scorecard to monitor changes in resilience for project 
beneficiary households. Indeed, the Project Goal aims at improving food security, 
incomes and resilience of pastoralist, agropastoralist and small crop farmers engaging in 
joint natural resources (NR) governance and management and development of related 
businesses in targeted landscapes. Furthermore, one of the key impact indicator is 
72,000 HHs (60%) with an increased score in the resilience scorecards. 
289.  The population’s future well-being in Sudan depends on the resilience of 
communities, cities and ecosystems, and resilience provides a critical point of integration 
for adaptation strategies. Building resilience is about the suitable actions taken at 
41 
present time so that the impact of inevitable shocks and stresses are minimized and the 
rebound accelerated.  
290.  Resilience is the ability to cope with adverse shocks and stresses, and to adapt 
and learn to live with changes and uncertainty. The ‘ability to resist, recover from, or 
adapt to the effects of a shock or a change’10. ‘Resilience is a long-term approach, not 
only focussed on the ability to bounce back but also integrating adaptation and 
transformation while undergoing change’11. Indeed, building resilience delivers near-
term economic benefits and jobs, while making everyone better prepared when a shock 
hits. There may be upfront costs to get this done, but money will be saved later: It costs 
sometimes more to rebuild in the wake of a disaster than to build in a way that can 
withstand the shock. Resilience can be approached at different levels, such as at the 
level of agroecosystems or productive territories, countries, communities or families, and 
facing different crises and shocks.  
291.  The programme uses a resilience model focused on vulnerable rural families. This 
model helps to define the strategies of programme interventions to support the 
vulnerable rural in improving the management of natural resources and adaptive 
capacities to climate change. The model followed in the Project is based on an 
identification and grouping of factors that contribute to the households’ capacities to face 
climate related stresses and shocks, reducing their effects and to recover quickly 
avoiding persistent adverse effects. The model is explained in more detail in the 
following figure. 
Figure  X:  Impacts  of  shocks  and  stresses  on  development  pathways  depending  on 
different levels of resilience 
292.  The previous figure illustrates how factors, prevention strategies and associated 
countermeasures contribute to the resilience of households based on their influence on 
them: 
the  depth  of  the  impact  (in  green)  that  the  shocks  (graph  on  the  right)  and  the 
- 
stresses (graph on the left) have on households; 
the  ability  of  households  to  recover  (in  blue)  after  a  shock  (graph  on  the  right) 
- 
and stress (graph on the left). 
293.  The depth of the impact depends on factors such as: i) the management of 
natural resources; ii) diversification of crops, income and means of subsistence; iii) the 
quality of the diet (health); iv) access by road and transport and other services; v) the 
10 IDS, 2012 - Resilience: New Utopia or New Tyranny? 
11 BC3, 2011 – Multidisciplinary perspectives on urban resilience 
42 
quality and location of the assets (infrastructure, fields and equipment); vi) the 
existence of an early warning system and prevention strategies; vii) membership in 
social networks and/or producer organizations; viii) the knowledge and skills necessary 
to understand climate trends, the risks and possible impacts on the means of production 
and subsistence, and the effectiveness of the available adaptation options. 
294.  On the other hand, the capacity and speed of recovery and adjustments depend 
on factors such as: i) savings; ii) access to credit; iii) insurance (where life, health, 
home insurance, etc. are generally more important than agricultural insurance); iv) the 
effectiveness of public (and private) response programs; v) access by road; vi) the 
ability to access new technologies and adopt them in subsistence activities; and, again, I 
saw) belonging to social networks and/or producer organizations. 
295.  The project will follow this resilience model in every steps of the implementation. 
Indeed, one of the main considerations for the approval and the adoption of the NRLMPs 
and NRLIPs by the CDCs and VDCs will be the extent to which they incorporate measures 
to promote resilience to climate change and prevent environmental degradation. The 
incorporation of these steps during the implementation stages will result in the 
sustainability of the benefits to the environment and climate change aspects. 
296.  The environmental and social screening that has been presented in the SECAP 
note has predominantly identified at the concept note and design level, for there to be 
no or low risks related to the Project. Based on the findings the project has been 
categorised as a category B project. The full design mission conducted public 
consultations at the ministerial levels, beneficiary as well as with donor and partner 
organisations, NGOs, civil society, academia and women and farmer associations 
operating in Sudan. 
Targeting strategy 
297.  SNRLP will be implemented in a total of nine States across the Butana region in 
East, the Sennar Region in the South-East and the Kordofan Region in the West of 
Sudan. The nine States are the River Nile, Khartoum, Gazira, Gedaref and Kassala States 
in the Butana region; the Sennar State in the Sennar region and; the North, South and 
West Kordofan States in the Kordofan region. Additionally, SNRLP will engage with the 
White Nile and the Blue Nile States in the Sennar region regarding inter-state NR 
governance and regulatory issues. These States have high incidence of poverty ranging 
from 26-60% and malnutrition varying from 14-20% (refer PIM, annex 2). The rural 
communities in the rainfed parts of these States are highly vulnerable to economic 
shocks as the NR base in these areas is under pressure from increasing population, high 
usage for livelihoods, lack of regulation, mismanagement, unregulated mechanised 
farming, incursions of large herds owned by wealthy farmers and CC, leading to drier 
conditions (refer PIM for more details). These factors have a particularly adverse impact 
on smallholder farmers, agro-pastoralists and pastoralists whose livelihoods depend on 
NR. SNRLP will build on and upscale the positive NRM related experiences of mainly 
three previous IFAD projects (BIRDP, SUSTAIN and WSRMP) that were active in these 
regions over the last decade. No activities will be in or close to buffer zones of a national 
park. 
298.  The “Programme area, the geographical targeting” and the “target groups and 
strategies” are detailed in the Project Implementation Manual (points 2.2 and 2.3 
respectively).  
Environment and Social Management Plan Matrix 
299.  The matrix below presents the Project interventions, identifies the Social, 
Environmental and Climate risks and vulnerabilities of rural families, and presents the 
43 
mitigation measure through the activities of the project. It also presents tentative 
questions proposed for the scorecard to monitor the increase in household resilience (the 
questions and the weight of each of them will be revised at the Project start-up).
44 
Project 
Intervention 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigating Measure 
Tentative Score-card 
questions/Supervision 
and reporting related to 
COSTAB (if applicable) 
Component 1: Scaling up community based NR management and businesses 
1.1: 
Subcompone
nt 
Community 
mobilization 
and  NR  and 
land-use 
management 
planning 
Social:  
  Smallholder  farmers,  especially  women 
and  youth,  from  poorer,  more  deprived 
areas  are  unaware  of  the  opportunity  or 
lack  the  knowledge  and  confidence  to 
for  grants  and  other  project 
apply 
activities.  
  Risk  of  increasing  marginalization  of 
to 
pastoralists 
agriculture, 
unregulated  mechanized 
natural resource degradation and climate 
change. 
conflicts 
and 
due 
  Land use and registration issues could be 
worsened  by  the  implementation  of  an 
agricultural project. 
  Lack  of  focus  on  smallholder  famers, 
women and youth.  
  Exclusion  of  women 
from  decision-
making 
Environmental/Climate:  
  Land use and registration issues could be 
worsened  by  the  implementation  of  an 
agricultural project.  
  Access to water: risk of elite capture and 
demand for water infrastructures beyond 
the actual need of the local communities, 
up 
for 
and 
scale 
Social:  
  Mobilizing  VDCs  and  CDC/NECs  will 
the 
consolidate 
development  of  community  institutions 
already  started  in  previous  and  on-
IFAD  projects.  Communities 
going 
already  supported  would  have  VDCs 
and  some  have  been  organized  in 
the  development  and 
clusters 
Community 
implementation 
Livelihood Adaptation and Sustainability 
Plans  (CLASP  –  IAMDP)  and  Cluster 
Adaptation Plans (CAP - LMRP). 
  Development  of  NRLMPs: 
The 
programme  will  support  the  CDC/NECs 
participatory 
conducting 
in 
community 
community 
and 
the 
planning  process 
formulation and ownership of a NRLMP, 
land  registration  processes  and  NR 
Conflict resolution mechanism. 
a 
inter 
leading 
to 
of 
  Development  of  co-management 
arrangement 
for  "open  access" 
common  areas.  Special  attention  will 
be  given  to  livestock  routs,  where 
relevant,  in  order  to  increase  mutual 
benefits  and  avoid  conflicts  between 
of 
Score-card: 
Can  you  explain  how  CVC 
have 
your 
affected 
production activities the last 
10  years  and  how  they  will 
be affected in the future?  
Can  you  explain  what 
adaptation 
options 
practices  and  changes  in 
your production system you 
can  and/or  may  implement 
to address these risks?   
Have  you  participated  in 
any 
for 
activities 
rehabilitation  of 
livestock 
routs  agreed  with  your 
community and do you trust 
it  will 
positive 
bring 
benefits? 
your 
Do 
community  will  be  able  to 
manage  the  open  access 
common  areas?  (why,  why 
not?)    
think 
you 
Page  
45 
Project 
Intervention 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigating Measure 
Tentative Score-card 
questions/Supervision 
and reporting related to 
COSTAB (if applicable) 
and 
degradation 
the 
overuse 
vegetation  and  land  in  the  surrounding 
area  and  conflict  over  resources  may 
erupt.  
of 
  Lack  of  knowledge  about  risks  and 
effects  of  the  Climate  Variability  and 
Change  and  options  of  adaptation 
practices 
  Climatic  shock: 
the  main  effect  of 
climate  change  on  weather  patterns  is 
the  increased  occurrence  of  extreme 
weather  events:  droughts,  flooding  in 
particular.  These  weather  shock  can 
have  a  direct  impact  on  crops  and 
damage infrastructure. 
  Risk  of  depletion  of  the  aquifer  and 
related depletion of rangeland. 
  Promotion  of  NR  related  livelihoods  and 
technologies  could  have  unintended 
adverse environmental impacts  
46 
the cluster or network communities and 
pastoralists 
agro-pastoralists 
passing through their area. 
and 
  Formulation 
livelihoods 
of 
investment plans (LIPs) and support 
of    Village  Savings  and  Credit  Groups 
(VSCGs)  involving  70%  women,  NR 
Livelihood 
and 
Vulnerable Women’s Groups (VWGs)  
(NRLGs) 
groups 
  Self-targeting  will  be 
use 
of 
systems 
facilitated 
gender-sensitive 
through 
delivering 
(e.g. 
delivery 
level),  capacity-
training  at  village 
building 
the  needs  of 
women,  youth  and  pastoralists  and  an 
on-going  consultative  process  with 
beneficiaries  through  committees  and 
forums 
tailored 
to 
  Women  will  constitute  a  minimum  of 
30%  and  youth  will  constitute  a 
minimum of 30% of members of VDCs, 
interest  groups  and 
In 
addition  women  and  youth 
sub-
committees  will  support  women  and 
youth representatives in the clusters.  
clusters. 
  The  inclusion  of  women  and  youth  in 
forums  formed  for  discussion  on  NRM 
will  be  ensured.  The  representation  of 
Project 
Intervention 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigating Measure 
Tentative Score-card 
questions/Supervision 
and reporting related to 
COSTAB (if applicable) 
women  (50  %  and  youth  (30  %)  in 
NRM  forums  at  locality,  State  and 
National level will be ensured.  
Environmental/Climate:  
  Village  Development  Committees 
(VDCs),  other  relevant  community 
organizations  and  networks  or 
clusters  of  VDCs.  The  objective  is  to 
strengthen their organisation in Cluster 
Development  Committees  or  Network 
Executive  Committees  (CDC/NECs)  and 
their  land  and  NR  governance  systems 
and institutions. 
with 
  Establishment  of  water-points  with 
careful 
the 
pre-analysis 
communities  and  the  establishment  of 
water  and  catchment  management 
arrangements. 
  Sensitization 
participatory 
and 
analysis  throught  the  development  of 
NRLMPs  of  the  effects  of  Climate 
Variability  and  Change  on  productive 
activities, water and other means of life 
identification  of 
of 
mitigation practices.  
families  and 
  Climate  Risk  Assessment  and 
Management  Plan  (CRAMP)  will  back 
the  NRLMP  in  each  cluster  to  identify 
the  main  environmental  and  climate 
47 
Project 
Intervention 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigating Measure 
Tentative Score-card 
questions/Supervision 
and reporting related to 
COSTAB (if applicable) 
risks  in  a  cluster,  The  CRAMP  will  be 
developed  as  a  part  of  the  NRLPMs 
development  process.  The  CRAMP  will 
influence  the  CDC/NECs  at  the  time  of 
the 
developing 
clusters.  It  will  also  highlight  the 
climate  risks  to  be  considered  (in  the 
NRLMPs) 
the 
interventions for attaining the NR vision 
of the cluster or network.  
the  NR  vision 
identifying 
while 
for 
Investment 
  Each  LIP  will  be  backed  by  a  Climate 
and 
Adaptation 
(CAIMP).  The 
Management  Plan 
CLAIMPs  will 
the  specific 
identify 
climate  risk  and  mitigation  measure 
association  with  the  implementation  of 
the activities defined in each LIP. 
Social 
1.  Subco
mpone
nt  1.2: 
Imple
menta
tion  of 
NR-
based 
Livelih
ood 
Invest
  Young  and  women  may  not  benefit  from 
 
project professional opportunities.  
In  the  absence  of  seed  capital  support, 
the  adoption  of  innovative  technologies 
and starting up microenterprises (ME) to 
diversify  smallholders’  livelihoods  is  very 
challenging. 
  Capital  financing  for  youth  and  women 
may  be  insufficient  to  start  business  in 
remote and poor areas.  
48 
to 
Social 
  Engagement  of  village  youth  and 
young  professionals 
support 
extension  services  to  VDCs,  CDC/NECs 
and  the  various  NR  and  common 
increase 
interest  groups  and 
opportunities for youth. The SNRLP will 
scale  up  the  good  experiences  of  the 
BIRDP  in  engaging  youth  in  supporting 
programme  activities.  Also,  experience 
from  the  BIRDP  shows  that  the  vast 
to 
Score-card: 
Did  you  benefit  from  seed 
capital  support  for  start-up 
your business? 
Does  the  land  developed 
have  sufficient  access  to 
water  resources  (stored  in 
soils  and/or  cisterns) 
to 
cover  the  needs  of  the 
production  during  the  dry 
season?  
Project 
Intervention 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigating Measure 
Environmental/Climate:  
  Climatic  shock: 
the  main  effect  of 
climate  change  on  weather  patterns  is 
the  increased  occurrence  of  extreme 
weather  events:  droughts, 
flooding. 
These  weather  shocks  can  have  a  direct 
impact 
damage 
infrastructure. 
Insufficient  and  /  or  insecure  access  to 
land and water for productive activities 
  Low interest and capacity of smallholders 
to  adopt  new  climate  smart  approaches 
and technologies. 
crops 
and 
on 
 
 
through 
increased 
  Water is a scarce resource in Sudan. The 
project  could  risk  to  increase  water 
insecurity 
and 
unsustainable  pressure  on  limited  water 
resources. 
Inappropriate  agricultural  practices  can 
lead  to  low  and  variable  productivity 
(due  also  to  erratic  climatic  conditions), 
land 
desertification, 
reduced  soil  fertility  and  health-related 
impacts (water and chemicals).  
practices 
not 
sustainable,  common  areas  over-used 
and creating conflicts.  
  Community-based 
degradation, 
majority  interested  and  embarking  on 
the  YP  programme  are  women.  With 
their  presence  as  articulated  and 
supporting  professionals  in  the  villages 
the  YP  programme  also  has  a  strong 
impact on the mobilization of women in 
the  villages,  change  in  culture  to  more 
openness towards women participation, 
in 
and  accepting  women  speaking 
meetings.  
  Business  development  support  to 
NR  related  enterprises  to  develop 
the  groups  and 
the  capacity  of 
individuals 
the 
implement 
enterprises successfully. 
to 
to 
the  beneficiary 
  Partnership  with  MFIs:  SNRLP  will 
select  partnering  financial  institutions 
(PFI)  that  are  ready  to  provide  access 
to  credit  to  beneficiaries  to  help  them 
contribution 
meet 
needed 
capital 
access 
financing.  SNRLP  will  offer  seed  capital 
support  for  start-up  NR  based  MEs  in 
collaboration  with  partnering  financial 
institutions  (PFIs).  The  share  of  the 
PFIs  will  be  very 
the 
beginning  and  increase  gradually  to 
support  the  growth  and  scaling  up  of 
limited  at 
seed 
ment 
Plans.  
49 
Tentative Score-card 
questions/Supervision 
and reporting related to 
COSTAB (if applicable) 
Is  your  micro  business 
supported  by  the  RELAP 
MET  facility  constrained  by 
insufficient access to water? 
Have  you  introduced  any  
CA  practice  to  improve  the 
fertility  and  water  storage 
capacity of your soils? 
If yes 
Have  you  observed  any 
improvement  in  the  yields 
of your crops by using these 
practices?    
land  under  the 
Is  your 
developed  CA 
practices 
under profitable production? 
2.  Supervision 
and 
reporting:  The  YPs 
and 
extension 
resource persons will 
assist  the  VDCs  to 
quarterly 
prepare 
the 
on 
reports 
progress 
the 
of 
enterprises 
supported 
through 
capital 
seed 
financing.  Based  on 
the  details  of  these 
Tentative Score-card 
questions/Supervision 
and reporting related to 
COSTAB (if applicable) 
the  CDOs 
regular 
the 
reports 
conduct 
monitoring  of 
programme 
supported 
enterprises. 
The 
technical team in the 
SPCU  will  also  be 
for 
responsible 
these 
monitoring 
enterprises 
during 
the field visits. 
Project 
Intervention 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigating Measure 
the MEs. 
Environmental/Climate:  
  The 
will 
project 
promote 
environmentally  and  climate  resilient 
CA practices, to better manage limited 
resources  and  protect  soils  by,  among 
others,  avoiding  cultivation  of  water 
crops; 
varieties 
consuming 
supporting the plantation of more trees 
(forest  and  horticulture);  practicing 
diversified  associate  crop  production 
and  mulching  system;  collecting  local 
seed 
systems; 
reintroducing  drought  tolerant  varieties 
and less water consuming of crops (e.g. 
Guar).  
preservation 
and 
of 
livestock 
  LIPs  activities  will  be  eligible  within 
limited  NR  related  investment  areas  as 
rearing; 
Rangeland  and 
Forestland  conservation  and  related 
businesses; Catchment and water point 
management;  Cropland  development 
farming 
and  climate  adaptation 
practices;  Stock  routes  management 
and livelihoods of pastoralists. 
in 
50 
  Interstate  and  federal  intervention 
the  project 
throughout 
is  ensured 
activities  i)  for  institutionalizing  the 
for 
community-based  practices  and 
Project 
Intervention 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigating Measure 
Tentative Score-card 
questions/Supervision 
and reporting related to 
COSTAB (if applicable) 
securing their sustainability and further 
scaling  up;  ii)  to  prevent  the  lack  of 
governance  and  degradation  of  vast 
areas of rangelands in Sudan which are 
under an open-access regime (common 
jurisdiction  of 
land)  outside 
the 
the 
communities; 
encroachment 
common 
of 
rangelands  and  the  blocking  of  the 
stock  routes  for  use  by  mechanized 
farming 
settled 
communities. 
to  prevent 
investments 
and 
the 
iii) 
2.1: 
Subcompone
nt 
Strengthenin
g  of 
and 
frameworks 
legal 
policy 
Component 2 Improving the institutional framework for upscaling community based NRM  
Social 
Social 
  Policies on NR taken at State and Federal 
local 
level  are  not  appropriate 
context.  
for 
  Difficulty  for  locality  and  civil  society 
in  policy 
implementation 
to  engage 
organisations 
formulation 
and 
processes at State and Federal level. 
  Reviews of land and NR governance 
frameworks,  four  systematic  reviews 
(one  federal  and  three  regional)  by 
independent consultants. 
  NR  consultation  fora  for  policy 
implementation, 
forums/multi-
Locality, 
formulation  and 
consultative 
NR 
stakeholder  platforms  at 
State, Inter-state and Federal levels. 
  Strategies  for  NR  governance  and 
of 
revision 
management 
policies and regulations. 
and 
3.  Subco
Environmental/Climate:  
Environmental/Climate:  
51 
Project 
Intervention 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigating Measure 
Tentative Score-card 
questions/Supervision 
and reporting related to 
COSTAB (if applicable) 
mpone
nt  2.2: 
Buildi
ng 
institu
tional 
capaci
ties 
  Lack  of  knowledge  on  CC  risks  and  CA 
practices  of  the  extension  and  service 
providers. 
  Lack  of  research  for  evidence-based 
impacts and decision making.  
  Difficulty 
to  capitalize  on  previous 
experience and facilitate scaling up. 
52 
CC 
government 
  Training for extension and research 
service  providers,  institutions  staff 
on 
and  NR 
adaptation 
governance.  Training  will  be  provided 
to  public  and  private  extension  service 
providers  and  Locality,  State  and 
Federal 
in: 
community-based  NR  governance  and 
management  and  the  related  roles  of 
the  Native  Administrations,  Localities 
and  States;  appropriate  investments  in 
sustainable  land  and  NR  use;  climate 
risk  reduction  and  climate  change 
adaptation  strategies;  Development  of 
Land-use  zoning  maps  and  related 
regulations 
native 
administration; GIS; etc. 
incorporating 
staff 
  Linkages  will  be  made  to  both  national 
and 
international  universities  and 
research  institutions  to  strengthen  the 
lessons 
capturing  and  analysis  of 
learnt. 
  Consolidating 
of 
capacities 
for 
implementation 
existing 
instrument,  e.g.  the  programme  will 
support  with  training,  materials  and 
equipment  for  the  effective  use  of  the 
land-use  map  in  Sennar  for  decision 
reforming  policies  and 
in 
making 
regulations 
follow-up 
monitoring. 
and 
for 
Project 
Intervention 
Social/Environmental/ 
Climate Risk Factors 
Mitigating Measure 
Tentative Score-card 
questions/Supervision 
and reporting related to 
COSTAB (if applicable) 
  Establishing  a 
the 
generation 
framework 
for 
revenue 
and 
reinvestment,  the  programme  will 
relevant  government 
support 
the 
institutions 
establishment  of  a 
framework  and 
guidelines  for  revenue  generation  for 
O&M and depreciation costs but also for 
reinvestment  in  land  and  NR  use  and 
management by communities. 
in  each  region 
in 
53 
Grievance and Redress Mechanism 
300.  The proposed project will utilise the existing IFAD's grievance mechanism to allow 
affected to raise concerns that the proposed project is not complying with its social and 
environmental policies or commitments. The consultative process with the community and 
beneficiaries   aims to ensure prevention of grievances that might arise from the project 
activities. However, if at all, there are any grievances, the below redressal mechanism is 
proposed:  
  Grievance  redressal  mechanism  would  be  shared  with  the  community  during  the 
project inception workshop and subsequent meetings with the beneficiaries 
  As  part  of  the  grievance  redress  mechanism,  the  contact  details  of  the  project 
partners  -  Cluster  Coordinator/  Project  Manager  would  be  made  available  to 
stakeholders  including  project  beneficiaries  and  the  community.  Contact  numbers 
would be displayed at common or predominant places along–with the project details. 
This is expected to promote social auditing of project implementation.  The grievance 
mechanism  will  be  available  to  the  entire  project  intervention  areas.  However,  the 
functionality  of  the  mechanism  rests  with  the  beneficiaries  considering  that  the 
project including the grievance mechanism is envisaged to be a bottom up approach.  
301.  Grievances are aimed to be addressed at the field level by the project team which 
will be the first level of redressal mechanism. If the grievance is not resolved at the field 
level, it will be escalated to the Project staff and then to IFAD who will be responsible for 
addressing grievances related to violation of any of the provisions of Environmental and 
Social Policy of the Adaptation Fund.  All grievances received and action taken on them will 
be put up before the Project staff and Steering committee meetings and will also be 
included in the progress reports to the NIE for reporting and monitoring purposes. 
302. 
IFAD has established a complaints procedure to receive and facilitate resolution of 
concerns and complaints with respect to alleged non-compliance of its environmental and 
social policies and the mandatory aspects of its Social, Environmental and Climate 
Assessment Procedures in the context of IFAD-supported projects. The procedure allows 
affected complainants to have their concerns resolved in a fair and timely manner through 
an independent process. IFAD may be contacted by e-mail at SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org. 
For more information, visit the IFAD webpage: 
https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/accountability-and-complaints-procedure. 
303.  The component 1 community participatory process leading to the development and 
agreement on NRLMPs which are setting the frameworks for the participatory development 
of LIPs, complies with FPIC requirements.  
Annex 1: Logframe 
Results 
Hierarchy 
Outreach 
Indicators 
Unit 
Baseline 
Mid- 
Term 
End- 
Target 
Source 
Frequency 
Respon-
sibility 
Assumptions 
Means of Verification 
1.a Households receiving project services* 
Proj. reports 
Annual 
CPCU 
Total number (50% female)  
HH 
84,000 
120,000 
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of HH members 
Proj. reports 
Annual 
CPCU 
-  Household members - Number of people (6 
members per households) 
HH 
Members 
504,000 
720,000 
1. Persons directly receiving SNRLP promoted/supported services 
Proj. reports 
Annual 
CPCU 
-  Men 
-  Women 
-  Youth 
-  Pastoralists 
-  Agro-pastoralists 
-  Smallholder farmers 
Project Goal 
Reduction of severe acute malnutrition in 
children 
Total number 
persons 
persons 
persons 
persons 
persons 
persons 
persons 
Prevalence of wasting 
in children under five 
(%) 
42,000 
60,000 
42,000 
60,000 
25,200 
36,000 
16,800 
24,000 
25,200 
36,000 
42,000 
60,000 
84,000 
120,000 
16.5 
14.5 
Baseline, mid 
& end line 
survey 
Baseline, Mid-
term, 
Completion 
CPCU 
- Stable political and macro-
economic environment 
- No major natural disaster 
affects the Project Area 
Improved food security, incomes and 
resilience of pastoralist, agro-pastoralist 
and smallholder crop farmers in the Butana, 
Kordofan and Sennar regions 
Households reporting an increase of at least 20% in income as a result of services 
provided by the project                                                   
Households with increased score of at least 30% in the resilience score card (appendix 
5.2)                                                               
HH 
HH 
30 
70 
36,000 
84,000 
20 
60 
24,000 
72,000 
Baseline, mid 
& end line 
Survey 
Baseline, Mid-
term, 
Completion 
CPCU 
Baseline, mid 
& end line 
Survey 
Baseline, Mid-
term, 
Completion 
CPCU 
Development Objective 
Increase production, secure access to NRs 
for vulnerable users and improve the 
sustainability of NR related livelihoods in 
Butana, Kordofan, and the Sennar regions 
Baseline, mid 
1.2.4  Households reporting increase in production of milk, meat, crop, forest products                                                                    
& end line 
Survey 
70 
40 
42,000 
24,000 
HH 
-  Men 
CPCU 
Baseline, Mid-
term, 
Completion 
Government willingness to 
improve access to NR 
-  Women 
-  Youth 
-  Pastoralists 
-  Agro-pastoralists 
-  Smallholder farmers 
HH 
HH 
HH 
HH 
HH 
24,000 
42,000 
14,400 
25,200 
9,600 
16,800 
14,400 
25,200 
24,000 
42,000 
Results 
Hierarchy 
Indicators 
Total 
Unit 
HH 
Baseline 
1.2.1  Households reporting improved access to each of land, forests, water or water 
bodies for production 
-  Men 
persons 
-  Women 
-  Youth 
-  Pastoralists 
-  Agro-pastoralists 
-  Smallholder farmers 
persons 
persons 
persons 
persons 
persons 
persons 
Total 
3.2.2  Households reporting adoption of environmentally sustainable and climate-
resilient practices 
-  Men 
persons 
-  Women 
-  Youth 
-  Pastoralists 
-  Agro-pastoralists 
-  Smallholder farmers 
persons 
persons 
persons 
persons 
persons 
persons 
Total 
Outcome 1 
Increased adoption of NR management 
practices, technologies and business 
models that enhances the quality and 
sustainable use of NRs,. 
Mid- 
Term 
48,000 
End- 
Target 
84,000 
30 
60 
18,000 
36,000 
18,000 
36,000 
10,800 
21,600 
7,200 
14,400 
10,800 
21,600 
18,000 
36,000 
36,000 
72,000 
30 
70 
18,000 
42,000 
18,000 
42,000 
10,800 
25,200 
7,200 
16,800 
10,800 
25,200 
18,000 
42,000 
36,000 
84,000 
Means of Verification 
Source 
Frequency 
Respon-
sibility 
Assumptions 
Baseline, mid 
& end line 
Survey 
Baseline, Mid-
term, 
Completion 
CPCU 
Progress 
reports by 
SCUs 
Annual 
SPCU 
NRM practices are disseminated 
and adopted widely 
Good quality BDS are available  
Smallholder access to rural 
financial services  
3.2.3 Persons reporting a significant reduction in time spent collecting water or fuel 
40 
70 
- Men 
- Women 
- Youth 
- Pastoralists 
- Agro-pastoralists 
- Smallholder farmers 
Persons 
Persons 
Persons 
Persons 
Persons 
Persons 
Persons 
Total 
24,000 
42,000 
24,000 
42,000 
14,400 
25,200 
9,600 
16,800 
14,400 
25,200 
24,000 
42,000 
48,000 
84,000 
Annual 
SPCU 
Progress 
reports by 
SPCUs 
3.1.4 Number of hectares of land brought under climate resilience management 
                                                                   Ha 
- Cropland 
Ha 
- Rangeland 
- Stock routes 
Ha 
Ha 
81,876 
793,972  Progress 
Annual 
SPCU 
reports by 
SPCUs 
65,285 
163,213 
11,441 
28,602 
3,750 
600,000 
Means of Verification 
Source 
Frequency 
Respon-
sibility 
Assumptions 
Semi-annually  SPCU 
Semi-annually  SPCU 
Progress 
reports by 
SPCUs 
Progress 
reports by 
SCUs 
Semi-annually  SPCU 
Progress 
reports by 
SCUs 
Results 
Hierarchy 
Output 1.1  
Inter-community framework for NR and 
land-use governance effectively 
implemented 
Indicators 
- Forest land 
Unit 
Ha 
Baseline 
Number of cluster/network NR and Land-Use Management Plans (NRLMP) with CCA 
mainstreamed being implemented 
                                         Number of plans 
1.1.1 Persons whose ownership or user rights over NR registered in national 
cadasters/ geographic information management systems (forests & rangelands 
registration) 
-  Men 
Persons 
-  Women 
-  Youth 
-  Pastoralists 
-  Agro-pastoralists 
-  Smallholder farmers 
Persons 
Persons 
Persons 
Persons 
Persons 
Persons 
Total 
Mid- 
Term 
1,400 
End- 
Target 
2,157 
70 
150 
30 
60 
18,000 
36,000 
18,000 
36,000 
10,800 
21,600 
7,200 
14,400 
10,800 
21,600 
18,000 
36,000 
36,000 
72,000 
Output 1.2 
Access to technical assistance and finance 
facilitated to support the implementation 
of Livelihood Investment Plans (LIP) aligned 
with NRLMPs 
Persons reporting reduction in dispute over use of land and natural resources 
30 
60 
-  Men 
-  Women 
-  Youth 
-  Pastoralists 
-  Agro-pastoralists 
-  Smallholder farmers 
Persons 
Persons 
Persons 
Persons 
Persons 
Persons 
Persons 
Total 
3.1.1  Groups supported to improve their livelihoods by sustainably managing NR and 
climate risks  
                                                     Number of groups (gp) 
-  Men 
Gp. members 
-  Women 
-  Youth 
-  Pastoralists 
-  Agro-pastoralists 
-  Smallholder farmers 
Gp. members 
Gp. members 
Gp. members 
Gp. members 
Gp. members 
-  Women in leadership position 
Group 
Total 
Gp. members 
18,000 
36,000 
18,000 
36,000 
10,800 
21,600 
7,200 
14,400 
10,800 
21,600 
18,000 
36,000 
36,000 
72,000 
3,850 
5,500 
42,000 
60,000 
42,000 
60,000 
25,200 
36,000 
16,800 
24,000 
25,200 
36,000 
42,000 
60,000 
84,000 
120,000 
1,155 
1,650 
Results 
Hierarchy 
Outcome 2 
Legal, policy and institutional framework 
for upscaling community based NRM 
improved 
Output 2.1  
Natural resources legal and policy 
frameworks strengthened 
Output 2.2 
Institutions capacitated on community 
based CCA and NR governance, 
management and suitable technology 
related issues 
Indicators 
-  Pastoralist in leadership position 
Unit 
Group 
Baseline 
Number of institutions at federal, state and locality level that have adopted and 
implemented improved regulations and policies in the realm of NRM 
                                                             Institutions 
Policy 1 Number of policy-relevant knowledge products completed 
                             Frameworks/knowledge products 
-  Reviews of frameworks governing land-use 
Frameworks 
and NRM with a set of recommendations for 
revisions and for strengthened 
implementation 
-  Guidelines for community schemes/models 
for governance and management of NRs 
generating revenues for reinvestment 
-  Other policy relevant knowledge products 
Frameworks 
Knowledge products   
Policy 2 Number of Land and NR governance multi-stakeholder platforms/fora at 
Locality, State & Federal levels 
                                                             Platforms 
No. of institution staff trained on CC adaptation & NR govern. 
                                                                 Staff 
-  Men 
Staff 
-  Women 
Staff 
Mid- 
Term 
280 
End- 
Target 
400 
Means of Verification 
Source 
Frequency 
Respon-
sibility 
Assumptions 
5 
5 
4 
3 
3 
6 
250 
150 
100 
10  M&E system  Annual 
SPCU 
10  M&E system  Annual 
CPCU 
-The capacities of institutions 
developed 
-Government support review for 
NRM framework 
4 
3 
3 
9 
500  M&E system  Annual 
CPCU 
300 
200 
Annex 2:  
                                                        1 Wasting reflects a deficit in weight relative to height due to a recent and severe process resulting in loss of tissue and fat mass (severe is three standard deviations below from median height and weight). Region States Poverty Incidence by State  Source: NBHS (National Baseline Household Survey) 2009 / IPRSP Percentage of under-five children wasted (moderate and severe acute malnutrition) by State  Source: Sudan MICS, 2014 Localities No. Of Villages  Data Source: Excel Doc titled All State Latest  Wasting Global (6-59 months WHZ)  Source: S3M, 2014  Wasting Severe1 (6-59 months MUAC)  Source: S3M, 2014 Improved Source of Drinking water   Source: S3M, 2014 Improved Sanitation  Source: S3M, 2014 Country level  46.5 Rural – 57.6 Urban – 26.5 16.3       Darfur  Central Darfur - 17.8 Azum 82 10.6 2.5 63.4 3.2 Bendasi 64 21.8 2.9 57.0 12.2 Central Jebel Mara 53 - - - - Mukjar  112 11.3 2.0 37.4 48.5 Mukjar (Town) 11.1 1.8 36.9 48.4 Nertiti 53 1.9 1.1 16.3 29.4 North Jebel Mara 52 - - - - Um Dukhun  86 11.1 3.3 77.0 9.1 Um Dukhun (Town) 11.1 3.4 76.9 9.0 Wadi Salih 170 10.5 3.5 46.2 7.8 Zalingi  127 14.6 0.8 46.1 22.2 Zalingi (Town) 13.4 1.5 68.0 58.0 Rokiro* - 10.1 0.0 72.9 67.8 All state except capital  12.7 2.6 55.9 9.6 East Darfur - 15.3 Abu Jabra 57     Abukarinka 39 14.3 2.8 4.2 0.0 Adila 77 3.6 1.6 0.0 28.1 Assalaya 110 27.0 5.7 69.4 3.5 Bahr El Arab 70 - - - - Ed Dain  26 11.1 3.2 0.9 0.0 Ed Dain (Town) 13.3 3.9 33.8 31.4 El Firdous 48 21.9 4.7 2.6 1.0 Shia’ria 58 25.7 6.6 52.1 2.1 Yassin 108 22.6 5.7 25.0 10.9  
Region 
States 
Poverty 
Incidence  by 
State 
Percentage  of  under-
five  children  wasted 
and 
(moderate 
Localities 
No. 
Villages 
Of 
Wasting 
Global (6-59 
Wasting 
Severe12 (6-59 
months 
Improved 
Source 
Drinking 
Improved 
Sanitation 
of 
12 Wasting reflects a deficit in weight relative to height due to a recent and severe process resulting in loss of tissue and fat mass (severe is three standard 
deviations below from median height and weight). 
severe 
malnutrition) 
State 
acute 
by 
Source:  Sudan  MICS, 
2014 
16.3 
Source:  NBHS 
(National 
Baseline 
Household 
Survey)  2009 
/ IPRSP 
46.5 
Rural – 57.6 
Urban – 26.5 
Country level 
Central Darfur 
- 
17.8 
Darfur  
East Darfur 
- 
15.3 
North Darfur 
69.4 
27.9 
Data  Source: 
Excel 
Doc 
titled All State 
Latest 
months 
WHZ) 
Source: 
S3M, 2014 
MUAC) 
water  
Source: 
S3M, 2014 
Source:  S3M, 
2014 
Source:  S3M, 
2014 
Azum 
Bendasi 
Central Jebel Mara 
Mukjar  
Mukjar (Town) 
Nertiti 
North Jebel Mara 
Um Dukhun  
Um Dukhun (Town) 
Wadi Salih 
Zalingi  
Zalingi (Town) 
Rokiro* 
All state except capital 
Abu Jabra 
Abukarinka 
Adila 
Assalaya 
Bahr El Arab 
Ed Dain  
Ed Dain (Town) 
El Firdous 
Shia’ria 
Yassin 
Aubgabar* 
Aubmatarg* 
All state except capital 
Dar Elsalam 
El Fasher 
El Fasher (Town) 
82 
64 
53 
112 
53 
52 
86 
170 
127 
- 
57 
39 
77 
110 
70 
26 
48 
58 
108 
- 
- 
42 
222 
10.6 
21.8 
- 
11.3 
11.1 
1.9 
- 
11.1 
11.1 
10.5 
14.6 
13.4 
10.1 
12.7 
14.3 
3.6 
27.0 
- 
11.1 
13.3 
21.9 
25.7 
22.6 
14.6 
10.3 
14.9 
16.7 
16.8 
16.5 
2.5 
2.9 
- 
2.0 
1.8 
1.1 
- 
3.3 
3.4 
3.5 
0.8 
1.5 
0.0 
2.6 
2.8 
1.6 
5.7 
- 
3.2 
3.9 
4.7 
6.6 
5.7 
0.0 
0.0 
3.2 
8.3 
4.9 
5.8 
63.4 
57.0 
- 
37.4 
36.9 
16.3 
- 
77.0 
76.9 
46.2 
46.1 
68.0 
72.9 
55.9 
4.2 
0.0 
69.4 
- 
0.9 
33.8 
2.6 
52.1 
25.0 
20.8 
4.9 
12.7 
94.4 
67.2 
59.2 
3.2 
12.2 
- 
48.5 
48.4 
29.4 
- 
9.1 
9.0 
7.8 
22.2 
58.0 
67.8 
9.6 
0.0 
28.1 
3.5 
- 
0.0 
31.4 
1.0 
2.1 
10.9 
0.0 
0.0 
7.9 
5.8 
22.0 
48.1 
El Lait 
El Malha 
El Serief 
El Tawisha 
El Tina 
El Kuma 
Kebkabiya 
Kelemando 
Kernoi 
Kutum 
Melit 
Saraf Omra 
Tawila 
Um Baru 
Um Kadada 
Zamzam Camp* 
El Serief Camp* 
All state except capital 
Beliel 
Buram 
Damso 
Ed Elfursan 
El Radoum 
El Sunta 
El Wihda 
Es Salam 
Gereida 
Kas 
Kateila 
Kubum 
Mershing 
Nitega 
Nyala North 
Nyala South 
Nyala Town* 
Rehaid Elbirdi 
Sharg El Jabal 
Shattaya 
Tulus 
Um Dafoug 
66 
57 
121 
79 
47 
34 
37 
96 
39 
141 
87 
129 
67 
27 
128 
- 
- 
87 
185 
34 
136 
210 
113 
18 
108 
87 
95 
91 
88 
83 
103 
16 
29 
- 
144 
51 
51 
46 
37 
40.5 
33.0 
21.9 
30.4 
14.2 
27.3 
15.1 
21.0 
31.3 
37.6 
33.5 
12.4 
9,5 
15.7 
33.8 
13.7 
22.5 
28.3 
15.9 
14.7 
23.1 
12.5 
9.7 
- 
19.8 
29.1 
17.7 
14.5 
22.3 
10.6 
16.0 
12.6 
- 
- 
12.9 
22.6 
- 
- 
20.2 
0.0 
9.7 
3.7 
7.3 
4.1 
0.0 
9.6 
2.1 
8.9 
0.0 
2.7 
3.9 
0.0 
3.3 
1.6 
3.5 
4.9 
7.4 
5.8 
0.0 
1.1 
20.8 
1.4 
3.7 
- 
2.1 
4.4 
0.0 
3.8 
4.6 
0.0 
5.9 
0.0 
- 
- 
2.9 
0.0 
- 
- 
23.5 
0.0 
100.0 
68.0 
27.4 
94.0 
31.9 
2.4 
28.3 
96.5 
51.7 
8.7 
83.5 
0.0 
46.2 
24.9 
67.6 
67.7 
26.5 
60.4 
13.5 
0.0 
37.5 
35.4 
23.2 
- 
93.8 
27.8 
33.3 
47.3 
19.2 
11.3 
100.0 
62.1 
- 
- 
15.1 
84.6 
- 
- 
7.8 
10.0 
23.6 
3.2 
12.9 
12.7 
2.8 
37.6 
3.1 
15.2 
0.0 
11.4 
0.8 
0.0 
3.6 
0.3 
10.7 
31.3 
12.2 
12.9 
12.5 
1.0 
19.8 
0.0 
1.3 
- 
1.8 
2.3 
6.1 
3.1 
0.0 
4.4 
0.0 
5.1 
- 
- 
11.6 
0.0 
- 
- 
3.1 
0.0 
South Darfur 
61.2 
15.9 
West Darfur 
55.6 
19.1 
Blue Nile 
56.5 
11.1 
Eastern 
Sennar 
44.1 
16.0 
Kassala 
36.3 
18.5 
Kalma Camp* 
All state except capital 
Beida 
El Geneina 
El Geneina (Town) 
Foro Baranga 
Habila 
Jebel Moon 
Kereneik 
Kulbus 
Sirba 
Morne Camp* 
All state except capital 
Baw 
Ed Damazine  
Ed Damazine (Town) 
El Kurmuk 
El Roseiris  
El Roseiris (Town) 
El Tadamon 
Geisan 
Wad El Mahi 
All state except capital 
Abu Hajar 
Ed Dinder 
El Dali 
Es Suki 
Sennar 
Sennar (Town) 
Sharg Sennar 
Sinja 
Sinja (Town) 
All State except capital 
Kassala Town 
New Halfa 
Refi Hamashkureib 
Hamashkureib (Town) 
Refi Kassla 
Refi Nahr Atbara 
Refi North Delta 
- 
109 
190 
49 
98 
66 
242 
57 
74 
- 
232 
138 
127 
116 
58 
125 
116 
103 
103 
37 
113 
239 
262 
122 
96 
113 
25 
124 
23 
46 
26.4 
18.3 
9.1 
9.2 
7.6 
14.2 
14.6 
10.5 
7.6 
12.6 
6.7 
11.9 
8.4 
25.0 
14.5 
12.7 
16.2 
20.3 
10.6 
14.5 
16.0 
- 
18.5 
14.9 
11.9 
13.3 
12.5 
13.4 
8.8 
15.0 
4.2 
9.0 
12.8 
15.2 
10.1 
16.7 
16.7 
19.1 
16.0 
12.8 
6.2 
3.6 
1.2 
0.0 
1.2 
2.3 
3.9 
0.9 
0.6 
1.3 
2.6 
2.1 
1.4 
4.4 
1.4 
2.7 
2.0 
5.2 
2.0 
0.0 
6.1 
- 
4.8 
2.1 
1.3 
1.2 
1.6 
1.1 
0.3 
1.7 
0.0 
1.1 
1.4 
1.2 
0.8 
7.7 
7.6 
2.8 
2.7 
4.9 
47.4 
11.1 
41.2 
53.5 
65.7 
60.1 
56.8 
50.1 
21.4 
19.8 
84.7 
34.5 
96.9 
99.0 
88.8 
37.5 
85.2 
86.3 
2.3 
97.6 
- 
84.9 
14.8 
78.5 
25.5 
42.2 
45.3 
84.4 
90.1 
83.8 
93.3 
46.4 
58.4 
45.3 
4.8 
4.9 
2.5 
100.0 
1.3 
2.2 
1.6 
56.9 
29.1 
3.0 
1.2 
22.2 
15.1 
0.9 
5.6 
51.1 
5.1 
0.0 
66.7 
19.5 
0.0 
73.2 
16.0 
0.0 
90.6 
- 
73.3 
3.9 
6.0 
13.5 
8.4 
7.1 
59.6 
17.1 
5.5 
44.3 
9.5 
52.1 
42.2 
0.0 
0.0 
0.6 
0.0 
0.5 
Rural Aroma 
Rural Khashm Elgirba 
Rural Telkok 
Rural Wad Elhilaiw 
Rural Western Kassala 
All state except capital 
Basunda 
Eastern Galabat 
El Fao 
El Fashaga 
El Mafaza 
El Qureisha 
El Rahad 
Elbutana 
Gala’a El Nahal 
Gedaref Town 
Middle Gedaref 
Western Galabat 
All state except capital 
El Hassahisa 
El Kamlin 
El Managil 
El Qureshi 
Ganub El Gazera 
Greater Medani 
Sharg El Gazera 
Um Elqura 
Madani Al Kobra* 
All state except capital 
Bahri 
Jebel Awlia 
Karrari 
Khartoum* 
Sharg Eineel 
Um Bada 
Um Durman 
All state 
El Diwaim 
El Gutaina 
El Jabalain 
120 
91 
57 
61 
65 
40 
75 
65 
102 
56 
56 
108 
55 
56 
123 
85 
106 
728 
373 
578 
413 
717 
64 
383 
221 
- 
132 
21 
90 
- 
269 
113 
90 
314 
259 
94 
21.8 
12.7 
16.2 
8.5 
11.6 
15.2 
16.2 
3.5 
6.8 
17.9 
13.3 
13.9 
5.2 
13.6 
14.7 
13.2 
- 
19.5 
13.2 
3.8 
9.5 
9.6 
- 
10.1 
8.1 
11.0 
10.9 
20.0 
9.6 
11.0 
6.4 
7.4 
7.7 
8.0 
5.1 
8.7 
8.2 
5.8 
9.4 
11.0 
9.5 
3.4 
4.8 
1.9 
2.0 
4.3 
4.7 
0.0 
0.0 
2.7 
2.0 
2.3 
0.0 
2.8 
1.2 
3.5 
- 
6.7 
2.0 
2.9 
1.6 
3.8 
- 
1.0 
3.1 
1.4 
3.6 
0.0 
2.6 
0.4 
0.3 
2.7 
1.2 
1.5 
1.9 
0.2 
1.3 
0.3 
2.0 
3.2 
0.0 
17.2 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
13.1 
1.3 
0.0 
77.2 
91.8 
33.3 
0.0 
84.4 
1.4 
12.9 
64.2 
- 
33.3 
46.0 
100.0 
87.6 
90.9 
- 
83.4 
94.0 
85.2 
59.3 
100.0 
86.9 
95.9 
91.3 
98.0 
88.4 
77.4 
96.0 
90.0 
90.4 
0.0 
10.3 
62.1 
2.3 
5.5 
24.6 
2.6 
2.3 
13.0 
2.1 
0.0 
0.0 
6.5 
100.0 
2.8 
0.0 
0.7 
1.2 
22.6 
- 
2.1 
4.0 
14.7 
7.6 
8.6 
- 
24.0 
62.9 
58.6 
35.1 
66.7 
16.2 
89.8 
52.7 
1.0 
82.0 
41.8 
25.1 
17.5 
47.9 
0.0 
10.4 
6.8 
Gedaref 
50.1 
15.4 
Gazera 
37.8 
14.0 
Central 
Khartoum 
26.0 
14.5 
White Nile 
55.5 
14.4 
Es Salam 
Guli 
Kosti 
Kosti (Town) 
Rabak 
Rabak (Town) 
Tendalti 
Um Rimta 
All state except capital 
Bara 
El Rahad 
Gebrat El Sheikh 
Gharb Bara 
Sheikan 
Soudari 
Um Dam Haj Ahmed 
Um Rawaba 
El Obied Town* 
All state except capital 
Abassiya 
Abu Jubaiha 
Abu Karshola 
Delami 
Dilling 
El Buram 
El Leri 
El Quoz 
El Rashad 
El Tadamon 
Ghadeer 
Habila 
Heiban 
Kadugli 
Reif Shargi 
Talodi 
Um Durein 
All state except capital 
Abu Zabad 
Abyei 
Babanusa 
123 
177 
147 
162 
305 
91 
324 
55 
167 
51 
280 
101 
39 
653 
- 
158 
334 
60 
44 
102 
138 
100 
240 
82 
312 
174 
66 
180 
230 
70 
114 
224 
137 
69 
90 
7.1 
7.6 
12.9 
10.1 
8.5 
10.0 
9.2 
10.2 
8.6 
9.7 
2.5 
13.9 
10.2 
12.1 
16.3 
22.5 
9.9 
8.1 
12.1 
17.2 
8.8 
- 
- 
7.6 
- 
7.8 
2.5 
5.8 
15.3 
4.7 
- 
11.9 
7.7 
11.2 
8.5 
- 
9.5 
18.1 
10.1 
6.0 
2.5 
1.2 
1.5 
0.7 
0.0 
0.5 
2.7 
0.9 
1.5 
1.5 
5.7 
0.7 
2.7 
1.0 
1.6 
0.0 
1.7 
1.5 
1.5 
3.1 
2.6 
- 
- 
1.9 
- 
2.6 
2.0 
0.0 
3.6 
4.7 
- 
1.0 
3.6 
2.4 
1.7 
- 
2.7 
1.2 
1.1 
0.0 
18.3 
44.8 
85.4 
40.4 
0.0 
51.7 
34.2 
53.8 
31.8 
56.7 
76.0 
0.6 
4.7 
65.0 
11.4 
10.3 
47.4 
44.1 
35.8 
72.9 
23.4 
- 
- 
100.0 
- 
65.1 
98.5 
79.5 
60.5 
64.9 
- 
55.2 
61.0 
100.0 
95.9 
- 
61.4 
41.4 
0.3 
3.8 
1.0 
3.1 
0.6 
31.9 
0.0 
29.6 
1.6 
3.1 
3.3 
0.0 
3.1 
0.0 
0.0 
8.6 
1.4 
0.0 
2.1 
41.8 
2.0 
47.9 
0.9 
- 
- 
0.0 
- 
0.0 
13.3 
0.0 
1.1 
0.0 
- 
0.0 
26.8 
0.0 
6.9 
- 
4.1 
5.7 
1.6 
0.0 
North Kordofan 
57.9 
14.8 
Kordofan 
South Kordofan 
60.0 
16.3 
West Kordofan 
- 
18.7 
El Dibab 
El Idia 
El Meriam 
El Nuhud 
El Khiwal 
Elsunut 
Es Salam 
Ghubaish 
Kellik 
Lagawa 
Wad Benda 
Fula Town* 
All state except capital  
Delgo 
Dongola 
Dongola (Town) 
El Burgaig 
El Daba 
El Golid 
Halfa 
Merwoe 
All state except capital 
Agig 
Dordieb 
El Ganab Elawlait 
Gabaot Elma’aadin 
Haleeb 
Haya 
Port Sudan 
Sinkat 
Swakin 
Tokar 
All state 
Abu Hamad 
Atbara 
Atbara (Town) 
Barbar 
El Buhaira 
El Damar 
El Damar (Town) 
76 
88 
68 
480 
54 
433 
229 
110 
64 
103 
160 
- 
89 
46 
31 
38 
26 
55 
112 
39 
17 
88 
8 
75 
94 
152 
74 
36 
56 
234 
26 
107 
157 
333 
13.0 
11.6 
13.6 
13.8 
11.2 
11.3 
7.9 
13.2 
7.1 
9.0 
19.8 
8.1 
12.7 
12.6 
11.8 
7.8 
0.0 
3.9 
19.0 
3.0 
8.7 
7.3 
22.7 
13.6 
20.6 
10.2 
28.6 
24.5 
13.8 
28.7 
34.4 
36.4 
20.2 
11.9 
21.4 
10.2 
9.3 
26.1 
15.1 
10.5 
1.0 
2.6 
0.0 
2.0 
1.6 
0.2 
1.9 
1.0 
1.2 
1.2 
3.2 
1.1 
1.8 
0.0 
0.3 
0.6 
0.0 
0.9 
0.9 
0.0 
3.2 
0.7 
16.4 
1.9 
3.5 
0.0 
3.4 
7.1 
3.1 
10.0 
15.1 
21.0 
8.5 
1.6 
0.0 
0.0 
2.8 
1.5 
2.7 
0.0 
0.0 
82.9 
0.9 
67.4 
53.1 
0.0 
5.4 
35.1 
1.5 
39.5 
22.0 
4.7 
28.6 
92.3 
99.0 
98.8 
100.0 
91.9 
78.2 
94.0 
76.0 
90.7 
75.3 
17.5 
3.4 
4.2 
1.6 
3.8 
25.5 
0.5 
9.8 
7.2 
27.9 
79.0 
58.2 
92.5 
83.9 
3.7 
73.3 
90.7 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
31.4 
44.4 
0.0 
4.6 
2.5 
0.4 
0.2 
1.3 
26.3 
8.7 
37.2 
50.0 
75.9 
50.0 
50.6 
71.4 
53.4 
51.0 
52.4 
7.3 
0.5 
5.8 
0.0 
3.9 
1.7 
73.9 
0.0 
2.1 
49.5 
44.1 
46.0 
31.0 
66.8 
50.8 
11.8 
35.1 
68.3 
Northern 
36.2 
11.4 
Northern 
Red Sea 
57.7 
14.0 
River Nile 
32.2 
20.1 
El Matama 
Shendi 
All state except capital 
158 
222 
13.9 
21.0 
15.2 
2.3 
0.5 
2.0 
87.6 
40.2 
68.8 
63.6 
14.1 
39.9 
Annex 3: Terms of reference 
Post title: Senior M&E expert 
Name of project: Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme 
Duration: 3 year renewable 
Duty Station: (leave this blank) 
1. 
Background  
In November 2017, the IFAD Result Based Country Strategic Programme (RB-COSOP 2013-2020) was 
reviewed. On that occasion, special attention was directed to the identification of pipeline projects for the 
remaining three years of the COSOP. In this context value chain development was considered as a less 
pressing matter as compared to natural resources management and the building of resilience to climate 
change. The latter were identified as top priorities, well reflecting the analysis of main drivers for poverty 
and food insecurity among rural population in Sudan. 
In this framework, the Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme (SNRLP) was 
approved. SNRLP’s aim is  to increase the adoption of natural resources management practices, 
technologies and business models by enhancing NR sustainable use and by securing access for 
vulnerable resources users.  
In this context the Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Officer will be responsible for the planning, 
coordination and implementation of all programme monitoring and evaluation activities; and for ensuring 
the quality and adequacy of the project monitoring for achieving the SNRLP’s 
Development Objectives. 
The M&E Officer will be the main coordinator and the ultimate responsible of all the M&E activities carried 
out on the ground. 
Job description: (please text) 
  Leading the planning and coordination of the regular and systematic monitoring of the overall 
implementation progress especially as for the achievement of the outcomes and outputs 
established in the main log frame;  
  Ensuring the regular reporting against the leading indicators established in the log frame; 
  Ensuring the compliance of the M&E system with the requirements of the  IFAD Operational 
Results Management System (ORMS);  
  Regularly update the online log frame in the ORMS ensuring the reliability and accuracy of the 
data reported; 
  Regularly liaising with the Country Director and the Near East, North Africa, Europe and Central 
Asia (NEN) Regional Portfolio Adviser on any M&E issues arising during the implementation; 
  Collecting, systematizing and consolidating all the data transmitted from States Programme 
Coordination Units (SPCUs);  
  Organizing monthly meetings with the SPCUs M&E and KM officers to promptly identify main 
implementation issues ongoing on the ground and work forwards corrective solutions; 
  Consolidation of State Action Plans- provided by the SPCUs M&E and KM officers -into one 
single Programme Action Plan 
  Undertaking regular visits to the field to support implementation of M&E system and to identify 
where adaptations might be needed; 
  Preparing regular project monitoring reports as required by IFAD, in collaboration with other  
Central Programme Coordination Unit (CPCU) staff, identifying potential implementation risks in 
achieving the programme development objectives and proactively proposing potential solutions; 
  Supporting the Project Coordinator in planning the programme supervision, the mid-term review 
and project completion processes; 
  Preparing detailed M&E budget and calendar of M&E activities. 
2. 
Qualifications and experience (insert text) 
Education: 
  Advanced degree in environment, natural resource management or development  or economics 
or statistics related fields  
  Sound and proven knowledge of the main M&E methods and approaches and data/ information 
analysis 
Working Experience  
  At least five years of proven experience with the logical framework approach and other strategic 
planning approaches as well as with the planning, design and implementation of M&E systems;  
  Excellent technical report writing skill and a high-level of computer literacy, in particular excellent 
command of Excel 
  Fluency in written and spoken English and Arabic is required for the post 
  Good personal organization, interpersonal and communication skills 
  Working at national and sub-national level in national development issues is an asset  
  Previous working experience with IFAD and other donors and development projects is an asset 
Post title: Senior KM and Communications expert 
Name of project: Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme 
Duration: 3 year renewable 
Duty Station: (leave this blank) 
3. 
Background  
In November 2017, the IFAD Result Based Country Strategic Programme (RB-COSOP 2013-2020) was 
reviewed. On that occasion, special attention was directed to the identification of pipeline projects for the 
remaining three years of the COSOP. In this context value chain development was considered as a less 
pressing matter as compared to natural resources management and the building of resilience to climate 
change. The latter were identified as top priorities, well reflecting the analysis of main drivers for poverty 
and food insecurity among rural population in Sudan. 
In this framework, the Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme (SNRLP) was 
approved. SNRLP’s aim is  to increase the adoption of natural resources management practices, 
technologies and business models by enhancing NR sustainable use and by securing access for 
vulnerable resources users.  
In this context, KM and communication will play a crucial role: the project will promote activities aimed to 
upscale community based natural resources management practices, technologies and businesses among 
targeted communities as well as to improve the institutional framework enabling these improvements. In 
this regard, communication and KM will be instrumental to cross-fertilize knowledge inputs emerging from 
the field and which show an untapped potential for replication in other areas of the country now covered 
by IFAD funded operations. 
4. 
Job description: (please text) 
  Work proactively with State Programme Coordination Units (SPCUs) M&E and KM officers to 
identify key lessons emerging from the field and decide through which type of KM product the 
latter should be disseminate to a wider public 
  Facilitate the sharing of experiences and knowledge as well as learning through the 
establishment of Discussion Groups, Fora, Communities of Practice, thematic networks and 
learning activities using also the IFAD Central Programme Coordination Unit (CPCU) KM website, 
which already exists and which should be enhanced during the implementation of the SRNLP. 
  Systematically document new information and knowledge on community natural resources 
management practices, technologies and business models in Sudan and in Africa at a large and 
regularly share this with SPCU M&E and KM officers so as to identify those inputs relevant to 
SRNLP activities; 
  Help to disseminate information and share knowledge widely among SRNLP stakeholders as 
through publications, knowledge fairs and exhibitions. 
  Work closely with the NEN KM focal point and the IFAD Communication Division to maintain and 
improve the CPCU website and other portals. 
  Regularly monitor and evaluate knowledge sharing within SRLNP. 
  Support SPCU M&E and KM officers in advancing knowledge management practices in general 
  Consolidate a culture of lessons learning involving all project staff and allocate specific 
responsibilities.  
  Ensure that TOR for consultants recruited by the project also incorporate mechanisms to capture 
and share lessons learned through their inputs to the project, and to ensure that the results are 
reflected in the reporting system. 
  Facilitate exchange of experiences by supporting and coordinating participation in any existing 
 
network of IFAD sharing common characteristics .   
Identify and participate in additional networks, for example scientific or policy-based networks that 
may also yield lessons that can benefit project implementation. 
  Developing knowledge products to serve diverse needs, including: to feed issues, lessons, 
evidence into policy discussions; to share lessons and good practice across the portfolio, with 
partners, local organizations and project participants; to give broader visibility to lessons and 
successes emerging from the country programme 
  Organizing on a regular basis programme learning days, promoted by the SCPCUs in 
collaboration with implementing partners, including local institutions and stakeholders. The 
purpose would be to highlight and discuss issues, challenges and solutions, as well as to give 
visibility to successes.  
5. 
Qualifications and experience (insert text) 
             Education: 
  Post-graduate degree in Knowledge Management, the Environmental Sciences, Social Sciences, 
Development Studies or related field 
  Familiarity with issues in the fields of climate change adaptation and natural resources 
management 
  Familiarity with knowledge management tools and concepts 
Working Experience  
  At least three years of experience on issues of knowledge management in relation to sustainable 
natural resources management with progressively increasing responsibilities in a developmental 
organization, including familiarity with IFAD’s programmes in this area. 
  Strong written and verbal communication skills; organized and able to present ideas in a concise 
and logical manner, including excellent skills in summarizing lengthy and complex information into 
short and simple language. 
  Familiarity with IFAD policies and experience with IFAD administrative procedures 
  Fluency in Arabic and English 
  Demonstrated ability to work in a multicultural environment and establish harmonious and 
effective working relationships both within and outside the organization. 
Post title: Senior Gender and Community Development Expert at the Central Project Coordination Unit 
Name of project: SNLRP 
Duration:  
Duty Station: (leave this blank) 
6. 
Background (Project to insert at the time of recruitment) 
7. 
Job description:  
  Ensure gender mainstreaming across all components of the project and oversee community 
mobilization activities 
  Develop a gender action plan in consultation with project staff that identifies opportunities and 
entry points for mainstreaming gender into the project in keeping with the gender strategy 
specified in the PDR  
  Develop a monitoring tool for gender mainstreaming in all the project activities, including 
indicators for assessing progress with gender mainstreaming, adapted to the project outcome, 
outputs and activities. 
  Familiarize staff with the gender action plan and build staff capacity to implement the plan 
  Mentor, guide, train and monitor the Community Development and Gender Officers in the State 
Project Coordination Units to support the development of inclusive Village Development 
Committees and Cluster Development /Network Executive Committees  
8. 
Qualifications and experience (insert text) 
  Masters Degree in Social Sciences 
  More than 7 years of professional work experience, as expert in gender equality in development 
programmes and projects. 
  Experience and knowledge of planning, design, monitoring and evaluation of gender equality 
project and programmes, as well as integrating governance and environmental considerations 
into programming; 
  Excellent communication and reporting skills; 
  Ability to coordinate and lead;  
Post title: Community Development and Gender Officers in the State Project Coordination Units 
Name of project: SNLRP 
Duration:  
Duty Station: (leave this blank) 
9. 
Background (Project to insert at the time of recruitment) 
10. 
Job description:  
  Ensure gender mainstreaming across all activities in the State Units  
  Collaborate in the development and implementation of the gender action plan at State level 
  Familiarize staff with the gender action plan and build staff capacity to implement the plan 
  Mobilize communities to develop inclusive Village Development Committees and Cluster 
Development /Network Executive Committees 
  Support the development of i) Village Savings and Credit Groups (VSCGs); ii) NR Livelihood 
groups (NRLGs); and iii) Vulnerable Women’s Groups (VWGs).  
Identify and address barriers to gender mainstreaming on an on-going basis  
 
11.  Qualifications and experience (insert text) 
  Masters Degree in Social Sciences 
  More than 4 years of professional work experience in in development programmes and projects. 
  Experience and knowledge of community mobilization; 
  Experience in implementing gender equality initiatives 
  Good communication and reporting skills; 
Post title: (Sector/ Regional NRM Policy Coordination Centers (SPCC)/ Sector/ regional Policy 
Specialist) 
Name of project: (SNRLP)  
Duration: (1 year renewable) 
Duty Station: (leave this blank) 
12.  Background (Project to insert at the time of recruitment) 
13. 
Job description: 
The  overall  goal  of  Regional  Policy  Coordination  Centre  (RPCC) 
is  to  ensure  effective 
coordination,  harmonisation,  therefore,  coherence  of  inter-state  NR  policies,  laws,  regulations 
and  governance  frameworks,  targeting  all  stakeholders  using  same  land  and  natural  resources, 
namely  public  and  private  institutions,  agro-pastoralists,  pastoralists,  traditional  and  modern 
farmers, gold mining, among many others. In view of this, a Sector (Regional) Policy Specialist 
(S/RPS) will perform the following: 
- Head Sector/ Regional Policy Coordination Centre, with support of a team of State Policy Officers 
(SPOs), one from each  State  in the sector, and under overall guidance  and supervision from NR 
Senior NRM Expert (SNRE) at CPCU; 
-  Anchor  and  lead  the  planning  for  the  NR  policy,  governance  and  regulations  at  the  sector  at 
large to ensure coherence and integration during implementation by each cluster and each state;  
- Ensure  adoption  of  (i)  Ecosystem  Approach  (EA)  (ii)  Cluster-Based  Approach  (CBA),  (iii) 
Institutional  Framework,  and  (iv)  NRGF  in  the  establishment  of    clusters,  networks,  NR  forums, 
Livestock  Route  Co-management  across  sector/  region,  at  the  beginning  of  project  planning  and 
implementation;  
- Coordinate  with  Senior  NRM  Expert  (SNRE)  at  the  CPCU  and  SPOs  in  order  to  develop  co-
management arrangements for "open access" common areas, including part of livestock corridors, 
rangeland and forest areas outside traditional village managed land (Hema) throughout the entire 
sector/ region space as continuum ecosystem; 
- Ensure that ‘open access’ land resources such as open rangelands, livestock roads, and water 
sources in the entire sector or region are part and parcel of AWPB and NRM within the sector and 
beyond 
- take  lead  in  providing  technical  guidelines  for  identification  and  implementation  of  all  activities 
related to NRs in the sector specially natural resources forums (NRFs), in close coordination with 
State Technical Support Team (STST), and under direct guidance and supervision of  Senior NRM 
Expert (SNRE) at the CPCU;  
- Integrate, in close colaboration and coordination with NR Senior NRM Expert (SNRE) at CPCU, 
all activities related to NR policy, laws, governance and regulations in the project annual work plan 
and budget; 
- Initiate and promote vertical and horizontal coordination and dialogues on issues related to NR 
policy, laws, governance and regulations in the sector;  
- Coordinate  with  states  technical  teams  in  planning,  implementation  of  natural  resource  forums 
(NRFs) at community, locality, state and inter-state levels and lead the process of following up and 
implementation of policy recommendations; 
institutional 
inter-state  dialogues,  and 
- Take lead to ensure implementation, consolidation or scaling up of NRGF or land use map when 
appropriate; 
- Promote 
inter-communal,  community-locality,  and 
coordination for effective use and management of NRs; 
- Promote  linkages,  networks,  learning  routes  and  exchange  visits  between  communities  as  well 
as within a cluster, sector/ region and even beyond; 
- Design  and conduct  unified training sessions  and capacity  building  workshops on  policies and 
regulations related to sustainable NR management and governance, at sector/ regional level, for all 
SPOs  and  state  technical  support  team,  in  collaboration  with  SPCUs,  on  one  hand,  and  Senior 
NRM Expert (SNRE) at the CPCU, on the other;  
- Provide, in close collaboration with NR Senior NRM Expert (SNRE) at CPCU, general guidelines 
to  technically  support  SPCUs  and,  consequently,  the  CDC/NECs  in  conducting  a  participatory 
community  and  inter  community  planning  process  leading  to  the  formulation  and  ownership  of  a 
NRLMP which provides a framework for the communities to address NR governance issues, invest 
in their NR and derived livelihoods, and enhance their resilience; and 
- Lead and support institutional capacity strengthening and policy engagement from local to State 
and Federal levels in order to institutionalise and scale up proven community and inter-community 
land and NR governance and management models; and 
- Facilitate the establishment of Interstate platforms with ability to effectively  engage  with federal 
levels,  through  interstate  task  force,  on  NR  issues  of  common  concern  and  interests  in  order  to 
influence institutional legal and policy frameworks at federal levels.    
3. Qualifications and Experience 
-  Strong  background  and  advanced  training  in  natural  resources’  management,  policies,  institutions, 
governance and regulations; 
-  At  least  M.Sc.,  or  M.A,  preferably  in  NRM,  Geography,  Environmental  Science,  and  Agricultural 
Sciences; 
- Minimum of 10 years working experience in similar projects with focus on natural resource management 
and governance, including institutional, policy and legal frameworks; 
- Fluent in Arabic and English languages; 
- Competency in computer skills;  
- Management, planning, budgeting and report writing skills;  
- Ability to work always in team work and collaborative tasks; 
- Ability to work in harsh human and physical environments, including extensive and intensive field works 
in remote rural areas. 
Post Title: (State Policy Officer) 
Name of Project: (SNRLP)  
Duration: (1 year renewable) 
Duty Station: (leave this blank) 
14.  Background (Project to insert at the time of recruitment) 
15. 
Job Description: 
A State Policy Office (SPO) will 
-  Lead  and  Coordinate  the  implementation  activities  related  to  NR  policy,  governance  and 
regulations in the state, in close collaboration with other state technical officers, and under overall 
guidance and supervision of Regional Policy Spelialist at Regional Policy Coordination Centre; 
-  Ensure,  at  the  beginning  of  project  planning  and  implementation,  the  adoption  of  (i)  Ecosystem 
Approach  (EA)  (ii)  Cluster-Based  Approach  (CBA),  (iii)  Institutional  Framework,  and  (iv)  NRGF  in 
the  establishment  of  clusters,  networks,  NR  forums,  Livestock  Route  Co-management  across  the 
state;  
-  Ensure  coherence  and  integration  of  all  NR  related  activities  during  implementation  processes 
within  each  cluster,  between  clusters  and,  consequently,  across  the  entire  state  as  a  continuum 
ecosystem; 
-  Coordinate with Regional Policy Specialist at Regional Coordination Centre, other SPOs at SPCU, 
and  Cluster  Development  Officer  in  order  to  implement  co-management  arrangements  for  "open 
access"  or  common  areas,  including  part  of  livestock  corridors,  open  rangeland  and  forest  areas 
outside  traditional  village  managed  land  (Hema)  throughout  the  entire  project’s  area  in  state  as 
continuum ecosystem; 
-  Ensure that  ‘open  access’ resources such as  open rangelands,  livestock routes, and open  water 
sources in the project area in the state are part of NRM, and consequently integrated in AWPB of 
the project; 
-  Take lead in identification and implementation of all activities related to NRM in the state in close 
collaboration with State Technical Support Team (STST), Cluster Development Officers, and VDCs 
under  direct  guidance  and  supervision  of  Regional  Policy  Specialist  at  Regional  Coordination 
Centre;  
Initiate  and  promote  vertical  and  horizontal  coordination  and  dialogues  on  issues  related  to  NR 
policy,  management,  laws,  governance  and  regulations  at  state  level  and  its  relevant  institutions 
and stakeholders;  
- 
-  Coordinate  with  states  technical  teams  in  planning  and  conducting  of  natural  resource  forums 
(NRFs)  at  community,  locality,  and  state  levels,  and  lead  the  process  of  following  up  and 
implementation of policy recommendations; 
-  Take lead to ensure implementation, consolidation or scaling up of NRGF or land use map when 
appropriate in project areas throughout the state; 
-  Promote linkages, networks, learning routes and exchange visits between communities as well as 
within a cluster, and between different clusters in state; 
-  Conduct  unified  training  sessions  and  capacity  building  workshops  on  policies  and  regulations 
related  to  sustainable  NR  management  and  governance,  at  state  level,  for    young  professionals, 
State Technical Support Team,  and Cluster Development Officers, members of Networks, VDCs, 
NECs and CDCs in collaboration with Regional Policy Specialist, at Regional Coordination Centre;  
-  Provide,  in  close  collaboration  with  Regional  Policy  Specialist,  at  Regional  Coordination  Centre 
general  guidelines  to  technically  support  the  Clusters,  CDCs/  NECs  in  conducting  a  participatory 
community  and  inter-community  planning  process  leading  to  the  formulation  and  ownership  of  a 
NRLMP which provides a framework for the communities to address NR governance issues, invest 
in their NR and derived livelihoods, and enhance their resilience; and 
-  Lead and support  institutional capacity strengthening and policy  engagement from local to  State 
levels in order to institutionalise and scale up proven community and inter-community land and NR 
governance and management models. 
-  Support communities in the creation of a strengthened village, inter-village cluster frameworks for 
land-use  planning,  negotiation  of  resources  governance  arrangements  and  joint  resources 
management, land registration, mitigation and resolution of conflict over access to and use of NR; 
-  Facilitate  the  processes  of  establishment  of  different  interest  groups,  in  collaboration  with  other 
STST,  and  support  them  in  formulating  and  implementing  livelihood  investment  plans  (LIPs)  to 
increase  their  resilience  and  benefit  streams  derived  from  NRs,  production  systems  and  related 
small businesses; 
-  Support  the  VDCs  and  CDCs/  NECs  to  organize  and  register  as  voluntary  functioning 
organizations  while  training  them  on  the  principles  of  land-use  planning,  NR  governance  and 
integrated NRM practices, transparency, accountability  and organisational management, resource 
mobilisation  and  reporting,  and  investment  in  cluster/network  and  community  development 
activities; 
-  Facilitate  the  establishment  of  a  State  Cluster  Stakeholder  Platform  (SCSP)  with  representation 
from  all  concerned:  CACCs  and  CDC/  NECs;  mobile  pastoralists  communities;  Localities;  NR 
related  technical  departments  of  ministries  at  the  State  level;  NGOs  supporting  NR  issues  in  the 
state;  parliamentarians;  private  sector;  and  experts  from  research  institutions  and  other 
development partners.  
-  Support the established SCSPs to serve as consultation fora with ability to engage and follow-up 
with the State Government on NR policy, governance and management issues; 
-  Production  and  dissemination  of  relevant  information  at  higher  levels  and  in  other  States  and 
nationally through policy briefs, information notes, workshops and other relevant media in order to 
influence public policies related to NR management, institutional and governance frameworks. 
16.  Qualifications and Experience 
-  Strong  background  and  advanced  training  in  natural  resources’  management,  policies,  institutions, 
governance and regulations; 
- Bachelor Degree in NRM, Geography, Environmental Science, and Agricultural Sciences. M.Sc., or M.A, 
is an advantage; 
- Minimum of 7 years working experience in similar projects, with focus on natural resource management 
and governance, including institutional, policy and legal frameworks; 
- Fluency in Arabic and English languages; 
- Competency in computer skills;  
- Management, planning, budgeting and report writing skills;  
- Ability to work always in team work and collaborative tasks; 
- Ability to work in harsh human and physical environments, including extensive and intensive stay or long 
field works in remote rural areas. 
Post title: SPCU M&E and KM hexpert 
Name of project: Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme 
Duration: 3 year renewable 
Duty Station: (leave this blank) 
17.  Background 
In November 2017, the IFAD Result Based Country Strategic Programme (RB-COSOP 2013-2020) was 
reviewed. On that occasion, special attention was directed to the identification of pipeline projects for the 
remaining three years of the COSOP. In this context value chain development was considered  a less 
pressing matter as compared to natural resources management and the building of resilience to climate 
change. The latter were identified as top priorities, well reflecting the analysis of main drivers for poverty 
and food insecurity among rural population in Sudan. 
In this framework, the Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme (SNRLP) was 
approved. SNRLP’s aim is  to increase the adoption of natural resources management practices, 
technologies and business models by enhancing NR sustainable use and by securing access for 
vulnerable resources users.  
Drawing on the lessons learned from other IFAD funded development initiatives aimed to strengthen of 
communities’ empowerment, the planning architecture of this initiative will be highly decentralized.  
In line with the overall project approach aiming to strengthen communities empowerment, the M&E 
system will be also participatory. Such an arrangement will allow the target communities to further be 
active participants in the tracking of results and in the eventual adoption of corrective measures to 
implementation gaps. This participatory M&E system is supposed to contribute to the learning of all the 
stakeholders involved in it, thus feeding also the KM system. 
 In this context the Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) and Knowledge Management (KM) Officer will be 
responsible for the planning, coordination and implementation of all programme monitoring and 
evaluation activities and for ensuring the quality and adequacy of the project monitoring for achieving the 
SNRLP’s Development Objectives. On the other hand, KM and communication will play a crucial role: the 
project will promote activities aimed to upscale community based natural resources management 
practices, technologies and businesses among targeted communities as well as to improve the 
institutional framework enabling these improvements. In this regard, KM at the SPCU 
Level will be crucial to identify best practices, which can be both up scaled and transferred to other areas 
of the country. 
Job description: (please text) 
  By closely liaising with CPCU M&E expert, the Community Management (CM) teams and the 
Village Development Clusters (VDC)/ network of village cluster, setting up of a Participatory 
Monitoring and Evaluation (PM&E) system which must well reflect the logic applied in the main 
log frame of the programme; 
  Undertaking regular visits to the field to support the establishment and implementation of M&E 
system, 
  Yearly update of the M&E system on the basis of the activities established in the an annual work 
plan prepared by CM teams, communities groups and Village Development Committees (VDC) 
clusters, 
  Assisting the SPCU staff, the CM teams, communities groups and Village Development 
Committees (VDC) clusters in developing the annual work plan by providing feedbacks and inputs 
based on the monitoring of the results achieved during the previous year; 
  Leading the planning and coordination of the regular and systematic monitoring of the overall 
implementation progress (including data collection and analysis), especially as for the 
achievement of the outcomes and outputs by ensuring consistency with the ones established in 
the main log frame of the programme; 
  Once analysed, transmitting the consolidated data reports to the CPCU M&E expert for the final 
consolidation process to be done at the programme level; 
  Holding a monthly meeting with Community Management (CM) teams and Village Development 
Clusters (VDC)/ network of village clusters to pin point the main issues and corrective actions to 
be performed in order to timely achieve the programme objectives; 
  Attending monthly meetings with other SPCUs M&E and KM officers and the CPCU M&E expert 
to promptly identify main implementation issues ongoing on the ground and work forwards 
corrective solutions; 
  Working proactively with SPCU KM expert to identify key lessons emerging from the field; 
  Facilitating the sharing of experiences and knowledge as well as learning through the 
establishment of discussion and focus groups among beneficiaries; 
  Regular production of documented lessons and best practice in different forms such as the 
narratives from stories from the field and videos. 
18.  Qualifications and experience (insert text) 
Education: 
  Advanced degree in environment, natural resource management or development  or economics 
or statistics related fields  
  Sound and proven knowledge of the main M&E methods and approaches and data/ information 
analysis 
  Familiarity with issues in the fields of climate change adaptation and natural resources 
management 
  Familiarity with knowledge management tools and concepts 
Working Experience  
  At least five years of proven experience with the logical framework approach and other strategic 
planning approaches as well as with the planning, design and implementation of M&E systems;  
  Excellent technical report writing skill and a high-level of computer literacy, in particular excellent 
command of Excel 
  Fluency in written and spoken Arabic is required for the post 
  Good personal organization, interpersonal and communication skills 
  Working at national and sub-national level in national development issues is an asset  
  Previous working experience with IFAD and other donors and development projects is an asset 
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme 
Financial Management section of PIM 
Contents 
Glossary of terms ............................................................................................................................. 3 
1. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Updates and changes to financial management arrangements ......................... 4 
Programme cycle and financial management activities ........................................ 5 
Pre-implementation activities .......................................................................................... 5 
IFAD Anticorruption policy ................................................................................................ 6 
FM organisational structure, roles and responsibilities ......................................... 7 
6. Planning and budgeting ............................................................................................................ 8 
7. Internal controls .......................................................................................................................... 9 
8. Flow of funds .............................................................................................................................. 11 
9. Accounting ................................................................................................................................... 13 
10. Cash flow forecasting ............................................................................................................ 18 
11. Disbursements ......................................................................................................................... 20 
12. Processing of payments ....................................................................................................... 25 
13. Financial Reporting ................................................................................................................ 46 
14. Audit matters ........................................................................................................................... 49 
15. Records Management ........................................................................................................... 51 
16. Fixed Asset Management .................................................................................................... 53 
17. IFAD financial management support .............................................................................. 54 
18. Programme completion and closure................................................................................ 56 
19. Staff loans ................................................................................................................................. 57 
20. Useful links ................................................................................................................................ 57 
21. Annexures ................................................................................................................................. 59 
21.1 AWPB Structure and preparation checklist ............................................................ 59 
21.2 Information checklist – preparing for IFAD missions ........................................ 61 
21.3 Terms of reference: Financial Manager ................................................................... 62 
21.4 Terms of reference: Senior Central Programme Accountant .......................... 65 
21.5 Terms of reference: Regional Programme Accountant ..................................... 67 
21.6 Terms of reference: State Accounts Officer .......................................................... 69 
21.7 Terms of reference: Senior Internal Auditor ......................................................... 71 
21.8 Supporting documentation for withdrawal applications.................................... 74 
1 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
21.9 Terms of reference: External Auditor ...................................................................... 75 
21.10 Terms of reference: Accounting software ............................................................ 80 
21.11 Illustrative financial statements .............................................................................. 86 
21.12 Appendix 1 ..................................................................................................................... 111 
21.13 Petty Cash forms ......................................................................................................... 114 
21.14 Vehicle Log ..................................................................................................................... 116 
2 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Glossary of terms 
Term 
Description 
CCU 
CAA 
Central Coordination Unit of IFAD Programmes 
Central Administrative Accountant 
Community 
Group 
Groups receiving investment via LIPs. Includes CDCs, VDSs, NRLGs, 
VSCGs, VWGs, CIFs 
CDC 
CIF 
CSPA 
CPA 
DSA 
FM 
GEF 
GoS 
ICP 
Community Development Cluster 
Community Investment Fund 
Central Senior Programme Accountant 
Central Programme Accountant 
Daily Subsistence Allowance 
Financial Management 
Global environmental Facility 
Government of Sudan 
IFAD Client Portal 
IFAD 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
IPSAS Cash 
International Public Sector Accounting Standards - Financial Reporting 
Under the Cash Basis of Accounting 
LDCF 
LIP 
MoA 
Least Developed Communities Fund 
Livelihood Investment Plan 
Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry 
MoFeP 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning 
MFI 
NAC 
NRM 
Micro Finance Institution 
National Auditor Chamber of Sudan 
National Resources Management 
NRLG 
Natural Resources Livelihood Group 
PIM 
PFI 
RPA 
Programme Implementation Manual 
Partnering Financial Institution 
Regional Programme Accountant 
SAAA 
State Administrative and Accounts Assistant 
SAO 
SC 
State Accounts Officer 
State Coordinator 
SNRLP 
Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme 
SOE 
Statement of Expenditure 
3 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
SPA 
VDC 
VSCG 
VWG 
WA 
Senior Programme Accountant 
Village Development Cluster 
Village Savings and Credit Group 
Vulnerable Women’s Group 
Withdrawal Application 
1.  Updates and changes to financial management arrangements 
SNRLP is an IFAD-funded Programme, therefore, in line with IFAD’s efforts to capacitate 
and  support  Programmes,  this  section  was  developed  during  the  Programme  design 
process.  It  is  envisaged  that  ongoing  improvements  and  updates  to  financial 
management  arrangements  be  updated  in  this  section  of  the  PIM  under  supervision  of 
objection.
the 
Financial 
Manager 
subject 
IFAD 
and 
no 
to 
4 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
1.  Programme cycle and financial management activities 
The Financial Manager of SNRLP will have final responsibility for the execution of the 
financial management activities at each stage of the Programme cycle as outlined below: 
Start-up 
Implementation 
Programme 
closure and 
completion 
FM activities at each stage of the Programme cycle 
Start-up 
Implementation 
  FM Staff appointment  
  Procurement / 
Development of 
accounting systems 
and financial 
management 
procedures  
  Preparation of first 
annual work plan and 
budget  
  Opening of bank 
accounts  
  Staff training 
  Ongoing 
improvements to the 
Financial Manual 
  Budgeting  
  Accounting  
  Disbursements and 
withdrawals 
  Record keeping  
 
Internal controls  
  Cashflow forecasting 
  Auditing  
  Financial reporting 
Programme closure 
and completion 
 
IFAD Specific 
completion and 
closure procedures  
  Final audit  
  Asset and inventory 
handover 
  Budget wrap up 
IFAD ongoing support 
2.  Pre-implementation activities 
During  the  start-up  of  the  Programme  it  is  recommended  that  Programme  staff 
undertake  the  following  activities.  These  activities  are  recommended  to  ensure  that 
Programme  staff  are  well  informed  and  knowledgeable  with  regards  to  the  financial 
management aspects of the Programme once implementation commences: 
Activity 
Overview 
Financial 
management 
staff 
appointment 
  Government will facilitate the appointment of seconded staff. 
  The Financial Manager recruitment process will be managed by 
the CCU to ensure appointment once financial agreements enter 
into force. 
Accounting 
software 
procurement and 
updates to the 
Financial Manual 
  The CCU will commence with the procurement of accounting 
software once the financial agreements enter into force, funded 
from start-up funds allocated by Government.  
  The Financial Manager will play a key role in the development 
process to ensure that the software meets the Programme’s 
needs. 
5 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
  The Financial Manager will be responsible for the review and 
improvement of the financial management arrangements in the 
PIM (subject to IFAD no objection). 
Open bank 
accounts 
  The Financial Manager, with the assistance from the CCU, will 
be responsible for the opening of the bank accounts at both 
CPCU and State level. Refer 8.1 for overview of required bank 
accounts. 
Preparation of 
first annual work 
plan and budget 
Staff training and 
capacity building 
  The Programme Director will oversee the preparation of the first 
Annual Workplan and Budget, subject to IFAD no-objection. 
  Newly appointed Financial Management staff will be required to 
complete the IFAD FM e-learning (available in Arabic) and 
submit completion certificates to IFAD within 1 month of date of 
appointment. Refer 20. for link to training. 
  Newly appointed staff will be required to review and study 
Programme related documents with a focus on FM related 
issues. (IFAD grant/loan agreement, GEF/LCDF Grant 
agreement, Letter to the Recipient, Programme Design 
Document (prepared by IFAD), PIM). 
  Under the supervision of the Financial Manager, it is 
recommended that new Programme financial management staff 
be seconded to existing IFAD Programmes for a period (to be 
agreed) with the aim of training on financial management 
processes in the context of IFAD requirements. 
3.  IFAD Anticorruption policy 
The management of Programme funds shall be sufficiently rigorous to safeguard against 
Fraud and Corruption. Fraud and corruption include, but are not limited to (as defined in 
the IFAD anticorruption policy): 
  Corrupt practice - offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting, directly or indirectly, 
anything of value to influence improperly the actions of another party. 
  Fraudulent practice - any act or omission, including a misrepresentation, that 
knowingly or recklessly misleads, or attempts to mislead, a party to obtain a financial 
or other benefit or to avoid an obligation. 
  Collusive practice - an arrangement between two or more parties designed to achieve 
an improper purpose, including influencing improperly the actions of another party. 
  Coercive practice - impairing or harming, or threatening to impair or harm, directly or 
indirectly, any party or the property of the party to influence improperly the actions 
of a party. 
IFAD  applies  a  zero-tolerance  policy  towards  fraudulent,  corrupt,  collusive  or  coercive 
actions  in  Programmes  financed  through  its  loans  and  grants.  ‘Zero  tolerance’  means 
that  IFAD  will  pursue  all  allegations  falling  under  the  scope  of  this  policy  and  that 
appropriate sanctions will be applied to parties or entities involved where the allegations 
are  substantiated.  IFAD  takes  all  possible  actions  to  protect  individuals  who  submit 
allegations  of  fraudulent  or  corrupt  practices  in  its  activities  from  reprisal.  The  primary 
responsibility  for  enforcing  the  Anticorruption  Policy  lies  with  the  SNRLP,  and  the  first 
defence for controls shall be exercised by Programme staff and counterparts Pursuant to 
this,  the  SNRLP  shall  have  the  responsibility  to  incorporate  pertinent  provisions  of  the 
Anticorruption  Policy  in  its  contracts  with  Programme  staff,  cooperating/implementing 
partners, and suppliers/consultants.  
6 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
It  is  the  Programme  Director  and  the  Programme  Financial  Manager’s  responsibility  to 
make sure that all Programme staff are aware of IFAD's and the National’s anticorruption 
policies and whistle blowing procedures. 
Refer to annexure 20 for useful links. 
4.  FM organisational structure, roles and responsibilities 
5.1 Overview of FM organisational structure 
The FM organisational structure has been developed based on the needs of the 
Programme and its various locations.  
The reporting lines are outlined below: 
The Programme Accountants at SPCU level will report directly to the respective state 
coordinators and via matrix management to regional accountants. Each regional position 
will be responsible for 3 SPCUs and will be based in one of these SPCUs. The allocation of 
7 | P a g e  
          SAO SAAA SAO SAAA SAO SAAA SAO SAAA SAO SAAA SAO SAAA SAO SAAA SAO SAAA SAO SAAA SPCU Internal auditor RPA RPA RPA CPA SC SC SC SC SC SC SC SC SC NSPC – National Prog Steering Com FM – Financial Manager SCPA – Senior Central Programme Accountant CAA – Central Administrative Assistant CPA – Central Programme Accountant RPA – Regional Programme Accountant SC – State Coordinator (non FM staff) SAO – State Accounts Officer SAAA – State Administrative and accounts assistant  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
SPCUs to regional staff and the SPCU where they will be based will be finalised by the 
Financial Manager during programme start-up. 
5.2 FM staff - key roles and responsibilities 
Detailed job descriptions for the Financial Manager, Senior Central Programme 
Accountant, Regional Programme Accountants and Senior Accounts Officers are outlined 
in 21.3, 21.4, 21.5 and 21.6. 
5.3 Leveraging experience of existing Programmes 
It is recommended that the Programme leverage the existing financial management 
experience of IFAD Programmes in Sudan. In most cases, existing IFAD Programmes will 
have SPCUs or the CPCU in proximity to SNRLP’s offices and the opportunity exists to 
engage with the financial management staff of these Programmes.  
6. Planning and budgeting  
Programme  financing  has  been  approved  in  line  with  the  following  expenditure 
components  and  categories  which  will  be  an  important  reference  for  preparation  and 
monitoring of the AWPB and progress in line with the approved financing agreements: 
Components 
Component 1 
Upscaling community based natural 
resources management and businesses 
Component 2 
Improving the Institutional framework for 
upscaling community based NRM 
Project Management and coordinating unit 
Expenditure categories 
  Civil works 
  Goods and Services 
  Consultancies 
  Training and Workshops 
  Equipment and materials 
  Grants Credit, Guarantee Funds 
  Salaries and Allowances 
  Operations and maintenance 
  Goods and Services 
  Consultancies 
  Training and Workshops 
  Equipment and materials 
  Goods and Services 
  Consultancies 
  Training and Workshops 
  Equipment and materials 
  Grants Credit, Guarantee Funds 
  Salaries and Allowances 
  Operations and maintenance 
The AWPB is developed and modified using excel. The AWPB is prepared using a bottom 
up  approach,  starting  the  lowest  levels.  The  Financial  Manager  is  responsible  for 
8 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
consolidation  of  the  AWPB  and  CPCU  level  for  submission  to  IFAD  for  its  no  objection. 
The  Financial  Manager  should  ensure  that  the  AWPB  is  prepared  in  the  recommended 
format and using the checklist as outlined in 21.1 
However, once the AWPB has been  developed and approved, it must be inserted in the 
budget  module  of  the  accounting  system  for  the  purposes  of  monitoring  actual 
implementation  in  line  with  the  budget.  The  Financial  Manager  needs  to  ensure  that 
expenditure per category is in line with the approved totals in the Financing Agreement. 
If the budgeting process indicates and expected over-expenditure on one or more of the 
cost categories, the Programme will have to obtain a no objection from IFAD, allowing a 
reallocation amongst categories.  
For information on how to prepare the AWBP (including the roles and responsibilities of 
various stakeholders and approval processes) refer to the PIM. 
7. Internal controls 
7.1 Overview of internal controls 
Internal control is a dynamic and integral process that is affected by an entity’s 
management and personnel at all levels.  The process consists of important checks 
instituted by management to have reasonable assurance that:  
  Operations are carried out in an efficient & effective manner  
  Transactions are recorded accurately & completely  
  Assets are properly recorded & safeguarded  
  Laws & regulations are complied with  
  Reliable reports are generated.  
Designing, Installing, and maintaining a system of internal financial control is an integral 
part of the Financial management function and is the responsibility of management.  
Component 
Description 
Control 
activities  
The design of the internal controls starts with the identification of the 
underlying risks.  Based on the identified risks, Programme 
management must put in place a set of controls to mitigate these 
risks.    
Authorisation  
Reconciliations 
and checks  
Segregation of 
duties  
Authorisation controls require certification that a transaction or event 
is acceptable for further processing.  The delegated authority of staff 
should ensure efficient implementation while mitigating related risks. 
Authorisation levels of Programme staff should be in line with their 
underlying roles. For example, only the programme director may be 
authorised to approve payments.  
Reconciliations between independent, corresponding sources of data 
are a key control for identifying errors and discrepancies in balances. 
The reconciliations should be done on a monthly basis. Any 
reconciling or balancing amounts should be promptly cleared. 
Unusually long outstanding reconciling items should be investigated. 
Physical checks should also be performed on assets and petty cash.  
An important element in any control system is the separation of those 
duties which would, if combined, enable one individual to record and 
process a complete transaction.  For example, an Accountant might 
prepare a document, but it would then be reviewed and cleared by 
the Financial Manager, and then approved by the Programme 
Director.  It is the Financial Manager’s responsibility to ensure that 
certain duties are segregated, including preparation, authorisation, 
9 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Component 
Description 
Restricted 
access  
Monitoring 
and review  
execution, custody, recording and the operation of systems.  
All data, records and assets should be kept in a physically secure 
environment. Petty cash, and cheques, should be kept secure. 
Financial data and other records should also be protected by back up 
procedures and copy records should be stored securely off site.  
Periodic financial reports must be prepared and submitted to IFAD 
during the Programme implementation period as outlined.  For the 
purposes of internal control, monthly management accounts should 
be prepared and monitored by the Programme management. Where 
necessary, corrective action should be taken where the authorised 
budget and procurement plan are exceeded.  
The PIM incorporates practical guidance on internal controls in the sections that follow. 
7.2 Reconciliations and checks 
Reconciliations between independent, corresponding sources of data are a key control for 
identifying errors and discrepancies in balances. The following reconciliations and checks 
should be prepared on a monthly basis: 
Type 
Description 
Preparer 
Reviewer 
Designated 
account bank 
reconciliation  
CPCU bank 
account 
reconciliation 
State bank 
account 
reconciliations 
Reconciliation of the bank balance 
of the designated account to the 
cash book balance. (IFAD format 
outlined in Appendix 21.9) 
State 
Accounts 
Officer 
Regional 
Programme 
Accountant 
Reconciliation of the bank balance 
of the CPCU pool account to the 
cash book balance. 
State 
Accounts 
Officer 
Regional 
Programme 
Accountant 
Reconciliation of the bank balance 
of the individual SPCU bank 
accounts to the relevant cash book 
balances. 
State 
Administrative 
and Accounts 
Assistant 
State 
Accounts 
Officer 
Petty cash 
reconciliation 
Reconciliation of petty cash to 
relevant cash book. Refer 21.11 
for reconciliation form. 
CPCU or SPCU 
admin 
assistant 
Advance account 
justification 
Clear all outstanding advances 
within 2 days of each quarter 
(received and record approved 
expenditure) 
Pre-financing 
review 
Compare sources and uses of 
funds (cumulatively) for both IFAD 
and Government with the intention 
of identifying pre-financing for 
correction. 
CPCU or SPCU 
admin 
assistant 
CPCU or SPCU 
admin 
assistant 
CPCU or 
SPCU 
Programme 
Accountant 
CPCU or 
SPCU 
Programme 
Accountant 
CPCU or 
SPCU 
Programme 
Accountant 
10 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
It is recommended that the Financial Manager (State Accounts Officer at SPCU level) 
undertake random spot checks of the petty cash. 
8. Flow of funds 
8.1 Flow of funds from IFAD, Government and Beneficiaries 
The Programme will manage the flow of funds by using the following bank accounts: 
  A designated account,  maintained  with the Central Bank of  Sudan, for the purposes 
of  receiving  disbursements  of  the  IFAD  grant/loan  and  GEF/LCDF  Grant  (euro 
denominated) 
  A Central CPCU pool account (SDG), maintained  with the Central Bank of Sudan  for 
the purposes of receiving funds from the IFAD Designated Account and Government’s 
contribution. 
  Various  state  Programme  accounts,  with  the  purposes  of  receiving  funds  from  the 
Central CPCU account. Beneficiary cash contributions are also received into the state 
Programme accounts. 
The flow of funds for SNRLP is depicted below:  
11 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
The following Programme state bank accounts will be opened: 
  Kassala 
  Al Gezira 
  Gadaref 
  Khartoum 
  River Nile 
  North Kordofan 
  West Kordofan  
12 | P a g e  
 SPCUs to finance technical assistance and seed investment capital to Community Groups Euro denominated account SDG denominated accounts Direct payments IFAD Loan Government of Sudan IFAD Designated Account Central PMU pool account (Sinnar) Direct disbursement from this account for Sinnar State from Central PMU pool account  Kassala SPCU  Al Gezira SPCU Gadaref SPCU  Khartoum SPCU account River Nile SPCU North Kordofan SPCU West Kordofan SPCU South Kordofan SPCU Livelihood Investment Plan  (LIP) implementation  GEF/LDCF PFIs SCPUs to provide training / capacity building / infrastructure to support activities of PFIs Community Group: CDC or VDS SPCU to provide 100% programme financing of technical assistance (TA) and 80% seed investment capital for public or common good investments  Payment to suppliers for fixed assets, tools, machinery and equipment, essential civil work. PFIs to support Community Groups with Micro Finance Loans (up to 30% of project costs), specifically financing gas cylinders where applicable Community Group: NRLG, VSCG, VWG SPCU to provide up to 80% programme financing of TA, and 70% seed investment capital (100% for pastoralist enterprises) for common good investments for group enterprises Payment suppliers for fixed assets, tools, machinery and equipment, essential civil work. Beneficiaries   Beneficiary cash or in-kind contribution to cover LIP project costs Individual households supported through NRLGs or VSCGs Programme financing of TA and 70% of seed investment capital for small start-up inputs (beneficiary funds investment costs) Payment to suppliers for seeds, inputs, fencing, land prep, irrigation, gas cylinders Community Group: VWGs Seed capital of 100% to establish Community Investment Funds (CIF) managed by VDCs as revolving funds in particular supporting vulnerable women organized in VWGs who cannot meet requirements for accessing micro finance institutions Payment to suppliers for fixed assets, tools, machinery and equipment, essential civil work Matching grants Matching grants Matching grants Revolving fund capital IFAD Grant  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
  South Kordofan 
  Programme activities for the Sennar State is paid directly from the Central CPCU pool 
account  (no  separate  state  level  account,  managed  as  separate  state  account  in 
general ledger only). 
Direct payments 
 
IFAD may make direct payments to suppliers. 
All banks will be reconciled on a month basis. 
8.2 Petty cash account 
In addition to the bank accounts as per above, the CPCU will operate a petty cash 
account in Sudanese Pounds. The purpose of the petty cash is to allow the CPCU to make 
payments for low value items in a quick and efficient manner. Payments through petty 
cash will only be allowed for amounts up to 500 SDG. 
8.3 Advance payments 
Payments will be paid via cheque if possible. Alternatively, advance payments will be 
provided for payments due in cash. Only once advance may be given per Programme 
employee at a time. The advance should be cleared before another advance is provided. 
8.4 Authorised bank signatories 
All bank accounts will have 3 authorised signatories. All cheques will be required to be 
signed by 2 authorised signatories. 
9. Accounting 
9.1 Accounting system 
Most of the Programme activities result in the receipt, commitment or expenditure of 
funds. The accounting system records, processes and organizes this data in order to 
produce useful financial information in the form of AWPB, Financial Reports, Withdrawal 
Applications, Financial Statements etc. needed by the Programme Financiers (IFAD, 
GEF/LDCF, Government, Beneficiaries) as well as the CPCU management.  The 
accounting system should reflect the Programme’s needs and be designed to provide the 
financial information required by all interested parties. It should also fulfil all the legal 
and regulatory requirements of SNRLP. In addition, the accounting system should 
incorporate the reporting requirement of the chosen accounting standard for SNRLP 
which is IPSAS, Financial Reporting under the Cash Basis of Accounting. 
9.2 Centralised accounting at the CPCU 
The  accounting  function  will  be  centralised  at  the  CPCU  and  maintained  under  the 
supervision  of  the  Financial  Manager.  The  CPCU  will  consolidate  the  accounting 
transactions  from  the  various  state  units  on  a  monthly  basis  by  receiving  each  State’s 
cash  book  in  an  off-line  format  which  can  be  uploaded  to  the  accounting  module 
maintained at the CPCU. 
9.3 Accounting software and accounting manual 
The CPCU will implement an accounting software which has been designed based on the 
needs  of  the  Programme.  As  soon  as  the  Financial  Manager  is  appointed,  he  will  be 
required to oversee this process. The following proposed steps serve as a guideline: 
Steps 
Step 1: Identify the various reports the system is expected to generate, based on the 
different  stakeholders’  requirements. What information (and in what format) needs to 
be produced by the CPCU. As a minimum requirement, the Accounting system must be 
able to produce the following reports:  
  Statement of cash receipts and payments (by category and by financier),  
  Statement of cash receipts and payments (by component),  
13 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Steps 
  Comparison of budget to actual expenditure, 
  Sources and uses of funds statement (by category/financier) 
  Sources and uses of funds statement (by component/financier) 
  Statement of Special Account movements,  
  Statement of Special Account Reconciliations,  
  SOE-Withdrawal Application Statement. 
  Fixed asset register summary 
Step  2:  List  the  transactions  and  activities,  which the  system  must  account  for.  As  a 
minimum requirement the accounting system must include: 
  Purchase  orders,  receipts,  check  books  and  other  similar  documents  evidencing 
receipt, commitment or expenditure of funds. 
  A  journal  for  primary  entry  of  all  transactions,  including  adjustments,  destined  to 
be posted to the ledger. 
  A petty cash book (PCB) for small cash expenditures below a certain low threshold. 
The  credit  side  of  the  PCB  should  be  analyzed  into  columns,  one  for  each 
Programme component. The totals are to be posted to ledger accounts monthly. 
  A bank cash book (one for each source of financing). The credit side should also be 
analyzed into columns, one for each Programme component. Total of these columns 
should be posted to their respective ledger accounts monthly. 
  A ledger containing separate ledger accounts for each Programme component. The 
debit  side  of  each  ledger  account  should  be  analyzed  into  the  expenditure 
categories defined in the IFAD Financing Agreement. The ledger accounts should be 
closed and trial balance prepared at the end of each month. 
  Fixed  asset  register  to  record  location,  price  and  date  of  acquisition,  responsible 
person and remark on the condition of the asset. 
Step  3:  Designed  the  specific  accounting  books,  including  a  chart  of  accounts  and 
records  to  be  maintained,  the  transactions  to  be  recorded  therein  and  the  precise 
accounting entries on the occasion of each transaction.  
Step  4:  Incorporated  the  systemic  accounting  issues  including  the  used  accounting 
standards and valuation criteria.  In accordance with the PDR, all Programme accounts 
will be kept on a double entry system and the used accounting standards will be IPSAS 
Cash.  
Step 5: Determined a tentative list of users and user rights for each staff member in 
line with their terms of reference in order to maintain a proper level of security. Define 
this foo both CPCU and SPCU staff. 
The above should be summarised in a term of reference, to be used in the procurement 
process. A proposed term of reference for the accounting software is included in 10.4. 
The  accounting  software  service  provider  is  required  to  develop  and  provide  an 
accounting  manual  which  serves  as  a  guide  to  FM  staff.  The  Financial  Manager  is 
responsible to ensure that the accounting manual is updated when required.  
9.4 Chart of accounts 
The accounting software should include the appropriate Chart of Accounts. The Chart of 
Accounts should be developed to cater for: 
  All  components  and  sub-components  are  incorporated  in  the  AWPB  (outlined  in  the 
financing in agreement) 
  All categories as outlined in the financing agreements 
14 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
  Sources of finance (Government, IFAD, Beneficiaries) 
  Sub categorisation to cater for activities at the various states 
The  Chart  of  Accounts  should  mirror  the  cost  tables  (as  presented  in  the  Programme 
design  report  and  section  1  of  this  manual)  to  enable  comparison  of  actual  Programme 
costs during implementation with those estimated during the Programme preparation.  
9.5 Recording and processing of transactions 
Whenever  a  transaction  takes  place  under  the  Programme,  it  should  be  recorded  and 
processed using the accounting software. Transactions are recorded on the cash basis of 
accounting  which  requires  the  recognition  of  cash  flows  when  they  occur  (inflows  and 
outflows). 
Each transaction should be recorded in the accounting software based on the following: 
  Use  double  entry  accounting  (debit  and  credit,  with  cash  always  being  one  of  the 
entries) 
  Capture the transaction using the correct account code (as determined by the chart 
of accounts) 
  Capture transactions which has the required supporting documentation 
  Capture information accurately and completely. 
For detailed instructions on how to record the expenditures in the accounting 
software, please refer to the accounting user manual. 
9.6 Recording of transaction at state level 
Cash flows from the Central CPCU pool account to the various state Programme accounts 
will be recorded as an advance until justified.  At state level, the Programme accountant 
will record transactions in the cash book using the correct account codes (which consider 
the appropriate category and component). The accountant at state level is not required 
to record transaction with consideration of the source of finance. Programme 
expenditure is recorded in terms of sources of financing at the CPCU level only. 
On a monthly basis, within 2 days of month end, the state Programme accountant will 
submit to the CPCU: 
  State cash book which include all transaction for the month under review 
  Reconciliation of the state bank account 
  Reconciliation of petty cash 
9.7 Accounting for in-kind contributions 
In  terms  of  the  IFAD  Handbook  for  Financial  Reporting  and  Auditing  for  IFAD-financed 
Programmes,  SNRLP  is  required  to  account  for  and  disclose  in-kind  contributions.  In 
order to meet this requirement, the  Programme is required to measure contributions as 
outlined below and record in the accounting system.  
It  is  expected  that  the  following  in-kind  contributions  will  be  received  by  SNRLP  as 
outlined in section 104 of the PIM: 
From beneficiaries, related to the financing of LIP implementation: 
(Beneficiaries may include Community Groups as defined, Government) 
  Construction materials (e.g. fencing, water supply systems) 
  Labour related to operational activities 
  Maintenance costs 
  Assignment of Land 
From Government: 
  Tax exemptions from Government 
  Salary payments to Programme staff 
15 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
  Equipment and materials from Government 
  Assignment of Land 
The following process is followed to account for in-kind contributions received  : 
Measure 
Review 
Approve 
Record  
Value of contributions are measured by on a monthly basis as 
outlined in the table below. 
The administrative assistant reviews the calculations and 
supporting documentations. 
The State Coordinator approves the calculations and supporting 
documentation before recording the information in the 
accounting software. 
Once approved, the Programme accountant captures the 
contributions in the accounting software. The information is 
captured in line with the relevant expense category (source of 
funds: beneficiaries) on a monthly basis.  
NB: Sources = expenses  
Type  
Measurement calculation 
Labour hours  Value = total hours worked X 
applicable wage rate (in most 
cases the applicable minimum 
wage rate for uneducated 
labour in the country) 
Supporting documentation to be 
retained  
Time sheet by the Community Group 
outlining the persons, and the hours 
they contributed during a specified 
time period. The time sheet should 
be duly signed by the Community 
Group representative and 
Programme technical/M&E staff   
Maintenance 
costs 
Value = actual cost of 
materials purchased 
Copies of invoices. 
Assignment 
of Land 
Value = NPV of reasonable 
lease fees for land, discounted 
over the remaining life of the 
SNRLP project 
Confirmation that land is not subject 
to conflict, copy of land use map 
indicating land assigned, NPV 
calculation with indication of how 
reasonable lease fees were 
determined. 
Value = cubic meters of gravel   Bill of lading prepared by the 
Construction 
material – 
gravel 
consulting engineer which indicated 
the estimation of gravel volume. The 
sheet should be duly signed by the 
community representative and 
Programme technical/M&E staff   
Copies of invoices. 
Construction 
material – 
other 
Value = actual cost of 
materials purchased 
Government 
salary 
contribution  
Value = government monthly 
salary X % of time worked for 
the Programme. 
Summary of staff names and top up 
salary contribution calculation per 
individual 
Value= monthly salary x the % 
16 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Type  
Measurement calculation 
Supporting documentation to be 
retained  
covered by the government 
Government 
utility 
contribution 
Value= monthly/annual value 
of utilities X the % covered by 
the government 
Summary of utility expense  
The calculation of tax and duties exemptions should be done using the prevailing tax or 
duties  rates  as  outlined  in  the  table  below.  The  tax/duties  exemptions  should  be 
supported by adequate documentation.    
Category 
Tax/duties rate  
Example (SDG 1000 cost 
item) 
Goods 
Works 
Value added Tax rate YY%, Import 
duties XX% 
Value Added Tax rate YY%, Import 
duties XX% 
0.17*1000=170  
0.15*1000=150  
Services 
Value Added Tax rate YY%, Import 
duties XX% 
0.03*1000=30  
The tax-exemptions should be duly recorded in the accounting software if possible. If the 
accounting software is not able to accommodate this, then separate excel spreadsheets 
should be maintained in such a format that they can be easily harmonized with the other 
financial reports as necessary.  
When recording the in-kind contributions, it is important that the in-kind contributions 
are classified according to the same principles as regular Programme expenditures; that 
is, every contribution must be by linked to an activity/component, by category and by 
financing source (government and/or beneficiaries) to ensure that consolidated financial 
reports can be produced without any extra effort.    
In-kind contributions should be disclosed separately in the financial statements. The 
notes of the financial statements should also briefly explain the methodology of how it 
was calculated. On the other hand, when in-kind contributions cannot be reliably 
measured, for example the use of office space, then these should also be discussed in 
the notes to the Programme financial statements. 
9.9 Accounting for exchange rate matters 
When claiming expenditures in local currency in Withdrawal Applications (forms 101, 102 
and  104)  or  preparing  a  financial  report,  it  is  important  to  use  the  prevailing  rate 
(historical exchange rate) at the time of transfer  of  funds from the Designated Account 
(denominated in Euro) to the local currency account. Subsequent expenditures should be 
recorded in line with FIFO methodology. This type of conversion is also called the First in 
First out (FIFO) basis.  
For example: 
Conversion of local currency expenditures funded from the designated account.  
 
IFAD transfers funds to the Designated Account (usually in USD) as per the approved 
WA  
17 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
  A  portion  of  the  funds  in  the  Designated  Account  (usually  the  estimated  local 
currency expenditures of the Programme for the next 3 months) is transferred to the 
Operating Account in the local currency and is topped up as the need arises  
  Local currency expenditures are then funded from the Operating Account.  
  When  justifying  the  local  currency  expenditures  to  IFAD,  these  expenditures  are 
converted into the denomination of the designated account, using the prevailing rate 
(historical  exchange  rate)  at  the  time  of  transfer  of  funds  from  the  Designated 
Account  to  the  Programme  Operating  Account.  This  is  also  known  as  First  In,  First 
Out (FIFO) accounting method. 
Also see example outlined in 12.9. 
9.10 Accounting for advances 
The Programme may make advances (either from petty cash for amounts less than 500 
SDG or by issuing checks). Advances are allowed for: 
  DSA for training or other travel; 
  Fuel expenses for trips of more than 400km; 
  Programme implementation activities in the field which is required to be paid in cash 
before an invoice is obtained. 
In terms of accounting for advances: 
  Advances are recorded in the accounting system at the date that the advance is 
made, subject to the required approval process. 
  The transaction is not recorded as an expenditure (in terms of categories, 
components) on this date.  
  All advances should be cleared in a timely manner by the submission of original 
invoices. 
  All outstanding advances should be cleared by no later than 10 days after the end of 
 
the fiscal year-end. 
In terms of the cash basis of accounting advances at the end of the period should be 
expensed and disclosed in the financial report. 
10. Cash flow forecasting 
The Financial Manager is responsible for monitoring cash flows and should prepare 
cashflow forecasts on a quarterly basis. The cash flow forecasting is required at two 
levels: 
Level 
1 – 
CPCU 
Cash flow forecasting at CPCU level should be conducted to determine the 
cash flow needs of the Programme which includes all state levels.  The cash 
flow forecast should be finalised 15 days before commencement of the 
relevant quarter. The forecast is prepared by the Financial Manager and 
approved by the Programme director. 
The outcome of the cash flow forecast process is to determine the amount of 
cash which should be transferred from the IFAD designated account into the 
CPCU pool account, which, together with Government and beneficiary 
contributions, is sufficient to fund Programme activities.  
The Financial Manager is required to prepare a cash flow forecast per source 
of finance to avoid the risk of pre-financing amongst financer. On a per 
financier basis, the following cash flow forecast can be prepared: 
IFAD 
Forecast expenses for the quarter per the AWPB 
18 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Plus contingency/buffer  
= Cash required for the forecast quarter 
Less opening IFAD cash balance per the ledger 
= Additional transfer from IFAD designated 
account 
Once the cash need is identified per financier, the Programme should 
proceed to access the sources of funds as follows: 
IFAD funds can be transferred from the designated account 
 
  Government funds is generally transferred to the Programme on a 
monthly basis, based on Government’s annual budget approval. The 
Programme may not have much control over how much funds is 
transferred to the Programme. Should the expected transfer from 
Government not be sufficient to meet the forecast expenditure on 
Government activities, it is required that the Programme submit a formal 
request to Government, indicating the expected shortfall. This request 
should be shared with the IFAD Finance Officer. 
[FINANCIAL MANAGER to develop Excel based template for cash flow 
forecasting at CPCU level (to be developed by the FM] 
Level 
2 - 
State 
The accounts officer for each state is required to submit a replenishment 
request to the CPCU, based on a cash flow forecast which is prepared 
quarterly. The state coordinator is responsible for the review and approval of 
the replenishment request. 
State 
Forecast state expenses for the quarter per the 
AWPB 
Plus contingency/buffer  
= Cash required for the forecast quarter 
Less opening cash balance per the ledger 
= Advance required from CPCU pool account 
The state accounts officer is required to submit the approved replenishment 
request within 15 days before commencement of the relevant quarter to 
ensure timely transfers from the CPCU pool account. 
The Financial Manager at the CPCU will receive and review all replenishment 
requests with supporting cash flow forecasts and transfer funds to the 
various state bank accounts by no later than the 5th day of the relevant 
quarter. 
NB: the State level cash flow forecast is not prepared by financier 
19 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
The designated account is maintained in Euro while most of the Programme expenditures 
are incurred in local currency. This flow of funds arrangement makes it important for the 
Programme to have proper controls and procedures in place to be able to: 
  Properly account for the exchange rate and its fluctuations 
  Mitigate  any  risks  rising  from  potential  exchange  rate  fluctuations  or  shock  such  as 
high rate of inflation or devaluations of the local currency. 
As  soon  as  funds  are  transferred  from  the  designated  account  denominated  in  Euro  to 
the Programme account in local currency account, the converted funds may lose part of 
their value with respect to the designated account denomination currency resulting in an 
exchange  rate  loss.  Particularly  in  the  case  of  high  domestic  inflation  or  currency 
devaluation, the Programme may incur a substantive exchange rate loss and as a result 
the Programme must have proper procedures in place to mitigate the potential financial 
impact.  The  risk  of  incurring  an  exchange  rate  loss  can  be  mitigated  by  keeping  the 
balance of the local currency account(s) as low as possible while keeping the funds in the 
designated account until these are really needed, keeping in mind the needs as identified 
during the cashflow forecast process. 
11. Disbursements 
11.1 Eligibility of expenditures 
In  accordance  with  the  IFAD  disbursement  procedures,  between  the  date  of  entry  into 
force  of  the  Financing  Agreement  and  the  Financing  Closing  Date,  SNRLP  may  request 
withdrawals from the IFAD grant/loan for eligible expenditures.   
Eligible expenditures are defined in the IFAD General Conditions Section 4.08 as follows:  
The  Financing  shall  be  used  exclusively  to  finance  expenditures  meeting  each  of  the 
following eligibility requirements:   
o  The  expenditure  shall  meet  the  reasonable  cost  of  goods,  works  and  services 
required  for  the  Programme  and  covered  by  the  relevant  AWPB  and  procured  in 
conformity with the Fund’s Procurement Guidelines.   
o  The expenditure shall be incurred during the  Programme Implementation Period, 
except that expenditures to meet the costs of winding up the Programme may be 
incurred after the Programme Completion Date and before the Financing Closing 
Date.   
o  The expenditure shall be incurred by a Programme Party.   
o 
If  the  Agreement  allocates  the  amount  of  the  Financing  to  categories  of  Eligible 
Expenditures  and  specifies  the  percentages  of  such  Eligible  Expenditures  to  be 
financed  by  the  Financing,  the  expenditure  must  relate  to  a  category  whose 
allocation  has  not  been  depleted  and  shall  be  eligible  only  up  to  the  percentage 
applicable to such category.   
o  The  expenditure  shall  be  otherwise  eligible  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the 
Financing Agreement.   
o  The  Fund  may  from  time  to  time  exclude  certain  types  of  expenditure  from 
eligibility.   
o  Any  payment  prohibited  by  a  decision  of  the  United  Nations  Security  Council 
taken under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, shall not be eligible 
for financing by the Financing.   
o  Any  payments  to  a  person  or  an  entity,  or  for  any  goods,  works  or  services,  if 
making  or  receiving  such  payment  constitutes  a  coercive,  collusive,  corrupt  or 
fraudulent  practice  by  any  representative  of  the  Borrower/Recipient  or  any 
Programme Party, shall not be eligible for financing by the Financing.    
o  All  expenditures  must  be  supported  by  sufficient  supporting  documentation  as 
stated in the LTB and the IFAD disbursement handbook (please see section below 
on supporting documentation). 
20 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
o  The proceeds of the financing shall not be used to pay taxes. However, taxes paid 
by  the  ultimate  recipient  of  an  expenditure  (e.g.  withholding  tax,  income  taxes 
paid  by  a  Programme  employee  or  taxes  on  the  profits  of  a  contractor)  are  not 
considered to be taxes paid by the Programme. 
The IFAD disbursement procedures as outlined below are governed by the Letter to the 
Recipient (LTR) and the IFAD Loan Disbursement Handbook. The handbook is also 
available on the IFAD website and SNRLP should ensure that they refer to the most 
recent version as published at http://www.ifad.org/pub/basic/index.htm.  
11.2 Disbursement procedures 
The  following  disbursement  procedures  may  be  used  for  withdrawal  from  the  IFAD 
grant/loan: 
Type 
Description 
Advance 
withdrawal 
The  advance  withdrawal  modality  for  SNRLP  is  imprest.  For  specific 
limitation (imprest account):  
  The ceiling amount is usually sufficient to cover average 
 
Programmeed eligible expenditures for a period of approximately 
6 months.  
It may be disbursed in one or several applications, depending on 
the type of financing and level of expenditures to be incurred.  
  Replenishment application should be requested when the amount 
withdrawn from the designated account is equal to about 20-30% 
of the advance.  
Direct payment  The  direct  payment  modality  is  used  for  eligible  Programme 
expenditures  to  be  paid  directly  by  IFAD.  This  payment  method  is 
used when IFAD has been requested to pay the Supplier directly and 
is suitable in the following situations:  
  Payment of large civil works  
  Retention payments  
  Consultancy fees  
 
  When exchange control regulations are present in the country.  
Importing goods (when a letter of credit is not practical)  
The Withdrawal Application MUST indicate the date on which 
payment becomes due to the supplier. 
Reimbursement  Reimbursement  is  applicable  when  eligible  Programme  expenditures 
are  pre-financed  by  the  Recipient  before  access  to  IFAD  grant/loan 
finance is possible. Such reimbursements are expected to be claimed 
no  later  than  90  calendar  days  from  the  date  of  payment  by  the 
Recipient. 
Note: There is a fourth disbursement method that is theoretically available, titled Special 
Commitment Letters, however due to their complexity this disbursement method is 
discouraged. 
Request for disbursement from Government should be submitted on a quarterly basis, in 
the format required by Government. 
11.3 Evidence of Authority to sign Withdrawal Applications 
21 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
IFAD  requires  SNRLP’s  representative,  as  designated  in  the  financing  agreement,  to 
furnish  satisfactory  evidence  of  the  authority  and  authenticated  specimen  signatures  of 
the  individuals  who  will  sign  WAs  on  behalf  of  SNRLP.  This  evidence  must  reach  IFAD 
before  the  first  WA  is  presented  by  SNRLP  and  should  be  the  original  (photocopies, 
facsimiles  or  other  means  of  transmission  are  not  acceptable).  A  sample  template  is 
provided  in  annex  1  of  the  IFAD  Loan  disbursement  handbook.  Each  WA  should  be 
signed by such duly authorized individuals, and the Fund must be notified of any change 
in the signatories authorized to withdraw funds from the loan/grant account.  
IFAD  must  also  be  notified  of  the  designated  signatories  for  operating  any  designated 
and/or  programme  or  other  accounts,  including  changes  thereto,  whether  or  not  these 
authorized  signatories  are  included  in  the  financing  agreement.  Such  changes,  as 
effected during the life of the Programme, must be communicated promptly to the IFAD. 
SNRLP,  guided  by  the  sample  in  annex  1  of  the  IFAD  Loan  Disbursement  Handbook, 
should  provide  the  names  and  specimen  signatures  of  the  newly  appointed  signatories 
and  include  the  date  when  such  change  is  to  take  effect.  The  original  of  such  changed 
documentary evidence is to be provided to IFAD.  
11.4 The Designated Account 
The  flow  of  funds  for  SNRLP  starts  with  the  opening  of  the  Programme  Designated 
Account  (DA)  in  Sudan,  in  accordance  with  IFAD’s  requirements  identified  in  the 
Financing Agreement and the Letter to the  Recipient (Euro denominated). The Financial 
Manager  is  responsible  for  opening  and  managing  the  Designated  Account  including 
preparing  a  monthly  reconciliation  and  statement  in  line  with  the  IFAD  templates  as 
outlined  in  22.9.  Disbursements  from  the  DA  should  be  recorded  in  the  PIU  account 
records as of the date they are made, that is when the checks are issued. 
11.5 Withdrawal of Financing Proceeds using withdrawal applications 
The  financial  manager  is  required  to  ensure  that  WAs  are  prepared  and  submitted  to 
IFAD with consideration of the following requirements: 
Requirement 
Guidance 
Timeliness 
Withdrawal  applications  should  be  prepared  when  the  expenditure 
equals 30%  of the advance in the designated  account  or quarterly 
(whichever occurs first) 
Completeness 
and accuracy of 
supporting 
documentation 
Account 
reconciliation 
the 
forms  and  supporting 
Prepare  and  submit 
documentary evidence of expenditure as outlined in the IFAD Loan 
Disbursement  Handbook.  (refer  to  IFAD  Loan  Disbursement 
Handbook  for  detailed  guidance).  Ensure  that  information  is 
complete and accurate. 
required 
SNRLP  should  submit  the  designated  account  reconciliation  and 
statement, prepared the same reporting period in which the eligible 
to  be 
expenditures  are  being  claimed.  This 
accompanied  by  bank  statements  of  the  designated  account  and 
that of any other operating Programme accounts ensuring that the 
closing  bank  balances  for  all  these  accounts  correspond  to  the 
balances at the end of the same reporting period as indicated in the 
WA period. 
form  needs 
Duly authorised  Ensure  that  WAs  are  duly  authorised  in  terms  of  SNRLP’s 
authorisation  procedures  and  signed  by  the  duly  authorised 
representatives. 
22 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Requirement 
Guidance 
Document 
retention 
Minimize 
transaction 
costs 
Submit  copies  of  supporting  documentation  with  the  WA.  Retain 
original  documentation  at  the  CPCU  for  inspection  by  IFAD  upon 
request. 
In order to minimize transaction costs, the financial manager must 
make  sure  that  withdrawals  from  the  grant  account  shall  be  made 
in  amounts  of  no  less  than  Euro  50  000  its  equivalent,  or  such 
other amount as IFAD may designate in an advice to the Recipient 
from time to time. 
11.6 Initial advance 
Ensure the disbursement conditions as per the financing agreement and the Letter to the 
Borrower (LTB) have been met which includes provision of the following:  
  Evidence  that  a  designated  account  has  been  opened  and  the  names/titles  of  the 
persons authorised to operate this account.  
  A  letter  from  the  SNRLP,  designating  the  name(s)  of  official(s)  authorised  to  sign 
withdrawal applications including their specimen signature(s).  
Complete and submit to IFAD:  
FORM 100 A - Application to Initiate Withdrawal from the Designated Account must be 
signed by authorised individuals.  
11.7 Replenishing the advance 
These are the forms you’ll need when using a WA to replenish the designated account.  
Form 100  
Application for Withdrawal signed by authorised individuals. This form is always required.  
Form 101  
This is the Application Summary Sheet for expenditures above the SOE threshold and is 
used  for  advance  withdrawal.  Click  here  to  see  the  supporting  documents  you  must 
include.  
Form 102 A  
Use this form for expenditures below the SOE threshold. (It is required for each category 
of expenditure, with subcategory indication where necessary).  
Form 104 A and 104 B  
These Designated Account Reconciliation Statements must be accompanied by:  
  Bank statement(s) of designated account(s) and  
  Statement(s) of other operating/district/Programme accounts. 
11.8 Withdrawals using Statements of Expenditures (SOE) and the SOE Thresholds 
The  statement  of  expenditure  (SOE)  procedure  is  normally  used  for  those  expenditure 
types  where  it  is  impracticable  or  unduly  burdensome  to  require  submission  of  full 
documentation  as  outlined  in  10.4.  However,  the  supporting  documentations  for  the 
Statements of Expenditures must be maintained by SNRLP and made available for review 
by IFAD supervision missions upon request and to external auditors during their annual 
review of Programme accounts to enable issuing of an independent audit opinion.  
23 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Details regarding the use of the Statement of Expenditure (SOE) are provided in section 
4 of the IFAD Loan disbursement handbook.  
In  accordance  with  the  Letter  to  the  Recipient,  the  SOE  procedure  may  be  used  for  all 
Programme expenditures up to Euro 50 000 (to be updated in line with LTB)  
11.9 Foreign exchange conversion in preparing withdrawal applications 
When claiming expenditures in local currency in Withdrawal Applications (forms 101, 102 
and  104)  or  preparing  a  financial  report,  it  is  important  to  use  the  prevailing  rate 
(historical exchange rate) at the time of transfer  of  funds from the Designated Account 
(denominated  in  EUR)  to  the  local  currency  account.  This  type  of  conversion  is  also 
called the First in First out (FIFO) basis.  
The historical exchange rate/FIFO basis of converting is to be used in the following two 
cases in particular:  
  When preparing a designated account reconciliation as part of a WA or a financial 
report, the closing balance of the local currency account(s), and any expenditures 
already incurred in local currency but not yet claimed must be converted to the 
denomination currency of the designated account using the historical exchange 
rate/FIFO basis of converting. 
  When  preparing  withdrawal  applications  (form  101  and  102)  the  expenditures 
incurred in local currency (or any other currency than the denomination currency of 
the  designated  account)  and  claimed  in  the  WA,  must  be  converted  to  the 
denomination  currency  of  the  designated  account  using  the  historical  exchange 
rate/FIFO basis of converting.   
Example: 
The  Programme  has  a  Designated  Account  denominated  in  Euro  and  an  Operating 
Account denominated in Sudanese Pounds: 
  Euro  100  000  is  transferred  to  the  Programme  Operating  Account  in  SDG  on  1  Oct 
2018 at a prevailing rate of 50 SDG to 1 Euro (equalling 5 000 000 SDG). 
  During  the  reporting  period  of  1  Oct  to  31  Dec  2018  the  Programme  incurs 
expenditures in local currency up to 4000 000 SDG. 
  Replenishment request  for total expenditures incurred during the reporting period is 
submitted to IFAD in Jan 2019, but the exchange rate is now 55 SDG to 1 Euro. 
  The  withdrawal  application  should  be  prepared  using  the  historical  rate  of  50  SDG  
(therefore claim 4000 000/ 50 = 80 000 euro) 
11.10 Suspension and the designated account  
 During  a  full  suspension,  IFAD  will  not  replenish  the  designated  account.    However, 
Recipients  may  continue,  except  as  otherwise  indicated,  to  use  any  balance  in  the 
designated  account  to  meet  eligible  expenditures  and  applications  documenting  these 
expenditures should continue to be regularly submitted.  
11.11 ICP 
24 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
The IFAD client portal (ICP) enables SNRLP to: 
  access real-time financing information on country portfolios as well as operational 
 
and financial information related to Programmes 
submit Withdrawal Applications directly and obtain electronic approvals required 
both from concerned ministries and IFAD 
  manage banking instructions electronically 
create and download relevant reports 
 
The Programme may submit electronic copies of its withdrawal applications and maintain 
hardcopies for audit purposes. 
11.12 Refund of withdrawals 
If the IFAD determines that any amount withdrawn from the Loan and/or Grant Accounts 
was not used for the purposes indicated or will not be needed thereafter to finance 
Eligible Expenditures, the Borrower/Recipient shall promptly refund such amount to the 
IFAD upon instruction by the Fund.   
12. Processing of payments 
IFAD funds may not be used for payment of taxes, customs or duties. 
12.1 Supporting documentation 
The processing of all payments are subject to SNRLP retaining the following original 
supporting documentation after processing: 
Supporting documentation 
  Signed contract or confirmed purchase order – showing the 
specified amount that is due to be paid;  
  The bank guarantee for: 
o  advance payment, as specified in the contract documents;  
o  performance, as specified in the contract documents;  
  Copies of communications sent by the IFAD country programme 
manager to the SNRLP providing the ‘no objection’ to the contract 
award; and  
  Evidence of payment made by SNRLP.  
Items listed above under “all” 
 
  Supplier’s invoice, duly certified for payment by the Programme 
Director– specifying the goods, their quantities, and prices;  
Expenditure 
type 
All  
Goods 
25 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Expenditure 
type 
Supporting documentation 
  Bills of lading or similar documents; and  
  As appropriate, the certificate of delivery (to include condition of 
goods on delivery). 
Civils works  
Items listed above under “all” 
 
  The claim of the contractor, including a financial progress report, 
stating the work performed and the amount due;  
  A certificate – signed by the Programme consultants or owner’s 
representative, if any, or by the borrower’s chief engineering 
officer or resident supervising engineer assigned to the 
Programme, to the effect that the work performed is satisfactory 
and the payment claimed is due in accordance with the terms of 
the contract; and  
  A copy of the contract payment monitoring form signed in original 
by the certifying officer. 
Services 
(including 
consultants) 
Items listed above under “all” 
 
  The supplier’s or consultant’s claim duly certified for payment by 
the Programme director and showing sufficient detail.  
  As appropriate, a certificate of delivery of satisfactory services.  
For payment 
related to 
LIPs  
Items listed above under “all” 
 
  Confirmation of LIP approval by the Central Review Committee 
(minutes of meeting) with indication of the amount of seed capital 
/ technical assistance / beneficiary contribution and MFI loan (if 
applicable) to fund the LIP 
  Signed loan agreement with MFI (if applicable) 
Vendor selection information / procurement documents as 
prepared by the cluster procurement committee 
For payment 
of Trips, fuel, 
stationary 
and other 
expenses  
Items listed above under “all” 
 
  Supplier invoices;  
  Evidence of payment; 
  Back to office report; 
  Travel authorization; and/or 
  Expense reports by the traveller (including invoices) 
  Boarding passes 
Pro forma invoices are not acceptable replacements for invoices. In all instances, 
supporting documentation need to include final invoices. 
12.2 General guidelines for processing of payments 
For  invoice  related  payments,  the  following  general  process  is  applicable  at  both  CPCU 
and SPCU level: 
Up to receipt of the invoice: 
26 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
1. Request 
activity in line 
with AWPB 
2. Approve 
activity in line 
with AWPB 
3. Request to the 
supplier or 
service provider 
4. Service 
delivered or 
goods received 
5. Invoice issued 
for goods / 
services 
From receipt of invoice to payment recorded: 
6.Prepare 
payment 
request 
7. Review 
payment 
request 
8. Approve 
payment request 
9. Process 
payment 
request 
10. Record 
payment request 
Activity 
CPCU procedures 
SPCU procedures 
The request and approval for activities is undertaken in line with the 
specific procedures are outlined for each category of expenditure as 
outlined in: 
  Travel 
  Civils works, equipment and tools 
  Consultants 
  Technical assistance and seed capital to Community Groups to 
fund LIP implementation 
Generally, ensure that expenses are in line with the AWPB and that 
IFAD no objection has been obtained if required. 
Obtain evidence that the goods were delivered / services received to 
the satisfaction of the Programme. Evidence to be retained for the 
purposes of providing supporting evidence for processing of invoice. 
  Once invoices are received, 
  Once invoices are received, 
the CAA prepares a payment 
request which includes 
supporting documentation. 
  The CPA reviews the 
payment request for 
accuracy and validity. 
  The CPA adds the correct 
account codes for the 
purposes of recording the 
transaction in the accounting 
software. 
  The CPA forwards the 
the SAAA prepares a payment 
request which includes 
supporting documentation. 
  The SAAA adds the correct 
account codes for the 
purposes of recording the 
transaction in the accounting 
software. 
  The SAAA forwards the 
payment request with 
supporting documentation to 
the relevant Technical Officer 
Request and 
approve 
activity in line 
with AWPB 
Service 
delivered, or 
goods 
received 
Prepare 
payment 
request 
27 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Activity 
CPCU procedures 
SPCU procedures 
payment request with 
supporting documentation to 
the relevant Technical Officer 
/Component Head for review 
and sign off. 
/Component Head for review 
and sign off. 
Review of 
payment 
request 
The SCPA shall review and sign 
the payment request, 
checking/confirming: 
The SAO shall review and sign 
the payment request, 
checking/confirming: 
 
  The expenditure is included 
in the approved AWPB (or   
undertaken with approval of 
the IFAD CPM with 
subsequent modification of 
the AWPB) 
IFAD no objection was 
obtained (if applicable). 
  All expenditures are eligible 
in line with the financing 
agreement and has been 
incurred before/completed 
before Programme 
completion date . 
  Payment was cleared by the 
relevant component technical 
officer/head. 
  The expenditure is included in 
the approved AWPB (or   
undertaken with approval of 
the IFAD CPM with subsequent 
modification of the AWPB) 
IFAD no objection was 
obtained (if applicable). 
 
  All expenditures are eligible in 
line with the financing 
agreement and has been 
incurred before/completed 
before Programme completion 
date. 
  Payment was cleared by the 
relevant component technical 
officer/head. 
  All supporting documentation 
  All supporting documentation 
is attached (refer xxx) 
is attached (refer xxx) 
Approve 
payment 
request 
The Project director shall 
review and sign payment 
request, checking/confirming: 
The SC shall review and sign 
payment request, 
checking/confirming: 
  The expenditure is included 
in the approved AWPB (or   
undertaken with approval of 
the IFAD CPM with 
subsequent modification of 
the AWPB) 
  All expenditures are eligible 
in line with the financing 
agreement and has been 
incurred before/completed 
before Programme 
completion date (also see 
xxx) 
  Payment was cleared by the 
relevant component technical 
officer/head. 
  All supporting documentation 
is attached (refer xxx) 
  The payment request was 
reviewed and approved by 
the Financial Manager. 
  The expenditure is included in 
the approved AWPB (or   
undertaken with approval of 
the IFAD CPM with subsequent 
modification of the AWPB) 
  All expenditures are eligible in 
line with the financing 
agreement and has been 
incurred before/completed 
before Programme completion 
date (also see xxx) 
  Payment was cleared by the 
relevant component technical 
officer/head. 
  All supporting documentation 
is attached (refer xxx). 
  The payment request was 
reviewed and approved by the 
SAO. 
28 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Activity 
CPCU procedures 
SPCU procedures 
  The approved Invoice with 
related documents shall be 
sent to the CPA for 
processing and issuance of 
appropriate instruction for 
mandate/cheque preparation.  
  Payment Voucher (PV) will be 
raised by the CPA, based on 
a duly authorised payment 
request which includes 
supporting documentation. 
The PV will indicate the 
accounting codes, category 
of payment, component of 
payment and source of 
finance. 
  The approved Invoice with 
related documents shall be 
sent to the SAAA for 
processing and issuance of 
appropriate instruction for 
mandate/cheque preparation.  
  Payment Voucher (PV) will be 
raised by the SAAA, based on 
a duly authorised payment 
request which includes 
supporting documentation. 
The PV will indicate the 
accounting codes, category of 
payment, component of 
payment and source of 
finance. 
  The PV and the supporting 
  The PV and the supporting 
documents will be sent to the 
SCPA who will ensure that 
the correct account codes as 
well as the appropriate 
Programme fund have been 
indicated on the PV.  
  Where the SCPA is satisfied 
with the internal checks, the 
PV will be approved for 
mandate/cheque writing and 
the appropriate instruction 
for writing a mandate/cheque 
will be issued to the 
Programme accountant. 
  The Financial Manager and 
Project Director will sign 
the prepared cheques and 
return to the CPA for 
processing. 
  Signed cheques will be 
recorded in the Cheque 
Issued /mandate Register 
before collection.  
  The turnaround time for 
settlement of invoices shall 
not exceed 3 working days. 
Before releasing the cheque 
to the payee, the accountant 
will ensure that the 
beneficiary signs the PV and 
Cheque Issued/Mandate 
Register.  
documents will be sent to the 
SAO who will ensure that the 
correct account codes as well 
as the appropriate Programme 
fund have been indicated on 
the PV.  
  Where the SAO is satisfied 
with the internal checks, the 
PV will be approved for 
mandate/cheque writing and 
the appropriate instruction for 
writing a mandate/cheque will 
be issued to the Programme 
accountant  
  The SAO and SC will sign the 
prepared cheques and return 
to the SAAA for processing. 
  Signed cheques will be 
recorded in the Cheque Issued 
/mandate Register before 
collection.  
  The turnaround time for 
settlement of invoices shall 
not exceed 3 working days. 
Before releasing the cheque to 
the payee, the accountant will 
ensure that the beneficiary 
signs the PV and Cheque 
Issued/Mandate Register.  
  Record the transaction in the 
accounting software, using 
the correct codes as captured 
on the PV. 
  File supporting 
documentation in line with 
  Record the transaction in the 
accounting software, using the 
correct codes as captured on 
the PV. 
  File supporting documentation 
in line with xxx, include proof 
Process 
payment 
Record 
payment 
29 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Activity 
CPCU procedures 
SPCU procedures 
xxx, include proof of 
payment (bank 
statement/bank confirmation 
of payment) 
of payment (bank 
statement/bank confirmation 
of payment) 
12.4 Travel related payments 
The following type of travel may take place by Programme staff or Programme 
beneficiaries: 
 
Internal training - Travel for training at CPCU or SPCUs – 12.4.1 
  External training - Travel for training not at CPCU/SPCUs – 12.4.2 
 
  Programme staff field visits – 12.4.1 
International training – 12.4.3 
All types of travel payments follow the general process: 
Request for 
travel 
Approval of 
travel 
request 
Advances 
provided (if 
applicable) 
Travel 
undertaken 
Justification 
of travel 
expenses 
Approval of 
travel 
expense 
payment 
Recording of 
travel 
expense 
The proses for each type of travel is outlined below: 
12.4.1 Local training (internal) and field visits 
Local training (internal) / field visits 
Type  
Training which is conducted for Programme staff or beneficiaries at the 
CPCU or SPCUs or field visits 
Overview 
of 
entitlement 
  The relevant SPCU or CPCU is expected to provide meals and 
 
accommodation. 
Individuals are entitled to pocket money in line with the staff 
bylaws, which is provided after the training.  
  With regards to field visits, the driver and Programme staff are 
entitled to a daily field allowance as specified in the Programme 
bylaws. 
  The number of travel days used for the calculation of pocket 
 
 
money/field allowance are calculated from date of departure from 
home until last day of the training. 
If Programme vehicles are used, the actual cost of fuel is paid by 
the Programme based on invoices. (fuel advance may be provided if 
trip distance is greater than 400km) 
If private vehicles are used, staff are reimbursed in line with the 
allowable rate per kilometre as specified in the staff bylaws, based 
on actual distance travelled. 
Request for 
travel 
The relevant department will prepare a request for travel which 
includes: 
For training: 
30 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Local training (internal) / field visits 
  List of individuals to attend training  
  Dates of training 
  Overview of training (agenda, location noted) – brochure / email 
correspondence or other suitable evidence 
  Related AWPB classification (category, component) 
  Confirmation from the administration officer that a Programme 
vehicle(s) is available for the travel dates should this be the mode of 
transportation 
  Calculation of the pocket money to be paid.  
For field visits: 
  List of individuals visiting field 
  Purpose of field visit 
  Relevant AWPB line item 
Approval of 
travel 
request 
  The travel request is reviewed by the Programme accountant for: 
 Accuracy and compliance with the staff bylaws in terms of 
the pocket money allowance / estimation for fuel costs 
o 
o  Alignment with the approved ABPB 
  The travel request is submitted to the Programme Director for 
approval. 
  Once approved, the team leader or individual should submit a 
request for vehicle use- 
Advance 
provide 
  An advance for fuel is provide from petty cash if the travel distance 
is more than 400km and travel is undertaken with a Programme 
vehicle. The advance is provided to the individual undertaking the 
trip (not provided to the driver). 
  The administrative assistance records the fuel advance in the petty 
cash book on the accounting software. 
  No other advances are provided. 
  Within 5 business days after the travel, the team leader / individual 
is required to prepare a travel expense report which includes: 
o  Attendance register completed at the training event 
o 
If a private vehicle was used, indication of total distance 
travelled in kilometres with payment due to vehicle owner, 
based on the approved rate in the bylaws. 
If a Programme vehicle was used, invoiced for fuel which was 
paid from fuel advance. 
o 
o  Back to the office report (in case of field visits) 
  The travel expense claim is submitted to the administrative 
assistant together with the fuel advance which was not used. 
  The administrative assistant confirms the accuracy and validity of 
the travel expense claim and determines the pocket money which is 
due. 
  The fuel advance returned is recorded in the accounting software. 
  The Programme accountant reviews the travel expense claim for 
accuracy and validity and captures the correct account codes on the 
request (in line with AWPB line items). (sign as evidence of review) 
  The travel expense is approved by the Programme Director by way 
of signing the travel expense report. 
Justification 
of travel 
expenses / 
return of 
unused fuel 
advance 
Approval of 
travel 
payment 
31 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Local training (internal) / field visits 
Payment of 
pocket 
money / 
fuel 
expenses 
  Once the travel expense claim is approved, the administrative 
assistant will provide the pocket money and reimburse for fuel 
expenses (in case of private vehicle use). Refer payment processing 
procedure outlined in 13.2. 
  Fuel is reimbursed based on invoices (if Programme vehicle is used), 
or based on km x staff bylaw rate if private vehicle is used. 
Recording 
of expense 
  The total travel expense is recorded as training expenditure in terms 
of the correct category and component, in line with the account 
codes which are captured on the travel expense report. 
  Only fuel expenses may be charged to the training budget code. If 
other vehicle maintenance was incurred, this expense is recorded as 
maintenance. 
  Meals and accommodation provided by the CPCU or SPCU where the 
training/field visit is held, is responsible to record the related 
expense in terms of the correct account codes. 
12.4.2 Local training (external) and other business-related travel within Sudan 
Local training (external) or other business-related travel within Sudan 
Type of 
travel 
  Training which is conducted for Programme staff or beneficiaries at 
an external location in Sudan. 
  Other business-related travel within Sudan (either to CPCU/SPCUs 
or other) 
Overview of 
entitlement 
 
Individuals are entitled to DSA, paid based on the number of days 
of travel for training purposes.  
  The DSA should be used to pay for the cost of accommodation and 
meals. 
  Unused DSA is not returned to the Programme. 
  The DSA is reduced in line with the staff bylaws in the event that 
meals or accommodations is provided to the individual. 
  50% of the DSA is advanced before commencement of the travel. 
  50% of the DSA is provide after completion of the travel and 
subject to approval of the travel expense report. 
  The number of travel days are calculated from date of departure 
 
 
from home until last day of the training. 
If Programme vehicles are used, the actual cost of fuel is paid by 
the Programme. 
If private vehicles are used, staff are reimbursed in line with the 
allowable rate per kilometre, based on actual distance travelled 
Request for 
travel 
The relevant department will prepare a request for travel which 
includes: 
  List of individuals to attend external training 
  Dates of training 
  Overview of training (agenda, location noted) – brochure / email 
correspondence or other suitable evidence 
  Cost of training and other expenses 
  Related AWPB classification (category, component) 
  Mode of transport (Programme vehicle or other)  
  Confirmation from the administrative officer that a Programme 
vehicle(s) is available for the travel dates should this be the mode 
32 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Local training (external) or other business-related travel within Sudan 
of transportation 
  Calculation of total DSA due (100%) 
  Calculation of total DSA advance required (individuals x applicable 
DSA rate x 50%) before departure  
o 
  The travel request is reviewed by the Programme accountant for: 
 Accuracy and compliance with the staff bylaws in terms of 
the DSA rate applied. 
 Alignment with the approved ABPB 
o 
  The travel request is submitted to the Programme Director for 
approval. 
  Once approved, the team leader or individual should submit a 
request for vehicle use. 
  Upon approval of the travel request by the Programme Director, 
the Programme accountant will advance 50% of the total DSA to 
individuals or the team leader as appropriate. (amounts greater 
than 500 SDG provided by cheque, following payment processing 
procedure as outlined in 13.2). 
  The Programme accountant will record the advance in the 
accounting system, indicating the amount, date of advance, to 
who advanced and related budget line item. (advance is not 
recorded as an expense at this stage) 
  Within 5 business days after the travel, the team leader / 
individual is required to prepare a travel expense report which 
includes: 
o 
o 
Invoices for hotels, meals (original) 
If a private vehicle was used, indication of total distance 
travelled in kilometres with payment due to vehicle owner, 
based on the approved rate in the bylaws. 
o  Attendance register completed at the training event 
o  Back to the office report (in case of other business-related 
travel) 
  The travel expense claim is submitted to the administrative 
assistant who confirms the accuracy and validity of the travel 
expense claim and determines the outstanding DSA which is due 
for payment. (sign as evidence of review). 
  The Programme accountant reviews the travel expense claim for 
accuracy and validity and captures the correct account codes on 
the request (in line with AWPB line items). (sign as evidence of 
review) 
  The travel expense is approved by the Programme Director by way 
of signing the travel expense report. 
  Once the travel expense claim is approved, the administrative 
assistant will provide the remaining 50% DSA from the training 
advance and reimburse for fuel expenses. Fuel is reimbursed 
based on invoices (if Programme vehicle is used),or based on km x 
staff bylaw rate if private vehicle is used. 
  Refer payment processing procedure outlined in 13.2. 
Approval of 
travel 
request 
Advance 
provide 
Justification 
of travel 
expenses 
Approval of 
travel 
payment 
Payment of 
outstanding 
DSA 
33 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Local training (external) or other business-related travel within Sudan 
Recording of 
expense 
  The total travel expense is recorded as training expenditure, by 
clearing the travel advance, in terms of the correct category and 
component, in line with the account codes which are captured on 
the travel expense report. 
  Only fuel expenses may be charged to the training budget code. If 
other vehicle maintenance was incurred, this expense is recorded 
as maintenance. 
12.4.3 International travel 
International travel 
Type of 
travel 
  Training which is conducted for Programme staff or beneficiaries at 
an international location. 
Overview of 
entitlement 
 
Individuals are entitled to DSA, paid based on the number of days 
of travel for training purposes.  
  The DSA should be used to pay for the cost of accommodation and 
meals. 
  Unused DSA is not returned to the Programme. 
  DSA is determined in line with the Bylaws of the Council of 
Ministries. 
  The DSA is reduced in line with the bylaws in the event that meals 
or accommodations is provided to the individual. 
  80% of the DSA is advanced before commencement of the travel. 
  20% of the DSA is provide after completion of the travel and 
subject to approval of the travel expense report. 
  The number of travel days are calculated from date of departure 
 
 
from home until last day of the training. 
If Programme vehicles are used, the actual cost of fuel is paid by 
the Programme. (to travel to airport). 
If private vehicles are used, staff are reimbursed in line with the 
allowable rate per kilometre, based on actual distance travelled. 
(to travel to airport). 
  Air travel is booked via CCU and paid for by the Programme 
directly. 
Request for 
travel 
The relevant department will prepare a request for travel which 
includes: 
  List of individuals to attend external training 
  Dates of training 
  Overview of training (agenda, location noted) – brochure / email 
correspondence or other suitable evidence 
  Related AWPB classification (category, component) 
  Confirmation from the administrative officer that a Programme 
vehicle(s) is available for the travel to the airport. 
  Calculation of total DSA due (100%) 
  Calculation of total DSA advance required (individuals x applicable 
DSA rate x 80%) before departure  
  Estimated cost of air travel  
  Estimated cost of visas 
(Air travel and visas are arranged via CCU and paid directly by the 
Programme) 
34 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
International travel 
o 
  The travel request is reviewed by the Programme accountant for: 
 Accuracy and compliance with the bylaws in terms of the 
DSA rate applied. 
 Alignment with the approved ABPB 
o 
  The travel request is submitted to the Programme Director for 
approval. 
  Once approved, the team leader or individual should submit a 
 
request for vehicle use if required. 
IFAD no objection should be obtained for travel request before 
approval by the Programme Director. 
  Upon approval of the travel request by the Programme Director, 
the Programme accountant will advance 80% of the total DSA to 
individuals or the team leader as appropriate. (prepare cheque for 
signing by the Programme Director) 
  The Programme accountant will record the advance in the 
accounting system, indicating the amount, date of advance, to 
who advanced and related budget line item. (advance is not 
recorded as an expense at this stage) 
  Within 5 business days after the travel, the team leader / 
individual is required to prepare a travel expense report which 
includes: 
o 
o 
Invoices for hotels, meals (original) 
Invoices for air travel and visas (or copies of visas if 
invoices were not provided) 
o  Boarding passes for air travel 
o 
If a private vehicle was used, indication of total distance 
travelled in kilometres with payment due to vehicle owner, 
based on the approved rate in the bylaws. 
o  Attendance register completed at the training event 
o  Back to the office report prepared by the team leader 
o  Confirmation of IFAD no objection (email correspondence) 
  The travel expense claim is submitted to the administrative 
assistant who confirms the accuracy and validity of the travel 
expense claim and determines the outstanding DSA which is due 
for payment. (sign as evidence of review). 
  The Programme accountant reviews the travel expense claim for 
accuracy and validity and captures the correct account codes on 
the request (in line with AWPB line items). (sign as evidence of 
review) 
  The travel expense is approved by the Programme Director by way 
of signing the travel expense report. 
  Once the travel expense claim is approved, the administrative 
assistant will provide the remaining 20% DSA. 
  Payment for air travel is processed in line with the procedures 
 
outlined in 13.2. 
Individuals are reimbursed for the actual cost of visas and fuel. 
Fuel is reimbursed based on invoices (if Programme vehicle is 
used),or based on km x staff bylaw rate if private vehicle is used. 
  Visas may be reimbursed on presentation of an invoice or a copy 
of the visa (only in instances were invoices are not issued at 
Approval of 
travel 
request 
Advance 
provide 
Justification 
of travel 
expenses 
Approval of 
travel 
payment 
Payment of 
outstanding 
DSA / 
reimburseme
nt for visa 
fees 
35 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
International travel 
passport control for entry visas)- 
Recording of 
expense 
  The total travel expense is recorded as training expenditure, by 
clearing the travel advance, in terms of the correct category and 
component, in line with the account codes which are captured on 
the travel expense report. 
  Only fuel expenses may be charged to the training budget code. If 
other vehicle maintenance was incurred, this expense is recorded 
as maintenance. 
In  all  instances,  unjustified  travel  advances  will  need  to  be  reimbursed  to  the 
Programme  by  the  traveller  within  three  months  after  the  travel  date  or  the 
amount will be deducted from the payroll. 
12.5 Civil works, equipment and tools 
Activity 
CPCU procedures 
SPCU procedures 
Request and 
approve 
activity in 
line with 
AWPB 
  Civils works, equipment and tools are defined and outlined in both 
the AWPB and the Procurement Plan. 
  Civil works, equipment and tools is contracted via a procurement 
process as outlined in the Programme Implementation Manual. 
IFAD no objection is required on the bidding document, 
recommendation of award and contract outline before the final bid 
award is made. (refer to Letter to the Recipient)  
 
  The procurement officer will 
request payment of invoices, 
subject to providing the 
following supporting 
documentation: 
-  Copy of civils contract 
with award letter (for 
civils only) 
  The procurement officer will 
request payment of invoices, 
subject to providing the 
following supporting 
documentation: 
-  Copy of civils contract with 
award letter (for civils only) 
-  Contract amendment letter 
-  Contract amendment 
letter (if applicable) 
-  Bid analysis and 
evaluation report  
-  Evidence of IFAD no 
- 
- 
objection related to the 
contract award 
Purchase order / Invoice 
Progress report prepared 
by consulting engineer 
and approved by 
Programme Technical 
head. 
(if applicable) 
-  Bid analysis and evaluation 
report  
-  Evidence of IFAD no 
- 
- 
objection related to the 
contract award 
Purchase order / Invoice 
Progress report prepared by 
consulting engineer and 
approved by Programme 
Technical head. 
  The SAAA prepares a payment 
  The CAA prepares a payment 
request which includes the 
supporting documentation. 
request which includes 
supporting documentation. 
  The SAAA adds the correct 
  The CPA reviews the 
payment request for accuracy 
account codes for the purposes 
of recording the transaction in 
Prepare 
payment 
request 
36 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Activity 
CPCU procedures 
SPCU procedures 
the accounting software. 
  The SAAA forwards the 
payment request with 
supporting documentation to 
the relevant Technical Officer 
/Component Head for review 
and sign off. 
and validity. 
  The CPA adds the correct 
account codes for the 
purposes of recording the 
transaction in the accounting 
software. 
  The CPA forwards the 
payment request with 
supporting documentation to 
the relevant Technical Officer 
/Component Head for review 
and sign off. 
Review of 
payment 
request 
The SCPA shall review and sign 
the payment request, 
checking/confirming: 
The SAO shall review and sign the 
payment request, 
checking/confirming: 
 
  The expenditure is included 
in the approved AWPB (or   
undertaken with approval of 
the IFAD CPM with 
subsequent modification of 
the AWPB) 
IFAD no objection was 
obtained (if applicable). 
  All expenditures are eligible 
in line with the financing 
agreement and has been 
incurred before/completed 
before Programme 
completion date. 
  Payment was cleared by the 
relevant component technical 
officer/head. 
  All supporting documentation 
is attached (refer xxx). 
  Where stipulated in the 
contract, the required 
bank guarantees are valid 
and is retained in the 
CPCU safe. 
  The expenditure is included in 
the approved AWPB (or   
undertaken with approval of 
the IFAD CPM with subsequent 
modification of the AWPB) 
IFAD no objection was obtained 
(if applicable). 
 
  All expenditures are eligible in 
line with the financing 
agreement and has been 
incurred before/completed 
before Programme completion 
date. 
  Payment was cleared by the 
relevant component technical 
officer/head. 
  All supporting documentation is 
attached (refer xxx). 
  Where stipulated in the 
contract, the required bank 
guarantees are valid and is 
retained in the SPCU safe. 
Approve 
payment 
request 
The Project director shall 
review and sign payment 
request, checking/confirming: 
The SC shall review and sign 
payment request, 
checking/confirming: 
  The expenditure is included 
in the approved AWPB (or   
undertaken with approval of 
the IFAD CPM with 
subsequent modification of 
the AWPB) 
  All expenditures are eligible 
in line with the financing 
agreement and has been 
incurred before/completed 
  The expenditure is included in 
the approved AWPB (or   
undertaken with approval of 
the IFAD CPM with subsequent 
modification of the AWPB) 
  All expenditures are eligible in 
line with the financing 
agreement and has been 
incurred before/completed 
before Programme completion 
37 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Activity 
CPCU procedures 
SPCU procedures 
before Programme 
completion date  
  Payment was cleared by the 
relevant component technical 
officer/head. 
  All supporting documentation 
is attached (refer xxx) 
  The payment request was 
reviewed and approved by 
the Financial Manager. 
date- 
  Payment was cleared by the 
relevant component technical 
officer/head. 
  All supporting documentation is 
attached (refer xxx). 
  The payment request was 
reviewed and approved by the 
SAO. 
  The approved Invoice with 
related documents shall be 
sent to the CPA for 
processing and issuance of 
appropriate instruction for 
mandate/cheque preparation.  
  Payment Voucher (PV) will be 
raised by the CPA, based on 
a duly authorised payment 
request which includes 
supporting documentation. 
The PV will indicate the 
accounting codes, category of 
payment, component of 
payment and source of 
finance. 
  The PV and the supporting 
documents will be sent to the 
SPCA who will ensure that 
the correct account codes as 
well as the appropriate 
Programme fund have been 
indicated on the PV.  
  Where the SPCA is satisfied 
with the internal checks, the 
PV will be approved for 
mandate/cheque writing and 
the appropriate instruction 
for writing a mandate/cheque 
will be issued to the 
Programme accountant. 
  The Financial Manager and 
Project Director will sign 
the prepared cheques and 
return to the CPA for 
processing. 
  Signed cheques will be 
recorded in the Cheque 
Issued /mandate Register 
before collection.  
  The turnaround time for 
settlement of invoices shall 
not exceed 3 working days. 
Before releasing the cheque 
  The approved Invoice with 
related documents shall be 
sent to the SAAA for 
processing and issuance of 
appropriate instruction for 
mandate/cheque preparation.  
  Payment Voucher (PV) will be 
raised by the SAAA, based on 
a duly authorised payment 
request which includes 
supporting documentation. The 
PV will indicate the accounting 
codes, category of payment, 
component of payment and 
source of finance. 
  The PV and the supporting 
documents will be sent to the 
SAO who will ensure that the 
correct account codes as well 
as the appropriate Programme 
fund have been indicated on 
the PV.  
  Where the SAO is satisfied 
with the internal checks, the PV 
will be approved for 
mandate/cheque writing and 
the appropriate instruction for 
writing a mandate/cheque will 
be issued to the Programme 
accountant  
  The SAO and SC will sign the 
prepared cheques and return 
to the SAAA for processing. 
  Signed cheques will be 
recorded in the Cheque Issued 
/mandate Register before 
collection.  
  The turnaround time for 
settlement of invoices shall not 
exceed 3 working days. Before 
releasing the cheque to the 
payee, the accountant will 
ensure that the beneficiary 
signs the PV and Cheque 
Process 
payment 
38 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Activity 
CPCU procedures 
SPCU procedures 
Record 
payment 
to the payee, the accountant 
will ensure that the 
beneficiary signs the PV and 
Cheque Issued/Mandate 
Register.  
  Record the transaction in the 
accounting software, using 
the correct codes as captured 
on the PV. 
  Update the contract 
monitoring form module in 
the accounting software with 
the payment made. 
  File supporting 
documentation, include proof 
of payment (bank 
statement/bank confirmation 
of payment) 
Issued/Mandate Register.  
  Record the transaction in the 
accounting software, using the 
correct codes as captured on 
the PV. 
  Update the contract monitoring 
form module in the accounting 
software with the payment 
made. 
  File supporting documentation, 
include proof of payment (bank 
statement/bank confirmation of 
payment) 
13.6 Payments for consultant services 
Activity 
CPCU procedures 
SPCU procedures 
Request and 
approve 
activity in 
line with 
AWPB 
  The process for requesting and approving consultants is outlined in 
the procurement section of the PIM (and LTR) and is dependent on 
whether the service is recruited internationally, nationally, locally 
or on a single source basis. 
In all instances the procurement of consulting services is subject 
to IFAD’s no objection. 
 
  The procurement officer will 
  The procurement officer will 
request payment of 
consulting services subject to 
providing the following 
supporting documentation: 
-  Copy of consulting 
contract and invoice 
requesting payment 
(invoice to specify bank 
details in line with 
contract) 
request payment of civil works 
invoices, subject to providing 
the following supporting 
documentation: 
-  Copy of consulting contract 
and invoice requesting 
payment (invoice to specify 
bank details in line with 
contract) 
-  Copy of output (report / 
-  Copy of output (report / 
study etc) 
study etc) 
-  Copy of timesheets (if 
time-based payment is 
required) 
-  Written recommendation 
for payment from the 
relevant technical 
department which 
confirms that the 
consultant(s) have 
delivered the key outputs 
as specified in the 
consulting contract. 
-  Confirmation of IFAD no 
-  Copy of timesheets (if time-
based payment is required) 
-  Written recommendation 
for payment from the 
relevant technical 
department which confirms 
that the consultant(s) have 
delivered the key outputs 
as specified in the 
consulting contract. 
-  Confirmation of IFAD no 
objection. 
  The SAAA prepares a payment 
Prepare 
payment 
request 
39 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Activity 
CPCU procedures 
SPCU procedures 
request which includes 
supporting documentation. 
  The SAAA adds the correct 
account codes for the purposes 
of recording the transaction in 
the accounting software. 
  The SAAA forwards the 
payment request with 
supporting documentation to 
the relevant Technical. 
Officer/Component Head for 
review and sign off. 
objection. 
  The CPA prepares a payment 
request which includes the 
supporting documentation. 
  The CPA reviews the 
payment request for accuracy 
and validity. 
  The CPA adds the correct 
account codes for the 
purposes of recording the 
transaction in the accounting 
software. 
  The CPA forwards the 
payment request with 
supporting documentation to 
the relevant Technical Officer 
/Component Head for review 
and sign off. 
Review of 
payment 
request 
The SCPA shall review and sign 
the payment request, 
checking/confirming: 
The SAO shall review and sign the 
payment request, 
checking/confirming: 
 
  The expenditure is included 
in the approved AWPB (or   
undertaken with approval of 
the IFAD CPM with 
subsequent modification of 
the AWPB) 
IFAD no objection was 
obtained (if applicable). 
  All expenditures are eligible 
in line with the financing 
agreement and has been 
incurred before/completed 
before Programme 
completion date (also see 
xxx) 
  Payment was cleared by the 
relevant component technical 
officer/head. 
  All supporting documentation 
is attached (refer xxx). 
  Where stipulated in the 
contract, the required 
bank guarantees are valid 
and is retained in the 
CPCU safe. 
  The expenditure is included in 
the approved AWPB (or   
undertaken with approval of 
the IFAD CPM with subsequent 
modification of the AWPB) 
IFAD no objection was obtained 
(if applicable). 
 
  All expenditures are eligible in 
line with the financing 
agreement and has been 
incurred before/completed 
before Programme completion 
date (also see xxx) 
  Payment was cleared by the 
relevant component technical 
officer/head. 
  All supporting documentation is 
attached (refer xxx). 
  Where stipulated in the 
contract, the required bank 
guarantees are valid and is 
retained in the SPCU safe. 
The Project director shall 
review and sign payment 
request, checking/confirming: 
The SC shall review and sign 
payment request, 
checking/confirming: 
  The expenditure is included 
in the approved AWPB (or   
undertaken with approval of 
  The expenditure is included in 
the approved AWPB (or   
undertaken with approval of 
Approve 
payment 
request 
40 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Activity 
CPCU procedures 
SPCU procedures 
the IFAD CPM with 
subsequent modification of 
the AWPB) 
the IFAD CPM with subsequent 
modification of the AWPB) 
  All expenditures are eligible in 
  All expenditures are eligible 
in line with the financing 
agreement and has been 
incurred before/completed 
before Programme 
completion date. 
  Payment was cleared by the 
relevant component technical 
officer/head. 
line with the financing 
agreement and has been 
incurred before/completed 
before Programme completion 
date. 
  Payment was cleared by the 
relevant component technical 
officer/head. 
  All supporting documentation is 
  All supporting documentation 
attached. 
is attached. 
  The payment request was 
reviewed and approved by 
the Financial Manager. 
  The payment request was 
reviewed and approved by the 
SAO. 
  The approved Invoice with 
related documents shall be 
sent to the CPA for 
processing and issuance of 
appropriate instruction for 
mandate/cheque preparation.  
  Payment Voucher (PV) will be 
raised by the CPA, based on 
a duly authorised payment 
request which includes 
supporting documentation. 
The PV will indicate the 
accounting codes, category of 
payment, component of 
payment and source of 
finance. 
  The PV and the supporting 
documents will be sent to the 
SPCA who will ensure that 
the correct account codes as 
well as the appropriate 
Programme fund have been 
indicated on the PV.  
  Where the SCPA is satisfied 
with the internal checks, the 
PV will be approved for 
mandate/cheque writing and 
the appropriate instruction 
for writing a mandate/cheque 
will be issued to the 
Programme accountant. 
  The Financial Manager and 
Project Director will sign 
the prepared cheques and 
return to the CPA for 
processing. 
  Signed cheques will be 
  The approved Invoice with 
related documents shall be 
sent to the SAAA for 
processing and issuance of 
appropriate instruction for 
mandate/cheque preparation.  
  Payment Voucher (PV) will be 
raised by the SAAA, based on 
a duly authorised payment 
request which includes 
supporting documentation. The 
PV will indicate the accounting 
codes, category of payment, 
component of payment and 
source of finance. 
  The PV and the supporting 
documents will be sent to the 
SAO who will ensure that the 
correct account codes as well 
as the appropriate Programme 
fund have been indicated on 
the PV.  
  Where the SAO  is satisfied 
with the internal checks, the PV 
will be approved for 
mandate/cheque writing and 
the appropriate instruction for 
writing a mandate/cheque will 
be issued to the Programme 
accountant  
  The SAO and SC will sign the 
prepared cheques and return 
to the SAAA for processing. 
  Signed cheques will be 
recorded in the Cheque Issued 
/mandate Register before 
collection.  
Process 
payment 
41 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Activity 
CPCU procedures 
SPCU procedures 
Record 
payment 
recorded in the Cheque 
Issued /mandate Register 
before collection.  
  The turnaround time for 
settlement of invoices shall 
not exceed 3 working days. 
Before releasing the cheque 
to the payee, the accountant 
will ensure that the 
beneficiary signs the PV and 
Cheque Issued/Mandate 
Register.  
  Record the transaction in the 
accounting software, using 
the correct codes as captured 
on the PV. 
  Update the contract 
monitoring form module in 
the accounting software with 
the payment made. 
  File supporting 
documentation, include proof 
of payment (bank 
statement/bank confirmation 
of payment) 
  The turnaround time for 
settlement of invoices shall not 
exceed 3 working days. Before 
releasing the cheque to the 
payee, the accountant will 
ensure that the beneficiary 
signs the PV and Cheque 
Issued/Mandate Register.  
  Record the transaction in the 
accounting software, using the 
correct codes as captured on 
the PV. 
  Update the contract monitoring 
form module in the accounting 
software with the payment 
made. 
  File supporting documentation, 
include proof of payment (bank 
statement/bank confirmation of 
payment) 
12.7 Payments related to seed capital and technical assistance to Community Groups for 
the implementation of Livelihood Investment Plans 
Community Groups may qualify for matching grants (seed capital and technical 
assistance) or revolving funds capital as follows: 
Community Groups will follow a process (as outlined in section 88. of the PIM) to obtain 
approval for their LIPs from the CPCU’s Central Review Committee. The committee will 
confirm the amount of the investment to be made and required beneficiary contribution 
if applicable (or MFI loan in the absence of).  
Revolving fund capital 
42 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
VDCs can set up revolving credit funds to support VWGs who cannot access micro 
finance. The general guidelines for payment processing should be followed with specific 
inclusion of the following: 
Activity 
Receive 
payment 
request 
Prepare 
payment 
request 
Review of 
payment 
request 
Approve 
payment 
request 
43 | P a g e  
1.  The VDC should submit a written request for revolving funds to 
the SPCU. The written request should outline the amount 
requested, the legal entity to which the funds will be disbursed 
(Community Investment Fund) and bank details of the 
Community Investment Fund.  
a.  The written request should be signed by an authorised 
representative of the VDC. 
b.  The request should be accompanied by a bank stamped 
letter from the commercial bank where the CIF has 
opened a bank account for the purposes of receiving the 
funds 
c.  The request should be accompanied by the legal entity 
registration documents (certified) which indicate the name 
of the CIF (corresponding to name on bank letter) 
2.  The Community Development Officer should provide supporting 
documentation which includes his/her validation report, minutes 
of the Central Review Committee meeting where the funds to the 
CIF was approved and copy of the LIP.  
  Once a disbursement request is received from the VDC, the SAAA 
prepares a payment request which includes supporting 
documentation. The Community Development Officer should 
provide supporting documentation which includes his/her 
validation report, minutes of the Central Review Committee 
meeting where the funds to the CIF was approved and copy of 
the LIP. 
  The SAAA adds the correct account codes for the purposes of 
recording the transaction in the accounting software. 
  The SAAA forwards the payment request with supporting 
documentation to the relevant Community Development Officer 
for review and sign off. 
The SAO shall review and sign the payment request, 
checking/confirming: 
  The funds allocation is included in the approved AWPB (or   
undertaken with approval of the IFAD CPM with subsequent 
modification of the AWPB) 
  Payment was cleared by the Community Development Officer 
  All supporting documentation is attached. 
  The bank details on the payment request agree to the bank 
stamped letter provided by the VDC and the amount of the 
payment agrees to the amount approved for allocation by the 
Central Review Committee. 
The SC shall review and sign payment request, checking/confirming: 
  The expenditure is included in the approved AWPB (or   
undertaken with approval of the IFAD CPM with subsequent 
modification of the AWPB) 
  Payment was cleared by the relevant Community Development 
Officer. 
Activity 
Process 
payment 
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
  All supporting documentation is attached (refer xxx). 
  The payment request was reviewed and approved by the SAO. 
  The disbursement request shall be sent to the SAAA for 
processing and issuance of appropriate instruction for 
mandate/cheque preparation.  
  Payment Voucher (PV) will be raised by the SAAA, based on a 
duly authorised payment request which includes supporting 
documentation. The PV will indicate the accounting codes, 
category of payment, component of payment and source of 
finance. 
  The PV and the supporting documents will be sent to the SAO 
who will ensure that the correct account codes as well as the 
appropriate Programme fund have been indicated on the PV.  
  Where the SAO is satisfied with the internal checks, the PV will 
be approved for mandate/cheque writing and the appropriate 
instruction for writing a mandate/cheque will be issued to the 
Programme accountant  
  The SAO and SC will sign the prepared cheques and return to the 
SAAA for processing. 
  Signed cheques will be recorded in the Cheque Issued /mandate 
Register before collection.  
  The turnaround time for disbursements shall not exceed 3 
working days. Before releasing the cheque to the payee, the 
accountant will ensure that the beneficiary signs the PV and 
Cheque Issued/Mandate Register.  
Record 
payment 
  Record the transaction in the accounting software, using the 
correct codes as captured on the PV. 
  File supporting documentation in line with xxx, include proof of 
payment (bank statement/bank confirmation of payment) 
Matching grants 
Seed capital can be used for a range of activities and it is recommended that the 
procurement of related goods and services be managed by the Cluster Procurement 
Committee with strong oversight from the SPCU procurement team. Payments related to 
LIPs can either be made directly to suppliers of the CG or by disbursing seed 
capital/technical assistance funds to the CG bank account.  
  For direct payments to suppliers, the general guidelines should be followed with 
consideration of the following additional steps: 
[to be developed further once the PIM outlines mechanisms for matching grants] 
  For disbursement of funds to the CG bank account, the following process if followed: 
[to be developed further once the PIM outlines mechanisms for matching grants] 
Guidance for further development (delete from final FM): 
-  The SPCU must retain documentary evidence of the LIP approval, including 
amounts approved and the required matching contribution. 
44 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
-  The SPCU must confirm that the beneficiary contribution has been made. This can 
be either paid to the supplier directly, deposited into a ring-fenced bank account 
created for receiving beneficiary contributions or paid to the PFI (if applicable). 
-  Specific consideration should be given to the PFI process. Ito Islamic Law, the PFI 
purchases the equipment on behalf of the CG and sells it to the CG with a mark-
up. In instances where a PFI loan is required, the SPCU may need to disburse the 
grant to the PFI who in turn will purchase the equipment. 
-  Consider processes as outlined for the revolving fund above. 
12.8 Petty cash payments and replenishments 
The advance to petty cash is 5000 SDG (at CPCU and SPCU level) and is managed by the 
administrative assistant. The purpose of the petty cash is to allow the CPCU to make 
payments for low value items (e.g. minor repairs, small supplies, newspapers, taxi fares, 
and other sundry expenses) in a quick and efficient manner. 
The Petty cash disbursements may be in the form of an advance or a reimbursement. 
Advances must be justified with proper supporting documentation (receipts etc.) on a 
timely basis. 
  The cash is placed in a locked cash box which is kept in the administrative assistant’s 
custody.  The Petty cash disbursements may be in the form of an advance or a 
reimbursement (when the staff member has personally advanced the funds).   
  For advances, the administrative assistant delivers petty cash advances on the basis 
of the approved request. After the purchase is made, the requestor must return the 
invoice/receipt along with the change, if any, to the Finance Officer for recording into 
the Accounting system. 
  For reimbursements (i.e. when the goods or services have already been delivered), 
the invoice or receipt is given to the administrative assistant who reimburses the 
requesting staff member or directly pays the supplier.  The form is signed by the 
individual who receives the money. 
  All disbursements from the Petty Cash must be recorded on a Cash Voucher form 
showing all particulars: the amount, the account being charged, the description of 
the transaction, authorization (by administrative assistant) and the signature of the 
payee.  The necessary documents (invoice, payment tapes, receipts) must be firmly 
attached. The Finance Officer must never disburse from the petty cash to herself 
without the Finance Manager’s authorization. 
  The petty cash replenishment point is set to 5000 SDG.  Once the level of the petty 
cash on hand falls below this point, the administrative assistant must request 
replenishment by submitting a completed petty cash replenishment form (22.11).  
This form will show a listing of all disbursements made, the accounts debited and the 
total sum replenished.  All the necessary petty cash vouchers and their supporting 
documents will be attached.  A check will be prepared for the amount to be 
replenished and the Financial Manager is required to review and confirm all 
disbursements on the Petty Cash form before signing the check. 
  Petty cash is replenished upon presentation of actual receipts to the Financial 
Manager.  All Petty cash replenishments will bring the balance of cash on hand to 
SDG 5000 since the cash on hand and the receipts available should always equal 
SDG 5000. 
  The Petty Cash Vouchers, Receipts and Electronic Petty Cash Reconciliation Sheet 
should be updated frequently.  At the end of each week, the Programme accountant 
will reconcile the petty cash journal with the physical cash count. These will be 
checked, along with a surprise cash count by the Finance Manager, (or Programme 
Director in the absence of the Financial Manager) via unannounced inspections at 
least once per month. 
12.9 Payments for fuel 
Vehicles may be refuelled at the local preferred fuel station, based on approved purchase 
orders issued to drivers by the Programme accountant. In such instances the driver does 
45 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
not pay in cash for fuel. On a monthly basis the preferred petrol station will submit a 
customer statement for payment to the Programme. The customer statement should: 
  List all individual invoices separately with supporting purchase orders issued by the 
Programme accountant 
Indicate the date and amount (value and volume) 
Indicate the vehicle registration number 
 
 
The administrative assistant will compare the customer statement information to the 
respective Programme vehicle logbooks to confirm accuracy of the customer statement. 
In addition, the administrative assistant with confirm that only approved Programme 
vehicles are listed on the customer statement. Once the administrative assistant is 
satisfied with the customer statement, a payment request will be prepared in line with 
the procedures in 13.2 
If drivers are not able to refuel at the preferred fuel station, drivers may use fuel 
advances to procure fuel. In all instanced, travel is approved in line with required 
procedures as outlined in section 13. The fuel invoices should be attached to the trip 
expense to be filed upon return to the office. 
13. Financial Reporting 
Financial reporting requirements applicable to IFAD-financed Programmes are outlined in 
the IFAD Handbook for Financial Reporting and Auditing for IFAD-financed Programmes.  
13.1 Frequency of financial reporting 
SNRLP is required to prepare financial reports and submit to IFAD as outlined in the table 
below: 
Type 
Period / Frequency of submission 
Annual 
Financial 
Statements 
  Unaudited:  Prepare  annual  reports  and  submit  to  IFAD  within  4 
months of the end of the financial year-end.  
  Audited:  Submit  audited  financial  statements  within  6  months  of 
the end of the financial reporting period. 
The reports should be prepared in line with requirements are outlined 
in  14.3.  The  annual  financial  statement  should  be  authorised  by  the 
Programme  Director  for  authorisation  before  submission  to  the 
auditor/IFAD. 
Interim 
financial reports 
Prepare  quarterly  reports  and  submit  to  IFAD  within  45  days  of  the 
end  of  the  quarter.  The  reports  should  be  prepared  in  line  with 
requirements are outlined in 14.3. 
Monthly 
management 
accounts 
It is required that the Programme prepare monthly management 
accounts which include information which is useful for the purposes of 
monitoring the Programme. The monthly management accounts are 
used for internal purposes only. The content may include: 
  A financial progress report (sources and uses) 
  Monthly reconciliations 
  Cashflow forecast 
  Summary of contract commitments  
  Overview of budget to actual expenditure analysis with variance 
explanations 
  Monthly vehicle maintenance and fuel consumption report  
  Travel and DSA report.  
The monthly management accounts should be prepared within 10 
46 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Type 
Period / Frequency of submission 
days of the end of the month and submitted to the Programme 
Director for review and discussion during management meetings. The 
purpose of the monthly management accounts is to provide a 
monitoring tool for management with the purposes of identifying 
issues and taking corrective action. 
13.2 Financial reporting requirements 
SNRLP is required to prepare financial reports in line with IPSAS, “Financial Reporting 
under the Cash Basis of Accounting” (IPSAS Cash). Should SNRLP propose to use a 
different accounting standard, this should be agreed with IFAD. In all instances, IFAD 
required Programmes to use internationally accepted accounting standard. 
13.3 General principles for the preparation of financial reports 
SNRLP shall prepare financial reports with consideration of the following specific 
principles: 
Principal 
Guidance 
Completeness 
  The financial reports shall be complete and include the activities of 
the  CPCU  and  all  state  offices  and  present  the  results  of  a  single 
entity. 
  The  sources  and  uses  of  all  categories/components  shall  be 
included (including sources received in-kind as per xxx). 
  The  sources  and  uses  from  all  financiers  shall  be  included, 
IFAD grant/loan 
including: 
o 
o  GEF /LDCF Grant 
o  Government Contributions 
o  Beneficiary Contributions 
Accuracy 
  Ensure  that  the  various  disclosures  as  outlined  in  13.3  are 
reconcilable as appropriate 
Accountability 
  The financial reports should promote the concept of accountability. 
13.4 Minimum prescribed content for interim and annual financial reports 
SNRLP are required to prepare financial reports (annual and interim) which includes the 
following minimum prescribed content (an illustrative financial report is included as 
22.9): 
Detailed guidance on the preparation of the disclosures as prescribed by IPSAS Cash can 
be found in the Standard (insert link). SNRLP is required to adopt all reporting 
requirements as outlined in Part 1 of IPSAS Cash. The Programme is encouraged to 
adopt Part 2 of IPSAS Cash on a voluntary basis. 
Content 
Statement of 
Cash Receipts 
and Payments 
Source of 
requirement 
Prescribed by 
IPSAS Cash 
Guidance on preparation of content 
  Layout: 
o  Receipts – Payments = Surplus/Deficit 
+ Opening Cash +/- Exchange rate 
difference = Closing Cash Balance 
  The opening and closing cash balance should 
47 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Content 
Source of 
requirement 
Guidance on preparation of content 
include the balance of the designated account 
(Euro) and all Programme accounts (SDG) 
  The opening and closing cash balance in the 
Designated Account is derived by applying the 
spot rate on the date of translation 
  Disclose cash receipts using an appropriate 
classification system (Contributions from 
external financiers, Contributions from 
Government, Contributions from Beneficiaries, 
Cash generated from Programme activities) 
  Disclose cash payments in line with the 
categories outlined in Schedule 2 of the IFAD 
financing agreement 
  Disclose the exchange rate gain or loss 
(resulting from the translation of funds in the 
designated account from Euro to Sudanese 
Pounds 
  Ensure that the Budget period corresponds to 
the Financial Reporting Period 
  Derive the budget disclosure from the 
approved AWPB. Disclose both the original and 
final approved AWPB. 
  Calculate the variance between budgeted and 
actual results for both receipts (sources) and 
uses (payments) 
  Provide narrative on the reason for the 
variances observed. 
Budget to Actual 
Comparison 
Prescribed by 
IPSAS Cash 
Accounting 
policies and 
explanatory 
notes 
Sources and 
Uses of Funds 
Statement 
Designated 
account 
reconciliation 
Prescribed by 
IPSAS Cash 
  Develop accounting policies with reference to 
the guidance provided in IPSAS Cash 
  Disclose the authorisation date 
  Disclose the basis of presentation 
  Disclose the presentation currency as SDG 
Prescribed by the 
IFAD Handbook 
for Financial 
Reporting and 
Auditing for 
IFAD-financed 
Programmes 
Prescribed by the 
IFAD Handbook 
for Financial 
Reporting and 
Auditing for 
IFAD-financed 
Programmes 
 
Include both cash and in-kind contributions in 
the Sources of Funds 
  Provide disclosure on uses of funds by 
financier/by category and financier/component 
  Prepare reconciliation which provide 
justification for the IFAD advance. 
  Explain variances. 
  The IFAD Loan Disbursement Handbook 
provides detailed guidance on the preparation 
of the reconciliation. 
Designated 
Prescribed by the    Ensure that opening and closing cash balances 
48 | P a g e  
Content 
account 
Statement 
Summary of 
Withdrawal 
Applications 
Fixed asset 
register 
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Source of 
requirement 
IFAD Handbook 
for Financial 
Reporting and 
Auditing for 
IFAD-financed 
Programmes 
Guidance on preparation of content 
presented in this Statement is reconciled with 
the cash balances used in the Statement of 
Cash Receipts and Payments. 
  Disclose the exchange rate gain/loss separately 
and ensure that this is reconciled with the 
Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments. 
  The IFAD Loan Disbursement Handbook 
provides detailed guidance on the preparation 
of the reconciliation. 
Prescribed by the 
IFAD Handbook 
for Financial 
Reporting and 
Auditing for 
IFAD-financed 
Programmes 
  Ensure that summary information is 
reconcilable with the IFAD historical transaction 
statement (to be requested from the IFAD 
Finance Officer) with regards to the value date 
of the transaction amount of withdrawal in loan 
denomination currency. 
  Cross reference amounts included here per WA 
to amounts included in the Designated Account 
Statement / Designated Account Reconciliation. 
Prescribed by the 
IFAD Handbook 
for Financial 
Reporting and 
Auditing for 
IFAD-financed 
Programmes 
 
Include a fixed asset register which lists all 
Programme assets (including those purchased 
on behalf of the cooperatives if the Programme 
retains the title and the assets will be returned 
to the Programme at Programme closure). 
  Ensure that all fields are included – refer 
illustration included in 22.9. 
In addition to the above disclosures, the Programme is required to maintain and Action 
Tracker log which is a log of agreed actions. This document should be maintained on an 
ongoing basis provide together with the financial report (interim or annual). The Action 
Tracker format is outlined in 22.9. It is required that the Action Tracker include actions 
which have been agreed on with IFAD during missions or the Auditor during the audit 
(derived from the management letter). The purpose of the Action Tracker is to keep 
track of progress regarding agreed on actions. 
13.5 Other considerations 
The following specific issues should be considered in the preparation of the financial 
reports: 
  Accrual related information should be disclosure in the notes of the financial 
statements. This includes outstanding advances, which, in terms of the cash basis of 
accounting, should be expensed when provided. This entails that the advance will be 
recorded in the relevant categories /components at year-end. (NB: Best practice is 
that zero advances are outstanding at the end of the fiscal year – refer xxx). 
In-kind contributions from Government should be reported in the financial 
statements in line with the process as outlined in 10.8. Also refer to 22.9 to see the 
illustrative accounting policy and explanatory notes. 
 
14. Audit matters 
14.1 Internal Audit  
SNRLP  will  have  a  permanent  Senior  Internal  Auditor,  based  at  the  CPCU.  The  Senior 
Internal  Auditor  will  focus  on  activities  at  both  the  CPCU  and  SPCU  levels.  The  Senior 
49 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Internal  Auditor  will  be  based  at  the  CPCU  and  provide  ongoing  internal  audit  support 
and  assist  the  internal  audit  firm  during  their  reviews.  The  Senior  Internal  Auditor  will 
report  directly  to  the  steering  committee  on  a  quarterly  basis  to  ensure  that 
independence is maintained.  
In addition, the Senior Internal Auditor role will be strengthened by the services of an 
externally appointed internal audit firm. This firm is expected to perform reviews on a 
monthly basis, working on a rotational basis among the CPCU and SPCU. The externally 
appointed internal audit firm provides independent and objective assurance and advisory 
services which add value to the Programme operations. (refer 22.5 for sample TOR). It 
assists in accomplishing its objectives by bringing a systematic, disciplined approach to 
evaluate and improve the effectiveness of risk management, control and governance 
processes. This is done by:  
Identifying key controls in each such operation, procedure & process  
  Analysing key processes, procedures and operations  
 
  Evaluating the adequacy of these controls  
  Testing compliance of sample transactions against these controls  
  Reporting results of the evaluation of controls and compliance testing of transactions  
  Recommending stronger controls wherever necessary  
  Suggesting methods to improve compliance with key controls  
  Follow up of action taken on recommendations made in previous reports.  
14.2 External Audit 
14.2.1 Auditing standards 
IFAD  promotes  the  use  of  internationally  accepted  auditing  standards  and  requires  that 
SNRLP be audited by the National Audit Chamber of Sudan in terms of the International 
Standards on Auditing (ISA). 
14.2.2 Auditor terms of reference 
SNRLP is required to agree the scope of work for the audit with the National Audit 
Chamber in advance of the commencement of the audit. Once the scope of work has 
been agreed, SNRLP should submit this to IFAD for no-objection. The IFAD no objection 
should be obtained before commencement of the audit. 
[NB: The auditor terms of reference should specifically include agreed upon procedures 
related to application of funds by Community Groups. The procedures should focus on 
whether CGs are using disbursed funds for eligible expenditure in line with approved 
LIPs. This is a critical risk area as the Programme will place reliance on the financial 
management related controls implemented by CGs.] 
14.2.3 Audit opinion and audit package 
The  audit  report  will  outline  the  audit  opinion  on  the  audited  financial  statements.  The 
National Audit Chamber of Sudan is required to issue an audit opinion in accordance with 
ISA 701/705.  
The  auditor  is  expected  to  submit  an  audit  package  that  at  a  minimum  includes  the 
audited  financial  statements,  the  audit  report  and  the  management  letter.  The 
management  letter  is  an  integral  part  of  the  audit  package,  which  documents  internal 
control issues identified by the auditor. The management letter should: 
  Outline  the  auditor’s  recommendations  to  address  identified  internal  control  issues, 
and the responses to them on the part of the Programme’s management. 
  Where  applicable,  provide  follow-up  commentary  on  the  issues  identified  in  the 
 
previous year’s management letter.  
Include  any  ineligible  expenditures  identified  during  the  audit  be  outlined  in  the 
management letter. 
1
ISA 700 (
Forming an Opinion and Reporting on Financial Statements
) provides illustrative audit reports. 
50 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
14.2.4 Audit reporting period 
IFAD  generally  requires  an  annual  audit  of  Programme  financial  statements.  However, 
the  frequency  of  the  audit  may  be  changed  by  IFAD  as  a  function  of  the  Programme’s 
risk profile. In all instances, IFAD will confirm the frequency with which SNRLP’s financial 
statements are to be audited. 
The audit reporting period may be amended for the first and/or final audits, in line with 
the following guidance: 
  For the first audit, in cases in which the Programme commences during the financial 
year, the following procedures will generally apply:  
o  When the period between the first disbursement and the end of the financial year 
is less than six months, IFAD may allow the results for the first financial period to 
be included in the following financial year’s audit; or 
o  When  the  period  between  the  date  of  the  first  disbursement  and  the  financial 
year-end  is  greater  than  six  months,  audited  financial  statements  for  the  period 
are always required. 
  For the final audit, IFAD may recommend an audit reporting period that is longer or 
shorter than 12 months, but that in no case may exceed 18 months. This is to ensure 
that the final audit can be concluded and the audit report  submitted to IFAD by the 
Programme Closing Date.  
In such instances, IFAD will discuss and agree on its requirements with the borrower well 
in advance of commencement of the final audit.  
14.2.5 IFAD Audit reviews 
IFAD will conduct reviews of SNRLPs’ audit reports. The main purpose of the reviews is 
to  determine  whether  NAC  conducted  a  quality  audit  resulting  in  an  audit  opinion 
acceptable to IFAD, and to assess the quality of the financial reporting of SNRLP. 
IFAD  will  communicate  the  results  of  the  audit  report  review  process  within  sixty  days 
following  receipt  of  the  audit  package.  If  required,  SNRLP  will  be  requested  to  take 
corrective  actions  within  a  specified  time  frame.  These  actions  should  be  included  and 
monitored in the Action Tracker (illustrated in 22.9). 
14.2.6 Public disclosure of audit reports 
IFAD will publicly SNRLP’s Programme financial statements and audit reports, subject to 
processes  applicable  to  their  publication.  In  line  with  the  standards  of  the  International 
Aid Transparency Initiative, SNRLP is encouraged to publish financial information on  it’s 
own  website,  for  increased  accountability.  SNRLP  must  ensure  that  the  audit  TORs 
explicitly mention the right of the SNRLP and of IFAD to publish the audit report, with no 
limitation-of-use clause. 
15. Records Management 
15.1 Maintenance of separate accounts and records 
In terms of IFAD’s General Conditions for Agricultural Finance: 
“The Programme Parties shall maintain separate accounts and records in accordance 
with consistently maintained appropriate accounting practices adequate to reflect the 
operations, resources and expenditures related to the Programme until the Financing 
Closing Date…”  
In order to comply with the above requirement, SNRLP is required to maintain accounts 
and records at the CPCU and State Offices. Such accounts and records may include: 
Type 
Example 
51 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Electronic 
information 
  Data  and  information  maintained  within  the  accounting 
software 
  Other  documents  and  files  maintained  electronically, 
either on desktops, laptops or removable storage devices 
Correspondence 
  Emails 
  Hard copy correspondence (letters) 
Documents received 
from external 
sources 
  Bank statements 
  Supplier documentation 
Internally generated 
information 
  Employee files 
  Withdrawal applications 
  Forms 
All documents and information are the property of SNRLP and may not be removed. 
15.2 Filing and storage of the financial records 
SNRL  is  responsible  for  filing  records  (the  FINANCIAL  MANAGER  may  appoint  the 
person(s) responsible for the various activities). To fulfil this responsibility: 
  SNRLP  should  maintain  files  in  a  chronological  order,  assigning  appropriate 
codes/sequential numbers; 
  SNRLP should perform filing activities on a regular basis to prevent the accumulation 
of papers and to ensure that the financial records are always maintained in an up-to-
date manner. 
  SNRLP should allocate an appropriate storage area for the financial records in paper 
format  and  maintain  them  in  locked  cabinets,  safe  from  water  and  fire,  to  which 
access is controlled and limited.  
  SNRLP should also classify the financial records as "Confidential", or "General".  
15.3 Off-site archiving of financial records 
The Financial Manager should ensure that the financial records are archived at an off-site 
location on a regularly basis. Once a year, the Financial Manager should make sure that 
the completed or inactive files are archived in a manner that will allow for easy retrieval 
of the files in case they are required at some future date.  
15.4 Electronic back-up procedures 
Back-up  of  electronic  information  is  an  important  function  to  be  undertaken  under 
instruction from the Financial Manager. It is required that: 
  Daily:        Electronic information at each Programme office is backed up on the local 
server 
  Weekly:   Electronic information is saved on an external storage device and kept in a 
locked cabinet at the respective CPCU/State office 
Programme  staff  access  to  backup  files  are  subject  to  authorisation  by  the  Programme 
director or Financial Manager. The access of external persons is prohibited except for the 
auditors and IFAD staff.  
15.5 Retention period 
SNRLP is required to retain accounts and records for at least ten (10) years after 
Financial Close. The Financial Manager should ensure that all documents and records 
(electronic and paper) are handed over to GoS at financial closure to ensure that records 
can be maintained for the 10-year period. 
52 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
16. Fixed Asset Management  
Fixed asset management is an important process that seeks to track fixed assets for the 
purposes of financial accounting and to ensure preventive maintenance, and theft 
deterrence. Adequate Fixed asset maintenance also increases the sustainability of the 
Programme. There are three elements in fixed asset management that require the 
attention of SNRLP Financial Manager:  
  Purchase of equipment 
  Setting up and maintaining an asset register including verification 
  Setting  up  a  plan  for  disposal  and/or  handover  of  the  asset  once  the  Programme  is 
completed  
16.1 Purchase of Equipment  
The SNRLP Programme Accountant should follow the following process for each fixed 
asset purchased: 
  Assign a unique, sequential asset number (excluding minor items such as stationary).  
  Tag each item with its unique asset number.  
  Record the item of equipment in fixed asset register  
16.2 Fixed asset register 
The SNRLP Programme Accountant must maintain a fixed asset register in the asset 
management module of the accounting software. The asset register should record the 
following information for each individual piece of equipment (refer 22.9 for illustration):  
  Asset description 
  Asset number 
 
  Source of funding of asset (IFAD, government etc),  
  Location of the asset 
  Date of purchase 
  Cost of purchase and invoice number 
  Remarks regarding the condition of the asset 
Individual responsible for asset 
The Finance Controller shall ensure that the consolidated fixed asset register is 
maintained and updated regularly.  
Assets purchased for beneficiary use should be included in the fixed asset register if the 
assets remain under the ownership of the Programme (therefore beneficiaries to return 
to Programme at Programme closure). 
16.3 Asset Verification Review 
Under the management of the Financial Manager, SNRLP must conduct an annual asset 
verification process whereby the following checks are performed: 
  Verify that all fixed assets are still held in the location recorded on the register;  
  Confirm the completeness and accuracy of the information recorded on the fixed 
asset register; 
  Check that equipment and vehicles are still in a reasonable state of repair and that 
remarks regarding the condition of the assets are correct as recorded in the fixed 
asset register; 
The verification review must be performed by different staff from those who use the 
equipment, to ensure adequate segregation of duty. Discrepancies between the 
verification exercise and the fixed asset register should be investigated. Where assets 
are missing or seriously damaged, they should be removed from the asset register. The 
removal should be formally documented and approved by Financial Manager and 
Programme Director. Moreover, the Financial Manager will undertake random verification 
of CPCU fixed assets during field visit. 
16.4 Vehicle Maintenance and Fuel 
53 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Fuel 
The drivers are required to record all trips and fuel refills in a logbook and collect all the 
supporting documentation (invoices etc.). The vehicle logbook provides control over the 
use of the cars as well as fuel consumption.  
Programme vehicles will be refuelled by drivers before commencement of a long-
distance trip. The following process applies at the CPCU and SPCUs: 
  The CPCU or SPCU opens an account with the local petrol station and provide a list of 
 
approved vehicles which may refuel at the petrol station. 
If required, the driver may refuel the vehicle at the petrol station. The driver retains 
an invoice for the fuel and logs the relevant information in a logbook. 
If a vehicle is refuelled in the field, the relevant Programme employee with use his/or 
fuel advance to refuel the vehicle. The driver will log the date, amount, volume in the 
logbook. 
Personal use of vehicles 
On an exceptional basis, Programme staff may request the use of a Programme vehicle 
for personal use (e.g. take family to hospital etc.). In such instances the Programme 
staff will pay the driver directly for his time and reimburse the Programme for fuel 
expenses (calculated at the rate per kilometre as specified in the staff bylaw). The 
request for personal use should include a reason for the travel, expected distance and 
date of travel. The request for personal use must be submitted to the Programme 
Director for approval and the signed request provided to the Programme Accountant for 
record keeping purposes. The fuel of cost is calculated by the Programme accountant 
and deducted from the monthly payroll. 
Vehicle insurance 
The Financial Manager should ensure that all Programme vehicles are comprehensively 
covered and that all drivers are noted on the insurance policy. Under no circumstanced 
may uninsured drivers drive the vehicles. The insurance policies should be renewed 
annually or as stipulated in the policy. The safety of cars is the responsibility of the 
drivers assigned to the vehicles. Consequently, they must ensure that the vehicles are 
parked in a secure area when not in use or outside working hours.  
Maintenance 
The drivers are required to monitor the maintenance of their assigned vehicles. The 
drivers must notify the xxxx of maintenance needs so that the cars can be serviced on a 
timely basis. The xxx is required to request the car maintenance, subject to approval by 
the Programme Director. 
The assigned cars must always be taken to the selected garage for repairs and 
maintenance.  
Monitoring of fuel usage 
On a monthly basis the administrative assistant will compare all fuel invoices (including 
customer statement from preferred petrol station) with the relevant logbooks and 
prepare an analysis of consumption per vehicle. The analysis will consider the purposes 
of the trips undertaken with the intention of allocating the monthly fuel expense to the 
correct budget items in the accounting software. 
17. IFAD financial management support 
17.1 Overview of IFAD support 
IFAD’s Financial Management Division (FMD) will remain involved with SNRLP from 
Programme inception (starting at Programme design) to Financial Closure to ensure that 
SNRLP fiduciary requirements are met. 
54 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
FMD’s Finance Officer will establish ongoing contact with the Programme, by liaising with 
the FINANCIAL MANAGER and will be available to provide remote support on financial 
management matters. In addition, FMD will visit SNRLP during missions to the 
Programme (represented by either the Finance Officer or an appointed consultant). 
Mission types include supervision missions, mid-term reviews and implementation 
support missions. During missions, FMD will assess and monitor the adequacy of SNRLP 
financial management arrangements such as accounting, budgeting, internal controls, 
flow of funds, financial reporting and the auditing practices. 
If financial management arrangements of SNRLP are deemed acceptable, IFAD will rely 
on them to provide assurance that the financing proceeds are being used for the 
intended purposes. In the case that IFAD identifies weaknesses in the financial 
arrangements, it will require SNRLP to take the appropriate measures to mitigate those 
risks.  
The key findings and recommendations of missions will be captured in the Aid Memoire 
which is a document which is shared with MoA and includes an overview of issues 
identified and proposed actions to be undertaken by the CPCU/IFAD to address issues 
identified. 
17.2 Roles and responsibilities related to IFAD support 
SNRLP will be required to participate in IFAD missions as follow: 
Stage 
Programme roles and responsibilities 
Before IFAD missions 
During IFAD missions 
  Prepare  Appendix  1 
(22.10)  and  submit 
the 
format  (Excel  Workbook, 
FO/Consultant 
including formulae) before commencement of the mission – 
the FO/Consultant will specify the date range to be covered 
within Appendix 1. 
in  electronic 
to 
  Complete 
the 
Assessment 
Questionnaire  (FMAQ,  refer  xxx)  and  submit  to  the 
FO/Consultant in electronic format. 
Financial  Management 
  Prepare 
all 
by 
information 
FO/Consultant  before  commencement  of  the  mission  (refer 
22.2). 
requested 
other 
as 
  Provide the FO/Consultant with all information which was 
requested before the mission. 
  Arrange meeting with the auditors (internal and external) 
and any other selected party requested by the mission. 
  Ensure that all FM staff are available to assist the 
FO/Consultant in performing their duties which may 
include: 
o  Review of financial reports, reconciliations 
o  Physical verification of fixed assets and inventory 
o  Meeting with the auditor 
o  Reviewing and completing the FMAQ 
  Discuss identified FM weaknesses and risks and assist the 
FO/Consultant with developing appropriate actions for 
inclusion in the aide memoire. 
After IFAD missions 
  Respond to any wrap-queries from the FO/Consultant 
  Commence with implementing all actions which are included 
in the Aide Memoire 
  Update the Action Tracker with all actions raised during the 
missions. 
55 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Stage 
Programme roles and responsibilities 
Ongoing 
  Monitor and update the Action Tracker to ensure all actions 
are  implemented  in  a  timely  manner.  Liaise  with  the 
Financial Manager if required. 
  Respond  to  ad-hoc  queries  received  from  the  Financial 
Manager or other IFAD staff as it related to FM matters. 
18. Programme completion and closure 
The Programme completion date is defined in the financing agreement and the 
Programme closure date is 6 months thereafter. The following is relevant to period 
before Programme completion up to Programme closure: 
STEP 1 
Prior to the 
Programme 
completion date 
STEP 2 
Between Programme 
completion and closure 
Subsequent to 
Programme closure date 
Programme completion 
date 
STEP 3 
Programme closure 
date 
STAGE 1 
STAGE 2 
STEP 3 
Up to the Programme 
completion date 
Between Programme 
completion and closure 
Programme closure date 
  Submit an advance 
  Commencement of the 
  Submit final audit 
recovery plan to IFAD, 
indicating how the 
advance will be 
recovered up to 
Programme closure (in 
line with financing 
agreement) (request 
template for plan from 
IFAD) 
  Agree on the audit 
final audit 
  Auditor performs the 
final audit in line with 
scope of work approved 
by IFAD 
Incur winding up 
expenditure only (cost 
of audit, staff salaries, 
operating costs, 
Programme completion 
 
report on or before the 
Programme closure 
date 
  Submit Programme 
completion report on or 
before the Financial 
Closure Date (as 
required in the 
financing agreement) 
  Confirm the final 
56 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
STAGE 1 
STAGE 2 
STEP 3 
 
scope of work with NAC 
and submit to IFAD for 
no objection 
Incur eligible 
expenditure up to the 
Programme completion 
date 
withdrawal application 
with IFAD 
  Return outstanding 
advance if applicable (if 
due and not recovered 
via recovery process) 
  Closure of the grant 
with IFAD 
report) 
  Submit final withdrawal 
application and recover 
advance via this 
process 
  Develop an asset 
handover and disposal 
plan (include up to date 
fixed asset register, 
indicate condition of all 
assets and to which 
entity the assets will be 
transferred. 
A notice is sent to the Borrower at least six months prior to the PCD to advise that all 
applications must be submitted before the closing date, and to remind the Borrower that 
expenditures incurred and commitments made after the PCD will not be honoured, 
except for authorised expenditures during the “Winding Up Period” (from PCD to 
Financing Closing Date). This means that goods are delivered, civil works are completed 
and services are rendered on or before such date.  
After the financing closing date, IFAD informs the Borrower of the formal closure of the 
loan/grant account, provides a history of disbursement transactions and cancels the 
unused loan/grant balance. A re-amortisation plan should be sent where relevant.  
Asset handover plan 
The  plan  should  develop  report  outlining  the  following  for  the  purposes  of  handing  over 
Programme assets to the identified beneficiaries: 
  The value of all the assets bought under the Programme  
  Summary of the current condition of the assets, 
  To which entity, will the assets be transferred to and on which date and for what purpose. 
  List the assets that will be disposed and the reason for being disposed. 
19. Staff loans 
Loans to staff are not allowed. 
20. Useful links  
Document 
Link 
IFAD financial management e-
learning 
IFAD anticorruption policy 
How to report any alleged 
wrongdoing to the Office of 
Audit and Oversight 
Guidelines for internal controls 
for Public Sector Entities 
IFAD Handbook for Financial 
Reporting and Auditing of IFAD 
Funded Programmes 
https://www.ifad.org/elearning_cfs_a/index.html 
www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/index.htm 
http://www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/how
.htm 
http://www.issai.org/en_us/site-issai/issai-
framework/intosai-gov.htm 
https://www.ifad.org/ar_SA/web/guest/document-
detail/asset/39641638 
IFAD Loan Disbursement 
https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/document-
57 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Handbook 
detail/asset/39635782 
IFAD Financial Administration 
Manual 
https://www.ifad.org/web/guest/document-
detail/asset/39637251 
IPSAS Cash Standard 
https://www.ifac.org/publications-
resources/revised-cash-basis-ipsas 
ICP page 
ICP support 
https://icp.ifad.org/ 
icpsupport@ifad.org 
SNRLP design report 
[insert link] 
Financial reporting template 
[insert link] 
58 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
21. Annexures 
21.1 AWPB Structure and preparation checklist 
The  PCU  is  responsible  for  the  development  of  the  Annual  Work  Plan  and  Budget 
(AWPB),  generally  covering  a  period  of  12  months,  which  should  include  the  following 
mandatory sections: 
Section 
Description 
Introduction 
  Provide a brief background 
 
Include  narrative  covering  the  strategic  focus,  target  group, 
geographical  focus  (Programme  sites),  outreach  (with  gender 
disaggregation),  Programme  components,  specific  activities  to  be 
undertaken and the planned output for each activity. 
Risks and 
mitigation 
Budget and 
financing plan 
  Outline  of  major  risks  that  could  affect  adversely  the  Programme 
outcomes and mitigating actions taken. 
  Describe  the  necessary  inputs  and  outputs  for  each  activity, 
financing  source  and  expected 
including  the  expenditures, 
completion date.  
  The  expenditures  should  be  classified  per  activity  and  should  also 
be  linked  to  a  component,  expenditure  category  as  per  the 
financing agreement and a financing source.  
  Each  activity  should  be  coupled  with  tangible  outputs  or  physical 
targets to facilitate the measurement of Programme progress. 
Procurement 
plan 
  Outline  detailed  plan  outlining  procurement  activities,  include 
expected cost for each item, procurement method and timeline.  
  The first Procurement plan should cover the first 18 months of the 
Programme  lifecycle  while  the  subsequent  procurement  plans 
should cover 12 months of the Programme lifecycle.   
Progress and 
past 
performance 
(include in 2nd 
AWPB onwards) 
Outline the following with: 
  Summary of the key achievements  
  Problems encountered and how these were resolved 
  Budget 
execution, 
per 
category/component  to  prior  AWPB  with  an  indication  of  category 
overspend  
expenditure 
comparing 
actual 
Other 
  Training and technical assistance schedule  
  PCU staff development plan 
  Programme  staff  payroll  (including  the  names,  titles,  salaries  and 
incentives) 
59 | P a g e  
Yes 
No 
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
AWPB Check: The checks listed below are designed to 
improve the quality of the AWPB during the final 
preparation stage.   
Is the AWPB complete and clearly presented? Does it disclose 
sufficient information? 
Is the AWPB in line with the Programme description and rational 
(schedule 1) as per the financing agreement and the Programme 
log-frame? Are all the activities relevant to the Programme? 
Does it contain the necessary summary tables by component and 
financier and by expenditure category and financier as well as the 
detailed tables by component? 
Does the implementation schedule seem realistic and does it 
show appropriate targets and milestones? Are the targets and 
execution level realistic compared to past years progress? 
Does it contain a separate annex disclosing the details of the 
Programme payroll? 
Does it contain a separate annex containing outlining the planned 
trainings? 
In the detailed tables are the expenditures structured by activity 
and linked to a component, expenditure category and financing 
source? 
Are the cost categories of the AWPB in line with the Schedule 2 of 
the IFAD financing agreements  and are expenditures within the  
agreed allocations? 
Is any expenditure category going to be overdrawn during the 
year? Is a reallocation of IFAD funds needed? 
Do the total (and subtotal) costs add up? Are the inputs (unit 
cost) and outputs (physical targets) adequately quantified? Is 
there coherence between the inputs and outputs? And does these 
represent value for money (i.e. what is the unit cots for per 
output, e.g. cost per trained farmer)? 
Are the unit cost are realistic and do they reflect market prices? 
Is the AWPB accompanied by a procurement plan? Is the 
procurement plan consistent with the AWPB. 
Is the format of the AWPB compatible with other financial reports 
and the accounting software to allow input in the budget module 
and  generation of actual vs budget reports and  
If last audit, does it take into account completion date of the 
Programme as well as winding up activities such as Programme 
completion report, final audit as handover/disposal of Programme 
assets (computers, vehicles etc.),  
60 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
21.2 Information checklist – preparing for IFAD missions 
It is required that SNRLP prepare the following in anticipation of IFAD missions: 
Information 
Guidance 
1. 
Appendix 1 
  Prepare Appendix 1 in Excel Workbook and include 
formulae as appropriate. 
2. 
FMAQ 
 
Include comments in the Financial Management 
Assessment Questionnaire (with exception of the 
summary section). 
3.  Withdrawal 
  Make hardcopy files of all recent withdrawal 
applications/ SOEs 
applications/statement of expenditures available (at least 
covering 12 months prior to the missions). Upon request, 
provide supporting documentation for a selection of 
expenditures. 
  Provide a summary of pending withdrawal applications / 
SOEs for review. 
4. 
Bank and petty 
cash reconciliations 
  Make hardcopy files of most recent bank and petty cash 
reconciliations available. Include copies of relevant bank 
statements. Ensure that IFAD designated account 
reconciliations are prepared in the correct format as 
outlined in the IFAD Loan Disbursement Handbook 
5. 
Financial reports 
  Provide most recent financial reports (as at end of most 
recent completed month), which include summary 
information (including all sources and uses of funds). 
  Provide most recent interim financial report (format 
illustrated in 22.9) 
  Provide copy of most recent audited financial statement. 
6. 
Fixed asset register    Provide updated fixed asset register in Excel Workbook 
format (export from accounting software).  
7.  Manuals and 
  Provide an electronic of the most recent version of the 
procedures 
Financial Manual (to which IFAD provide a no objection). 
  Provide a copy of the accounting software manual. 
8.  Contract register 
  Make available the update Contract Register and 
and monitoring 
forms 
Contract Monitoring Forms (export from Accounting 
software). 
9. 
Action tracker 
  Update the action tracker with progress to date. 
10.  AWPB/Procurement 
  Make available electronic copies of the AWPB and 
Plan 
Procurement Plan (provide in Excel Workbook format). 
11.  Advances 
  Make available a summary of outstanding advances with 
supporting documentation. 
61 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
21.3 Terms of reference: Financial Manager 
Post title: 
Financial Manager 
Name of Programme: 
Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme 
Duration: 
One-year renewable 
Duty station: 
insert 
Type of contract:  short term 
Closing date: 
insert 
Background 
[INSERT] 
Job Description 
  The  Financial  Manager 
is  responsible 
financial  and  administrative 
including  Accounting,  Budgeting,  Financial 
management  of  the  projgramme 
Reporting, Internal Controls, Auditing Arrangements, Flow of Funds and the efficient 
management of programme resources in accordance with the requirements of IFAD.  
He/she  will  report  directly  to  the  Programme  Director  and  will  work  in  close 
collaboration with his or her counterparts at CPCU and the SPCUs. 
for  the 
  Operating within a computerized environment, the Financial Manager will perform the 
following duties: 
o  Develop behavioural ways of working within the finance team that promotes value 
addition, continuous professional improvement and a culture of cost effectiveness 
by all managers. 
o  Take a leading role, with Programme Director and SPCU's responsible team on 
financial aspects of Annual Work Plan and Budgets (AWBPs) preperation and 
consoliation. 
o  Ensure timely uploading of the CPCU and SPCUs budgets to the accounting 
system. 
o  Master IFAD key documents such as, the disbursement handbook, procurement 
guidelines and handbook, IFAD guidelines for Programme audits, the Financing 
Agreement (FA) and the Letter to the Recipient(LTR). 
o  Work closely with the accounting system developer on custoimzing and 
maintaining an efficient accounting system and reliable internal control 
procedures and guidelines for financial reporting and recordkeeping. 
o  Ensure compliance with all legal and statutory reporting requirement in country. 
o  Ensure that administrative and financial directives and guideliness are reflected in 
all programme financial activities. 
o  Ensure that all financial accounts are managed with respect to disbursement and 
replenishment in accordance with the approved procedures stipulated by the 
financiers.  
o  Responsible for the preparation, review and monitoring of programme budgets 
including financing plan, procurement plan (together with the Procurement 
Officer), and staff development plan (together with the training focal point). 
o  Take prompt and definite action on non-compliance with procedure and practices. 
Verify all withdrawal applications for submission to IFAD, and ensure the 
availability of funds for all planned activities. Manage the Programmes bank 
accounts, approve and co-sign all payments. 
o  Apply for and manage Federal counterpart funds. 
62 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
o  Prepare and provide annual financial reports which are compliant with the IFAD 
Handbook For Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-Financed Programmes and 
the Programme’s Financial Manual. 
o  Prepare financial reports, including monthly funds reconciliation, and monthly, 
quarterly, semi-annual and annual expenditure statements; Prepare and analyise 
monthly financial reports for the Programme Coordinator indicating financial 
performance of the Programme compared with the annual work plan and budget. 
o  Coordinate between different Ministries at the Central and State level. 
o  Act as focal point for all related SNRLP's financial correpondances.  
o  Share IFAD ToR with National Audit Office to ensure that timely audit of the CPCU 
and all SPCUs are conducted. 
o  Develop and maintain a system of financial control over all expenditure incurred 
by the Programme including SPCUs and implementing partners. 
o  Monitor the level of advances/funds to SPCUs to ensure both that there are 
sufficient funds to implement the programme activities and that the level of 
advances/fund are adequate and there are no idle funds. 
o  Monitor compliance with the Financing Agreements for the IFAD grant/loan. 
o  Monitor compliance with the Letter to the Recipient. 
o  Approve all reconciliations including bank and advance reconciliations. 
o  Responsible for developing and managing an effective and performance based 
human resources management system. 
o  Supervise and coordinate the work of staff placed under his/her direct authority 
as well as supervising the work of the financial management staff in the SPCUs. 
o  Review and regularly update the Financial Manual of the Programme. 
o  Develop and update together with the Accountant the Accounting manual of the 
implementation across SNRLP. 
o  Responsible for the organization and supervision of the CPCU office, assets, 
logistics, and all administrative matters. 
o  Coordinate and supervise audit arrangements in all States and Programme 
locations. 
o  Responsible for the implementation of internal and external audit and supervision 
mission recommendiations. 
o  Ensure good working relationships with other departments to enable smooth 
implementation of financial procedures.   
o  Undertake any other activities assigned by the Programme Director. 
Qualifications and Experience 
  An acceptable accounting and finance qualification (BSc, ACCA or last stage of AAT). 
A Master’s Degree is preferable. 
  A minimum of 15 years professional experience with at least 10 years experience in 
financial management preferably in management position.  
  Experience on donor financed Programmes is preferable. 
  The candidate would be expected to have a thorough understanding of accounting 
practices, finance and investment.  Familiarity and experience in use of accounting 
software is a must. 
  Candidates with previous experience in rural development Programmes in Sudan and 
aptitude for working in the rural area will be given preference.   
  Good command of Arabic and English, both oral and written. 
  Prior experience working with donor-funded Programmes as well as experience with 
government of Sudan regulations and procedures. 
  Good knowledge of Microsoft Office.   
63 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
  The ability to lead and to work as part of a team. 
  Good communication skills. 
  Ability to work with multi stakeholders, including government, private sector 
companies, civil society organizations, and community. 
  Professional and personal endurance and commitment to complete complex 
assignments efficiently and effectively in a high demanding working environment. 
The initial contract will be for one year with six-month probation, period, renewable 
every year on continued satisfactory performance. 
64 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
21.4 Terms of reference: Senior Central Programme Accountant 
Post title: 
Senior Central Programme Accountant  
Name of Programme: 
Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme 
Duration: 
One-year renewable 
Duty station: 
insert 
Type of contract:  short term 
Closing date: 
insert 
Background 
[INSERT] 
Job Description 
  Assist  the  Financial  Manager  with  overall  financial  management  activities  of  the 
Programme. 
  Support  preparation  of  Annual  Work  Plan  &  Budget  (AWPB)  for  each  state  and 
consolidation. 
  Manage  the  Programme  bank  accounts  at  CPCU  level  and  provide  oversight  of  the 
operating accounts at the SPCUs level;   
  Review and provide professional feedback on SPCUs monthly accounts; 
  Work  alongside  the  Financial  Manager  to  ensure  timely  and  accurate  submission  of 
withdrawal applications to IFAD; 
  Assist  the  Financial  Manager  in  Preparation  and  submission  of  all  financial 
statements,  budgets,  financial  Programmeions,  cash  flow  forecasts  and  all  other 
Programmes  reports  as  requested  by  the  Programme,  IFAD  and  the  Ministry  of 
Finance , at the federal and the state levels; 
  Prepare    specific  budgetary  documentation,  according  to  the  Sudanese    legislation, 
issue  payment  vouchers  and  obtain  the  necessary  approvals  for  finalizing  payments 
to the suppliers/contractors; 
  Facilitate timely transfer of advances/funds to SDG accounts at each State based on 
a monthly forecast; 
  Operate  and  maintain  the  financial  management  software  system  related  to 
accounting  and  financial  management  by  ensuring  thatall  financial  transactions  are 
entered into the system; accurately on daily basis;  
  Ensure that all CPCU's financial transactions (hard and sot copies) are filled properly 
and on daily basis and easily accessible; 
  Monitor actual expenditure and disbursements against allocations for each category; 
  Review  and  validate  Payment  Vouchers  against  approved  AWPB  and  supporting 
documents; 
  Ensure smooth and timely transfer of approved payments for eligible expenditure to 
Contractors in compliance with FM Manual and Legal Agreement. 
  Maintain  the  master  contract  register  for  all  contracts  issued  at  central  and  state 
levels. 
  Maintain and update the fixed assets register for the entire programme; 
  Maintain and update advance registers and ensure timely clearances; 
  Complete data entry for CPCU incurred expenditures in the accounting software with 
appropriate allocations to the different financing sources. 
  Prepare monthly salaries for programme staff and other statutory deductions; 
65 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
  Prepare  on  monthly  basis 
including 
reconciliation  of  CPCU  transactions,  on  receipt  of  SPCU  reconciliations  and  bank 
statements; 
the  consolidated  bank 
reconciliation, 
  Apply accounting standards and policies consistently; 
  Ensure that daily upload of SPCU accounts are performed from the SPCU accounting 
database; 
  Follow up and maintain an up to date records on in-kind contributions; 
  Occasional field visit to States and communities for overall oversight; 
  Cover  for  SPCUs  Accountants  and  deputize  for  Financial  Manager  during  their  leave 
and as required; 
  Assist  the  Financial  Manager  in  preparation  of  the  Accounting  Manual  of  the 
programme; 
  Perform other duties, of financial nature which pertains to the implementation of the 
programme, as may be requested by the Programme Director and Financial Manager. 
Qualifications and Experience  
  An acceptable accounting and finance qualification (BSc, ACCA or last stage of AAT).  
  A minimum of 10 years professional experience with at least 5 years experience in 
accounting and financial management.  
  The candidate would be expected to have a thorough understanding of accounting 
practices, finance and investment.  Familiarity and experience in use of accounting 
software is a must. 
  Good command of Arabic and English, both oral and written 
  Prior experience working with donor-funded Programmes as well as experience with 
government of Sudan regulations and procedures. 
  Good knowledge of Microsoft Officer   
  Ability to work in team and multi-tasking. 
  Good communication skills. 
  Ability to work with multi stakeholders, including government, private sector 
companies, civil society organizations, and community. 
  Professional and personal endurance and commitment to complete complex 
assignments efficiently and effectively in a high demanding working environment.  
The initial contract will be for one year with six-month probation, period, renewable 
every year on continued satisfactory performance. 
66 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
21.5 Terms of reference: Regional Programme Accountant 
Post title: 
Regional Programme Accountant  
Name of Programme: 
Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme 
Duration: 
One-year renewable 
Duty station: 
insert 
Type of contract:  short term 
Closing date: 
insert 
Background 
[INSERT] 
Job Description 
  Support  the  Financial  Manager  (CPCU)  with  financial  management  activities  of 
allocated cluster of states (3 states as allocated by the Financial Manager) 
  Support  preparation  of  Annual  Work  Plan  &  Budget  (AWPB)  for  each  allocated  state 
and consolidation. 
  Assist  the  Programme  Accountants  at  SPCU  level  with  performance  of  financial 
management activities, including: 
o  Review and provide professional feedback on SPCUs monthly accounts; 
o  Assist the Programme Accountant at SPCU level in preparation and submission 
of  all  budgets,  financial  Programmeions,  cash  flow  forecasts  and  all  other 
Programmes reports as requested by the CPCU. 
o  Prepare    specific  budgetary  documentation,  according  to  the  Sudanese  
legislation,  issue  payment  vouchers  and  obtain  the  necessary  approvals  for 
finalizing payments to the suppliers/contractors; 
o  Facilitate  timely  transfer  of  advances/funds  to  SDG  accounts  at  each  State 
based on a monthly forecast; 
o  Operate  and  maintain  the  financial  management  software  system  related  to 
financial 
thatall 
accounting  and 
transactions are entered into the system; accurately on daily basis;  
financial  management  by  ensuring 
o  Ensure  that  all  CPCU's  financial  transactions  (hard  and  soft  copies)  are  filled 
properly and on daily basis and easily accessible; 
o  Monitor  actual  expenditure  and  disbursements  against  allocations  for  each 
category; 
o  Review  and  validate  Payment  Vouchers  against  approved  AWPB  and 
supporting documents; 
o  Ensure  smooth  and  timely  transfer  of  approved  payments  for  eligible 
expenditure  to  Contractors  in  compliance  with  FM  Manual  and  Legal 
Agreement. 
o  Maintain  the  master  contract  register  for  all  contracts  issued  at  central  and 
state levels. 
o  Maintain and update the fixed assets register for the entire programme; 
o  Maintain and update advance registers and ensure timely clearances; 
o  Complete  data  entry  for  CPCU  incurred  expenditures  in  the  accounting 
software with appropriate allocations to the different financing sources. 
o  Prepare monthly salaries for programme staff and other statutory deductions; 
o  Apply accounting standards and policies consistently; 
o  Ensure  that  daily  upload  of  SPCU  accounts  are  performed  from  the  SPCU 
accounting database; 
67 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
o  Follow up and maintain an up to date records on in-kind contributions; 
o  Occasional field visit to States and communities for overall oversight; 
o  Cover for SPCUs Programme Accountants during their leave and as required; 
o  Perform other duties, of financial nature which pertains to the implementation 
of  the  programme,  as  may  be  requested  by  the  Programme  Director  and 
Senior Programme Accountant and Financial Manager. 
Qualifications and Experience  
  An acceptable accounting and finance qualification (BSc, ACCA or last stage of AAT).  
  A minimum of 10 years professional experience with at least 5 years experience in 
accounting and financial management.  
  The candidate would be expected to have a thorough understanding of accounting 
practices, finance and investment.  Familiarity and experience in use of accounting 
software is a must. 
  Good command of Arabic and English, both oral and written 
  Prior experience working with donor-funded Programmes as well as experience with 
government of Sudan regulations and procedures. 
  Good knowledge of Microsoft Officer   
  Ability to work in team and multi-tasking. 
  Good communication skills. 
  Ability to work with multi stakeholders, including government, private sector 
companies, civil society organizations, and community. 
  Professional and personal endurance and commitment to complete complex 
assignments efficiently and effectively in a high demanding working environment.  
The initial contract will be for one year with six-month probation, period, renewable 
every year on continued satisfactory performance. 
68 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
21.6 Terms of reference: State Accounts Officer  
Post title: 
Accountant) 
State Accounts Officer (also adaptable for Central Programme 
Name of Programme: 
Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme 
Duration: 
One-year renewable 
Duty station: 
insert 
Type of contract:  short term 
Closing date: 
insert 
Background 
[INSERT] 
Job Description 
  Support preparation of Annual Work Plan & Budget (AWPB) at state level. 
  Manage the Programme bank accounts at SPCU level, 
  Review and provide professional feedback on SPCUs monthly accounts; 
  Prepare  and  submit  of  all  state-level  budgets,  financial  Programmeions,  cash  flow 
forecasts and all other Programmes reports as requested by the CPCU; 
  Prepare    specific  budgetary  documentation,  according  to  the  Sudanese    legislation, 
issue  payment  vouchers  and  obtain  the  necessary  approvals  for  finalizing  payments 
to the suppliers/contractors; 
  Facilitate timely transfer of advances/funds to SDG accounts at each State based on 
a monthly forecast; 
  Operate  and  maintain  the  financial  management  software  system  related  to 
accounting  and  financial  management  by  ensuring  thatall  financial  transactions  are 
entered into the system; accurately on daily basis;  
  Ensure that all SPCU's financial transactions (hard and soft copies) are filled properly 
and on daily basis and easily accessible; 
  Monitor actual expenditure and disbursements against allocations for each category; 
  Review  and  validate  Payment  Vouchers  against  approved  AWPB  and  supporting 
documents; 
  Ensure smooth and timely transfer of approved payments for eligible expenditure to 
Contractors in compliance with FM Manual and Legal Agreement. 
  Maintain the master contract register for all contracts issued at state level; 
  Maintain and update the fixed assets register for the state 
  Maintain and update advance registers and ensure timely clearances; 
  Prepare monthly salaries for state programme staff and other statutory deductions; 
  Prepare on monthly basis the bank reconciliation; 
  Apply accounting standards and policies consistently; 
  Follow up and maintain an up to date records on in-kind contributions; 
  Occasional field visit to communities for overall oversight; 
  Perform other duties, of financial nature which pertains to the implementation of the 
programme, as may be requested by the Regional Programme Accountant or Senior 
Programme Accountant. 
Qualifications and Experience  
  An acceptable accounting and finance qualification (BSc, ACCA or last stage of AAT).  
69 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
  A minimum of 7 years professional experience with at least 4 years experience in 
accounting and financial management.  
  The candidate would be expected to have a thorough understanding of accounting 
practices, finance and investment.  Familiarity and experience in use of accounting 
software is a must. 
  Good command of Arabic and English, both oral and written 
  Prior experience working with donor-funded Programmes as well as experience with 
government of Sudan regulations and procedures. 
  Good knowledge of Microsoft Officer   
  Ability to work in team and multi-tasking. 
  Good communication skills. 
  Ability to work with multi stakeholders, including government, private sector 
companies, civil society organizations, and community. 
  Professional and personal endurance and commitment to complete complex 
assignments efficiently and effectively in a high demanding working environment.  
The initial contract will be for one year with six-month probation, period, renewable 
every year on continued satisfactory performance. 
70 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
21.7 Terms of reference: Senior Internal Auditor 
Post Title 
Senior Internal Auditor- Firm  
Programme   
    Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme 
Duty Station 
[insert] 
Duration 
12 months (10 working days per month) 
Starting Date 
[insert] 
Languages required  English and Arabic 
1.  Background: 
[INSERT] 
2.  Reporting System:  
The  objective  of  the  Senior  Internal  Auditor  firm  is  to  add  value  and  improve  the 
Programme’s operations and assist Programme’s Board of Directors and management by 
independently  reviewing  all  activities,  processes  and  systems  with  particular  regard  to 
risk  and  control  aspects  and  bringing  a  systematic  and  disciplined  approach  to  the 
effectiveness of risk management, control, and governance processes.  
The  successful  firm  will  possess  a  thorough  knowledge  of  internal  auditing  procedures, 
accounting procedures and have sound judgment on risk identification and management. 
The  firm  will  produce  a  monthly  internal  audit  report  presented  to  the  Programme 
Director of the Programme.  
Internal  Audit  firm  shall  monitor  the  appropriate  follow-up  on  audit  findings  and 
recommendations. All significant findings will remain in an open issues file until cleared. 
3.   Independence:  
The internal audit firm reports to the Board, who appoints and terminates the firm upon 
recommendation  of  the  Board  and  Donors.    The  firm  will  work  under  the  overall 
supervision of the Programme’s Board of Directors.  
All  internal  audit  activities  shall  remain  free  of  influence  by  any  element  in  the 
organisation, including matters of audit selection, scope, procedures, frequency, timing, 
or report content to permit maintenance of an independent and objective mental attitude 
necessary in performing the function.  
Internal Audit shall have no direct operational responsibility or authority over any of the 
activities  it  reviews.  Accordingly, it  shall not  develop  nor  install  systems  or  procedures, 
prepare  records,  or  engage  in  any  other  activity  which  would  normally  be  considered 
management or staff's responsibility.  
4.  Authority and confidentiality:  
Authority  is  granted  for  full  and  unrestricted  access  to  all  THE  PROGRAMME  records, 
physical  properties,  and  staff  relevant  to  any  area  under  review.  All  employees  are 
requested to assist the internal audit in fulfilling its function.  
Documents  and  information  obtained  by  the  Senior  Internal  Auditor  will  be  handled  in 
the same prudent and confidential manner as by those employees normally accountable 
for them. 
5.  Duties and Responsibilities:  
Within  the  framework,  as  described  above,  the  internal  audit  firm  will  carry  out  the 
following tasks:  
71 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
to 
their 
  Conduct  a  post-audit  procedure  on  each  division  within  THE  PROGRAMME,  with 
respect 
functions  and  activities  within  THE  PROGRAMME.  Make 
recommendations  on  possible  improvements  of  the  procedures  to  enhance  THE 
PROGRAMME’s  control  mechanisms,  financial  performance  and  produce  quality 
reports for senior management and Board of Directors, to enhance decision making, 
on monthly basis. 
  Audit  all  contracts  signed  between  THE  PROGRAMME  with  service  providers, 
suppliers, and contractors to verify that (i) compliance with terms and conditions of 
grant / loan agreements and procurement regulations and donor guidelines; and (ii) 
the  contract  is  in  line  with  best  practice  with  respect  to  compliance  with  terms  of 
reference, request for proposal, tender documents etc. 
  Develop  professional  and  constructive  working  relationships  with  key  managers  and 
be able to challenge when necessary.  
  Provide support to Economic Opportunities Fund risk management processes as well 
as  provide  advice,  guidance  and  support  on  risk  and  control  issues  to  staff  at 
different levels of the Fund. 
  Lead development of specific innovative ways of working and new ideas for reviewing 
risk and control issues.  
  Assess  risk  and  control  related  policies  and  procedures,  provide  input  to  updates  in 
existing procedural documents with respect to controls as necessary 
  Apply internal audit procedures to audit the financial statements, accounting records 
and  other  financial  and  non-financial  registries  applying  accepted  internal  audit 
standards. 
  Undertake  special  assignments  and  investigations  and  in  particular  undertake  more 
complex and high-level audit investigations under advisement of the Board. 
  Reviewing  the  means  of  safeguarding  assets  and,  as  appropriate,  verifying  their 
existence.  
  Reviewing  and  appraising  the  economy  and  efficiency  with  which  resources  are 
employed.  
  Reviewing  operations  or  programs  to  ascertain  whether  results  are  consistent  with 
established  objectives  and  goals  and  whether  the  operations  or  programs  are  being 
carried  out  as  planned,  including  verify  the  adherence  of  THE  PROGRAMME  staff  to 
AWPBs, policies, plans, procedures, laws, and fund regulations that are influential on 
Fund works as well as donors accounting procedures. 
  Asses  the  efficiency,  effectiveness  and  economy  of  the  usage  of  resources  and 
reports of any deviations in case they are existed.  
  Reviewing the adequacy, implementation and operation of donors’ transparency and 
accountability policies and of other anti-corruption, fraud and related misuse policies 
and procedures.  
6.  Audit Planning:  
 
Internal Audit firm shall regularly submit to the Board an up-to-date summary of the 
audit work schedule.  
  The audit work schedule is developed based on a prioritisation of the audit universe 
using a risk-based methodology. Any significant deviation from the formally approved 
work schedule shall be communicated to the Board through periodic activity reports. 
7.  Qualifications: 
  Member of recognized professional international Accountancy/ Audit body  
  Proven relevant working experience in Internal Audit. 
72 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
  Full  Working  knowledge  of  English,  including  excellent  drafting  and  presentation 
skills. 
  Excellent  computer  skills,  including  full  working  knowledge  of  standard  word 
processing, spreadsheets and presentation packages. 
  The  firm  shall  govern  themselves  by  adherence  to  The  Institute  of  Senior  Internal 
Auditors'  Code  of  Ethics.  The  Institute's  International  Standards  for  the  Professional 
Practice of Internal Auditing shall be adhered to by the firm.  The Institute of  Senior 
Internal Auditors' Practice Advisories will be adhered to as applicable.  
8.  Competencies:  
  Proven experience of risk management frameworks and approaches.  
  Experience of operational auditing & risk based approach to review. 
  Excellent negotiating and high level influencing skills and the ability to challenge at a 
senior level when necessary. 
  Ability to work in challenging environments. 
  Ability to work and deliver to tight deadlines. 
  Logical and systematic in analytical thinking. 
  Facilitation and presentational skills.  
73 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
21.8 Supporting documentation for withdrawal applications 
As  specified  in  chapter  3  of  the  IFAD  Loan  disbursement  handbook,  the  following 
supporting documentation is required:  
Type of payment 
Supporting documentation 
  The  signed  contract  or  confirmed  purchase  order 
(Showing the specified amount that is due paid. If this 
has  been  sent  earlier  to  the  fund  a  reference  to  the 
accompanying letter  or  document  should  be  given  in  a 
footnote  to  the  relevant  Application  summary  Sheet  –
form 100) 
  The bank guarantee for advance payment, as  specified 
in the contract documents 
  The  bank  guarantee  for  performance,  as  specified  in 
the contract documents 
  Copies  of  communications  sent  by  the  IFAD  country 
programme  manager  to  the  lead  Programme  agency 
(LPA)  providing  the  IFAD’s  no  objection  (post  or  Prior) 
to the contract award, and  
  Evidence of payment. 
  Supplier’s  invoice  duly  certified  for  payment  by  the 
Programme  director  –  specifying  the  goods,  their 
quantities and prices 
  Bills of lading or similar documents; and  
  As  appropriate,  the  certificate  of  delivery  (to  include 
condition of goods to delivery. 
  The  supplier  or  consultant  claim,  duly  certified  for 
payment  by  the  Programme  director  and  showing 
sufficient  detail.  If  such  Services  relate  to  the 
importation  of  goods  (for  example, 
freight  and 
insurance  payments),  adequate  reference  should  be 
given  to  enable  IFAD  to  relate  each  of  these  items  to 
specific goods whose cost has been or is to be financed 
by the financing closing date; and  
  As  appropriate,  a  certificate  of  delivery  of  satisfactory 
services 
 
the  claim  if  the  contractor,  including  a  financial 
progress  report,  stating  the  work  performed  and  the 
amount due; 
  A  certificate-signed  by  the  Programme  consultants  or 
owner’s  representative,  if  any,  or  by  the  borrower’s 
chief  engineering  officer  or 
resident  supervising 
engineer assigned to the Programme, to the effect that 
the  work  performed  is  satisfactory  and  the  payment 
claimed  is  due  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the 
contract, and  
  A copy of the contract payment monitoring form signed 
in original by the certifying officer. 
All types of payments 
Payment of goods 
Payments for services 
(including consultants) 
Progress and retention 
payments of civil 
works 
74 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
21.9 Terms of reference: External Auditor 
1.  Background 
  The International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) is aiding the 
borrower/recipient in the form of loan(s) [and/or grant(s)]. 
  A financing [and /or grant] agreement or agreements has/have been signed 
 
between IFAD and the borrower/[recipient]; refer to appendix 1.  
[Insert for private auditor]: IFAD requires the borrower/recipient to appoint an 
independent auditor to audit the accounts related to the Programme, in accordance 
with the IFAD Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing. 
  The reporting entity is [xxx]. 
  The entity prepares its financial statements in accordance with [applicable 
accounting standard]. 
  The auditor conducts its audit in terms of [applicable auditing standard]. 
 
[Insert any other information that may be relevant to the auditor]. 
2.  Objective 
The objective of this audit is to enable the auditor to express an opinion on whether the 
financial  statements  (including  additional  disclosures  as  outlined  in  section  5)  present 
fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the reporting entity as at [insert 
year-end date], and/or the results of its operations and its cash flows for the years then 
ended, in conformity with the [applicable accounting standards]. 
3.  Responsibilities of the borrower/[recipient] 
i.  General 
  Provide financial statements for the activities financed by the loan/[grant] that 
are reconcilable to its records and accounts. 
  Provide the auditor with access to all legal documents and correspondence with 
consultants, contractors and other persons or firms engaged by the Programme, 
and any other information associated with the Programme and deemed necessary 
by the auditor.  
  Ensure that the accounting policies are consistently applied and disclosed. 
  Ensure that appropriate internal controls are implemented to prevent 
misstatements and susceptibility to fraud. 
  Ensure compliance with all relevant laws and regulations that pertain to the 
entity, as well as with the financing agreement between the borrower/[recipient] 
and IFAD. 
  Provide the financial statements to the auditor within a reasonable time and be 
available for any queries that the auditor may have. 
ii. 
Financial statements 
         The borrower/[recipient] shall: 
  Prepare financial statements covering the reporting period [date] to [date], in 
accordance with [IPSAS/IPSAS “Financial Reporting under the Cash Basis of 
Accounting” standards]. In addition, the following specific disclosures will be 
included in the financial statements: 
  Withdrawal application summary – appendix 1 to the IFAD Handbook on 
Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Programmes; 
  Sources and uses of funds statement – appendix 2 to the IFAD 
Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed 
Programmes; 
75 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
 
  Designated Account statement and reconciliation – appendix 3 to the 
IFAD Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed 
Programmes; 
[Statement of Expenditure – appendix 5 to the IFAD Handbook on 
Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Programmes] – 
application to grants; 
[Expenditure transaction list - appendix 6 to the IFAD Handbook on 
Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed Programmes] – 
applicable to grants. 
 
4.  Responsibilities of the auditor 
i.  Auditing standards 
  The auditor is responsible for the formulation of an opinion on the financial 
statements in accordance with [ISA/ISSAI/national auditing standards]; 
ii.  General principles 
By agreeing to these terms, the auditor confirms that: 
  The  firm  is  independent  from  the  Programme,  its  staff  and  activities,  in 
accordance with international best practices. 
  The firm is not providing consultancy services to the  Programme or preparing its 
Programme financial statements (nor has it done so in the previous two years). 
  The  auditor  is  suitably  qualified  and  a  member  of  a  professional  body  affiliated 
 
with the International Federation of Accountants. 
[The  office  of  [public  auditor]  is  a  member  of  the  International  Organization  of 
Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI).] 
  The auditor is able to conduct the audit in line with auditing standards acceptable 
to IFAD, pursuant to paragraph 4.1. 
  The  firm  can  assign  an  audit  team  to  the  audit  that  has  the  necessary 
competence and skills. 
  The  firm  has  a  proven  track  record  in  conducting  audits  of  a  similar  nature  and 
complexity. 
iii.  Management letter 
The  management  letter  is  an  integral  part  of  the  audit  package  that  documents 
accounting  and  internal  control  issues  identified  by  the  auditors.  The  management 
letter should: 
  Outline  the  auditor’s  recommendations  to  improve  identified  accounting  and  internal 
 
control issues; 
Include  the  responses  of  Programme  management  to  the  identified  control  issues,  and 
its proposal to address the issues identified within a specific time period. 
  Where applicable, follow up on the issues identified in the previous year's management 
letter.  
iv. 
 Reporting 
The Auditor is required to deliver an audit package that includes: 
  The  audited  financial  statements,  including  additional  disclosures  as  outlined  in 
paragraph 3.2; 
  An  audit  opinion  on  the  financial  statements,  within  the  scope  as  outlined  in 
 
paragraph 5; 
[A  report  on  factual  findings,  within  the  scope  of  agreed-upon  procedures  as 
outlined  in  paragraph  6.]  Any  ineligible  expenditure  identified  should  be  clearly 
mentioned. 
76 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
  A management letter, including the information outlined in paragraph 4.3; 
The  audit  report  should  provide  sufficient  detail  as  to  the  nature  and  extent  of  the 
procedures  performed  by  the  auditor.  The  auditor  is  required  to  provide  the  audit 
package by no later than [insert date]. Reports are to be delivered in English.  
5.  Scope of the financial audit 
            In performing the audit, at a minimum the auditor shall: 
  Obtain an understanding of the internal controls related to the financial reporting 
process, to identify and assess any weakness in internal control that might result 
in misstatements, whether due to fraud or to error; 
  Design and conduct audit procedures in response to any weaknesses identified in 
the  internal  controls  relating  to  the  financial  reporting  process,  to  obtain  audit 
evidence that the financial statements are fairly presented and free from material 
misstatements, in accordance with the applicable accounting framework; 
  Verify whether expenditure that was incurred in the name of the Programme is in 
line with the terms of the financing agreement(s) (appendix xx) and incurred for 
the  purposes  intended  in  this  agreement.  Both  IFAD  and  third  party  funding 
should be taken into consideration; 
  Verify that the inventory and fixed assets held by the entity exist, are complete, 
are properly accounted and are used for the Programme purposes; 
  Note  any  weaknesses  in  the  internal  control  environment  and  in  the  financial 
reporting process, and communicate those in the management letter.  
[List others]. 
 
6.  Scope of the agreed-upon procedures 
The  auditor  is  required  to  perform  the  following  specific  procedures  and  report  on 
factual findings as outlined:  
Designated account statement(s) (page xxx) 
  Confirm/agree  that  opening  and  closing  bank  balances  (in  Euro  and  SDG)  disclosed 
on  the  designated  account  statement(s)  agree  to  the  bank  account  statement  and 
that such balances reconcile with disclosures in the notes the financial statements. 
  Recalculate  the  closing  balance  of  the  designated  account  statement  (in  Euro  and 
SDG). 
  Confirm/agree  that  the  euro  denominated  amounts  disclosed  have  been  accounted 
for  in  SDG  at  the  historical  exchange  rate,  in  line  with  the  procedure  as  outlined  in 
the IFAD Financial Administration Manual (available on IFAD website). 
  Recalculate  the  foreign  exchange  gain  /  loss  as  included  in  the  designated  account 
statement and agree to the amount disclosed in the Statement of Cash Receipts and 
Payments. 
  Agree replenishments / transfers and direct payments to the bank account statement 
and IFAD historical transaction information. 
  Confirm  amounts  disclosed  for  withdrawal  applications  agree  to  the  information 
disclosed on the withdrawal application summary. 
Designated account reconciliation(s) (page xxx) 
  Confirm the accuracy of the reconciliation. 
  Confirm that the designated account has been managed in line with the provisions of 
 
the financing agreement / Letter to the Borrower (Recipient). 
If applicable, review and determine the reasonability of the explanation for variance 
as disclosed on the designated account reconciliation. 
  Agree  disclosed  amounts  to  supporting  documentation  (bank  statements  /  IFAD 
historical financial information). 
77 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Withdrawal application summary 
  Determine  whether  goods  and  services  have  been  purchased  through  the  SOE 
mechanism in line with the stipulated SOE threshold. 
  Determine whether the expenditures claimed through SOE procedures were properly 
and appropriately authorized, classified and supported by audit documentation. 
  Select  a  sample  of  withdrawal  applications  and  confirm  the  accuracy  of  the 
disclosures to the underlying documentation submitted to IFAD. 
  Test a sample of project expenditure transactions from the withdrawal applications 
and confirming eligibility of expenditure / adequacy of supporting documentation. 
Summarise all ineligible expenditures identified in the conclusions section. 
Fixed asset register (page xxx) 
  Select a sample of fixed assets from the fixed asset register and confirm the accuracy 
and completeness of the information included in the fixed asset register. 
  Select  a  sample  of  project  assets  from  the  floor  and  confirm  that  the  asset  is 
accurately recorded in the fixed asset register. 
Community Group expenditure (Livelihood Investment Programmes) 
  Select  a  sample  of  grants  made  to  Community  Groups  (both  matching  grants  / 
revolving funds) 
  Design  and  perform  procedures  to  confirm  whether  CG  expenditure  is  made  in  line 
with  approved  LIPs  and  for  eligible  expenditure  as  defined  in  the  financing 
agreement. 
Other 
  Confirm the degree of compliance with the recipient’s procurement policy and identify 
non-compliance. 
7.  Public disclosure 
IFAD  promotes  public  disclosure  of  Programme  financial  information  to  enhance  the 
level  of  transparency  and  accountability.  IFAD  will  disclose  Programme  audit  reports, 
as appropriate, in line with the Fund’s disclosure policy. Management Letters issued by 
auditors  are  not  subject  to  public  disclosure  by  IFAD.  In  agreeing  to  the  terms  of 
reference,  the  auditor  explicitly  acknowledges  IFAD’s  right  to  publicly  disclose  audit 
reports (audited financial statements and audit opinion) and will issue reports without 
a limitation of use clause. 
To  facilitate  the  public  disclosure  process,  the  auditor  is  requested  to  submit  two 
separate files as follows:  
-  Audited financial statements and audit opinion; and  
-  Management Letter.  
8.  Appendices [list as applicable] 
Appendix: Financing/grant agreement(s) 
Appendix: Letter to the Borrower 
Appendix: IFAD Handbook on Financial Reporting and Auditing of IFAD-financed 
Programmes 
78 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
________________________________ 
Signed by: 
Authorized representative of the auditor 
Date: 
79 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
21.10 Terms of reference: Accounting software 
Background 
[INSERT] 
In  order  to  comply  with  IFAD’s  reporting  requirements  the  Programme  will  need  to 
procure  an  Accounting Software  to  be  used  by  the  Programme  Coordination  Unit  (PCU) 
and 9 State Implementation Units (SPCUs) for the following purposes: 
 
 
 
 
to  collect,  analyze,  store,  and  disseminate  information  that  is  useful  for  decision 
making 
to provide transparency and accountability of the Programme activities, 
to  provide  timely  reports,  help  detect  errors  and  deficits  during  Programme 
implementation and indicate necessary corrections, and  
to  prepare  and  present  progress  reports  to  the  PCU  and  Programme  financiers  and 
stakeholder 
Specifications of the Software 
General features 
The  Accounting  software  should  be  configured  as  a  modular  solution  and  the  different 
modules should be suitably integrated, the following are the basic modules: 
1.  Chart of Account 
2.  Accounting 
3.  Financial Reporting 
4.  Budget 
5.  Assets 
6.  Withdrawal Application 
7.  Contract Management and integrating other modules. 
8.  Payroll sub-system 
9.  Purchases  sub-system  classifying  the  levels  of  the  Chart  of  Accounts  into  six  level 
collectively, partially and individually when necessary; 
  Type (Component – Location – Sub-component-Category-Sub-category-Activities) 
  General Ledger Account 
  Subsidiary Ledger Accounts 
  Subsidiary -1 Accounts, to end up with auxiliary accounts. 
10. Handling  all  the  financial  transactions  of  the  Programme  according  to  the  chart  of 
account, that is used to: 
  Capture the financial data under the appropriate headings 
  Classify and group financial data for the various financial reports.  
11. The structure of the Chart of Accounts caters for data to be captured by: 
the Programme components and sub-components 
 
  expenditure items under each component and sub-component 
  The IFAD disbursement category for the Programme 
  Sources of funding 
12. All vouchers used in the system are based on double entries. 
13. Ability  to  account  under  different  bases  of  accounting  (cash  basis,  modified  cash 
basis, accrual basis. 
14. Using adjusting entry when needed to reverse and correct entries 
15. Handling the definition of various currencies used by the system 
16. Holding multi – donor’s information,  
17. Recording the daily currency rates for all the predefined currencies, if reports can be 
demanded by SDG (Sudan local currency) 
18. Recording the Grant number and source of fund. 
19. Capacity to customize reports by e.g. exporting data to excel, word or PDF formats. 
80 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Financial reporting 
20. Produce the periodic Financial Reports as requested by IFAD: 
  Statement  of  Cash  Receipts  and  Payments  per  Programme  components  showing 
quarterly, yearly and cumulative balances for the period and cumulative;  
  Statement  of  Cash  Receipts  and  Payments  per  Programme  categories  showing 
quarterly, yearly and cumulative balances for the period and cumulative;  
  Statement of Designated Account reconciling period-opening and end balances;  
  Statement  of  Programme  commitments,  i.e.,  the  unpaid  balances  under  the 
Programme’s signed contracts; 
  Statement of fixed assets, 
  Statement of Cash Payments using Statement of Expenditure (SOE). 
  Bank accounts movements and balances 
  Petty cash statements including cleared and un-cleared balances 
21. produce  other  financial  statements  on  a  quarterly,  semi-annual  and  annual  basis, 
which are as follows; 
 
Journal and Payment Vouchers 
  Statement of Special Accounts 
  Contracts monitoring forms 
  Contracts register 
  Contracts paid and committed amounts 
22. Progress report (physical) and not financial by contract, component and category (all 
Programme units). This request will involve: 
  A function will be designed and developed to allow the user to define the planned 
(estimated) physical % completion on each period (monthly, year, Quarter). 
  A  function  will  be  designed  and  developed  to  allow  the  user  to  enter/modify  the 
actual  reported  on  physical  %  completion  on  each  period  (monthly,  year, 
Quarter). 
  An Inquiry function to display physical progress on each contract. 
  A report showing detailed physical progress reporting per period 
  A report showing up-to-date physical progress reporting per period 
23. Consolidated report (financial report) of all programs managed under the software. 
24. Recording the budget of all the activities of the  Programme, and enable comparison 
of  the  actual  performance  with  budgets/targets  (monthly,  quarterly,  semi-annual, 
annual, and cumulative for the Programme).  
25. a  fixed  assets  listing  report  indicating  all  relevant  information  (such  as  description, 
location,  quantity,  serial  number,  etc.)  which  needs  to  be  updated  and  include  any 
discrepancies between the regular physical inspection and the accounting records. 
26. Enhancement  on  the  Withdrawal  Application  report  to  include  the  SMART  SOEs  and 
Summary sheet based on the latest updated packages received from IFAD. 
Specified Features 
Procurement 
27. Keeping  detailed  records  for  all  the  suppliers,  contractors  and  consultants  (ID 
number,  Name,  Nationality,  Address,  Phone,  Fax,  e-mail,  contact  name  “position, 
phone number, fax, bank account bank address” and other information needed, and 
the  accounting  system  should  provide  information  regarding  the  procurement  cycle 
that take place before contract signature and report on the following:. 
  Prior review thresholds; 
  Procurement methods thresholds; 
  Procurement reference; 
  Activity description; 
81 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
  Component (as per the description schedule (1) of the Grant); 
  Category (as per disbursement schedule "2"); 
  Estimated amount; 
  Procurement method used; 
  Prior/Post review; 
  Date of issuance of advertisement; 
 
  Date of bid (Goods/works) or RFP (consultants) submission; 
  Bid opening date (goods/works) or Financial Proposal opening date(consultants); 
 
 
  Date of submission to the IFAD of the Copy of signed contract; 
  The system has to provide a process and control for the quoted contract analysis 
IFAD No objection to evaluation report; 
IFAD no objection to contract draft; 
IFAD No Objection on bidding documents (Goods/works) or RFP (consultants); 
(technically and financially) selected contracts approval. 
  The  system  has  to  enable  entering  the  financial  and  other  payment(  e.g. 
deliverables,  net  of  VAT  contract  value,  related  category)  terms  stated  in  the 
contract, so that to be utilized for matching when executing the payment against 
the contract. 
  The  system  has  to  provide  a  tool  that  will  monitor  the  execution  of  contract  in 
accordance with time frame specified in the approved contract and to report any 
delays. 
  The system should provide the matrix to ensure the following before any payment 
against  the  contract:  1-obtaining  of  approved  deliverables  certificate  2-advance 
payment  has  to  be  made  against  valid  bank  guarantee  3-  obtaining  of  IFAD  no-
objection  whenever  that  is  required  4-the  amount  to  be  paid  is  matching  with 
financial terms specified in the contract. 
  The  system  has  to  create  the  accounting  double  entry  by  considering  the 
following:  1-  allocation  of  the  amount  paid  among  the  financiers  in  accordance 
with the designated percentage  for  each financier as stated in the agreement 2-
amount  allocated  to  donor  is  net  of  VAT  3-DR/CR  related  current  accounts  of 
financier(S) when required 3- allocation to related category and component. 
  Provide  a  feature  for  selecting  the  appropriate  form  for  reporting  the  amount 
related to donor. 
  Provide a feature for foreign currency conversion. 
  The  system  has  to  provide  the  report  of  the  contract  payments  as  per  contract 
payment monitoring form C-11. 
  The  system  has  to  provide  the  report  of  the  contracts  register  as  per  contracts 
register form C-10. 
  All  contract  related  data  should  be  entered  at  first  (date  of  signature,  date  of 
completion, contract amount, and contract amendments and payments terms). 
Purchases 
The Programme has methods of purchasing for each type of procurement as explained in 
IFAD  guidelines  for  procurement  and  letter  to  the  recipient  including  the  ceiling  for 
obtaining  IFAD  no  objection  (prior  or  post)  which  is  explained  in  the  letter  to  the 
recipient and the requirements for Purchase sub-system are: 
1.  The  system  has  to  provide  an  option  for  implementing  the  vendors  approved  list 
system for particular goods and services purchase. 
2.  The direct purchase to be for particular limit (e.g. SDG 250) and above that must be 
routed through the 3 ways match (PR/PO, Receiving Report and invoice for a certain 
value and above that certain value (e.g. SDG 1500) the 4 ways match system can be 
applied (PR/PO, Quotation analysis, receiving report and invoice). The system should 
provide the capability to enter and update the limits. 
3.  The system has to provide matrix that ensures the following before any payment: 1- 
obtaining of IFAD no objection whenever that is required, 2- a valid bank guarantee 
in case of advance payment 
82 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
4.  The  system  has  to  create  the  accounting  double  entry  by  considering  the  following: 
1-  allocation  of  the  amount  paid  among  the  financiers  in  accordance  with  the 
designated  percentage  for  each  financier  as  stated  in  the  agreement  2-amount 
allocated  to  donor  is  net  of  VAT  3-DR/CR  related  current  accounts  of  financier(S) 
when required 3- allocation to related category and component. 
5.  Provide a feature for selecting the appropriate form to report the amount as per IFAD 
required form 
6.  Provide feature for foreign currency conversion. 
Payroll 
The Programme has a payroll section and is seeking to have the payroll section to be the 
focal  point  responsible  for  employees’  entitlements,  benefits,  advances,  deductions  and 
the payroll system to be integrated with the general ledger to create all related financial 
transactions from and to the payroll system. So the system requirements are: 
A.  The  system  has  to  enable  the  implementation  of  the  staff  manual  and  the 
Programme by-laws, contracts or labour office law for: 1- salaries and allowances 
2-Computation  of  the  vacation  dues  3-allowances  computation  4-topping 
computation  5-  after  service  benefits  computation  6-  penalties  and  absence 
deductions  7-social  insurance  deductions  computation  8-  Periodic  deductions  for 
personal advances. 
B.  The  system  has  to  enable  the  recording  of  salaries  directly  paid  by  state 
government. 
C.  The  system  has  to  create  the  accounting  double  entry  by  considering  the 
following:  1-  allocation  of  the  amount  paid  among  the  financiers  in  accordance 
with the designated percentage  for  each financier as stated in the agreement 2-
amount  allocated  to  donor  is  net  of  VAT  3-DR/CR  related  current  accounts  of 
financier(S) when required 3- allocation to related category and component. 
D.  Provide a feature for selecting the appropriate form to report the amount  
E.  Provide feature for foreign currency conversion.   
General Ledger 
The  Programme  is  planning  to  have  all  of  the  transactions  related  to  the  contract, 
purchases  and  payroll  to  be  created  in  the  related  sub-modules  as  stated  above  and 
having the GL module to monitor and control these transactions. Other transactions have 
to  be  conducted  directly  in  the  GL.  In  addition  to  that  the  GL  is  needed  to  create  the 
required report and financiers fund management. So the requirements for GL are: 
  GL  has  to  allow  for  entering  the  approved  annual  budget  and  to  provide  actual  vs. 
budget  detailed  and  summary  reports  on  monthly,  quarterly,  semi  -annually,  yearly 
and year to date report. 
  The  system  has  to  provide  a  tool  to  control  the  actual  expenditure  of  any  category 
not  to  exceed  120%  of  budgeted  amount  unless  an  approval  of  the  Programme  is 
obtained. 
  The  system  has  to  allow  the  revising  and  re-allocation  of  budget  after  getting  IFAD 
no-objection. 
  Design  of  chart  of  accounts  to  cover  the  following:  1-PCU  for  consolidation,  2-The 
SPCUs,  -3  Components  (  as  parent  and  children),  4-  office  location  (  PCU  and  each 
SPCU),  5-category  (as  parent  and  children),  6-  all  the  sources  and  uses  of  funds 
items. 
  The  chart  of  accounts  maintenance  to  be  the  sole  responsibility  of  the  Financial 
Manager. 
  The GL to be interfaced with the sub-modules in the PCU and SPCUs offices levels. 
83 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
  Application of the reimbursable advances system for all of the SPCUs. Such a system 
is  to  allow  the  generation  of  internal  withdrawal  application  and  creation  of  the 
related entry in both PCU that generates the IWA.  
  Recording of the initial deposit and the initial deposit recovery and related entries 
  Create  the  different  types  of  the  withdrawal  applications  (i.e.  replenishment, 
reimbursement, direct payment and special commitment). 
  For  replenishment  withdrawal  application  the  following  parameters  are  to  be 
considered: 1- to be created only after closing of the month, -2 to be only for donor 
related  spending  and  separate  withdrawal  applications  for  co-financed  local 
counterpart with each donor, -3 to be only for the items actually paid (no payables or 
accruals), 4- to use the updated SMART SOEs form 102/A and 101/A. 
  For  reimbursement  withdrawal  application  all  of  the  parameters  mentioned  in  j- 
above to be considered except that to use form 101 B and 102 B 
  For  the  direct  payments  withdrawal  application  the  following  parameters  should  be 
considered:  1-  can  be  generated  in  any  time  (even  can  be  before  closing  of  the 
month),  -2  To  be  only  for  suppliers,  contractors  and  consultants  those  performed  a 
particular job and related amount falling due (i.e. payable), -3 the Financial Manager 
has  to  be  provided  a  tool  enabling  to  select  the  item  to  be  included  in  the  in  direct 
payments withdrawal application (as per Programme documents). 
  The  system  has  to  create  all  of  the  entries  for  each  withdrawal  application  form  at 
closing of the monthly entries and up to receiving of the fund. Noting the importance 
of recording any withheld amounts and their release or not in the future. 
  Recording  of  individual financiers  transactions  (e.g.  financier  related  bank  accounts, 
funding  by  each  financier,  inter-financier,  in  kind  contribution,  tax  and  duties 
exemptions). 
  The  system  to  be  able  to  provide  multi  options  for  foreign  currency  translation  for 
reporting this multi options can be provided by 1- spot rate, 2- FIFO-Layer. 
  The system should generate: 1- Sources and Uses of Funds and all financial reports 
 
mentioned before. 
In  addition  to  previous  reports  the  system  should  generate  following  reports:  1- 
status  of  funds  for  each  donor,  2-  historic  transaction  for  each  donor,  3-  donors 
grants  utilization  and  disbursements,  4-  GOS  disbursement  and  utilization,  progress 
on AWPB, 5- financial performance by category by financier, 6- financial performance 
by component by financier, 7-withheld amount, special accounts reconciliation. 
  The system should provide a tool for users defined reports  
Security 
  Handling  the  required  security  according  to  predefined  system  security  and 
privileges. 
  The  Programme  should  have  adequate  security  features  including  password 
protection not possible to delete a posted transaction, controlled access 
Includes proper backup and system maintenance procedures. 
 
Training and support 
  Training  the  Financial  Manager,  senior  accountant  and  SPCUs  accountants  in  four 
SPCUs  offices  on  all  features  of  the  software  and  administrative  officers  (in  payroll 
sub-system) and procurement officers in procurement and purchase sub-systems 
  Provide a complete and a user-friendly manual 
  Configuration  and  Full  installation  of  the  software  in  eight  computers  for  PCU  and 
SPCUs. 
A.  Delivery time table 
The commencement of services for this assignment is expected to be no later than [xxx] 
The  main  objective  of  the  firm  is  to  deliver  well  designed  software,  that  facilitates 
reflection  of  Programme  needs  and  be  designed  to  provide  the  financial  information 
84 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
required by all interested parties (the PCU, Ministry of Finance, IFAD and other financiers 
and stakeholders) and fulfil the legal and regulatory requirements of the Government of 
Sudan) 
85 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
21.11 Illustrative financial statements 
[PROGRAMME NAME] 
ANNUAL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
FOR THE 12 MONTH PERIOD ENDING 30 JUNE 2018 
[THIS ILLUSTRATION IS BASED ON A NEW PROGRAMME. FOR EXISTING PROGRAMME, 
DISCLOSE PRIOR PERIOD COMPARATIVE INFORMATION AND CUMULATIVE 
INFORMATION ON S&U STATEMENT] 
Table of content: 
1.  Background 
2.  Management Statement 
3.  Audit report 
4.  Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments 
5.  Budget to Actual Comparison 
6.  Accounting policies 
7.  Notes to the financial statements 
8.  Designated account statement 
9.  Designated account reconciliation 
10. Withdrawal application summary 
11. Fixed asset register 
12. Action tracker (supplementary) 
Background 
Insert Programme background information 
Indicate reporting lines – Ministry of Animal Welfare / Steering Committee 
Indicate Programme start date 
 
  Provide outline of CPCU and operations in various states. 
 
  Provide overview of categories and components 
  Provide description of programme activities 
  Status update 
 
Indicate the relevant legislation governing the Programme activities (e.g. Laws of 
Sudan etc.) 
  Overview of financing facilities – see table below: 
Source of funds 
IFAD Loan 
IFAD 
grant/loan 
GEF/LDCF 
Facility/agreement number 
Amount approved (indicate 
currency) 
Undrawn balance at period end 
If applicable, interest rates and 
repayment periods 
Restrictions on use of funds (e.g. 
designated account workings, 
authorised allocation) 
Management Statement 
86 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
Insert management responsibility statement 
Audit report (illustrative only) 
Independent Auditor’s report (Provided on Auditor letterhead) 
Report on the Audit of the Financial Statements 
Opinion 
We have audited the financial statements of [xxx], a project funded by the International 
Fund for Agricultural Development (loan xxx and grant xxx). The financial statements 
comprise of the Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments, Budget to Actual 
Comparison, accounting policies and explanatory notes. 
In our opinion, the accompanying financial statements of xxx give a true and fair view of 
the Financial performance and cash flows for the year then ended in accordance with 
IPSAS Financial Reporting Under the Cash Basis of Accounting. 
Basis for Opinion (refer to ISA705 for modifications) 
We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing (ISAs). 
Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor’s 
Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements section of our report. We are 
independent of the Company in accordance with the International Ethics Standards 
Board for Accountants’ Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants (IESBA code) 
together with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial 
statements in Sudan, and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in 
accordance with these requirements and the IESBA Code. We believe that the audit 
evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our 
opinion. 
Key audit matter 
Key audit matters are those matters that, in our professional judgment, were of most 
significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period. These matters 
were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole, and in 
forming our opinion thereon. We do not provide a separate opinion on these matters. 
[insert matters if applicable] 
Other information  
The Board of Directors is responsible for the other information. The other information 
comprises the xxxx. Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other 
information and we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon. In 
connection with our audit of the financial statements, our responsibility is to read the 
other information and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially 
inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or 
otherwise appears to be materially misstated. If, based on the work we have performed, 
we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information, we are 
required to report that fact. We have nothing to report in this regard. 
Responsibilities of Management and Those Charged with Governance for the 
Financial Statements 
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the financial 
statements in accordance with IPSAS and for such internal control as management 
determines is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free 
87 | P a g e  
FINANCIAL MANUAL SECTION OF SNRLP PIM 
from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error. Those charged with 
governance are responsible for overseeing the project's financial reporting process. 
Auditors' Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements 
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial 
statements as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or 
error, and to issue an auditors' report that includes our opinion. Reasonable assurance is 
a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance 
with lSAs will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can 
arise from fraud or error and arc considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, 
they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on 
the basis of these financial statements. 
As part of an audit in accordance with ISAs, we exercise professional judgment and 
maintain professional scepticism throughout the audit. We also: 
 
ldentify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements. 
Whether due to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to 
those risks, and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a 
basis for our opinion. The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting 
from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, 
forgery, intentional omissions. misrepresentations, or the override of internal control. 
  Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design 
audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose 
of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the project's internal control. 
  Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of 
accounting estimates and related disclosures made by management. 
  Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the financial statements, 
including the disclosures, and whether the financial statements represent the 
underlying transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation. 
We communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, 
the planned scope and timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any 
significant deficiencies in internal control that we identify during our audit.  
We also provide those charged with governance with a statement that we have complied 
with relevant ethical requirements regarding independence and communicate with them 
all relationships and other matters that may reasonably be thought to bear on our 
independence and where applicable, related safeguards. 
From the matters communicated with those charged with governance, we determine 
those matters that were or most significance in the audit or the financial statements of 
the current period and are therefore the key audit matters. We describe these matters in 
our auditors' report unless law or regulation precludes public disclosure about the matter 
or when, in extremely rare circumstances, we determine that a matter should not be 
communicated in our report because the adverse consequences of doing so would 
reasonably be expected to outweigh the public interest benefits of such communication. 
Public disclosure 
This report has been prepared on request of the project and the International Fund for 
Agricultural Development, however, the report is a matter of public record and its 
distribution is not limited. 
The engagement partner on the audit resulting in this independent auditors' report is xxx 
from the National Audit Chamber of Sudan. 
88 | P a g e  
Independent Assurance Report prepared for IFAD (provided on auditor 
letterhead) 
This report represents the results and conclusions of the independent assurance 
engagement undertaken on behalf of IFAD. 
Background 
[Summarise details of financiers, facilities and amounts of funding provided for the 
period under review and committed in total to the project] 
Audit Objectives and Scope 
An assurance engagement was undertaken in line ISAE 3000 Assurance Engagements 
other than audits or reviews of historical financial formation in order to provide a report 
to the International Fund of Agricultural Development on the following: 
1.  Whether the expenditures, reported by the project are in eligible in terms of the 
financing agreement with the International Fund of Agricultural Development. 
2.  Whether the project has adhered to other terms and conditions of the IFAD 
Financing agreement / Letter to the Borrower/Recipient and other financial 
management related requirements related to maintenance of the designated 
account records. 
3.  Whether the IFAD specific disclosures are accurate and complete and agree to 
IFAD financial records (statements etc). 
The financial information outlined in pages xxx to xxx was the subject of this assurance 
engagement. 
Summary of work performed 
The following specific work was performed in order to address the scope of work: 
Preparatory 
  Review the IFAD loan / grant financing agreement(s) and related amendments to 
determine key financing terms and conditions application to the project. 
  Review the Letter to the Borrower / Recipient and related amendments to determine 
key financing terms and conditions applicable to the project. 
  Obtain IFAD financial information related to the project from the IFAD finance officer, 
as may be appropriate and required. 
Designated account statement(s) (page xxx) 
  Confirm/agree  that  opening  and  closing  bank  balances  (in  Euro  and  SDG)  disclosed 
on  the  designated  account  statement(s)  agree  to  the  bank  account  statement  and 
that such balances reconcile with disclosures in the notes the financial statements. 
  Recalculate  the  closing  balance  of  the  designated  account  statement  (in  Euro  and 
SDG). 
  Confirm/agree  that  the  euro  denominated  amounts  disclosed  have  been  accounted 
for  in  SDG  at  the  historical  exchange  rate,  in  line  with  the  procedure  as  outlined  in 
the IFAD Financial Administration Manual (available on IFAD website). 
  Recalculate  the  foreign  exchange  gain  /  loss  as  included  in  the  designated  account 
statement and agree to the amount disclosed in the Statement of Cash Receipts and 
Payments. 
  Agree replenishments / transfers and direct payments to the bank account statement 
and IFAD historical transaction information. 
89 
  Confirm  amounts  disclosed  for  withdrawal  applications  agree  to  the  information 
disclosed on the withdrawal application summary. 
Designated account reconciliation(s) (page xxx) 
  Confirm the accuracy of the reconciliation. 
  Confirm that the designated account has been managed in line with the provisions of 
 
the financing agreement / Letter to the Borrower (Recipient). 
If applicable, review and determine the reasonability of the explanation for variance 
as disclosed on the designated account reconciliation. 
  Agree  disclosed  amounts  to  supporting  documentation  (bank  statements  /  IFAD 
historical financial information). 
Withdrawal application summary 
  Determine  whether  goods  and  services  have  been  purchased  through  the  SOE 
mechanism in line with the stipulated SOE threshold. 
  Determine whether the expenditures claimed through SOE procedures were properly 
and appropriately authorized, classified and supported by audit documentation. 
  Select  a  sample  of  withdrawal  applications  and  confirm  the  accuracy  of  the 
disclosures to the underlying documentation submitted to IFAD. 
  Test a sample of project expenditure transactions from the withdrawal applications 
and confirming eligibility of expenditure / adequacy of supporting documentation. 
Summarise all ineligible expenditures identified in the conclusions section. 
Fixed asset register (page xxx) 
  Select a sample of fixed assets from the fixed asset register and confirm the accuracy 
and completeness of the information included in the fixed asset register. 
  Select  a  sample  of  project  assets  from  the  floor  and  confirm  that  the  asset  is 
accurately recorded in the fixed asset register. 
Community Group expenditure (Livelihood Investment Programmes) 
  Select  a  sample  of  grants  made  to  Community  Groups  (both  matching  grants  / 
revolving funds) 
  Design  and  perform  procedures  to  confirm  whether  CG  expenditure  is  made  in  line 
with  approved  LIPs  and  for  eligible  expenditure  as  defined  in  the  financing 
agreement. 
Other 
  Confirm the degree of compliance with the recipient’s procurement policy and identify 
non-compliance. 
Conclusions on procedures performed 
[Summarise findings of procedures] 
Management letter 
Other issues related to internal control weaknesses are included in the management 
letter issued on xxx. 
[Signed by engagement partner] 
90 
Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments 
91 
TABLE 1: STATEMENT OF TOTAL CASH RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTSCurrent period31 December 2020Months in period12CurrencySDG'000 (thousands)notesTOTAL CASH RECEIPTSProceeds from External financiers 2-                                Proceeds from Recipient3-                                Beneficiary contribution4-                                Total receipts-                                TOTAL CASH PAYMENTSCivils works-                                Goods and services-                                Consultancies-                                Training and workshops-                                Equipments and materials-                                Grants credits, Guarantee Funds-                                Recurrent costs - salaries and allowances-                                Recurrent costs - operations and maintenance-                                Total payments-                                INCREASE/(DECREASE) IN CASH-                                Unrealised gains/(losses)5-                                CASH BEGINNING OF THE YEAR1-                                CASH AT THE END OF THE YEAR1-                                 
Budget to Actual Comparison 
92 
TABLE 2:BUDGET TO ACTUAL COMPARISONCurrent period actualCurrent period budgetVariance%31 December 202031 December 2020Months in period1212CurrencySDGSDG'000 (thousands)notesCASH RECEIPTS BY FINANCIERIFAD Loan-                                           -                  #DIV/0!IFAD Grant-                                           -                  #DIV/0!GEF/LCDF-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Private sector-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Government of Sudan - cash-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Government of Sudan - in-kind-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Beneficiaries - cash-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Beneficiaries - in - kind-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Total receipts-                                           -                                        -                  #DIV/0!Uses - By categoryCivils works-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Goods and services-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Consultancies-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Training and workshops-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Equipments and materials-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Grants credits, Guarantee Funds-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Recurrent costs - salaries and allowances-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Recurrent costs - operations and maintenance-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Total payments-                                           -                                        -                  #DIV/0!Uses - By componentUpscaling community based natural resources management and businesses-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Improving the Institutional framework for upscaling community based NRM-                                           -                  #DIV/0!Project  Management and coordinating unit-                                           -                  #DIV/0!-                                           -                                        -                  #DIV/0!Explanation of variancesExplain variance 
Accounting policies 
1.  Definitions 
  Designated account – Ring-fenced, foreign denominated bank account which is 
maintained on behalf of the entity. The entity may receive replenishments from 
the direct account in line with the working as outlined in the IFAD Disbursement 
Handbook. 
IFAD – International Fund for Agricultural Development 
 
  GEF/LDCF – Global Environmental Facility 
 
Impress account – An account which maintains a record of all cash advances 
made for staff or Programme expenses which are either returned to the 
Programme or justified by valid expenditure documentation. 
  CPCU – Programme Management Unit 
  Recipient – The Recipient is the Government of Sudan 
2.  Reporting entity 
The financial statements are for SNRLP. The Programme is managed centrally by the 
CPCU and has operations in various states which are reported on as a single entity. 
3.  Reporting period 
These financial statements include a 12-month reporting period for the current and 
prior year with additional cumulative disclosure (from Programme inception) provided 
in the notes where appropriate.  
4.  Basis of preparation 
The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the Standard. The 
entity complies with all the requirements as outlined in Part 1 of the Standard and as 
described in the accounting policies. In addition, the entity has elected to adopt the 
following recommended disclosures in line with Part 2 of the Standard: 
  Payments of Third Parties on behalf of the entity (refer 16. Voluntary Disclosure) 
5.  Authorisation date 
These financial statements have been authorised for issue by the Programme 
Director on [xxx]. No events after this date are included in the financial statements. 
6.  Presentation currency and level of precision 
The presentation currency is the local currency, Sudanese Pounds (SDG). Where 
appropriate, the designated account balances are reported in Euro. The amounts are 
displayed in million (SDG'000) unless otherwise specified in the notes. Additional 
note disclosures may quote US Dollar amounts if loans or grants from financiers are 
denominated in US Dollar. 
7.  Adoption of IPSAS Financial Reporting under the Cash Basis of Accounting 
The Entity elected to adopt IPSAS Financial Reporting under the Cash Basis of 
Accounting ("the Standard") for the first time for the 6-month interim reporting 
period ending 30 June 2018, in line with recommended early adoption. 
8.  Comparative information 
It must be noted that, due to the first-time adoption of the Standard, comparative 
results presented for the period ending 31 December 2018 (and cumulative results 
where applicable) was not prepared in line with the Standard. Where practical and 
material, adjustments have been made to align prior period (and cumulative results) 
with the IPSAS Financial Reporting under the Cash Basis of Accounting 
9.  Composition of the annual financial statement  
The financial statements comprise the Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments, the 
Budget to Actual Comparison and the notes. The notes include various other 
93 
disclosures which are required by external financiers, including IFAD, which may 
enhance fair presentation and accountability. Additional, supplementary information 
is indicated as such. 
10. Cash basis of accounting 
In terms of IPSAS Financial Reporting under the Cash Basis, the entity measures 
transactions and events only when cash is received or paid by the entity. The 
measurement focus of the financial statements is balances of cash and changes 
therein.  In terms of the Standard, cash may include cash on hand, demand deposits, 
impress accounts and cash equivalents. Cash equivalents are investments with a 
maturity of less than 3 months.  
11. Control of cash 
In line with the Standard, cash balances reported at the end of the reporting period 
include all cash which the entity can use or otherwise benefit from at the exclusion of 
other. Therefore, cash will include all IFAD designated account balances which are 
maintained in foreign currency (Euro) to which access is restricted in line with the 
financing agreement entered into between the Recipient and IFAD. 
12. Materiality and disclosure 
The Programme discloses material information separately on the face of the financial 
statements or in the notes. The materiality is assessed in line with the nature and 
amount of the item. In all instances, payments of third parties on behalf of the 
Programme is considered material and disclosed separately. This will include 
payments made on behalf of the Programme to third parties or received "in-kind". – 
refer "16. Voluntary disclosure" 
13. Classification of transactions 
Uses of cash receipts are disclosed in line with categories as defined in the 
Programme financing agreements. Additional useful disclosures in terms of 
components are provided in the notes to the financial statements. Receipts of funds 
are disclosure based on the source of finance. 
14. Foreign currency 
Cash receipts and payments arising from transactions in foreign currency are 
incorporated in the financial statements Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments in 
Sudanese Pounds by applying to the foreign currency amount the spot exchange rate 
between the reporting currency and foreign currency at the date of the 
receipts/payments. The spot rate is defined as the rate of exchange for immediate 
delivery. 
Closing cash balances held in foreign currency are translated to Sudanese Pounds at 
the spot rate on the last day of the reporting period. Resulting foreign gains / losses 
are reported as a reconciling item on the Statement of Cash Receipts and payments. 
Further information with regard to the gains/losses per financier is disclosed in the 
notes. 
[COMMENT ON USE OF FIFO] 
15. Additional note disclosures – accrual basis 
The notes to the financial statements provide additional information about liabilities 
and assets which are not presented on the Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments 
or Budget to Actual Comparison. These may include contingent liabilities related to 
suppliers, advance payments from contractors, staff loan receivable and any other 
material items which will enhance the fair representation of the financial statements. 
94 
16. Voluntary adoption of Part 2 of the Standard – Payments made to 3rd parties on 
behalf of the Programme 
In line with Part 2 of the Standard, the Programme shall disclose payments made on 
its behalf to 3rd parties. For the Programme, this disclosure deals specifically with 
payments made by the Recipient/beneficiaries for items such as salaries and xxx. 
Additional note disclosure is provided which outlines the total of such amounts for the 
period, the nature of activities paid for and the manner in which management has 
arrived at a value for such payments. In the event that management is of the opinion 
that the estimation or value may not be fully reflective of the total value received, 
this will be indicated in the notes. 
95 
Notes to the financial statements 
96 
1Cash and cash equivalents:Cash included in the statement of Cash Receipts and Payments comprise the following amounts:31 December 202031 December 2020SDGEuroExchange rateinsert spot rateBank balances per financierIFAD LoanIFAD GrantGEF/LCDFPrivate sectorGovernmentBeneficiaries  Total in SDG ('000)-                                  -                                   31 December 202031 December 2020SDGEuro-                                  -                                   Bank balance per type of accountIFAD designated account Link to DA statement closing balance - foreign currencyGEF/LCDF designated accountProject accountsCash on handImpressAdd note if impress not zeroTotal ('000)-                                  -                                   -                                  -                                   should be zero2Proceeds from external financiersThe following external source of finance were received from the IFAD grant/loan during the period:31 December 2020Replenishment-                                  Reimbursement-                                  -                                  Include additional info, total approved grant, undrawn portion etc.The IFAD designated account is governed by the Grant Agreement and withdrawals need to be verified via withdrawal applications. The IFAD designated account statement and reconciliatio is included in table 4.1 and 4.2. 
97 
3Recipient contributions in kindThe following is included in Recipient proceeds:31 December 2020Government of Sudan - in-kind-                                   -                                   Uses of fundsCivils worksGoods and servicesConsultanciesTraining and workshopsEquipments and materialsGrants credits, Guarantee FundsRecurrent costs - salaries and allowancesRecurrent costs - operations and maintenance-                                   4Beneficiary contributions in kindThe following in included in beneficiary contributions:31 December 2020Beneficiaries - in - kind-                                   -                                   Uses of fundsCivils worksGoods and servicesConsultanciesTraining and workshopsEquipments and materialsGrants credits, Guarantee FundsRecurrent costs - salaries and allowancesRecurrent costs - operations and maintenance-                                   Explain basis for measuring value. Outline the nature of contribution. Specify that in-kind is required in terms of grant agreement. Indicate the uses of these funds by categoryExplain basis for measuring value. Outline the nature of contribution. Specify that this is required in terms of grant agreement. Indicate the uses of these funds by category 
98 
5Unrealised gains/(losses)31 December 2020IFAD LoanIFAD GrantGEF/LCDFTotal unrealised gains/(losses)-                                   6Other - accrual based information7PrefinancingAdd explanatory noteIFAD LoanIFAD GrantGEF/LCDFPrivate sectorGovernmentSources-                                  -                          -                          less Uses-                                  -                          -                          Surplus/(deficit)-                                  -                                   -                          -                          -                          Plus opening cash balance-                                  -                          -                          Add forex gains / deduct fore losses-                                  -                                   -                          Pre-financing component= Closing cash balance-                                  -                                   -                          -                          The forex gains and losses related to the IFAD and GEF designated accounts which is maintained in Euros.Provide info on accrual related info not disclosed in cash receipts and payments. Eg. Staff loans/advances. 
Sources and uses of funds statement 
99 
TABLE 3: SOURCES AND USES OF FUNDS STATEMENTCurrent period31 December 2020Months in period12Currency'000 (thousands)SDGSOURCES OF FUNDSnotesIFAD Loan-                                Replenishment2ReimbursementIFAD Grant-                                Replenishment2ReimbursementGEF/LCDFPrivate sectorGovernment3-                                Government of Sudan - cashGovernment of Sudan - in-kindBeneficiaries4-                                Beneficiaries - cashBeneficiaries - in - kindTOTAL SOURCES OF FUNDS-                                 
100 
USES OF FUNDSBY CATEGORYIFAD Loan-                                Civils worksGoods and servicesConsultanciesTraining and workshopsEquipments and materialsGrants credits, Guarantee FundsRecurrent costs - salaries and allowancesRecurrent costs - operations and maintenanceIFAD Grant0Civils worksGoods and servicesConsultanciesTraining and workshopsEquipments and materialsGrants credits, Guarantee FundsRecurrent costs - salaries and allowancesRecurrent costs - operations and maintenanceGEF/LCDF-                                Civils worksGoods and servicesConsultanciesTraining and workshopsEquipments and materialsGrants credits, Guarantee FundsRecurrent costs - salaries and allowancesRecurrent costs - operations and maintenancePrivate sector-                                Civils worksGoods and servicesConsultanciesTraining and workshopsEquipments and materialsGrants credits, Guarantee FundsRecurrent costs - salaries and allowancesRecurrent costs - operations and maintenanceGovernment-                                Civils worksGoods and servicesConsultanciesTraining and workshopsEquipments and materialsGrants credits, Guarantee FundsRecurrent costs - salaries and allowancesRecurrent costs - operations and maintenanceBeneficiaries-                                Civils worksGoods and servicesConsultanciesTraining and workshopsEquipments and materialsGrants credits, Guarantee FundsRecurrent costs - salaries and allowancesRecurrent costs - operations and maintenanceTOTAL USES BY CATEGORY-                                SURPLUS / (DEFICIT)-                                 
101 
BY COMPONENTIFAD Loan-                                Upscaling community based natural resources management and businessesImproving the Institutional framework for upscaling community based NRMProject  Management and coordinating unitIFAD Grant-                                Upscaling community based natural resources management and businessesImproving the Institutional framework for upscaling community based NRMProject  Management and coordinating unitGEF/LCDF-                                Upscaling community based natural resources management and businessesImproving the Institutional framework for upscaling community based NRMProject  Management and coordinating unitPrivate sector-                                Upscaling community based natural resources management and businessesImproving the Institutional framework for upscaling community based NRMProject  Management and coordinating unitGovernment-                                Upscaling community based natural resources management and businessesImproving the Institutional framework for upscaling community based NRMProject  Management and coordinating unitBeneficiaries-                                Upscaling community based natural resources management and businessesImproving the Institutional framework for upscaling community based NRMProject  Management and coordinating unitTOTAL USES BY COMPONENT-                                -                                SURPLUS/DEFICIT-                                 
Designated account statement 
102 
TABLE 4.1: IFAD GRANT DESIGNATED ACCOUNT STATEMENTEuroSDGNotes1-                              -                              Add:1-                              -                              Deduct:1-                              -                              2Direct paymentsnoteAdd:3Exchange rate gain/(loss)-                              -                              -                              -                              -                              Note: -                              Opening BalanceIFAD Replenishments:Transfers to Operating Accounts:Closing balanceTABLE 4.2: IFAD LOAN DESIGNATED ACCOUNT STATEMENTEuroSDGNotes1-                              -                              Add:1-                              -                              Deduct:1-                              -                              2Direct paymentsnoteAdd:3Exchange rate gain/(loss)-                              -                              -                              -                              -                              Note: -                              Opening BalanceIFAD Replenishments:Transfers to Operating Accounts:Closing balance 
103 
TABLE 4.3: GEF DESIGNATED ACCOUNT STATEMENTEuroSDGNotes1-                              -                              Add:1-                              -                              Deduct:1-                              -                              2Direct paymentsnoteAdd:3Exchange rate gain/(loss)-                              -                              -                              -                              -                              Note: -                              Opening BalanceGEF Replenishments:Transfers to Operating Accounts:Closing balance 
Designated account reconciliation 
104 
TABLE 5.1: IFAD GRANT DESIGNATED ACCOUNT STATEMENTIFAD Financing agreement nr: Bank account nr:SECTION 1Euro1Total advanced by IFAD to designated account2Less Total amount recovered by IFAD 3= Outstanding amount advanced by IFAD-                              SECTION 24Balance of designated account as per bank statement 5Plus balance of operating accounts Plus cash on hand= Period end cash balance-                           6Plus amount claimed for the period-                           Provide reasons - not yet claimed8-                           9Less: interest earned10= Total advance accounted for-                           11Explanation of difference between outstanding advance (line 3) and advance accounted for (line 10)-                           Insert explanationsPlus amounts claimed in period not yet credited at date of bank statement and claimed after date of bank statement 
105 
TABLE 5.2: IFAD LOAN DESIGNATED ACCOUNT STATEMENTIFAD Financing agreement nr: Bank account nr:SECTION 1Euro1Total advanced by IFAD to designated account2Less Total amount recovered by IFAD 3= Outstanding amount advanced by IFAD-                              SECTION 24Balance of designated account as per bank statement 5Plus balance of operating accounts Plus cash on hand= Period end cash balance-                           6Plus amount claimed for the period-                           Provide reasons - not yet claimed8-                           9Less: interest earned10= Total advance accounted for-                           11Explanation of difference between outstanding advance (line 3) and advance accounted for (line 10)-                           Insert explanationsPlus amounts claimed in period not yet credited at date of bank statement and claimed after date of bank statement 
106 
TABLE 5.3: GEF DESIGNATED ACCOUNT STATEMENTIFAD Financing agreement nr: Bank account nr:SECTION 1Euro1Total advanced by IFAD to designated account2Less Total amount recovered by IFAD 3= Outstanding amount advanced by IFAD-                              SECTION 24Balance of designated account as per bank statement 5Plus balance of operating accounts Plus cash on hand= Period end cash balance-                           6Plus amount claimed for the period-                           Provide reasons - not yet claimed8-                           9Less: interest earned10= Total advance accounted for-                           11Explanation of difference between outstanding advance (line 3) and advance accounted for (line 10)-                           Insert explanationsPlus amounts claimed in period not yet credited at date of bank statement and claimed after date of bank statement 
Withdrawal application summary 
107 
TABLE 6.1: WITHDRAWAL APPLICATION STATEMENT - IFAD LOANWithdrawal application numberDate12345678Total local currencyDesignated account currency equivalentValue date (transfer to project)Rejected by IFAD / Recovery in closing periodNet reimbursedNet reimbursedValue date exchange rateEuroEuroEuroLoan currencySection A: Payment method - ReplenishmentApproved withdrawals-               -                      -               -                      -               -                      Total            -               -               -               -               -               -                      -                             -                             -                                  -                                       -   Category key:Civils works1Goods and services2Consultancies3Training and workshops4Equipments and materials5Grants credits, Guarantee Funds6Recurrent costs - salaries and 7Recurrent costs - operations and 8SDG 
108 
TABLE 6.2: WITHDRAWAL APPLICATION STATEMENT - IFAD GRANTWithdrawal application numberDate12345678Total local currencyDesignated account currency equivalentValue date (transfer to project)Rejected by IFAD / Recovery in closing periodNet reimbursedNet reimbursedValue date exchange rateEuroEuroEuroLoan currencySection A: Payment method - ReplenishmentApproved withdrawals-               -                      -               -                      -               -                      Total            -               -               -               -               -               -                      -                             -                             -                                  -                                       -   Category key:Civils works1Goods and services2Consultancies3Training and workshops4Equipments and materials5Grants credits, Guarantee Funds6Recurrent costs - salaries and 7Recurrent costs - operations and 8SDG 
109 
TABLE 6.3: WITHDRAWAL APPLICATION STATEMENT - GEFWithdrawal application numberDate12345678Total local currencyDesignated account currency equivalentValue date (transfer to project)Rejected by IFAD / Recovery in closing periodNet reimbursedNet reimbursedValue date exchange rateEuroEuroEuroLoan currencySection A: Payment method - ReplenishmentApproved withdrawals-               -                      -               -                      -               -                      Total            -               -               -               -               -               -                      -                             -                             -                                  -                                       -   Category key:Civils works1Goods and services2Consultancies3Training and workshops4Equipments and materials5Grants credits, Guarantee Funds6Recurrent costs - salaries and 7Recurrent costs - operations and 8SDG 
Fixed asset register 
Action tracker (supplementary) 
110 
TABLE 7: FIXED ASSET SCHEDULEAsset refDescriptionSourceCategoryLocationAssigned toTag nrSupplierInvoice nr/contractDate of purchaseDate of recieptPurchase priceRemarksAsset codeSource of financeNote on condition of assetTABLE 6: ACTION TRACKERDeadline#Audit or IFADRequirements/recommendations/actionsResponsible personCurrent status 
21.12 Appendix 1 
Financial: actual financial performance by financier; by component and disbursements by category 
Table 1:  Financial performance by financier (Euro ‘000) 
Appraisal  
Disbursements   Percent 
disbursed 
Financier 
IFAD Grant 
IFAD Loan 
GEF/LDCF Grant 
Government 
Beneficiaries 
Total 
Table 2: 
Financial performance by financier by component (Euro ‘000) 
IFAD grant/loan 
GEF/LDCF Grant 
Government 
Beneficiaries 
Total 
Component  Appraisal  Actual  %  Appraisal  Actual  %  Appraisal  Actual  %  Appraisal  Actual  %  Appraisal  Actual  % 
111 
Table 3(a):  IFAD loan disbursements (Euro, as at [Insert date: dd-m-yy]) 
Category  Category description 
Original  
Revised  
Allocation 
Allocation 
Disbursement  W/A pending 
Balance 
Per cent 
disbursed 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
Initial deposit 
Total 
Table 3(b):  IFAD grant disbursements (Euro, as at [Insert date: dd-m-yy]) 
Category  Category description 
Original  
Revised  
Allocation 
Allocation 
Disbursement  W/A pending 
Balance 
Per cent 
disbursed 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
Initial deposit 
Total 
Table 4: 
GEF disbursements (Euro, as at [Insert date: dd-m-yy]) 
112 
Category  Category description 
Original  
Revised  
Allocation 
Allocation 
Disbursement  W/A pending 
Balance 
Per cent 
disbursed 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
Initial deposit 
Total 
113 
21.13 Petty Cash forms 
Petty cash request form 
Date: 
Requested by: 
Signature of requester: 
Mode of payment: (tick selected):   
Unit  
price 
Quantit
y 
Total 
cost** 
Activity 
code 
Explanation / 
Comments 
o  Reimbursement 
o  Advance 
Description of 
purchases 
(goods/services) 
TOTAL AMOUNT* 
________________   
___________________ 
_________________ 
Approved by   
Processed by   
Payment received by 
Finance Officer 
Accountant 
* Total amount cannot exceed 500 SDG 
** Attach supporting document (invoice, receipt, etc.) 
114 
Petty cash reconciliation 
Date of reconciliation: 
Part 1. Petty cash reconciliation 
Petty cash balance brought forward (a) 
           ______________ 
Replenishments during the current month (b) 
            ______________ 
Total petty cash balance (c = a + b) 
______________ 
Disbursements during the current month (d) 
             ______________ 
Petty cash book balance (e = c – d) 
______________ 
Cash count balance (f) – see part 2. below  
______________ 
Difference (G = E – F) 
Explanation of Difference 
______________ 
______________________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________ 
Part 2 - Cash Count 
Description 
Quantity 
Total amount 
Total in SDG 
Counted/reconciled by (Programme accountant):      
Reviewed by (Financial Manager): 
Date: 
115 
21.14 Vehicle Log 
Vehicle registration number _____________________________ Assigned driver ______________________________ 
Date 
Time 
Departing  Arrival  Departing  Arrival  Destination  Purpose 
Mileage 
Trip 
Fuel purchase 
Mileage 
Quantity 
Driver 
signature 
Responsible 
staff 
Vehicle History Record 
Vehicle registration number     ______________________                   Assigned driver ____________________ 
Date  Repairs 
Service & maintenance 
Description of 
repair 
Garage  Cost  Description 
Garage 
Cost 
of service 
Insurance 
Type  
Period 
covered 
Fitness tests 
Cost 
Cost  Check
ed by  
116 
Report accidents in the space below, providing all relevant details for each occurrence: 
Date: 
Place: 
Name of driver: 
Circumstances: 
Damage to CPCU vehicle: 
Damage to other vehicles: 
Injuries (indicate name of victims and describe injuries): 
Insurance settlement: 
117 
Sudan
Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Risk Framework (IRF)
Document Date:
15/07/2019
Project No.
2000002105
Report No.
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
1/2
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
1. Political and governance
High
High
Promoting effective governance mechanisms with
appropriate incentives for implementation, building
institutional capacities.
2. Macroeconomic
High
High
3. Sector strategies and policies
Low
Low
4. Technical aspects of project or
program
Low
Low
Community-based implementation, using commercial
bank accounts to avoid disadvantageous exchange rate of
Central Bank of Sudan, mobilization of co-financing,
obtaining high-level governmental support.
Preparation of policy-relevant knowledge products based
on programme evidence, promoting inclusive policy
dialogue, integrating perspectives of different
stakeholders, proper coordination between different
stakeholders, building institutional capacities.
The programme builds on and upscales the achievements
of previous projects. At least 1 previous projects will be a
part of the clusters and influence changes.
Additionally, promoting participatory programme
approaches, organizing bottom-up community
mobilization, capacity building and awareness-raising,
building on best practise examples of previous successful
IFAD-funded projects, using demonstrations to encourage
voluntary imitation.
5. Institutional capacity for
implementation and sustainability
Low
Low
Local capacity building, community trainings, putting
emphasis on practical knowledge, demonstration and
exchange with other communities with already functioning
NR governance and management arrangements.
6. Financial management
High
High
Adequate and qualified staffing, reliable and functional
accounting software system, unified salaries and
allowances scale, effective internal controls systems
including independent internal audit and strong oversight
at all levels.
7. Procurement
Medium
High
Strong oversight of community level procurement
functions. Capacity building of procurement staff.
8. Stakeholders
Low
Medium
Strong communication, involvement of stakeholders and
showcasing the results. Training and capacity building of
stakeholders where needed.
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
2/2
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
9. Environment and social
Medium
High
Overall
Medium
Medium
Promoting sustainable and climate resilient agricultural
practices (rangeland rehabilitation and management
preserving buffer areas for dry years, terraces,
conservation agriculture, crop rotation and intercropping
with climate adapted varieties, composting, water
harvesting, IPM and other agro-ecological practices such
as permaculture).
Sudan
Sustainable Natural Resources and Livelihoods Programme
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Document Date:
15/07/2019
Project No.
2000002105
Report No.
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 10: Exit Strategy 
1. 
Exit Strategy 
SNRLP’s exit strategy will be based on: i) building community level organisations 
2. 
and human capacities; ii) developing partnerships and local linkages with the community 
organisations; iii) mobilising local and external resources; iv) calibrating the phasing of 
activities and resources; and v) supporting stakeholders to evolve their activities in the 
project area. 
Building community level organisations and human capacities: SNRLP will support 
3. 
the self-governance and management of the NRs in the clusters by a range of 
community level institutions that will allow smooth exit of the project. SNRLP will 
strengthen different types of small groups (NRLG, VSCGs, VWGs) and VDCs at the 
community level and CDCs at the cluster level. SNRLP will also capacitate these entities 
for the development, implementation and monitoring of the NR governance frameworks 
in the clusters leading to the improvement of the status of these NRs and the 
contribution of these NRs towards the economic development of the user communities. 
These institutions will also be responsible for the management of the community level 
investments such as hafirs, and water yards.  
SNRLP will support these institutions to develop necessary foundation documents, 
4. 
members rules and regulations and framework for activities and resource generation. 
Where relevant the project will support the registration of these institutions and the 
opening of their bank accounts. Capacity building training will be supported focusing on 
leadership aspects, project management areas, book keeping and financial management 
areas and a range of other technical areas to develop the human capacities necessary 
for transparent and robust management of these local institutions. To further support 
the community level institutions SNRLP will strengthening the capacity of the 
government technical departments at the State and locality levels through staff capacity 
building, exposure visits, relevant infrastructure support and knowledge management 
activities.  
Development of partnerships and local linkages: SNRLP’s cluster development 
5. 
approach will naturally support linkages and partnerships between different communities 
within a cluster. To further strengthening these partnerships SNRLP will support intra-
community linkages between different types of small groups (VSCGs, NRLP, VWG) within 
the communities and the respective VDCs. The VDCs will facilitate the eligible groups to 
access finance and carry out their activities smoothly while the small groups will ensure 
compliance to the VDC monitored NR governance framework during the implementation 
of their NR related enterprises. Similarly, SNRLP will facilitate inter-community linkages 
and partnerships between different VDCs and the relevant CDC. The CDCs will permit the 
VDCs to utilize the common/shared NRs in the cluster in a manner that is compliant with 
the NR governance framework established and monitored by the CDCs. Likewise, SNRLP 
will promote the linkage between pastoralists and settled communities through the 
representation of the pastoralists in the CDCs. 
SNRLP will also strengthen the linkages between the different technical 
6. 
departments of the government at the State and the locality level with the communities 
(VDC and CDC). For this, SNRLP will institutionalize the participation of the State and 
locality government representative in cluster level forums at least two times a year. 
Similarly, State level cluster stakeholder platform meetings will be organised at least 
once a year bringing together cluster and government representatives within the state 
for discussing different NR related issues. During these meetings NR related issues will 
be discussed for resolving challenges and facilitating appropriate planning and allocation 
of NR related resources by the government to the project supported clusters. SNRLP will 
also support the development of partnerships on linkages between the clusters and 
private-sector service providers such as financial institutions, machinery service 
providers, and inputs suppliers. 
Mobilising local and external resources: As a part of the exit strategy SNRLP will 
7. 
support the community institutions to mobilise local and external resources through a 
range of measures comprising: i) self-generation of internal capital from the different 
types of livelihood enterprises implemented by these institutions; ii) generation of 
membership and user fees for use of common NRs covered by these institutions; and iii) 
participation in the planning and allocation of government resources for the NR 
development activities in the project areas. The self-generation of internal capital will 
consist of internal savings and credit activities by VSCGs as well as other relevant small 
groups; allocation of a part of the returns from the livelihood enterprises for 
reinvestment in other NR development activities before distribution of profits to 
members; and recovery of the seed capital financing provided by the project by the 
different community level institutions to support repairs and maintenance of the assets 
and growth in outreach of these activities in the future. The NR governance framework 
developed by the clusters will define the appropriate membership fees and user fees 
related to the utilisation of the shared NR services by users. 
Phasing of activities and resources: SNRLP will calibrate the phasing of the project 
8. 
activities in a manner that allows sufficient time for the establishment, stabilisation 
strengthening and empowerment of the local institutions to function and develop on their 
own by the time of project closure. To facilitate this the selection of 75% of the clusters 
and local institutions will be completed within the first four years of implementation. It 
will allow sufficient time for training, capacity building and strengthening of these 
institutions to perform on their own by project closure. Simultaneously the project will 
pursue the scaling up of the success stories in the project supported clusters in other 
areas of the states through i) collaboration with other IFAD supported projects as well as 
projects implemented by other development partners; ii) promote collaboration between 
the State cluster stakeholder platform and the state government to implement the 
success stories in other clusters. 
Supporting stakeholders to evolve their activities in the project area: SNRLP will 
9. 
support the stakeholders to develop their roles and evolve in the project area in 
response to the issues and opportunities that emerge during project implementation. For 
example, the CDCs will be supported to include new villages as members as well as 
develop direct linkages with other CDCs. Similarly, financial institutions will be 
encouraged to expand their roles to support the full range of savings and credit 
requirements of the rural communities including financing for different actors in the 
value chains for both livestock and crop production activities.  
10. 
Sustainability 
SNRLP’s sustainability is embedded in the exit strategy and will be supported by a 
11. 
number of programme features. Institutional sustainability will be supported by the 
strengthening of a range of community level institutions such as small groups, VDCs and 
CDCs along with the development of partnerships between them for the implementation 
of livelihood related enterprises and the utilisation of shared natural resources. Resource 
mobilisation by these institutions through different mechanisms as described earlier will 
strengthen their institutional sustainability and capacitate them to continue reinvestment 
in the development of NR and continuation of the benefits after the end of the project. 
These institutions will also be involved in the management of the physical facilities which 
are developed using project resources contributing to the sustainability of the benefits of 
these facilities. The engagement of the pastoralists in the development of the NRLMPs at 
the cluster level will develop long-term solution to conflict between them and settled 
communities resulting in greater economic development in a peaceful environment. 
Marketing sustainability will be supported in partnership with the current IAMDP 
12. 
and LMRP projects which are involved in strengthening crop marketing services and 
livestock marketing services respectively. About 40% of the SNRLP communities will 
overlap with communities where current IFAD projects such as IAMDP and LMRP are 
implemented. Each SNRLP cluster is expected to have at least one community supported 
by these previous IFAD projects. SNRLP will collaborate with IAMDP and LMRP to 
facilitate the expansion of their market linkage services to all SNRLP supported 
communities within a cluster. This will lead to marketing sustainability of the project for 
both crop marketing activities (supported by IAMDP) and livestock marketing activities 
(supported by LMRP)  
Technical sustainability will be achieved through the capacity building of the 
13. 
relevant government technical departments. Additionally, the community level 
institutions along with the young professionals and business facilitators will be fully 
capacitated on the various technical aspects of the project. Additionally, success stories 
and good practices will be documented and widely circulated. SNRLP’s policy level 
interventions will reduce regulatory gaps, overlaps and bottlenecks related to the 
management, reduce ambiguities, conflicts and promote the sustainable NR 
management. The development and implementation of the NRLMP according to technical 
recommendations of the project will result in the technical sustainability of the NR 
management good practices promoted by the project. 
One of the main considerations for the approval and the adoption of the NRLMPs 
14. 
and NRLIPs by the CDCs and VDCs will be the extent to which they incorporate measures 
to promote resilience to climate change and prevent environmental degradation. The 
incorporation of these steps during the implementation stages will result in the 
sustainability of the benefits to the environment and climate change aspects. 
