Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development 
Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Main report and appendices 
Document Date:  27-Oct 2017 
Project No. 
Report No:  Post QA review version 
2000001517 
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Contents 
Currency equivalents 
Weights and measures 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
Map of the project area 
Executive Summary 
Logical Framework 
I. 
Strategic context and rationale 
A.
  Country and rural development context 
B.
  Rationale 
II.  Project description 
A.
B.
Project area and target group 
Targeting Strategy for the IAMDP 
C.
  Development objective and impact indicators 
D.
  Outcomes/Components 
E.
Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies and the SECAP 
III.  Project implementation 
A.
Approach 
B.
  Organizational framework 
C.
  Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management 
D.
E.
Financial management, procurement and governance 
Supervision 
F.
  Risk identification and mitigation 
IV.  Project costs, financing, benefits and sustainability 
A.
B.
Project costs 
Project financing 
C.
  Summary benefits and economic analysis 
D.
  Sustainability 
iv 
iv 
iv 
viii 
ix 
xiv 
1 
1 
4 
8 
8 
9 
11 
11 
30 
31 
31 
33 
34 
36 
40 
40 
41 
41 
41 
41 
43 
i 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
List of Tables 
Table 1:  Components project cost summary 
Table 2:  Components by financiers (US$ '000) 
Table 3: Three models based on farm budgets in Sinnar and South Kordofan 
Table 4: Three models based on farm budgets in West and North Kordofan 
Table 5: Crop growth rates (GR) as a result of improved production and marketing and the  
use of appropriate mechanization and assumed self-consumptions for selected crops 
Table 6: Four models based on crop budgets 
Table 7: Distribution of the households and area according to the project models 
Table 8: Distribution of the project area/beneficiaries in Sennar and South Kordofan 
Table 9: Distribution of the project area/beneficiaries in West & North Kordofan 
Table 10: Crops Farm Gate (FGP) prices for main and secondary crops in Sinnar and  
South Kordofan   
41 
41 
158 
158 
159 
159 
159 
160 
160 
160 
Table 11: Crops Farm Gate (FGP) prices for main and secondary crops in West  
and South Kordofan 
160 
161 
Table 12: Total number of casual labor for the three models, by model (person'000/day) 
Table 13: Total number of casual labor for the three models, by model (person'000/season)  161 
161 
Table 14: Financial Analysis for crop production in Sinnar and South Kordofan 
Table 15: Financial Analysis for Storage and marketing improvement in Sinnar and 
 South Kordofan   
Table 16: Financial Analysis for crop production in West and North Kordofan 
Table 15: Financial Analysis for Storage and marketing improvement in West and  
North Kordofan 
Table 18: Inflation rates and estimated exchange rates 
Table 19: Economic prices, world prices and HS codes for the four crops 
Table 20: EIRR base cases and sensitivity analyses 
Table 21: The risk of delay in benefits 
Figure 1: Theory of Change 
162 
162 
162 
163 
163 
164 
164 
7 
ii 
45 
47 
55 
67 
107 
111 
113 
119 
121 
125 
131 
135 
157 
197 
199 
203 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendices 
Detailed project description 
Poverty, targeting and gender 
Country and rural context background 
Country performance and lessons learned 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Appendix 1: 
Appendix 2: 
Appendix 3: 
Appendix 4: 
Appendix 5: 
Appendix 6: 
Appendix 7: 
Appendix 7.1: 
Appendix 7.2:   Summary of financial management risks and mitigating actions 
Appendix 8: 
Appendix 8.2: 
Appendix 9: 
Appendix 10: 
Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Economic and financial analysis 
18 Months procurement plan 
Project cost and financing 
Flow of funds chart 
Procurement 
Appendix 11:    Project Implementation 
Appendix 12:    Compliance with IFAD policies 
Appendix 13: 
Contents of the project life file 
iii 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Currency equivalents 
Currency Unit 
USD 1.0 
= 
= 
Sudanese Pounds (SDG) 
SDG 15.88 
Weights and measures 
1 Feddan 
= 
4200 sq.m 
Abbreviations and acronyms 
ABSUMI 
Agricultural Bank of Sudan Microfinance Initiative 
AFD 
AfDB 
AFSTA 
APT 
ARC 
ARP 
AWPB 
BIRDP 
CAADP 
CAP 
CBO 
CBS 
CC 
CCU 
Agence Francais de Developpment (French Aid Agency) 
African Development Bank 
African Seed Trade Association 
Adaptation Planning Team (service provider) 
Agricultural Research Centre 
Agriculture Revival Project 
Annual Work Plan & Budget 
Butana Integrated Rural Development Project 
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Project 
Community Action Plan 
community-based organization 
Central Bank of Sudan 
Climate Change 
Central Coordination Unit (MoAI, for IFAD Funded Projects) 
CFSVA 
Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis (WFP) 
COMESA 
Common Market for Eastern & Southern Africa 
CPF 
CPIA 
CPP 
DA 
DSF 
DVA 
DVM 
ECCA 
ECD 
Country Project Framework (FAO) 
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment 
Country Project Paper (Drought Emergencies in the Horn of Africa) 
Designated Account 
Debt Sustainability Framework 
domestic value added 
Derived Variable Model 
Environmental and Climate Change Assessment 
Environment and Climate Division (IFAD) 
iv 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
ECMWF 
European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts 
EFA 
EIRR 
EIU 
ELP 
EM-DAT 
ENABLE 
ENRM 
EPA 
ERP 
ESR 
EWS 
FAO 
FC 
economic and financial analysis 
economic internal rate of return 
Economist Intelligence Unit 
Extension-Link Producer 
The International Disaster Data Base 
Empowering Noble Agri-business Led Employment 
environmental and natural resource management 
Environment Protection Act 
Emergency Response Plan 
Environmental and Social Review 
Early Warning System 
Food and Agriculture Organisation (UN) 
Financial Controller 
FEWS NET 
Famine Early Warning System Network 
FIRR 
FNC 
GALS 
GAPA 
financial internal rate of return 
Forestry National Corporation 
Gender Action Learning System  
Gum Arabic Producers Association 
GAPMP 
Gum Arabic Production and Marketing Project 
GHI 
GoS 
Global Hunger Index 
Government of Republic of the Sudan 
GSLRP 
Gash Sustainable Livelihoods Regeneration Project 
HACCP/ISO 
Hazard Analysis Critical Control Points/International Standardization Organisation 
HCENR 
Higher Council for Environment and Natural Resources (UN) 
HDI 
HH 
HIPC 
ICB 
ICO 
ICR 
ICT 
IES 
IFI 
IGAD 
IPM 
ILPMP 
ISMGF 
IPRSP 
IRR 
Human Development Index 
Household 
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative 
International Competitive Bidding 
IFAD Country Office 
Implementation Completion Report 
information communication technology 
Institute of Environmental Studies 
Intermediate Financial Institution 
Inter-Governmental Authority on Development 
Integrated Pest Management  
Improving Livestock Production and Marketing Project  
Innovation Scale-up Matching Grant Facility 
Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 
internal rate of return 
v 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
IsDB 
LET 
LMRP 
MFU 
MICS 
MICT 
MIS 
MoAI 
MAAWI 
MoFEP 
MoLFR 
MSP 
MoU 
MUVI 
NAO 
NAP 
NAPA 
NBHS 
NCB 
NDDU 
NEN 
NGO 
NPPD 
NPV 
PA 
PCU 
PPPP 
RAP 
RAU 
RCM 
RFO 
RFU 
Islamic Development Bank 
Locality Extension Team 
Livestock Marketing and Resilience Project 
Micro Finance Unit 
Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey  
Mobile Information and Communications Technology 
market information system 
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry 
Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Wealth and Irrigation 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning 
Ministry of Livestock, Fisheries and Rangelands 
Mechanised Service Provider 
Memorandum of Understanding 
Manufactures Unit Value Index 
National Audit Office 
National Adaptation Plan 
National Adaptation Programme of Action 
National Baseline Household Survey 
National Competitive Bidding 
National Drought and Desertification Unit 
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division (IFAD) 
non-governmental organisation 
National Plant Protection Directorate 
Net Present Value 
producers associations  
Project Coordination Unit 
Public-Private-Producer-Partnership 
Rural Access Project 
Rural Agricultural Unit 
Regional Climate Model  
Rural Finance Extension Officer 
Rural Finance Unit 
RSGPMP 
Revitalizing the Sudan Gum Production and Marketing Project 
SGAMP 
Sudan Gum Arabic Production and Marketing Project 
SA 
SAGA 
SAI 
SBD 
SCCF 
SCF 
Seed Administration 
Sudan Agrochemical Association 
Supreme Audit Institution 
Standard Bid Document 
Special Climate Change Fund 
Standard Conversion Factor 
vi 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
SCG 
SDAT 
SDP 
SEC 
SECS 
SGG 
SHF 
SIFSIA 
SPIU 
SKRDP 
SMDC 
SSP 
SUDNAIP 
SUSTAIN 
ToT 
WFP 
WSRMP 
YABIC 
hafir 
jubraka 
sanduq 
Savings & Credit Group 
State-level Development & Adaptation Team 
Seeds Development Project 
State Environmental Council 
Sudanese Environment Conservation Society 
Seed Growing Group 
smallholder farmer 
Sudan Integrated Food Security Information for Action 
State Project Implementation Unit 
South Kordofan Rural Development Project 
Sudan Microfinance Development Corporation  
spray service provider 
Sudan’s National Agriculture Investment Plan  
Supporting Small-scale Traditional Rainfed Producers in Sinnar State 
Training of trainers 
World Food Project 
Western Sudan Resources Management Project 
Youth Agri-Business Incubation Centres  
water storage structure 
gardens near the homestead 
Community-managed village microfinance system 
wadi crossing 
bridge built over feeder roads 
vii 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Map of the project area 
viii 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Executive Summary1 
 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
Strategic context – Sudan is endowed with 61 million ha of arable land (of which 17.4 million 
ha are cultivated) and 104 million livestock heads. Sudan GNI per capita was estimated at 
US$1920 for 2016, while inflation rate is still at double digit level (11% in 2017). The high 
inflation rate was driven by the recent devaluation of the local currency. Sudan economy is 
characterised by the existence of dual exchange rates: one official rate of 6.5 SDG per 1 USD 
and one commercial rate of 15.8 SDG per 1 USD. Comprehensive US sanctions on Sudan, 
levied in 1997 and expanded in 2006, were eased in January 2017, allowing for financial and 
trade transactions between US citizens and entities, and their Sudanese counterparts.  
Agriculture is important to Sudan’s economy given that: (i) agriculture accounts for nearly one-
third of the national GDP; (ii) nearly half of the national workforce is engaged in agriculture (i.e. 
crop, livestock, fisheries and forestry production) and agro processing industries; (iii) two thirds 
of total population of Sudan (36.2 million) live in rural areas; (iv) the national poverty rate is 47 
percent; with 58 percent of the population classified as rural poor; and (v) 3.9 million people are 
food insecure. The rainfed production system is an important agricultural subsector, typically 
divided into semi-mechanised farming, traditional crop production and livestock systems. 
Depending on rainfall, the rainfed subsectors contributed three-quarters of foreign exchange 
earnings from agricultural exports. Semi-mechanised rainfed farming is practiced by large 
farmers and companies with low rent leases granted by the federal government and produces 
40 percent of the country’s sorghum, 62 percent of sesame and 90 percent of sunflower and 
cotton grown in the country. Traditional rainfed farming is practiced by family households with 
farms ranging from two to 50 hectares in size, farming for income and subsistence. Traditional 
rainfed farming covers about 18 million feddans 2, growing about 95 percent of the country’s 
millet, 38 percent of sorghum, 67 percent of groundnut and 38 percent of sesame. The 
subsector also grows gum Arabic, rosella and melon seeds for export. 
Climate change impacts in Sudan: In Sudan, many studies have confirmed that climate 
change has had major impact on the fragile environments and the livelihoods of the rural poor, 
particularly in rainfed areas. Studies suggest that by 2060, average temperatures are expected 
to rise (1.5oC and 3.1oC) and rainfall to decrease in magnitude and frequency (about 6mm per 
month during the rainy season. The impact of such changes on agriculture is: (i) reduction of the 
area available for crop production due to a southward shift in moist agro climatic zones; and (ii) 
decrease in the food crop yield between 13 percent and 82 percent for sorghum and between 
20 percent and 76 percent for millet, and in the production of the gum Arabic between 
25 percent and 30 percent.   
Justification and Rationale - Productivity in rainfed cropping systems is declining due to land 
degradation, reduced soil fertility, traditional tillage practices, lack of quality seed and lack of 
knowledge on improved management practices. Use of improved seeds, minimum tillage/water 
harvesting, mechanized planting, and improved weed control technologies in pilot projects have 
clearly demonstrated major improvements in crop yields. Other challenges facing rainfed crop 
production include unpredictability of rainfall that typically allows only 40 to 80 percent of the 
area planted to be harvested and pests and diseases (including locusts). There is an urgent 
need for households to diversify their sources of income and add value to what they produce. 
The lack of accessible rural financial services and appropriate extension are also major 
impediments. 
1 The mission consisted of Mr. Abdelhamid Abdouli (Mission Leader), Mr. Don Greenberg (Marketing and Business 
Development Specialist), Mr. Mohamed Omran (Economic and Financial Specialist), Mr. Swandip (Rural Finance Specialist), 
Ms. Mia Madsen (Associate Programme Officer, IFAD), Mr. Ahmed Gabir Subahi, (Country Programme Officer, IFAD) and 
Mr. El-Fadul Ahmed Ishag, (Programme Support Officer, IFAD). Mr. Tarek Ahmed (Country Programme Manager, IFAD) joined 
the mission during part of its stay in Sudan and supervised the overall mission work. 
2 One feddan is 4,200 m2, or 1.038 acres or 0.42 ha. 
ix 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
 5.
 6.
 7.
 8.
 9.
IFAD conducted a value chain study on the three most important crops for the traditional rainfed 
small-scale farming in Sudan: sesame, groundnut, and sorghum (March 2017). In addition, 
IFAD and WB commissioned a study on gum Arabic, as input to the PCR of the IFAD-WB 
supported Revitalizing the Sudan Gum Arabic Production and Marketing Project which have 
been updated by market studies developed by the ongoing pilot AFD-financed RSGPMP. The 
three main conclusions of these studies: (i) the high comparative advantage of rainfed areas in 
Sinnar, North, South and West Kordofan in the production of the three field crops and gum 
Arabic agroforestry; (ii) the existence of a well-established national and international markets 
with increasing demand for the crops; and (iii) the importance of these crops for the livelihoods 
and resilience of the smallholder rainfed farmers, rural women and youth in the project area. 
Sesame, groundnuts and gum Arabic are the main sources of income as cash crops3. Sorghum 
is a major source of household food security, but for households with surpluses it is also an 
important cash crop.   
The key findings of GAPMP and RSGPMP on gum Arabic are: (i) ensuring that higher farm-gate 
prices are received by producers through measures to improve quality and better market access 
have a large impact on profits; (ii) pre-financing of tapping operations will allow greater 
productivity and production and higher revenues; (iii) when producer incomes are high there is a 
strong desire to protect and expand planting of gum Arabic trees, with a positive impact on the 
environment and climate change.  
Project Area – IAMDP will be implemented in the four states of Sinnar, North Kordofan, South 
Kordofan, and West Kordofan. The main source of livelihood among rural populations in project 
area is traditional rainfed agriculture (crop production, animal husbandry (mainly of small 
ruminants)) and forest-based activities (mainly gum Arabic).  
Target Group – The IAMDP will intervene in 129 villages targeting 27,000 smallholder 
households, including small producers, rural women and youth (engaged as spray and 
mechanised service providers, and agro dealers at the village level). Of these 129, 66 villages 
are from the current SDP and SUSTAIN projects and 63 will be new villages.  In North Kordofan 
state the IAMDP targets 3,343 rural HHs, of which 671 are women-headed HHs. The total 
number of village population targeted is estimated to be 21,412, of which 50 percent are women 
and 30 percent are youth. In West Kordofan IAMDP targets 1,428 rural HHs, of which 344 are 
women-headed. The total number of village population targeted in WK is estimated to be 9,065 
of which 50 percent are women and 30 percent are youth. In South Kordofan IAMDP targets 
6,026 rural HHs, of which 1,508 are women headed HHs. The total number of village population 
targeted in SK is estimated to be 40,045 of which 50 percent are women and 30 percent are 
youth. In Sinnar state IAMDP targets 15,876 rural HHs, of which 2,381 are women-headed HHs. 
The total population in villages targeted by the IAMDP in Sinnar state is estimated to be 82,082. 
Of these about 50 percent are women and 30 percent are youth. 
The same studies concluded that there is a great wealth of traditional knowledge and skills by 
smallholder farmers on semi-subsistence cropping and livestock systems, under harsh climactic 
conditions and a non-supportive enabling environment. But these traditional knowledge and 
skills are not enough to break the cycle of poverty.  Smallholder farmers have little technical 
knowledge about improved or proper, land preparation, seeds, inputs, planting, weeding, 
harvesting, storage, and market opportunities. They lack the business skills to make sound 
decisions about inputs, services, finance, and marketing, directly or through their associations.   
 10.
The two ongoing and about to close SUSTAIN and SDP (and to a lesser extent WSRMP) 
projects have focusses on improving food security, incomes and resilience to shocks of the 
smallholder producers in rainfed areas of Sinnar, North, South and West Kordofan. However, 
3 Sudan has made remarkable progress in reducing levels of aflatoxin in groundnuts down to levels required by even the most 
stringent markets (e.g. the EU).  Groundnut exports have increased dramatically in the past year or two, and if the 2017 season 
is favorable, Sudan will export over 100,000 MTS of groundnuts (compared to 3,300 MTs in 2015).   Exports of groundnut oil 
and seedcake are also growing dramatically.  
x 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
 11.
 12.
 13.
 14.
 15.
these projects were not originally designed to work through private sector service providers, nor 
to develop partnerships with private companies for input and/or output market access.  Only at a 
later stage of implementation did the SUSTAIN and SDP projects succeeded in testing the 
model of private public partnership between farming households and the private sector suppliers 
of inputs (such as certified seeds, fertilizers) and services (such as chisel ploughing, spraying, 
etc.). 
Building on achievements and lessons learned from implementation of SUSTAIN, SDP and 
WSRMP, the rationale for IAMDP is based on four main lessons learned: (i) projects support 
was limited to only 52 percent of reachable poor villages; (ii)  adoption of improved agricultural 
practices is linked to exposure though demonstrations led by extension teams, but much more 
needs to be done on building the supply chain down to the small-scale farmers and on the 
private sector provision of extension services wherever possible to complement the public 
sector; (iii) initial adoption with limited scaling-up is mainly by large farmers (who have the 
financial means and ready access to required services) or by smaller farmers who access to 
financial and technical services; (iv) focus was more on productivity enhancement and 
production increase with less emphasis on post-harvest processing and marketing; and (v) rural 
finance is a key to enable farmers to invest in agricultural production.   
The IAMDP will (i) consolidate the investment activities supported by the ending projects; and 
(ii) move from demonstration to scale-up to the same and additional geographical areas where 
other smallholder farmers face similar challenges on low crop productivity, limited access to 
market and finance, and vulnerability to climate change. IAMDP will rely on the following 
success factors: (i) build on the experience of previous projects in the area; (ii) involve well-
capacitated communities with adequate organizational structures, and work and capacitate the 
already existing extension teams at the locality level; (iii) engage with emerging village-based 
private sector operators; and (iv) tap into the project management experience and staff 
dedication of the PCUs of SUSTAIN and SDP. 
Project’s Goal and Development Objective – The goal of the IAMDP is to ‘enhance food 
security and reduce poverty in poor rural households’, through investment in crop production, 
marketing and capacity building of public and private service providers. The Project 
Development Objective (PDO) and central strategy of IAMDP is to improve household incomes 
and resilience to climate change of the smallholder producers, rural women and youth in rainfed 
areas of Sinnar, North, South and West Kordofan states. Project objectives would be met 
through better access to improved agricultural inputs and services, enhanced business skills, 
access to rural finance and appropriate marketing support, and better organisation of producer’s 
associations.   
Project Components - The project’s development objective will be achieved through the 
effective implementation of three technical components and a project management component. 
Component 1: Enhanced crop productivity and production. The expected outcome is 
enhanced smallholder productivity, quality, and production of the main cash crops (sesame, 
groundnuts and gum Arabic) and sorghum as the main staple crop. The outcome will be 
achieved by increasing smallholders’ access to an improved quality inputs and services, 
demonstrated to be cost-effective under local conditions, and supplied by private village or 
locality based service providers. Five main activities will be supported: (i) village-based private 
service provider and agrodealers capacity building; (ii) innovation and on-farm demonstrations; 
(iii) engagement with national private sector companies; (iv) gum Arabic production, productivity, 
and quality support; (iv) climate change resilience building; and (v) promotion of home garden 
(jubraka) cultivation for enhanced nutrition and food security. 
 16.
Component 2: Market linkage and value addition. The expected outcome is higher income 
for the smallholder producers through improved market access, introduction and strengthening 
of village-based post-harvest crop storage, and introduction of value addition/market linkage 
xi 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
 17.
 18.
 19.
 20.
 21.
 22.
activities to increase the net returns from cash crops. Three main activities will be supported: (i) 
physical market access (wadi crossings); (ii) storage facilities development; and (iii) market 
linkages and value addition (village processing). 
Component 3: Enabling environment. The expected outcome is improved smallholder access 
to finance, a higher level of smallholder business competency, and strong, active farmer 
producer associations with a purpose and activities that go beyond receiving project support.  
Two main activities will be supported: (i) farmers associations strengthening and business skills 
development; and (ii) improved access to locally available rural finance. Better access of the 
rural poor to finance would be achieved through development and strengthening of SCGs and 
their village level associations, and partnership with PFIs, including banks, microfinance 
institutions and micro insurance providers but also including value chain finance partners 
including suppliers of equipment and services and buyers of crops.  
Component 4:  Project implementation – The lead project agency will be the Federal Ministry 
of Agriculture and Forestry. A Project Coordination unit (PCU) will be established in El Obeid in 
North Kordofan State to provide overall leadership and oversight of implementation activities. 
The implementation activities will be conducted by the four State Project Implementation Units 
(SPIU), to be established one in the Sinnar State and one each in North Kordofan, South 
Kordofan and West Kordofan.  The lead PCU would include the following key staff: principal 
project coordinator, a technical team led by a private sector engagement/marketing specialist, 
production specialist, and rural finance specialist as well as the finance manager, senior M&E 
and KM officer, community and gender development officer, procurement officer, and an 
accountant.  
In each State SPIU, the key project staff would consist of a State project coordinator, M&E and 
KM officer, private sector coordinator, marketing coordinator, crop protection specialist, 
mechanization specialist, community and gender development officer, accountant, and rural 
finance officer. The required SPIU staff would be recruited on a competitive basis, including but 
not limited to secondment from relevant government state offices.  At the field level, the 
multidisciplinary locality extension teams (LET) will play a key role in the project implementation 
at the village level. Each LET consists of the following staff: locality private sector officer/team 
leader, locality crop protection officer, locality mechanisation officer, locality agroforestry officer, 
locality marketing officer, locality rural finance and community gender development officer. Most 
of these teams have been trained by SUSTAIN, SDP and WSRMP on targeting and gender 
focus, participatory transfer of technology, management of demonstrations, and liaison with 
private operators but much more will need to be done by IAMDP to deepen their knowledge and 
to take care of the high levels of staff turnover. 
In order to take advantage of their experience and for a fast take-off of project implementation, it 
would be preferable to retain the good performing and competent staff of the above mentioned 
positions currently in charge of management and implementation of SUSTAIN and SDP. Other 
required staff would be recruited on a competitive basis, including secondment from relevant 
government state offices.  
Social, Environment and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) – A project SECAP has 
been prepared as part of the design. Based on IFAD SECAP criteria, IAMDP has been 
categorized as category B, namely that it does not present any irreversible impacts on the short 
or long term or during construction and /or operations.  
Project costs and financing – The total project costs for a period of six years are estimated at 
US$47.5 million.  Project cost would be financed as follows: IFAD DSF grant of US$26 million, 
Government contribution of US$8.8 million, private sector (including agro dealers, mechanised 
service providers, banks) contribution of US$10.2 million, and beneficiaries’ contribution of 
US$2.5 million. 
xii 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
 23.
 24.
Project economic internal rate of return and net present value – The EIRR on the 
investments in the IAMDP area over 20 years is estimated at 20.54 percent. The economic 
analysis suggests that the project is feasible and the EIRR is robust for an increase in cost, 
reduction of revenues or delays in benefits.  
Alignment with IFAD policies and strategies - IAMDP project is in line with IFAD Strategic 
Framework 2016-2025, NEN COSOP for Sudan and relevant IFAD policies. The project 
activities, implementation arrangements and M&E system have been designed in compliance 
with IFAD Targeting Policy, IFAD policy on gender equality and women’s empowerment and in 
line with the approaches outlined in the Framework for Gender Mainstreaming in IFAD 
investment operations. The project is designed to be consistent with IFAD’s Private Sector 
Development and Partnership Strategy, its Rural Finance Policy and the associated Decision 
Tools for Rural Finance. The preliminary environmental and social category is B, considering 
that the project approach will promote use of climate resilient technologies of particular 
relevance to Sudan, IAMDP is also fully in line with IFAD's policy on Engagement in Fragile and 
Conflict-affected States and Situations. 
xiii 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Logical Framework 
Results Hierarchy 
Name 
Unit 
Multiplier  Baseline  Midterm 
End 
Target 
Source 
Frequency 
Responsi- 
bility 
Indicators 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions (A) / 
Risks (R) 
Macro-economic 
stability (A) 
US sanctions lifted 
(A) 
Estimated corresponding 
total number of 
households members (CI 
1.b) 
Number of households 
reached  
(CI 1.a) 
Number of persons 
receiving project services 
promoted or supported by 
the project  
(CI 1) 
Number of villages 
receiving project services 
promoted or supported by 
the project 
Percentage of women 
reporting improved quality 
of their diets (CI 1.2.8) 
Percentage of targeted 
households with 30% 
increases in asset 
ownership index 
Number 
Household 
member 
0 
78,000  162,000 
Number  Household 
0 
13,000 
27,000 
Number  Person 
0 
26,000 
54,000 
Number 
New 
villages 
Number  Old villages 
% 
Female 
0 
0 
0 
24 
23 
66 
63 
30% 
60% 
% 
Household 
0 
40% 
80% 
Number of households 
reporting 20% increase in 
income  
Number  Household 
0 
11,000 
21,600 
Outreach 
Goal: Contribution to food 
and nutrition security and 
reduction of poverty in 
poor rural households 
Project  Development 
Objective: 
Enhanced income for 
smallholder farmers 
through access to 
improved agricultural 
inputs, climate resilient 
technologies, services, 
rural finance and 
marketing outlets 
xiv 
 Project 
baseline 
study, mid-
term review 
and 
completion 
report 
 Specialized 
thematic 
studies 
Baseline, 
Mid-term, 
Completion 
PCU M&E unit 
Overall political and 
economic situation 
remains stable (A) 
Stability of prices in 
agricultural 
commodities (A) 
Macroeconomic 
conditions remains 
stable (A)  
Climate change 
effects are 
contained (R) 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Results Hierarchy 
Outcome 1: 
Enhanced smallholder 
climate resilient 
productivity and 
production 
Output 1.1: Private 
service provider and agro-
dealer capacity built  
Indicators 
Means of Verification 
Name 
Unit 
Multiplier  Baseline  Midterm 
End 
Target 
Source 
Frequency 
Responsi- 
bility 
Assumptions (A) / 
Risks (R) 
Households reporting at 
least a 25 % increase in 
production  
(CI 1.2.4) 
Number of households 
reporting adoption of 
new/improved inputs, 
technologies and practices 
 (CI 1.2.2) 
Number of village service 
providers and agro-
dealers supported by the 
project to improve their 
service delivery and 
business skills 
% 
Household 
0 
40% 
Number  Household 
0 
11,000 
80%   Project 
baseline 
study, mid-
term review 
and 
completion 
report 
21,600 
Number 
Service 
provider/ 
agro-dealer 
0 
20 
60 
 Project 
baseline 
study, mid-
term review 
and 
completion 
report 
 Specialised 
thematic 
studies 
Baseline, 
Mid-term, 
Completion 
PCU M&E unit 
Stability of project 
area is not 
adversely affected 
Climate change 
effects are 
contained 
Output 1.2:  CC resilient 
On-Farm and Innovation 
Demonstrations 
established 
Output 1.3:  Higher 
Engagement of local SMEs 
with National Private 
Sector Companies 
Number of persons 
trained on CC resilient 
production practices 
and/or technologies (CI 
1.1.4) 
Number of local SMEs 
(input suppliers, service 
providers) with business 
connections to the private 
sector 
Number 
Smallholder 
farmers 
0 
15,000 
27,000 
Number  SME 
0 
40 
200 
 PCU and 
stakeholder 
records 
Quarterly 
basis 
PCU M&E unit 
Outcome 2: Higher 
income for smallholder 
producers 
Percentage of smallholder 
farmers reporting at least 
20% increase in income 
(Same as PDO indicator)  
% 
Smallholder 
farmers 
0  
40%  
80%  
 Project 
baseline 
study, mid-
term review 
and 
completion 
report 
Baseline, 
Mid-term, 
Completion 
PCU M&E unit 
Stability of prices in 
agricultural 
commodities 
xv 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Indicators 
Means of Verification 
Name 
Unit 
Multiplier  Baseline  Midterm 
End 
Target 
Source 
Frequency 
Responsi- 
bility 
Assumptions (A) / 
Risks (R) 
Results Hierarchy 
Output 2.1: Improved 
Physical Market Access 
(wadi crossings) 
Output 2.2: Increased 
value added (village 
processing) and market 
linkage. 
Outcome 3: Sustainable 
pro-poor financial and 
organisational 
environment established. 
Number of climate 
resilient wadi crossings 
constructed 
Number of climate 
resilient processing or 
storage facilities 
established or 
rehabilitated (CI 3.1.4) 
Number of producer 
associations engaged in 
formal 
partnerships/contracts 
with public or private 
partnerships (CI 2.2.3) 
Number  Crossing 
0  
15  
24  
Number 
Storage/ 
processing 
facility 
0  
30  
85  
 PCU and 
stakeholder 
records 
Monthly 
basis 
Number 
Producer 
association 
0 
80 
130 
Output 3.1: Pro-poor 
financial institutions fully 
operational in project area. 
Number of local service 
providers taking loans 
and/or loan insurance  
Number 
Service 
provider 
0 
30 
60 
Number of households 
taking crop production 
loans and/or crop 
insurance (CI 1.2.5) 
Number of producer’s 
associations established 
and registered  
Number of smallholder 
farmers reporting increase 
in sales  
Number  Household 
0 
15,000 
25,000 
Number 
Producer 
association 
0 
80 
130 
Number  People 
0 
11,000 
21,600 
Output 3.2: Farmers 
associations strengthened 
Output 3.3: Business 
oriented production and 
marketing systems 
established. 
 Project 
baseline 
study, mid-
term review 
and  
completion 
report 
 PFI records 
Baseline,  
Mid-term, 
Completion 
Monthly 
basis 
PCU M&E unit 
PFIs 
Macroeconomic 
conditions remains 
stable 
*Up to 15 indicators including a few optional RIMS indicators. In addition to these, RIMS mandatory indicators must be added. **The distribution of indicators is illustrative 
***Intermediate targets for the Goal and Outputs are optional. 
xvi 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
I.  Strategic context and rationale 
A.  Country and rural development context 
 1.
The Sudan’s total area is estimated at 1,881,000 km2. The country is endowed with 61 million 
ha of arable land, of which 17.4 million ha are cultivated, 14 million ha natural pasture, and 
21 million ha forests (covering about 11.6 percent of the total area of the country). The livestock 
population is estimated at 104 million heads. 
 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.
 6.
 7.
Sudan GNI per capita was estimated at US$1920 for 2016, while inflation rate is still at double 
digit level (11% in 2017. In addition to the high and persistent inflation rate, the country faces 
the challenge of continuous weak local currency. Throughout the last five decades, a number of 
exchange rate policies have been adopted in Sudan; including fixed, floating and dual 
exchange rate regimes.  The main goal of this policy was to reduce the external imbalances 
through encouraging exports, and attracting remittances of Sudanese nationals working 
abroad. In late 2016 the Central Bank of Sudan introduced an incentive policy and increased 
the exchange rate in commercial banks. As a result, the US dollar exchange rate went up in 
banks to SDG 15.8 in comparison with to the official rate of SDG 6.5.  
With the loss of oil fields and production to South Sudan in mid-2011, the agriculture sector has 
regained its role as a major source of growth for the economy of Sudan. Agriculture and 
livestock are essential to Sudan’s economic diversification and contribution to medium-term 
macro-economic stability. While these sectors presently contribute approximately 35-40 percent 
of Gross Domestic Product (GDP), they could contribute significantly more with greater 
investment and better governance. Sudan now recognizes the need for greater attention to 
agriculture and livestock, as reflected in its Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (I-PRSP) 
and the Five-year Program for Economic Reforms approved by its parliament in December 
2014 (WB overview, April 2017). Despite the importance of the agriculture sector in the overall 
economy, rural poverty in Sudan remains high and poverty rates are substantially higher in rural 
areas, with 57.6% compared to 26.5% in urban areas. 
Sudan GNI per capita was estimated at US$1920 (World Bank Atlas, 2016). The country 
remains a highly indebted country that has accumulated sizeable external arrears. At the end of 
2015, Sudan’s external debt amounted to US$50 billion (61 percent of GDP) in nominal terms, 
about 84 percent of which was in arrears (WB overview, April 2017). The country is eligible for 
debt relief under the Highly-Indebted Poor Countries Initiative.  
Comprehensive US sanctions on Sudan, levied in 1997 and expanded in 2006, were eased in 
January 2017, allowing for financial and trade transactions between US citizens and entities, 
and their Sudanese counterparts. However, the order to ease sanctions is under six-month 
review and could either be rescinded or made permanent.  
Agricultural Sector. Several reports (IFAD SUSTAIN PDR 2012, IFAD LMRP 2014, FAO Plan of 
Action 2015-2019, 2015) clearly indicate that agriculture is important to Sudan’s economy given 
that: (i) the two thirds of total population of Sudan (36.2 million) live in rural areas; (ii) the 
national poverty rate is 47 percent; but 58 percent of the population are rural poor; 
(iii) 3.9 million people are food insecure (November/December 2014 IPC Report), 
(iv) agriculture accounts for nearly one-third of the national GDP; and (v) nearly half of the 
national workforce is engaged in agriculture (i.e. crop, livestock, fisheries and forestry 
production) and agro processing industries. 
Challenges to the Agriculture Sector.  The strengths and weaknesses of Sudan’s agriculture 
sector reflect the need for a focus on: (i) development of technical and functional capacity for 
policy and planning; (ii)  enhancement of agriculture productivity and production; (iii) increasing 
public and private sector agricultural research and development; (iv) public and private 
investment in rural infrastructure, e.g. irrigation systems, slaughterhouses, agro processing 
1 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
 8.
 9.
 10.
 11.
 12.
facilities and markets; and (v) expanding disaster risk management to include challenges 
arising from climate change.  
Climate change.  In Sudan, climate change scenarios4  were formulated for projected changes 
in temperatures and precipitations by 2030 and 2060 for the States of North and South 
Kordofan only. Although these two states are located to the west of Sinnar State, they cover the 
latitude zone of Sinnar State. This suggests that the temperature and precipitation change are 
likely to be of similar magnitude in Sinnar and Kordofan and the impacts on the agriculture 
sector and rural livelihoods similar. The average temperatures are expected to rise significantly 
relative to the baseline (1961-1990). By 2060, average temperatures are expected to rise from 
between 1.5oC and 3.1oC above the baseline during August (rainy season), and from between 
1.1oC to 2.1oC during January (beginning of dry season). Average rainfall is also expected to 
reduce by about 6mm per month during the rainy season. The impact of such changes on 
agriculture is: (i) reduction of the area available for crop production due to a southward shift in 
moist agro climatic zones; and (ii) decrease in the crop yield between 13 percent and 
82 percent for sorghum and between 20 percent and 76 percent for millet, and in the production 
of the gum Arabic between 25 percent and 30 percent (assuming no mitigation measures)  
The rainfed sector is typically divided into semi-mechanised farming, traditional crop production 
and livestock system although there is a trend towards smaller-scale farmers adopting 
improved inputs and equipment and transitioning from subsistence to commercial production. 
Depending on rainfall, the rainfed subsectors contributed three-quarters of foreign exchange 
earnings from agricultural exports. 
Semi-mechanised rainfed farming is practiced by large farmers and companies with low rent 
leases granted by the federal government. It is characterised by cheap access to land allowing 
unlimited horizontal expansion and a low-input/low-output system with limited concern for 
sustainable land management. Investors plant according to market prices and availability of 
loans and subsidies. Semi-mechanised rainfed farming cultivates 14 million feddans, 
predominantly producing commercial sorghum grain and sesame for export. The subsector 
produces 40 percent of the country’s sorghum, 62 percent of sesame and 90 percent of 
sunflower and short-staple cotton grown in the country.  
Traditional rainfed farming is practiced by family households with farms ranging from two to 
50 hectares in size, farming for income and subsistence. Traditional rainfed farming covers 
about 18 million feddans, growing about 95 percent of the country’s millet, 38 percent of 
sorghum, 67 percent of groundnut and 38 percent of sesame. The subsector also grows gum 
Arabic, rosella and melon seeds for export. 
Productivity in rainfed cropping systems is declining due to land degradation, reduced soil 
fertility, inappropriate tillage practices, deteriorating seed quality and lack of knowledge on 
improved management practices. Use of improved seeds, minimum tillage, water harvesting, 
mechanized planting and improved weed control technologies in pilot projects have clearly 
demonstrated room for major improvements in crop yields. Other challenges facing rainfed crop 
production include unpredictability of rainfall that typically allows only 40 to 80 percent of the 
area planted to be harvested, as well as pests and diseases (including locusts). Although crop 
failure normally still implies fodder for livestock, there is an urgent need for households to 
improve their productivity, diversify their sources of income and add value to what they 
produce. The lack of accessible rural financial services and appropriate extension are also 
major impediments to adoption of improved systems technologies. 
 13.
Institutional changes relevant to IAMDP.  Four important institutional changes have been 
undertaken. First, the West Kordofan State, which was once dissolved and merged in North 
and South Kordofan States, has been reinstated to put the number of states in the country back 
4 Source: Ministry of Environment and Physical Development and Higher Council for Environment and Development, Feb 2003, 
Sudan’s First National Communication under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. 
2 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
 14.
 15.
 16.
to 18. Second, the National Forestry Administration has been taken out of the Ministry of 
Natural Resources and attached to the Ministry of Agriculture to form the current Ministry of 
Agriculture and Forests. Placement of forestry in the Ministry gives it a stronger grip on some 
important resources management and climate change issues. Three, a new law has been 
enacted that dissolves the long-time existing Farmers and Pastoralists Unions and putting in 
place a new setup of Agriculture and Livestock Producers’ Organizations. These new Producer 
Organizations have the potential to provide a more effective means for farmer collaboration and 
access to improved inputs, services, and finance. Four, the rangelands administration has been 
shifted from the Ministry of Agriculture to the Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries to become the 
Ministry of Livestock, Fisheries, and Rangelands, and lately, Ministry of Livestock. This requires 
strong coordination between the two ministries as well as with the Ministry of Environment.  
Sudan’s National Agriculture Investment Plan (SUDNAIP) is a five-year investment plan which 
maps the investments needed to achieve the Sudan Comprehensive Africa Agriculture 
Development Project (CAADP) target of six percent annual growth in Agriculture GDP. The 
Sudan will pursue this target through allocating a minimum ten percent of its budget to the 
agricultural sector. SDNAIP objectives are: (i) Promotion of exports of crops and livestock with 
a view to safeguarding against the risks of collapse of the whole economy as a result of neglect 
of the agricultural sector and distortions to agricultural incentives; (ii) increasing productivity and 
efficiency at the production and processing stages; (iii) realization of food security and nutrition; 
(iv) reducing rural poverty by 50 percent by 2020, generation of job opportunities, especially for 
youth and women, and increasing per capita income; (v) achievement of a regionally-balanced 
sector and economic growth in order to encourage settlement in the rural areas; and 
(iv) development and protection of natural resources to ensure its renewal and sustainability.  
Food security and nutrition. Food and nutrition security is fragile and undernourishment is 
widespread in Sudan. The Global Hunger Index (GHI) calculated each year by the International 
Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) rated the food security in Sudan as alarming in 2013 
and 2014.  Sudan could not be included in the 2015 and 2016 GHI scores because of lack of 
sufficient data. According to the Sudan Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) from 2014 the 
prevalence of child malnutrition is high in Sudan: 33 percent of under-five children are 
underweight, 38.2 percent of children under-five years are stunted (too short for their age), and 
16.3 percent of children are wasted (too thin for their height). The prevalence of underweight is 
23.2 percent in urban area as compared to 37.1 percent in rural areas. There is also a very 
wide gap in child stunting between rural areas (43 percent) and urban areas (27.1 percent). 
Very high prevalence of children underweight can be found in the three Darfur states, West 
Kordofan (38.7 percent) and Kassala state (42 percent). According to FAO Sudan Plan of 
Action 2015-2019 approximately 2 million children in Sudan are suffering from acute 
malnutrition, while 500,000 children are severely acutely malnourished. The MICS 2014 survey 
classified coping strategies that rural households use when they don’t have enough food or 
money to buy food as follows. 
Land grabbing in project area. Sudan is among the global ‘hotspots’ for large-scale land 
acquisitions. According to a 2014 study by the World Bank, Sudan transferred nearly four 
million hectares of land (6.5% of arable land in the country) to foreign private investors between 
2004-2013, more than any other country surveyed. As such, Sudan has established itself as 
number two in the region, second to Saudi Arabia, in attracting foreign direct investment. There 
is insufficient information on the impacts that realized land deals have had on the livelihoods of 
rural communities in project area. Mission field visits did not record any claim of land 
confiscation without compensation.  However, some reports and studies (such as the 
Implication of Land Grabbing on Pastoral Economy in Sudan by Yasin Elhadary, Hillo Abdelatti, 
University of Khartoum, 2016) have indicated that the total grabbed land in Sudan is estimated 
at 2,270,000 ha and concluded “the Unregistered Land Act of 1971, Ministerial Act of 1996 and 
the Investment Act of 2013, have paved the way for more land grabbing in Sudan. These acts 
ignored completely the historical right of the local communities over land resources. Lack of 
3 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
 17.
transparency, unfair compensation and limited or absent consultation of the local communities 
are some characteristics shaping land grabbing in Sudan”. 
South Sudan refugees. According to UNHCR and the Commission of Refugees (COR), over 
23,000 South Sudanese refugees arrived in Sudan in April 2017. This brings total new arrivals 
in 2017 to over 108,000 and the total refugee figure to 375,000 refugees since December 2013. 
About 41 percent and 49 percent of the refugees live in camps and settlements, respectively. 
Two states, West and South Kordofan, (out of the four states covered by IAMDP) have received 
28,000 refugees since beginning of 2017. According to UNHCR a WFP representative, the 
North Sudanese communities living in these two states are not directly affected by the influx of 
refugees as far as agricultural production is concerned. However, efforts to improve health 
service coverage for refugees and host community members in the two states are ongoing. In 
particular, as the rainy season is fast approaching and the risk of malaria increasing, UNHCR 
and health partners are working to ensure refugees receive mosquito nets and scale-up vector 
control activities at refugee sites. Islamic Relief Worldwide (IRW) rehabilitated 2 water yard 
engines to improve water access for refugees and local users. In South Kordofan, CIS 
rehabilitated 10 hand pumps in different areas within Abu Jubaiha town. Their work on 
communal showers for refugees at Sirajiya is ongoing, and have completed 22 out of 
40 planned showers so far. In El Meiram, West Kordofan, Concern Worldwide began the 
construction of a nutrition distribution centre and operating theatre to bolster nutrition and health 
service delivery in a key reception area for new refugee arrivals. 
B.  Rationale 
 18.
IFAD conducted a value chain study on the three most important crops for the traditional rainfed 
small-scale farming in Sudan: sesame, groundnut, and sorghum (March 2017). In addition IFAD 
and WB commissioned a study on gum Arabic, as input to the PCR of the IFAD-WB supported 
Revitalizing the Sudan Gum Arabic Production and Marketing Project (March 2015). The main 
conclusions of these studies confirmed three aspects: (i) the high comparative advantage of 
rainfed areas in Sinnar, North, South and West Kordofan in the production of the three field 
crops and agroforestry production of gum Arabic; (ii) the existence of a well-established 
national and international market with increased demand for the cash crops and sorghum; and 
(iii) the importance of these crops for the livelihoods and resilience of the smallholder rainfed 
farmers, rural women and youth in the project area. Sesame, groundnuts and gum Arabic are 
the main sources of income as cash crops. Sorghum is a major source of household food 
security as a staple crop, and is also an important cash crop in surplus years.  Millet is an 
important food security crop in North and West Kordofan, but as per SDP experience, farmers 
to date do not wish to adopt improved technologies. They see Millet as a hardy crop that will 
always provide enough grain for food security and they prefer to invest their scarce resources 
on cash crop or Sorghum. Detailed information about the comparative advantage of these 
crops in the project area is presented in Appendix 4. 
 19.
The same studies concluded a great wealth of traditional knowledge and skills by smallholder 
farmers on how to survive based on semi-subsistence cropping and livestock systems, under 
harsh climactic conditions and a non-supportive enabling environment. But these traditional 
knowledge and skills are not enough from the technical and business point of view.  On the 
Technical Knowledge, the smallholder farmers have little technical knowledge about improved 
or proper land preparation, seeds, inputs, planting, weeding, harvesting, and storage. They lack 
the business skills to make sound decisions about inputs, services, finance, and marketing, 
directly or through their associations.   
 20.
The two ongoing and about to close SUSTAIN and SDP (and to a lesser extent WSRMP) 
projects have aimed at improving food security, incomes and resilience to shocks of the 
smallholder producers in rainfed areas of Sinnar, North, South and West Kordofan. However, 
these projects were not originally designed with realistic, complete models of commercial 
4 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
scaling-up, to extensively work through private sector service providers, or develop 
partnerships with private companies5.  Only at a later stage of implementation, the SUSTAIN 
and SDP projects succeeded in testing (albeit at a small scale) the model of private public 
partnership between the private sector suppliers of inputs (such as certified seeds, fertilizers) 
and services (such as chisel ploughing, spraying, etc.), the farmers, and the public extension. 
There have been some encouraging results of scale-up from the SUSTAIN project.  The 
SUSTAIN project has reported commercial scale-up (i.e. farmers paying full commercial prices) 
of heavy chisel land preparation for 53,627 feddans as of the 2016/7 season.  This is quite 
impressive, but at least 80% of this increase has come from large-scale farmers who have 
ready access to finance and required services.  However, the large-scale farmer scale-up has 
provided positive impacts.  The large-scale farmer scale-up is an important role model for 
smaller farmers, it has led to positive environmental benefits, and it has led to increase in 
service provision that can be accessed by smallholders, as many adopting large-scale farmers 
have become service providers themselves.  These piloted initiatives need to be scaled-up by 
IAMDP at the wide smallholder level.  In contrast, SDP has placed greater emphasis on 
ensuring that well-trained service providers offering affordable services are available to small-
scale farmers and consequently has shown much higher adoption rates for improved 
technologies, but real change has only come in the final year of project implementation and 
much needs to be done to strengthen implementation models.   
 21.
Despite substantial achievements of SUSTAIN and SDP (see Appendix 3) in demonstrating the 
importance of appropriate technology for sustainable rained farming, their experience has 
shown that technology demonstrations are a necessary but not sufficient means of encouraging 
adoption and scaling-up of improved agronomic inputs and methods. An efficient and smoothly 
functioning supply chain that can improve delivery inputs and services sustainably and cost 
effectively is essential.    
 22. Moreover, improving production and productivity is essential but not sufficient for the 
sustainable enhancement of the livelihoods of the rural poor. Increased crop productivity and 
production should be complemented with enhanced market access. The latter is an issue in the 
project area primarily because of the high costs imposed by the poor condition of roads, and a 
system of high locality and state taxes as crops move from farm to processors/exporters at 
state and national level (despite Federal government policy that attempts to curb excessive 
state taxation).  Market demand is not a constraining factor for the main crops.  Sesame, 
groundnuts, gum Arabic, and sorghum all have high demand year-round in village, state, 
national, and international markets. These markets always clear; however, prices are volatile 
throughout the year with prices post-harvest, when small-scale farmers need cash urgently, 
usually at the lowest point.  The other key factors for scaling-up are access to sufficient levels 
of reasonably priced and adequately structured finance; improved farmer business skills, and 
dynamic farmer organizations.  Together, increased productivity, value-addition, market access, 
financial services, stronger organizations, and business skills training will enable smallholder 
farmers to move from subsistence farming as a way of life to farming as a business (FAAB). 
 23. With regards to rural finance, the rainfed areas in Sudan suffer from the wide unavailability of 
formal loans for supporting agricultural activities. In the SUSTAIN and SDP project areas this 
gap has hardly narrowed even after these projects developed specific linkages with ABSUMI to 
finance the crop production needs of the target group farmers. The main reason behind the 
reluctance of the financial institutions to deliver crop production loans is the risky nature of 
rainfed agriculture which has contributed to a long history of heavy losses suffered by formal 
financial institutions. 
 24.
Along the same lines, rural communities in Kordofan and Sinnar are particularly vulnerable to 
climate change. Their agrarian livelihoods are often beset by damaging floods and droughts 
5 The original SDP did incorporate a plan for partnerships with private seed companies.  However, the original design was not 
feasible, and partnerships were not developed until major changes in partnership design were made after the mid-term review.   
5 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
 25.
 26.
that have significant economic implications. Such climate events are expected to increase in 
both intensity and frequency given a changing climate in the coming decades. Many rural 
communities in the sub-region already face considerable socioeconomic challenges, and 
climate hazards, particularly major events, can tip many into extreme poverty. While most rural 
households have some means of managing climate and other risks through diversified farming 
practices, social capital networks, and reliance on public assistance, on the whole they are 
ill-equipped to cope with climate shocks. 
Building on  achievements and lessons learned from implementation of SUSTAIN, SDP and 
WSRMP,  the rationale for IAMDP stems from at least four considerations to areas in need of 
further improvement: (i) projects support was limited to only 52 percent of reachable poor 
villages; (ii) the methodology for encouraging adoption of improved agricultural practices have 
been largely limited to exposure to demonstrations until recently, and initial adoption  has been 
dominated by larger farmers who have the financial means and ready access to required 
services. However,  SDP has shown that when improved technologies and services are 
attractively priced on a value for money basis, there is considerable demand from small-scale 
farmers; (iii) the projects focus was more on productivity enhancement and production increase 
with less emphasis on quality, post-harvest storage and processing, and better marketing; and 
(iv) rural finance was more oriented towards animal financing when compared to crop 
operations financing (most of the credit demand by clients was for financing livestock activities 
due to relatively low risks and high returns in a short period of time. Almost 75 percent 
ABSUMI’s portfolio is currently concentrated on livestock production activities).   
To this end, the IAMDP would (i) improve quality and coverage of support services to the target 
group by the investment activities supported by the two on-going projects in current project 
areas; and (ii) make a much stronger move from demonstration to scaling up to the same and 
additional geographical areas where other smallholder farmers face similar challenges on low 
crop productivity, quality, limited access to market and finance, and vulnerability to climate 
change. IAMDP would rely on the following success factors: (i) building on the experience of 
previous projects in the area; (ii) involvement of well capacitated communities with adequate 
organizational structures, working with the already existing extension teams at the locality level; 
(iii) capacitating and encouraging emerging village-based private sector operators in remote 
areas; and (iv) building on the project management experience and staff dedication of the 
PCUs of SUSTAIN and SDP. 
6 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Figure 1: Theory of Change 
Major contextual challenges for 
small farmers in the project area 
Technical and natural resources 
constraints 
• Lack of farmers’ technical know-how 
on rainfed cropping, reluctance of 
service providers to engage with 
smallholders. 
• Climate change:  
Due to severe and frequent 
draughts, floods, soil degradation. 
Increased vulnerability of small 
producers and inability to invest 
in good agricultural practices. 
Economic constraints: 
Limited access to market, weak 
producers organization, limited access 
to finance, and  to scale up on-farm 
demonstrations research. 
Main Risks 
Outcomes 
Development 
objectives 
Results indicators 
Technical risks 
• Risky nature of rainfed 
agriculture. 
• Inadequate access to 
appropriate pro-poor 
technology. 
Economic risks: 
• High production costs due 
to pre-financing of cropping 
operations by traders.  
• Private service providers 
reluctant to establish 
business at the village level. 
• ABSUMI and other MFIs 
focussing largely on 
livestock.  
• Export prices of cash crops 
subject to fluctuation. 
Social risks 
• Weak community-based 
organizations. 
• Elite capture. 
Institutional risks 
• Weak extension system. 
• Limited managerial 
capacity. 
• Outcome 1: Enhanced 
smallholder climate 
resilient productivity and 
production. 
• Outcome 2: Higher income 
for smallholder producers. 
• Outcome 3: Sustainable 
pro-poor financial and 
organisational 
environment established. 
Enhanced income for 
smallholder farmers 
through access to 
improved agricultural 
inputs, climate 
resilient technologies, 
services, rural finance 
and marketing outlets. 
• Increased adoption of 
new or improved 
inputs, technologies 
and practices. 
• Increased productivity 
and production. 
• Increased 
smallholders’ income. 
• Improved quality of 
nutrition and diet. 
7 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
II.  Project description 
A.  Project area and target group 
 27.
IAMDP will be implemented in the four states of Sinnar, North Kordofan, South Kordofan, and 
West Kordofan. The number of HHs within an average village in Sinnar state is 200-300 with an 
average of 6-9 HH members per family. Approximately 60 percent of village populations are 
women, while youth represent around 65 to 70 percent. The average of female-headed 
households per village is 31. According to the SUSTAIN baseline survey from 2012  about 
54 percent HHs in an average village population falls within the category Very Poor and Poor, 
while 26 percent are Moderately Poor but just barely above the poverty line. 
 28.
 29.
 30.
In Greater Kordofan, the number of HH within an average village is 232 with an average of 
6.2 HH members per family. Almost 52 percent of village population are women, while youth 
represent around 45 percent. The average of female-headed households per village is 
6 percent. It is noted that about 55 percent of the average village population falls within the 
category Very Poor and Poor and 34 percent are Moderate Poor but just barely above the 
poverty line.  
The main source of livelihood among rural populations in project area is traditional rainfed 
agriculture (crop production, animal husbandry (mainly of small ruminants)) and forest-based 
activities (mainly gum Arabic). The crop mix that is widely practiced in the project area is a 
combination of staple crops, mainly sorghum and millet, plus sesame and groundnut as cash 
crops. Wage labour is a major source of income during the rainy season for the landless. 
Livestock selling is the main coping mechanism to meet unexpected demands or crop failure. 
Poor smallholder farmer households. The target smallholder farmer HHs live in areas with 
clay and sandy soils and usually grow food and cash crops appropriate for their conditions in 
fields located both close and far from their homestead, generally within a radius of 10 km.  The 
women members of the HH have home garden (jubraka) land located close to the homestead 
where, horticulture crops and sorghum are grown for home consumption (including nutrition and 
food security) and sale of small surpluses. Women also have access to land to plant field crops 
for home consumption. The main field crops grown are sorghum, millet (on sandier soils), 
sesame, groundnut. Gum Arabic is harvested primarily from natural stands as well as some 
areas planted with encouragement of the Forestry National Corporation. Major challenges of 
smallholder HHs in all fours states include low agricultural productivity due to inadequate 
agronomical techniques, the limited use of good quality seeds, erratic rainfall, pest infestations, 
and declining soil fertility not countered with fertilization. In the targeted States, smallholder 
HHs also face drought and water shortages during the dry season due to the limited supply of 
water and the high cost of purchasing water when it is available. Furthermore, the lack of 
adequate access to sufficient productive assets prevents smallholder HHs from making 
maximum use of the land (draught power/machinery, good quality seeds, fertilizer, and labour). 
Poor households face food insecurity during about 5-6 months a year. Poor households have 
low or limited access to extension services and are often poorly organised. HHs usually receive 
low prices from the sale of their products due the fact that the HHs need to sell their products 
as quickly as possible after harvest to gain cash and therefore weaken their bargaining power. 
Lack or limited access to credit together with low levels of savings is a major constraint that 
prevents HHs from purchasing inputs and accessing hired machinery and labour for expensive 
and labour intensive farming activities – especially planting, weeding and harvesting. As a 
result, HHs leave part of their available land uncultivated, and underutilize the land that they do 
cultivate, and most of their gum Arabic trees untapped. Instead, household members engage in 
off-farm wage labour, for example gold mining, handicrafts and petty trade, or charcoal making 
and sale.  
8 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
 31. Women in agriculture. In the pastoral and traditional rainfed sector, women provide a 
remarkable contribution to the household’s wellbeing and food security. Women’s specific 
responsibilities include: (i) in settled farming villages women practice farming, both on the HH 
fields together with their husbands and on the jubraka land, generally up to 2 feddans (0.84 ha), 
where they mainly grow green vegetables, tomatoes, cowpeas, okra, sorghum and maize for 
both HH consumption and sale; (ii) all HH work, which includes preparing food, collecting fire 
wood and fetching water; (iii) childcare; (iv) rearing small animals; and (v) petty trade. The 
varied tasks mean that women generally work longer hours than men. In spite of their 
responsibilities, women access to smaller plots of land allows them to control cash income 
coming from petty trade and poultry rearing, but are rarely involved in decisions concerning key 
productive assets, such as land and livestock sale. Women also have limited decision-making 
power in the household or within the community. Their empowerment is hindered by a high rate 
of illiteracy, persisting gender inequalities perpetuated by the customary law, and early 
marriage. Compared to men, women earn lower incomes, but tend to allocate more of their 
earnings to buy food items for their HH. Women headed HH are particularly vulnerable.  
 32.
Rural youth, particularly unemployed youth, and young women. The majority of the young 
people live in rural areas with no access to basic services or sustainable livelihood 
opportunities, limited or no employment opportunities, as well as limited access to capacity 
building or microfinance services that would enable them to establish their own businesses. 
Conflict in the country has prejudiced the chances of a whole generation of youth for 
educational and developmental opportunities. Unless this situation changes, the prospects are 
bleak for village youth in the project areas.  
B.  Targeting Strategy for the IAMDP 
Geographical targeting 
 33.
 34.
The IAMDP project area has been determined in close consultation with Government and 
Project staff from the on-going IFAD supported WSRMP, SDP and the SUSTAIN. Localities and 
villages have been selected on the following criteria: (i) high poverty levels and sufficient 
numbers of potential beneficiaries, particularly women and youth; (ii) coverage under the 
on-going IFAD co-financed projects and potential to capitalize on successful approaches; and 
(iii) potential for crop production and marketing of groundnuts, sesame, sorghum and gum 
Arabic. Based on the above-mentioned selection criteria the IAMDP will intervene in 
129 villages (66 old and 63 new) including 27,000 households over a period of 6 years (see 
selection table in Appendix 2).  Specific activities for new and old villages are detailed in 
Appendix 4. The consultations have resulted in the selection of 13 localities, in each state as 
follows: Sinnar state:  Dinder, Dali&Mazmoum, Abu Hujar. North Kordofan: El Rahad, Sheikan, 
Um Rawaba. West Kordofan: Abu Zabad, El Khowai, Elsunut. South Kordofan: Elgoz, Rashad, 
Tadamon, Abassiya. 
Target Group. The IAMDP target group is smallholder farmers, with a special focus on 
engaging rural women and assisting youth to be engaged as service providers, and agents at 
the village level). In North Kordofan state the IAMDP targets 3,343 rural HHs, of which 671 are 
women headed HHs. The total number of village population targeted is estimated to be 21,412, 
of which 50 percent are women and 30 percent are youth. In West Kordofan IAMDP targets 
1,428 rural HHs, of which 344 are women-headed.  The total number of village population 
targeted in WK is estimated to be 9,065 of which 50 percent are women and 30 percent are 
youth. In South Kordofan IAMDP targets 6,026 rural HHs, of which 1,508 are women-headed 
HHs. The total number of village population targeted in SK is estimated to be 40045 of which 
50 percent are women and 30 percent are youth. In Sinnar state IAMDP targets 15,876 rural 
HHS, of which 2,381 are women headed HHS. The total population in villages targeted by the 
IAMDP in Sinnar state is estimated to be 82,082. Of these, about 51 percent are women and 
60 percent are youth.  
9 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
 35.
 36.
In all the project interventions, there is a strong focus on women who represent a specific target 
for IFAD, due to their traditional relevance in agricultural production, their growing social and 
economic responsibility, and their vulnerable position in societies. 
Targeting strategy. The targeting mechanism for IAMDP will build on the IFAD gained 
experiences through the SDP, SUSTAIN, and WSRMP in reaching the more vulnerable 
categories of the rural population in the Sudan. The entry point for the Project will be organized 
groups of farmer producer organisations, working initially through Village Development 
Committees, with an emphasis on including women and youth. Females would be targeted 
through women and rural development dedicated organizations (saving and credit groups, 
ABSUMI, etc.) as these institutions facilitate independent access to land, farm equipment, credit 
and training for their members.  
 37. Geographical targeting: Selection of the poorest villages. This process will ensure that 
129 among the poorer villages are selected by means of a structured and comprehensive 
socio-economic survey covering all the villages in the project areas. The villages will be rated 
against the following indicators: (i) percentage of poor households in the village; (ii) number of 
women headed households; (iii) reliance on rainfed farming and herding as the main source of 
livelihoods; and (iv) quality of the agricultural land and degree of erosion as manifested in the 
infestation with noxious weeds. 
 38.
 39.
 40.
Self-targeting measures. The self-targeting of communities will involve in-depth discussion 
with the community members and their traditional authorities within the selected villages in 
order to identify the poorest members in the village. This selection will be triangulated by the 
village authorities and other entities active at village level such as existing Village Development 
structures, the Zakat Chamber, Women’s Union, Farmers Organisations, etc. Main criteria for 
beneficiary selection are: farm size (smallholders of less than 15 feddans), potential for higher 
production, willingness to adopt new technologies, willingness to establish farmer producers 
associations.  
The targeting and self-targeting of youth, women, and rural poor and small-scale farmers will be 
achieved though: (i) promotion of activities with a relatively low barrier of entry which are not 
attractive to large-scale agricultural enterprises; and (ii) facilitation, empowerment and 
capacity-building measures to encourage active participation of the target group and their 
organisation, in such a way to minimise elite capture. These measures include: (i) information 
and mobilisation campaigns through producer organisations); (ii) group-based approaches and 
schemes to lower entry thresholds for the rural poor; (iii) linkages with the microfinance sector 
to leverage their investment capacity; and (iv) institutional strengthening of groups and 
management training of their members, including training on the adoption of Gender Action 
Learning System (GALS). The GALS aims at increasing awareness of gender roles in the 
households and communities by improving their capacity to negotiate their needs and interests 
and find innovative, gender-equitable solutions in livelihoods planning and value chain 
development. The IAMDP will pilot the GALS methodology in Sudan along with other IFAD 
projects, and the results will be documented and shared within the Sudan portfolio and other 
NEN countries.   
Empowerment and capacity-building measures. Rural community institution building 
activities would include: (i) mobilisation and strengthening of farmer producer organizations, 
with measures taken to include women and youth, amongst others, to enable them to negotiate 
win-win deals with off-takers; (ii) sensitisation of leaders at grassroots levels in understanding 
and overcoming gender and youth issues that hinder development; (iii) functional literacy 
training for women; (iv) sensitisation of youth on employment and business opportunities in the 
agriculture sector, sharing of experience among youth, and organisation of exchange visits 
using a peer-to-peer approach; (v) application of minimum quotas for women (50 percent 
target) and youth (15 percent) to serve on project supported producer organizations; and 
(vi) facilitate access to gas cookers as labour saving devices for women through rural finance.  
10 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
 41. Gender and youth strategy. The gender mainstreaming strategy of the project aims to enable 
women to access extension services as well as participate in relevant training, demonstration 
and scaling up activities. The gender mainstreaming strategy rests on the following: (i) tailoring 
the technical packages to women’s needs: this justifies the inclusion of the jubraka; 
(ii) introducing post-harvest handling techniques that will enable women to extend the shelf-life, 
of food products as well as sell these at the market during the off season thus increasing the 
income generated from such activities; (iii) introducing gas stoves to save on women’s labour 
and conserve trees. The use of gas stoves will also save women’s time as they will not be 
going to fetch fuelwood; (iv) a quota system will be established whereby the Project will support 
the inclusion of youth in rural enterprise development. In addition, minimum quotas of 
50 percent women and 15 percent youth will be applied to all Project-related decision-making 
bodies and committees to protect the interests of those target groups; (v) gender training will be 
delivered to the village development committees, to the extension teams, and the project 
management office; and (vi) the project M&E system will monitor the project outreach to women 
and youth and results on their, livelihoods, and access to resources. In this regard, appropriate 
sex and age disaggregated data indicators were included in the project log frame, and 
(7) promotion of GALS at implementation. 
C.  Development objective and impact indicators 
 42. Goal. The goal of the Project is to enhance food security and reduce poverty in poor rural 
households, through investment in climate change resilient rainfed crop production, marketing 
and capacity building of CBOs. 
 43. Objectives. The project aims at improving incomes and resilience to climate change of the 
smallholder farmers, rural women and youth in rainfed areas of Sinnar, North, South and West 
Kordofan states. Project objectives would be met through better access to improved agricultural 
inputs, services, and climate resilient technologies, rural finance and appropriate marketing 
support, and better organisation of the producers associations. 
D.  Outcomes/Components 
Outcomes 
 44.
Five development outcomes are expected: 
(a) An economically viable crop production input and service system that meets smallholder 
farmers’ and market expectations and demands is developed and operational. 
(b) A rainfed production system sustainably resilient to climate change. 
(c) Improved market access and prices for smallholder produce. 
(d) Enhanced access to rural finance for smallholder producers and value chain actors, rural 
women and youth. 
(e) Enhanced organizational capacity and enterprise skills of smallholder farmer’s associations, 
including rural women producers. 
Components 
 45.
The project will have three inter-linked components and a project management component: 
(i) enhanced crop productivity and production; (ii) market linkage and value addition; 
(iii) enabling environment; and (iv) project management. 
Component 1: Enhanced productivity and production  
 46.
Expected outcome. The expected outcome of this component is enhanced smallholder 
productivity and production, through activities addressing smallholder farming of the three main 
cash and staple field crops of the region; sorghum, sesame, and groundnuts; and gum Arabic 
agroforestry activities. The outcome will be achieved by increasing smallholders’ access to an 
11 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
improved package of inputs and services, demonstrated to be cost-effective under local 
conditions, and supplied by village or locality based input and service providers. 
Description of activities 
 47.
Activities will build the capability of the private sector at the village, state, and national levels to 
develop and sustain cost-effective service delivery for smallholders, through support to 
government to improve the enabling environment for private sector service delivery and by 
providing training to service providers. The project will encourage government to restrict free or 
subsidized service delivery for demonstrations or for targeting poor subsistence farmers, and to 
use private sector service providers for this to ensure that the public sector is not crowding out 
the private sector.   
Activity 1.1:  Private sector service provider and agrodealers capacity building  
 48.
 49.
 50.
 51.
Village and locality mechanized and/or spraying service providers, agro-dealers, and 
mechanics/village blacksmiths will be supported so that they will become (i) suppliers of high 
quality, cost-effective inputs, tools, and services on a commercial and sustainable basis that 
offer a clear value for money proposition to smallholders; and (ii) trusted advisors to smallholder 
farmers that complements and supports the public sector extension services as well as their 
own businesses.  
Sub-activity 1.1.1:  Agrodealer capacity building 
Agrodealer assessment.  Agrodealers in target localities will be assessed for their technical 
understanding of the use of inputs, store infrastructure, types of inputs stocked and supplied, 
relationships with national input supply companies and local government. Agrodealer 
assessments done for SDP and SUSTAIN will be updated and expanded.    
Agrodealer training.  Based on the agrodealer assessment, training and support activities will 
be developed that are tailored to the agro-economic conditions and needs of each locality. 
Agrodealers will receive training on (i) technical issues in the safe and effective use, storage, 
and handling of seeds, seed dressing, herbicides, pesticides, fertilizers, and other agricultural 
inputs 6; and (ii) business training covering topics such as: financial management, marketing 
(including in-store merchandising, promotions, demonstration, advising customers), 
recordkeeping, management information systems, and supplier relationships.  
Agrodealer association formation at the state and possibly national will be supported 
possibly in partnership and under the umbrella of the Sudan Agrochemical Association (SAGA).  
The Agrodealer Association will develop a Code of Conduct that will cover the key aspects of 
safe storage and marketing of seeds and chemicals.  The association will represent the 
interests of the agrodealers in their dealings with government and suppliers.  Many existing 
agrodealers may not qualify for full inclusion in an Agrodealer Association because of not 
meeting current regulatory requirements (e.g. university degree), and in consultations with 
SAGA, some means of including and upgrading these agrodealers in an Agrodealer 
Association will be incorporated (perhaps as associate members). 
Sub-activity 1.1.2:  Mechanized service provider (MSP) capacity building  
 52. MSP assessment.  Tractor owners in the project localities will be identified, geo-referenced, 
and assessed, covering key issues such as owner/operator qualifications, years in business, 
make and types of equipment used, service provided and demand, existing relationships with 
6 All pesticides (including herbicides) must be approved by the Pesticides Council of Sudan, an inter-ministerial body with 
private sector participation.  IAMDP will only promote herbicides and other agrochemicals that have been approved by the 
Pesticides Council, and only for the uses for which the chemicals have been approved. IAMDP will actively promote the use of 
neem and other biological pest control measures where cost-effective or otherwise required for market reasons (e.g. pursuing 
certified organic production).  
12 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
equipment suppliers etc.  Based on this assessment, tractor owners/operators will be selected 
as candidates for MSP training, with input from the local communities.7   
 53. MSP training.  The project will provide training on: (i) technical training on tractor 
maintenance, equipment calibration, maintenance, and proper use of implements; and 
(ii) business training covering topics such as negotiation with suppliers, pricing and market 
services, and financial management. Active MSPs that have been previously trained by 
SUSTAIN and SDP will have access to refresher and advanced training as required. 
 54.
 55.
 56.
Sub-activity 1.1.3:  Spray services provider (SSP) capacity building  
SSP assessment.  An initial assessment of spray service providers (SSPs, referred to as IPMs 
by SUSTAIN and WSRMP) will be undertaken in localities and villages where IAMDP will be 
active, according to a phased schedule.  Surveys already undertaken by SDP will be updated. 
This may be done in collaboration with one or more chemical and equipment suppliers who 
have expressed interest in collaboration.   
SSP training. Each project village team (LET and VDC) will then select 2-4 youth for SSP 
training, based on their aptitude, prior experience, and motivation. The project will provide SSP 
training on: (i) technical training and certification on the safe and effective usage of crop 
protection chemicals, including: proper pest scouting techniques, selection of the proper 
chemical and dosage for the job, mixing chemicals and calibrating sprayers, optimal spraying 
conditions, and proper pre-harvest intervals; and (ii) business skills training, pricing and 
market services, record-keeping, linking with agrodealers, access to finance. Active existing 
SSPs will be eligible for refresher and advanced training as required.  
Sub-activity 1.1.4:  Village blacksmith and mechanic capacity building 
Village Mechanic and blacksmith assessment.  An initial assessment and geo-referencing of 
village blacksmiths in the localities where IAMDP will be active.  This may be done in 
conjunction with one or more equipment suppliers who have expressed interest in collaboration 
and greater linkages with mechanics and blacksmiths.  The assessment will cover capabilities 
in servicing and maintaining tractors, sprayers, and implements as well as fabrication of 
rudimentary spare parts and simple hand tools (e.g. the sonki used for gum Arabic tapping, the 
harvester for gum Arabic harvesting).  The assessment will cover years in business, type and 
condition of machinery, financial strength, and motivation in participation in the project.   
 57.
Village mechanic and blacksmith training.  One or more mechanics and blacksmiths in each 
village will be selected, based on the assessment and with community input, for technical and 
business training and linkage with equipment suppliers.  
Activity 1.2:  On farm and Innovation Demonstrations  
 58.
Sub-activity 1.2.1:  Innovation demonstrations. Innovation demonstrations will be held in at 
least one location in each project locality, to demonstrate new or improved seed varieties, 
agro-chemicals, equipment for mechanisation from land preparation through to and including 
post-harvest primary processing, and methods of application 8 for the three field crops.  The 
Innovation Demonstrations will showcase crop varieties, crop protection chemicals, fertilization, 
and equipment that are not in common use in the locality, but which are deemed by project 
7 All mechanised services promoted by IAMDP will follow appropriate guidelines set by the Federal or State governments.  For 
example, the use of heavy tractors is not permitted in the more fragile sandy soils found predominantly in West and North 
Kordofan, and IAMDP will follow SDP and WSRMP promote lighter tractors as well as animal traction in these areas coupled 
with the use of the light chisel for land preparation.  In the heavier clay soils, predominately in South Kordofan and Sinnar 
states, IAMDP will follow SP and SUSTAIN and continue to promote the use of heavy chisel for land preparation which greatly 
increases soil permeability, resulting in greater moisture retention in soil and less run-off and erosion.  Finally, while 
mechanized operations usually require the removal of trees from fields, farmers will be required and incentivized to plant gum 
Arabic (or other appropriate species) for shelter belts with the net result that trees planted will far exceed trees removed.   
8 In all cases, the technologies demonstrated in the on-farm or innovation demonstrations, will have received approval when 
required, from the appropriate authority, e.g. the Federal Seed Agency for seeds of new crop varieties, and the National 
Pesticides Council for agrochemicals.    
13 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
 59.
 60.
 61.
specialists, private companies, and ARC to have high potential for use by small-scale farmers 
in rainfed areas.  Technologies judged as most appropriate by farmers will be incorporated into 
the on-farm demonstrations in the following season.  The use of gum Arabic for shelter belts will 
be encouraged, especially in areas where mechanization will require the removal of trees from 
fields.  
The Innovation Demonstrations for the field crops will be financed and managed in partnership 
with the participating private companies.  The participating private companies will commit to 
ensure that any technologies demonstrated will be available for sale by local agrodealers or 
provided by local service providers in the following season.   
Project support for the Innovation Demonstrations will be provided  by the project for three 
years with an increasing level of management and financial responsibility from the private 
companies (and possibly, with in-kind contributions from local service providers).  The guideline 
for project / private cost sharing split is:  PY1 - 75 percent/25 percent, PY2-  50 percent / 
50 percent, PY3 - 25 percent/75 percent.  However, the actual level of cost sharing will be 
subject to negotiation, as it will vary depending on location of the demonstration, type of 
technology demonstrated, etc.   
Sub-activity 1.2.2:  On-farm field crop demonstrations at the village level will be on proven 
technologies that are appropriate for the locality and be hosted on farmer-managed fields.  The 
farmers will select technologies that they have seen in the Innovation Demonstrations, and will 
share in the cost of the on-farm demonstrations with a target 33% farmer/67% project split 
(e.g. 1 feddan financed by the farmers and 2 feddans financed by the project).  In the 
experience of SDP and SUSTAIN, demonstrations of technologies selected by the farmers, and 
managed and cost-shared by the farmers, on their own fields, are more likely to lead to 
adoption and scale-up.  The on-farm demonstration farmers will have full access to the crops 
produced.  The on-farm demonstration farmers will be encouraged to plant a minimum 10% of 
their land to shelter belts using gum Arabic species where and when appropriate, or other 
species such as Moringa oleifara.   
Activity 1.3:  Engagement with national private sector companies  
 62.
 63.
 64.
 65.
Project support will accelerate, deepen, and expand private sector engagement with 
smallholder farmers, both directly and indirectly.  Specifically, private sector companies will be 
encouraged to: (i) provide training, technical and financial support to agrodealers, MSPs, SSPs, 
and village mechanics/blacksmiths serving SHFs, as part of their ongoing business relationship; 
and (ii) develop and market new inputs, tools, equipment and services appropriate for SHFs 
that are used or sold by the service providers.  
Sub-activity 1.3.1:  Information sharing and technical assistance/training. As noted earlier 
in the lessons learned section, private companies are willing to invest in developing new 
products and supplying smallholder farmers on a commercial basis, provided they are 
convinced that there is real business potential. To accelerate this learning process the project 
will undertake the following. 
Information sharing. The project will develop and share information on the market potential to 
the private sector in the form of concise reports, which will be updated regularly.  Most of the 
information in the reports will be collected in the course of project implementation, but will need 
to be packaged in a manner appropriate for private sector decision making. 
Technical assistance and training.  Private sector companies will be trained on modern 
methods of marketing and distribution of goods and services designed for the small-scale 
farmer.  For example, developing and using inventory or distributor management software 
systems.  There will be 50%/50% cost-sharing for technical assistance provided to individual 
companies. 
14 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
 66.
Sub-activity 1.3.2:  The Innovation Scale-up Challenge Grant Facility (ISCGF) is based on the 
experiences that the SDP and SUSTAIN project have had working with the private sector.  The 
degree and speed of private investment and participation in smallholder agriculture could be 
greatly accelerated if there is seed funding provided by the project for risker ventures that would 
be matched by the private sector.  The ISCGF will leverage private sector interest and 
resources and will be based on successful models identified by a recent review of the 
experience of challenge grant funds. 9  The ISCGF will support private sector proposals that 
have a transformative impact on smallholder farmer access to inputs, tools, equipment and 
services, or enhanced linkages to markets (covered by Component 2: Market Access).  
Safeguards against the risk of elite capture will be incorporated during the proposal review 
process, and incorporated in the grant agreements.  Cost sharing from the private sector will be 
at a level appropriate to the risk of the activity proposed, but in all cases the private sector will 
provide at least 25 percent of funding. Proposals that have higher level of private sector 
matching would have priority. 
 67.
The ISMGF will provide successful applicants with a one-off, limited duration grants to stimulate 
innovation, research and development, and implementation of new marketing approaches. 
ISGMF-funded activities will be selected through an open, publicized, and competitive process. 
The details are presented in Appendix 4.  
Activity 1.4:  Gum Arabic support 
 68.
 69.
The IAMDP gum Arabic activity will build on the accomplishments and draw from the lessons 
learned from the completed IFAD/World Bank GAPMP and the ongoing AFD-financed 
RSGPMP summarized earlier.  The key findings of GAPMP and RSGPMP are: (i) higher farm 
gate prices can be received by producers through measures to improve quality and better 
market access; (ii) pre-financing of tapping operations allow greater productivity and production 
and higher revenues; and (iii) when producer incomes are high there is a strong incentive to 
protect and expand planting of gum Arabic trees, with a positive impact on the environment and 
climate change.  RSGPMP will likely close before the start of IAMDP, however the project will 
monitor closely and collaborate where possible with a proposed gum Arabic support project 
under development by FAO for seven states in the gum belt (the Darfur and Kordofan states, 
and Sinnar state) that will be submitted for GCF funding late in 2017 or in 2018, and possibly 
effective in 2019.  Component 1 Activities for gum Arabic will focus on production, productivity, 
and quality in the project localities where gum Arabic production is or could be an important 
contributor to household incomes.  
Sub-activity 1.4.1:  Improved potential of the gum Arabic resource base. Support will be 
given to Forest National Corporation (FNC), the Institute for Gum Arabic and Desertification 
Research Studies (IGADRS), and the private sector to identify and multiply improved landraces 
of gum Arabic (both the Acacia senegalensis producing the premium hashab gum, and Acacia 
seyal, producing the less expensive talha gum will be covered).  Improved landraces may have 
more or higher quality gum production, may be more climate resilient, may mature more 
quickly, etc.  In all cases consultations will be made with private sector exporters and if possible 
importers as to quality requirements.  The seeds and seedlings of improved landraces will be 
made available to state level nurseries of FNC, as well as to community and individual 
nurseries.  Other research with practical impacts on gum Arabic productivity (e.g. agronomic 
techniques) will be sponsored based on requests from FNC, IGARDS, or the private sector.  
 70.
Sub-activity 1.4.2:  Technical support for community and farmer based nurseries will be 
provided.  Community-based nurseries may be managed by Gum Arabic Production 
9 For a review of challenge funds and recommended best practices, see the following:  1) Pompa, Claudia “Understanding 
Challenge Funds”, ODI, October 2013 (found at http://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-
files/9086.pdf; 2) Brain, A, N Gulrajani and J Mitchell: “Meeting the Challenge: How Can Enterprise Challenge Funds be made 
to work better”, UKAID, April 2014; and 3) Moeller, O. and Akerbak, J. “Swedish experiences of challenge funds: Case of 
Innovations Against Poverty”, GREAT Insights, Vol. 3, Issue 6, June 2014.  
15 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
 71.
Associations (GAPAs) or an independent income generating opportunities for women or youth 
supplying seedlings for producers as local circumstances dictate.  This will also include support 
to rehabilitating the gum nurseries at FNC state level, ensuring that they are providing the best 
genetic material available.  
Sub-activity 1.4.3:  Gum Arabic Innovation Demonstrations.  At least one Gum Arabic 
Innovation Demonstration for gum Arabic similar to the field crops will be held in each project 
locality, either on private or FNC lands at easy to reach localities.  Gum Arabic Production 
Associations will be trained in improved agronomy, tapping (e.g. use of the sonki developed by 
ARC), harvesting (e.g. use of the new harvester developed by IGADRS), grading, and storage 
techniques to maximize the productivity and quality of gum Arabic production, grading, and 
storage.  The gum Arabic Innovation Demonstrations may be financed and managed in 
partnership with private sector partners who will be supporting activities to increase the quantity 
and quality of gum Arabic produced (and whom will guarantee purchase of higher quality gum 
at a premium to auction levels, in activities described in Component 2).  Separate courses may 
be developed for independent tappers or sharecroppers as appropriate for the production 
systems in the localities (these are independent gum Arabic service providers paid either a 
daily wage or provided a share in the harvest). 10  
 72.
Sub-Activity 1.4.4:  Enhanced productivity and improved quality of gum Arabic. Gum 
Arabic Production Associations will be trained in modern tapping and primary grading 
techniques to maximize the productivity and quality of gum Arabic production.  Training will be 
done in partnership with private sector gum Arabic processors and exporters, several of whom 
have expressed an interest in supporting activities to increase the quantity and quality of gum 
Arabic produced in Sudan (see Component 2).  
Activity 1.5:  Climate change resilience building  
 73.
 74.
The project climate risk profile was successfully raised from Medium to High after consulting 
with the national environmental authority in Sudan and after field proofing the H status. 
Consequently, it is necessary to take proactive steps to face the threats of CC in the project’s 
areas, namely fragility and vulnerabilities. The objective of this activity is to enhance resilience 
of the target group and their eco systems to CC.  It will also clarify the following: (i) who is at 
risk of what (analyzing vulnerabilities); and (ii) who is responsible and for what (institutional 
assessment); and define priorities (coherent and coordinated adaptation action).  
In addition to project support on the promotion of “good agricultural practices” through 
involvement of the Locality Extension Teams and private service providers in the promotion of 
environment friendly mechanised operations for on farm CC mitigation (chisel ploughing 
reducing water runoff, harrowing, weeding), drought tolerant crop varieties, IPM, water 
conservation, gum Arabic on-farm shelter belts and rehabilitation/afforestation) at village level, 
the project would provide support in building capacity of policy and decision-makers and 
implementers from relevant government institutions (e.g. Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of 
Environment, ARC, etc.) through tailored training on: (i) current vulnerability in agriculture; 
(ii) recommended revisions to current policies and institutions to integrate adaptation to climate 
change; and (iii) the standardized approach to safeguards and climate risk management. In 
addition, the project would provide support to analyze and synthetize existing strategies, 
policies, programs, reports etc. in climate change adaptation and actualize them by bridging the 
gaps in developing vulnerability assessment reports for the four States (North Kordofan, South 
Kordofan, West Kordofan and Sinnar). 
Activity 1.6:  Support to home garden (jubraka) cultivation 
 75.
The project will support jubraka demonstrations in the new villages and scaling up in the old 
and new villages for improving women home gardens. This will be the entry point for household 
10 The costs of introducing new gum Arabic technologies are minimal; e.g., 30 SDG for a sonki tapping tool.  Therefore, there 
does not appear to be a need for activities parallel to the on-farm demonstrations for the field crops.   
16 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
nutrition and will supplement household incomes. Other entry points would include: capacity 
building on good agricultural practices; gender and climate mainstreaming, post-harvest 
handling techniques; time and energy saving stoves, and production and productivity of nutrient 
rich food crops. In order to further contribute to enhancing nutrition at the household level, the 
project would be promoting jubraka cultivation through chiselling, improved vegetable seeds, 
plastic sheet for lining of small irrigation pits, experimentation with simple micro-irrigation drip 
systems, and technical and nutrition-sensitisation training.  This home based production 
increase would help the households in securing all the home food needs of dried okra and 
tomatoes, and sizeable contribution to neighbours and selling the surplus as well as the cash 
crops like groundnut in the local markets. The average jubraka size will be 0.5 feddan but the 
size will be determined by the participating women and technical factors (such as rainfall). A 
total of 150 women in the new villages and 10,000 women in the old and new villages would 
benefit from this activity through demonstrations and scaling up, respectively.  
 76.
Jubraka scaling up in the old villages would take place largely through women training and 
access to rural finance, and assistance in linkage to improved markets (such as marketing dried 
okra in peak price periods immediately before Ramadan). The purpose of the loans will be to 
enhance production and income from homestead farming. Women interested in these loans 
can access financing for activities that enhance homestead production such as land preparation 
using the improved mechanised services promoted by the project, fencing equipment, digital 
excavation and lining. The project will specially promote the access to these loans for the 
excavation of ditches that can lead to supplementary irrigation for early maturing vegetables 
resulting in additional income and timely repayment.  
Implementation arrangement for Component 1  
 77.
Component 1 will be managed by the private sector coordinator within the PCU, who together 
with the production specialist will supervise, guide, and troubleshoot problems for the SPIU 
technical specialists.  The SPIU team will be responsible for state implementation of 
Component 1 working through the SPIU technical staff, supported by local extension officers at 
the locality level.  Many of these extension team members have been trained by SUSTAIN, 
SDP and WSRMP on targeting and gender focus, participatory transfer of technology, 
management of demonstrations facilities, and liaison with private sector service providers and 
financial institutions. They are organized into five brigades; each brigade is composed of a 
multi-disciplinary extension team as indicated in Section on project management and staffing.  
Each team will be responsible for a group of 20 villages.  It will have a team leader who is 
responsible for the smooth operation of the team. Each extension agent will be responsible for 
the implementation of a monthly programme and the preparation and submission of monthly 
progress reports. Extension team leaders will prepare a consolidated monthly report.  They will 
continue applying their current modus operandi introduced by SUSTAIN, SDP and WSRMP. A 
monthly inter and intra team coordination meeting will be organized at the SPIU level. Monthly 
meetings at the SPIU level will be chaired by the M&E officer with the participation of the 
locality extension teams. These meetings should discuss the progress made, difficulties 
encountered and remedies for addressing emerging problems. Detailed project staffing is 
presented under Section III.B. 
Sequencing of activities  
 78.
New Villages.  For new villages that have had little or no exposure to SDP or SUSTAIN 
activities, project activities will be implemented as follows: 
(a) Year 1 - Mobilization. Farmers, rural women and youth are provided technical and 
business training.  They visit the Innovation Demonstrations in the locality, and the On-
Farm demonstrations in the nearest village. SSP and MSP candidates are selected and 
begin training. Early-adopter farmers are selected and with LET support choose 
technologies for demonstrations.  Gum Arabic quality and productivity training begins.  
17 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
(b) Year 2 onwards. Productivity focus.  On-farm field crop and gum Arabic demonstrations are 
introduced based on technologies, systems, and tools selected by the farmers after their 
participation in Mobilization phase activities.  
(c) Year 3 onwards - Market access focus (see Component 2)  
 79. Old villages.  For old villages that have had substantial exposure to SDP or SUSTAIN, project 
activities will be implemented as shown below: 
(a) Year One onwards - Productivity focus-consolidation and scaling up. For the SDP villages, 
refresher training for the MSPs, SSPs, and Agrodealers.  For SUSTAIN villages, refresher 
training for the MSPs, and identification and training of SSPs and agrodealers. On-farm 
demonstrations.   
(b) Year Two onwards -  Market access focus (described in Component 2).  
Private sector service provider capacity building 
 80.
Business skills training. Training of trainers (ToT) and training materials for business skills for 
the service providers will be developed by an international specialist with an understanding of 
conditions in Sudan, supported by a national FAAB specialist, using local private sector input 
wherever possible.   
 81.
Technical training for the service providers will be provided as follows: 
(a) Spray service providers. SSP technical training and certification programme will be 
designed and implemented by SAGA 11 following IPM principles, supervised by the PCU 
Production specialist.  SAGA will work closely with the federal Pesticides Council and state 
level crop protection departments to ensure their buy-in and support and that all materials 
support the laws and regulations concerning safe handling of agrochemicals. The SAGA 
ToT will be delivered to master trainers drawn from individual private sector companies 
(members of SAGA) and from the state crop protection specialists.  These master trainers 
will provide training of the selected village SSPs (and agrodealers, as described below).  
(b) Mechanized service providers. MSP technical training programme and materials, and 
delivery of training, will be done by the PCU Production Specialist with the support of 
national mechanization specialists as required. All MSPs trained by the project will have 
access to a suitable tractor, as this is a condition of their participation in the training. Private 
sector equipment suppliers will be actively encouraged to participate/fund this training.  
(c) Agrodealers. Agrodealer technical ToT and training on the safe and effective handling of 
agrochemicals will be developed by SAGA using the process described above for the 
SSPs.  
(d) Village mechanics/blacksmiths.  ToT and training materials will be developed by a 
national consultant for use by the LET mechanization specialists. 
 82. On Farm and Innovation Demonstrations. The production specialist will have the lead 
responsibility for managing the design, organization, and management of the on-farm and 
innovation demonstration activities who will work through state level implementation units and 
the LETs.  
 83.
Innovation Demonstrations at the locality. In partnership with the private sector companies, 
IAMDP will develop one or more Innovation Demonstration plots in each project locality.  The 
Innovation Demonstration sites will be jointly selected by the project and the private companies, 
and will be located in areas that are easily accessed by other farmers in the locality.  The 
production specialists at the PCU and SPIU level will be responsible for overall design of the 
Innovation Demonstrations, and will liaise with the PSCs and ARC.  The design of the 
11 SAGA has a world-wide program supporting safe and effective use of agrochemicals through the training and certification of 
SSPs.  SAGA provided the master trainer for the SDP SSP ToT in 2016.    
18 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Innovation Demonstration sites will be undertaken by state level SPIUs with on the ground 
support from the LETs.  Project trained agrodealers, MSPs and SSPs will be competitively 
selected to provide the inputs and mechanization and crop protection services.  The Innovation 
Demonstration plots will be overseen on a regular basis by volunteer lead farmers, who will be 
allowed to keep the produce from the fields in exchange for their time. The project will share the 
costs of the Innovation Demonstration with private sector partners on a declining basis for three 
years, following the cost sharing guidelines, and based on MOUs which will be individually 
negotiated with each company.  
 84. On-farm demonstrations in project villages.  During the mobilization year, the local 
extension specialists will review the possible agronomic package options being demonstrated in 
the Innovation Demonstrations with the farmers, for selection for the on-farm demonstrations in 
the following Productivity Focus year.  Up to 20 early adopter farmers in each village that are 
willing to cost-share will be selected for the on-farm demonstrations. The early adopter farmers 
will base their decisions on technology packages to be demonstrated on the LET training 
sessions, organized visits to other village on-farm demonstrations, to the innovation 
demonstration in their locality, and when possible to villages that are already in the process of 
scale-up.   
Engagement with national private sector companies 
 85.
 86.
Information sharing.  The private sector specialist, with support from the four technical 
specialists, will ensure the development and distribution of the assessments and studies of the 
information sharing sub-activity.  
Innovation Scaling up Challenge Grant Facility (ISCGF).  The ISCGF operations manual will 
be developed by an international specialist with experience in challenge funds, together with 
national specialists.  The following is a brief summary of the main points to be included in the 
ISCGF manual that will be reviewed by IFAD: 
(a) The IAMDP PCU will manage the day to day activities of the ISMGF, through the private 
sector specialist.  
(b) The PCU will take steps to publicize the ISMGF to encourage relevant proposals from the 
widest possible base of potential promoters.   
(c) Membership of the ISMGF Selection Committee will include the Federal Ministry of 
Agriculture and Ministry of Finance, participating State Ministries of Agriculture, and 
representatives of producers, private sector companies and civil society.  
(d) The ISMGF Selection Committee will review proposals against the following criteria:  
 •
 •
 •
 •
 •
 •
productivity and production impacts (degree to which smallholder productivity and 
production will increase);  
innovativeness (degree in which the activity to Sudan, to the state, to smallholder 
farmers);  
degree of matching contribution by the private sector and farmers (the higher the 
better);  
additionality (degree to which the grant accelerates, deepens, and broadens what the 
private sector planned to do without the grant);  
scalability (degree to which positive impacts to continue to grow as a result of 
successful implementation; and  
systemic impacts (degree to which the grant will have a positive impact on systems 
and the environment, beyond the company and direct smallholder beneficiaries.  
Examples are positive environmental impacts or reforms in marketing policy. 
19 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
 87.
If the ISCGF funding is disbursing rapidly with good results, and there is continued demand 
through high quality proposals of scaling up activities, the IAMDP project management and 
IFAD may pursue co-financing arrangements with from other donors or financial institutions.   
Gum Arabic production, productivity and quality support  
 88.
 89.
Improved Potential of the gum Arabic resource base.  The PCU Agronomy Expert will 
supervise this component, working through the State Agronomy Specialist and the LET 
agroforestry officers to ensure that the improved A. senegalensis and A. seyal seeds/seedlings 
are made available to community and individual nurseries.   
Establishment of community and individual nurseries.  Under the guidance of the PCU and 
SPIU agronomists, the LET Agro-forestry Officer will work with GAPAs and individual producers 
who plan to upgrade/replace their trees with improved landraces.  The LET credit officer will 
explore the business potential for woman or youth run nurseries.   
 90. Gum Arabic Innovation Demonstrations.  The Gum Arabic Innovation Demonstration sites 
will be selected by the SPIU agronomists, in consultation with stakeholders.  TOT and training 
materials in improved gum Arabic agronomy, tapping, grading, storing developed by the World 
Bank/IFAD and AFD projects, FNC, and other sources will be updated as required by a national 
consultant in consultation with IGADRS and the private sector.  The PCU private sector expert, 
SPIU private sector specialists will negotiate MOUs with private sector gum Arabic buyers to 
assist with the development of training materials, TOT of LET officers, etc.  Training of GAPAs 
will be done by the LETs and FNC extension agents with support as required by private sector 
partners.   
 91.
Climate change resilience building. The project will have a long time CC/Climate Risk 
consultant. The trainings and demonstrations of climate change adaptation initiatives targeted 
at vulnerable groups will be conducted by experts specialized in adaptation. They would also be 
involved in coaching staff from Ministry of Environment, Ministry of Agriculture and the 
Agriculture Research Center (ARC) on using climate monitoring equipment and calibration, use 
of multiple sources of climate data for developing of climate change scenarios, impact 
scenarios and modelling. 
 92.
Support to home garden (jubraka) cultivation. The LET would be responsible for 
demonstration of jubraka at rural women households. Jubraka scaling up will take place in all 
project area with LET agents and credit officers at the Locality level being in charge of training 
and facilitation of access to rural financing. 
Component 2:  Market linkage and value addition 
 93.
Expected Outcome. The expected outcome of this component is higher income for the 
smallholder producers through improved market access, introduction and strengthening of 
village-based crop storage, and introduction of market linkage/value addition activities to 
increase the net returns from the crops grown and gum Arabic.  
Activity 2.1:  Physical market access (wadi crossings construction) 
 94. Wadi crossings will be constructed to facilitate and ease the transportation of agricultural 
produce to the markets and ensure the supply of agricultural inputs, fuel, spare parts of the 
tractors etc. to farming areas. The criteria for selecting the wadi crossing sites for the crossings 
will be: (i) on main tracks which passes through farming areas, and connect the largest number 
of villages to market centers, or main paved/raised gravel roads; (ii) on main tracks which are in 
a reasonable condition; (iii) are in suitable locations for construction i.e. the safest and 
economical locations; and (iv) have a low negative impact on environment. 
 95.
Potential beneficiaries will provide input in the selection process, and must provide firm 
commitment to form wadi crossing committees that undertake routine maintenance (for which 
they will receive training).  State governments will need to provide a firm budgetary commitment 
for repairs and upkeep as a condition precedent to initiating construction. 
20 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Activity 2.2:  Storage facilities Development 
 96.
 97.
 98.
 99.
Sub-Activity 2.2.1: Smallholder owned and operated cash crop storage demonstration 
facilities 
The project will support construction of one modern village-level storage facility in each locality, 
capable of safe and cost-effective storage of cash and food security crops including gum 
Arabic. The storage facilities will have security systems that will be reviewed and approved by 
financial institutions.  These will be designed to allow bank financing on attractive terms, 
secured by the stored crops.  The storage facilities will be managed and operated by a 
registered farmer producer association (FPA) that has undergone IAMDP training in business 
and technical skills (see Component 3). These project-financed stores will demonstrate to 
farmers and financial institutions the cost-effectiveness and risks/rewards associated with crop 
storage.  The FPAs will keep warehouse records adequate for (a) sound business 
management; (b) use of the facilities for obtaining post-harvest credit; and (c) for tracking the 
returns to storage.   
All FPAs will receive training on analyzing costs, benefits, and risks of crop storage under the 
FAAB activity of Component 3.  This will include the risks and returns of speculative storage of 
cash crops.  The training will cover how to develop a business plan with estimated cash flows to 
be used for obtaining commercial finance.    
The project will provide 80 percent of the construction costs of the secure storage facility.  The 
capacity will be approximately 200 MTs (roughly equivalent to 220 bags of sesame or 100 bags 
of in-shell groundnuts).  The farmer producer association will provide 20 percent of the costs 
through in-kind contributions of inputs and labor. 
Sub-activity 2.2.2:  Studies on storage and pricing  
The project will commission studies on storage and pricing as required that will help refine 
project implementation activities such as storage structure design, siting, training, etc. The 
project will conduct a thorough analysis of sorghum, groundnut, sesame, and gum Arabic 
commodity prices and transport costs, moving up the value chain from farm gate, village 
market, auction/wholesale market, and FOB export, over the course of the year.  This will give 
guidance to FPAs and financial institutions into the risks/rewards of storing crops in anticipation 
of higher prices. 
Activity 2.3:  Market linkage/value addition 
100. Market linkage/value addition activities selected for project support will be based on market 
analysis and market demand from buyers (processors or exporters (at the state or national 
level).   
101. Sub-Activity 2.3.1: Market assessment studies. As required, market assessment studies will 
be undertaken to identify new markets or market niches appropriate for the IAMDP crops.  One 
example would be an assessment of the market potential for Sudan for Fair Trade, Certified 
Organic, or other international certification.    
102. Sub-Activity 2.3.2:  Direct support for market linkage/value addition.  Buyers and 
FPAS/GAPAs will be provided technical, logistical, and financial support to pilot and scale-up 
value-addition/market linkage activities that have a high likelihood of commercial success.  The 
goals of the market linkage/value addition activities are to provide a combination of one or more 
of the following:  (i) higher price per unit of crop produced; (ii) greater assured volumes; 
(iii) technical training and support; (iv) production credit on reasonable terms. 
103. For smaller, village or locality pilot demonstrations, project support will be provided for testing 
new systems, tools, technologies and equipment. For scale-up, commercial investment from 
farmers or from the private sector will be expected.  For exceptional situations requiring risk 
reduction, the Innovation Scaling Up Challenge Grant Facility can be utilized.  
21 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
104. Project support will be limited, time-bound, and focused on areas where the private sector has 
little expertise or could not be expected to invest (e.g. in the formation and training of FPAs or 
GAPAs, coordinating access to finance, locating transporters, etc.).  In no case will the project 
play a market actor role (e.g. loan money, take on risk, provide transport services) but should 
focus on facilitating market actor participation in value chain upgrading.  
105. Market Linkage/Value addition activities with potential linkages with external markets can be 
explored by the project are listed below.  These are meant only to guide project managers, final 
selection should be made based on private sector and farmer interest.  
(a) Marketing of unrefined sesame or groundnut oil produced by village based oil 
processors. Larger commercial oil refineries have indicated a possible interest in the 
purchase of unrefined oil from village processors, if minimum quantities can be aggregated 
and if the price is competitive.  One company has expressed interest in sending a tanker 
car directly to the village for collection, and pay farmers on the spot if quality was 
acceptable. The seedcake by-product produced is a valuable livestock feed for local animal 
fattening operations, and surpluses also would find a ready market from large-scale 
livestock operations, which could make arrangements for bulk collection.  Some degree of 
pre-shipment finance could be extended by the unrefined oil buyers.  El Obied wholesale 
auction plans to add sesame and groundnut oil and seedcake as a listed commodity by 
early 2018; this would create an alternative market outlet for village production of these 
products.    
(b) Marketing of shelled groundnuts from village based shellers. Larger exporters and 
processors have expressed interest in purchasing shelled groundnuts at the village level 
(the normal practice is to buy in-shell groundnuts because of concerns over damage 
caused by low quality shellers and poor storage practices).  The buyer would require that 
the FPAs are using high quality groundnut shellers and with properly dried in-shell nuts, 
with technical training provided by the project with input from the buyer.  The buyers would 
be willing to provide some degree of production finance, collect minimum quantities from 
primary aggregation points, provide input into shelling machine selection and purchase, 
and to pay in cash at prices that would be higher than selling to local traders, and 
comparable to El Obied or Omdurman auction prices (less transport charges and taxes 
incurred). 
(c) High quality gum Arabic. A number of gum Arabic exporters have expressed interest in 
buying direct from GAPAs provided that they could obtain a higher quality product than 
what is available from intermediate traders or the auctions.  They would provide 
pre-financing gum Arabic tapping costs (through a no-interest loan), providing mats and jute 
bags for grading and packing, and paying a cash price at a premium to the El Obied 
auction prices.  In return, the project would organize and train the GAPAs in proper 
harvesting, sorting, cleaning, grading, and packing.   In fact, the RSGPMP project has 
undertaken a small but successful pilot with two gum Arabic companies in North Kordofan 
with 13 hashab gum GAPAs.  This could be scaled up with in all four states with many more 
buyers, and include talha gum as well which is in high demand in India.  
(d) Certified seed production.  There is ongoing interest from seed companies to purchase 
certified seed from smallholder groups in the SDP project areas, which is close to being on 
a sustainable basis.  IAMDP will support additional FPAs that wish to produce certified 
seed under contract to private seed companies, and for local sale, and to expand the scope 
of to Sinnar and West Kordofan (where at least one seed company is interested in sourcing 
certified groundnut seed). 
22 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Implementation arrangements for Component 2  
106. Overall supervision of Component 2 will be done by the private sector coordinator and 
marketing expert, who will coordinate and supervise a network of federal, state, and locality 
staff.  
107. Wadi crossings construction will be supervised by the state ministries of physical planning 
and public utilities.  Locality level engineering units will direct and supervise the maintenance 
process, and train the wadi crossing committees. Contracting firms will be competitively 
selected to undertake the construction work.   
108. Storage. The crop storage demonstration facilities will be owned and operated by registered 
and active farmer producer associations (FPAs).  One FPA per locality will be selected as the 
recipient of funding for the storage unit from the project, on a competitive basis, through a 
mechanism worked out by relevant PCU, SPIU, and LET staff.  The selection will be based on a 
review of a simplified business plan that includes:  
(a) Realistic projections of operating, interest, maintenance, and depreciation costs (including 
the project-subsidized capital costs).   
(b) Realistic projections of revenues from operations.  These would include reduction in crop 
storage losses, and projected returns from price increases. 
(c) Proof of registration as a crop production FPA, with a bank account, active for at least one 
cropping season. 
(d) Commitment to share business records for project monitoring and impact assessment 
purposes, and to host visitors from the locality. 
109. The Rural Finance Specialist (Subcomponent 3.2) will coordinate with financial institutions to 
ensure that crop storage facilities are usable for post-harvest financing, and liaise with 
insurance companies about the possibility of obtaining coverage for stored crops.  A local 
certified SSP will provide pesticide control of the storage facility as required.   
110. The technical TOT and training materials for maintenance of storage, and pest control will be 
provided by the Marketing Expert, with input from national consultants.  
111. The business TOT and training materials and methods on crop storage will be developed and 
tested by a national consultant (Subcomponent 3.1) with additional support as required from 
agricultural economists from the Federal, State, and locality levels and the state level 
implementation units.  The actual trainings of the FPAs will be done by the LETs. 
112. Storage and financing studies. The analysis of storage and post-harvest financing options at 
the locality and state level will be undertaken by a national specialist or specialists, 
competitively recruited.  
113. The dynamic price analysis of sorghum, sesame, groundnut, and gum Arabic market prices 
over time will be undertaken by an international crop marketing specialist with support of one or 
more national crop marketing consultants, all competitively selected. 
114. Marketing Linkage/Value Addition  
115. Market assessment studies will be undertaken by an international consultant who will be 
partnered with a national expert consultant. 
116. The marketing linkage/value addition direct support activities will be led at the PCU level 
by the private sector/marketing expert, who will be focused on structuring national and regional 
level partnerships, and guiding/supporting the work of the state marketing specialists.  The 
private sector/marketing expert will initiate contacts with buyers interested in sourcing from 
FPAs/GAPAs.  This will start with the initial contacts established by SDP (e.g. Savola for 
sesame/groundnut unrefined oil, Yusuf Habibi for shelled groundnuts, RANS for groundnut 
23 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
seed, El Hamama for high quality talha gum).  An international PPP consultant will support the 
marketing specialist in liaising and structuring pilot initiatives both locally and for international 
markets (especially if internationally certified production such as fair trade or organic is shown 
to be potentially feasible).  MOUs will be negotiated with buyers to specify the roles and 
responsibilities of each party.  To ensure that production meets market requirements, the 
buyers will be encouraged to provide technical training materials and TOT for the LETs and 
where relevant private sector service providers.  IAMDP technical assistance and training for 
FPAs and GAPAs will be delivered by the technical and specialists on the LETs, with input as 
appropriate from the buyers or their agents.  A limited budget for procurement of tools and 
equipment for pilot or first stage initiatives will be managed by the marketing expert.  Scale-up 
of market linkage/value addition activities may also be financed by the ICGSF (described in 
Component 1), in conjunction with private sector, FPA/GAPA, and financial institutions.    
Component 3:  Enabling environment 
117. Expected outcome. The expected outcome of Component 3 is improved smallholder access to 
finance, a higher level of smallholder business competency, and strong, active FPAs and 
GAPAs with a purpose and activities that go beyond receiving donor project support or 
government subsidy.  This component includes two subcomponents: (i) farmers associations 
strengthening and business development; and (ii) access to rural finance.  
Subcomponent 3.1:  Farmers and farmer associations business capacity strengthened  
Activity 3.1.1:  Farming as a business training (FAAB) 
118. The farming as a business (FAAB) curriculum developed by SDP and SUSTAIN will be 
expanded and improved to provide farmers and gum Arabic producers the analytical tools and 
concepts to plan, make investment decisions, and operate their farming and other businesses 
profitably.  This will cover financing, operations, and marketing.  After training, the smallholders 
and will be capable of developing simple business plans that will help them make key 
investment decisions (e.g. crop selection, input selection, buy/rent equipment, contract farming 
versus storage and independent marketing), raise finance for farm and value added activities, 
manage their business affairs, critically evaluate the season’s results, and use the insights to 
plan the next year’s crop. 
Activity 3.1.2: FPA/GAPA capacity building  
119.
IAMDP will mobilize and support FPAs to become the primary means by which farmers 
collaborate on individual and joint farming and other business activities.   Most FPAs and 
GAPAs have been formed at the urging of donors and government, with the primary objective 
the expectation of free or subsidies services.  They have little independent life.  However, to 
interact successfully with suppliers or with buyers, small-scale farmers must have a viable 
means of organization. Where GAPAs or FPAs do not include the poorer strata of village (and 
there is evidence of this in some areas), steps will be taken to either ensure their participation in 
existing organizations or are assisted to form their own associations.  Many GAPAs have been 
established as cooperatives, and those that wish to will be assisted convert to the new FPA 
legislation.  
120. The FAAB training described in described earlier in Activity 3.1.1 will provide the basic building 
blocks of FPA capacity building.  However, under Activity 3.1.2, FPAs will also receive the 
following support: 
(a) FPA mobilization and organizational training that addresses the business reasons why 
FPAs are formed, how they should be managed, how to select members, how individual 
smallholder and collective FPA businesses should interact, financing, taking advantage of 
incentives, rights, and obligations under the law. 
(b) Joint business activity trainings that guide FPAs on determining when collective or 
collaborative action is preferred (e.g. bulk input purchase, negotiation with service 
24 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
providers, storing and marketing produce) and how to ensure that individual effort is 
rewarded. 
(c) Apex association formation and capacity building at the locality and state level 
Following the development of strong FPAs, support will be provided in the later years of the 
project to analyze and support formation of apex structures at the locality and state level.  
Topics to be covered include: (i) management, governance, and funding of apex 
organizations; (ii) coordination of large-scale market linkage/value addition projects; 
(iii) developing membership services; and (iv) government advocacy.  
Implementation arrangement for subcomponent 3.1 
121. Overall supervision of the Farming as a Business and Farmer Producer Association Support 
activities will be managed by the Private Sector Expert, who will retain a specialist national 
FAAB consultant.  
Activity 3.1.1:  Farming as a business 
122. The FAAB TOT and training curriculum will be developed by a national consultant. Inputs will 
come from international and national consultants who develop key case studies and specialized 
modules (e.g. covering MSPs, agrodealers, gum Arabic sharecroppers, etc.).  Where possible, 
input will be obtained from private sector partners. The FAAB TOT will be delivered to the LET 
Farming as business officers.  The service business development officer will be responsible for 
FAAB trainings to service providers.  The LET Farming as business officers will be responsible 
for rolling out FAAB training to FPAs and GAPAs.   
123. High level FAAB sensitization sessions will be provided for state ministries of agriculture to 
encourage them to support to a FAAB approach towards smallholder promotion, and to roll out 
FAAB training for all extension teams (not just the project-supported LETs).    
124. Under supervision of the PCU community development national consultant, ToT and training 
materials for FAAB training that can effectively reach semi-literate and illiterate farmers.  A 
possible source material is the FAO “FAAB story book” methodology12 developed for farmers 
with limited literacy.   
Activity 3.1.2:  Farmer producer association capacity building 
125. TOT and training materials for FPA mobilization and FAAB training will be developed by a 
FAAB national consultant with support from an international farmer association specialist. The 
FPA TOT will be delivered to the project LET Farming a business officer, as well as agricultural 
economists from other extension teams, and possibly state level officials with the responsibility 
for mobilizing FPAs.   
126. The FAAB national consultant will liaise, through the state implementation units, with the state 
government FPA mobilization committees for delivering the initial parts of the FPA mobilization 
and organizational training programme.  
127. The Rural Finance and FAAB specialists will liaise with Nile Bank and the Agricultural Bank of 
Sudan, and any other potential partners in FPA capacity building, concerning ways to leverage 
the impact of FPA capacity building. 
128. Apex Association Capacity Building at the locality and state level training materials will be 
developed by an international farmer organization specialist, with assistance of the FAAB 
specialist and a national farmer association specialist.  The international specialist will design, 
organize, and lead an exposure tour for high performing FPAs and key government officials to a 
country with strong apex smallholder farmer associations that provide effective membership 
services and policy advocacy.   
12 “Farming as a Business Story Book”, FAO, 2015. 
25 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Subcomponent 3.2:  Access to rural finance 
129. This subcomponent will increase smallholder farmers’ access to finance for adopting improved 
agricultural packages. It will support smallholder farmers to meet their financing requirements 
for (i) improved crop production activities; and (ii) post-harvest marketing activities.  
(a) Improved crop production activities will be supported by facilitating (i) smallholder farmers’ 
access to crop production financing to increase the demand for improved crop production 
packages; (ii) MSPs and agro dealers access to asset financing (agricultural machinery) 
and working capital loans (seeds, agrochemicals) for increasing the supply of improved 
crop production inputs and services. 
(b) Post-harvest marketing activities will be supported by (i) post-harvest shared marketing 
contracts with ABS; and (ii) access to credit from financial institutions on pilot basis against 
crops secured in village level storage facilities. 
Improved crop production financing 
Increase smallholders’ access to crop production financing  
130.
IAMDP will increase smallholders’ access to finance for adopting improved crop production 
practices by facilitating (i) pre-financing linkages with buyers; (ii) formal crop loans from 
financial institutions; and (iii) informal loans from internal capital of village savings and credit 
groups. These areas are described below. 
131. Pre-financing linkages with buyers. IAMDP will strongly promote pre-financing from buyers 
(advance against future delivery of produce) as a major instrument for financing smallholders to 
adopt improved technologies. Buyer pre-financing is already visible in the French supported 
market focused gum Arabic development initiative in the project area. Moreover, the sheil 
system is an informal pre financing mechanism which is widely prevalent but exploitative of 
smallholders. IAMDP will strongly promote pre-financing from buyers while brokering buyer 
linkages with smallholders. The advance received by the smallholders will be settled by 
deducting it from the value of the produce delivered to the buyer at harvest. IAMDP will assist 
smallholders to negotiate market led selling price for their produce to ensure fair returns after 
the advance settlement. Where relevant IAMDP will link the buyer (pre-finance supplier) to 
MSPs and agro dealers in the project area for in-kind supply of quality inputs and services to 
the smallholders. It is expected that buyers will be supportive of pre financing smallholders who 
are already linked in previous seasons. For financing first time linkages IAMDP will support crop 
loans from PFIs through matching equity as described in the next section.  
132. Formal crop loans from financial institutions. IAMDP will increase smallholders’ access to 
formal crop loans by supporting PFIs with (i) revolving matching equity funds; (ii) TA, training, 
capacity building inputs; (iii) infrastructure and operations gap financing; (iv) refinancing and 
extension service linkages  
(a) Revolving matching equity support. The high credit risk faced by FIs in delivering first 
cycle loans to smallholders, who lack credit history in high risk rainfed areas, is a major 
reason for the shortage of formal crop loans in the project areas. IAMDP will address this 
gap by providing revolving matching equity support to the PFIs specifically to finance first 
cycle loans of smallholders for the adoption of improved agricultural packages. The total 
credit funds required to finance the approved first cycle loans will be shared between the 
IAMDP matching equity (75%) and PFIs own funds (25%). Losses suffered on the first 
cycle loans will be shared in the same proportion and will reduce the PFIs’ credit risk while 
developing new crop loan linkages. IAMDP will contribute its share directly to the PFIs. The 
PFI will deliver these loans using the same mechanisms used for other seasonal loan 
without any special conditions that subsidise smallholders’ cost of funds or principal 
repayments.  
26 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
(b) It is expected that this mechanism will link 15,000 smallholders to formal credit source with 
average loan size of SDG 1,500, at 24-36% profit margin. PFIs will lend to smallholders 
against repayment cross guarantee by group members. On successful repayment of the 
first cycle loan the PFI will finance repeat loans using its own sources of finance. The 
project will structure the funds flow in a manner that the repayments of the matching equity 
from clients to the PFI is available in a project account at the end of each season. IAMDP 
will use these funds for supporting the existing or new PFI in subsequent seasons based on 
performance. At completion IAMDP will transfer these funds to the CBS-MFU (refer section 
below on partnerships) for possible topping-up and replication across the country.  
(c) Implementation arrangements. The project will select at least two PFIs to offer services in 
each project locality. ABS and ABSUMI will be pre-selected as PFIs based on their existing 
partnerships and investment already received from other IFAD projects (refer annex 4). 
Additional PFIs will be selected competitively based on (i) call for proposals and shortlisting 
potential PFIs; and (ii) assessment of detailed business plans (BP) submitted by the 
shortlisted PFIs and final selection based on criteria including (i) presence in multiple 
project localities; (ii) prior experience in delivering crop loans in rural areas; (iii) existing 
refinancing partnership with CBS, SMDC, etc.; and (iv) clear organisational strategy for 
developing crop loan portfolio. MFIs, commercial banks and development banks can all 
respond to the call for proposals (refer annex 4 for detailed PFI selection process).  
(d) Technical assistance, training and capacity building of PFIs. IAMDP will organise TA, 
training and capacity building to support PFIs’ to (i) refine their business plans by 
developing products and delivery methodologies to address the full range of MF needs by 
the target households including savings services and crop, livestock and microenterprise 
loans; and (ii) harmonise RF implementation plans with IAMDP implementation structure 
involving the SPIUs, and LETs. IAMDP will train the PFIs’ credit officers on the improved 
crop production packages and,  
(e) Provide them with active exposure to the demonstrations of new technologies. It will 
provide the PFIs with total investment estimates, cost benefit estimates and credit 
requirement estimates for different crop models involving the project promoted 
technologies. The Rural Finance Expert in the PCU and the Rural Finance Specialist in the 
SPIUs will anchor TA, capacity building and training activities in collaboration with local 
service providers mainly hired from the pool of individuals trained by previous IFAD projects 
for development and implementation of ABSUMI, Bara’ah and SCG models.  
 (f)
Infrastructure support and operations gap financing to PFIs. The lack rural branches, 
inadequate transportation and high initial operations costs are some of the main challenges 
faced by FIs intending to expand their rural outreach. Based on performance in the first 3 
years, the project may assist promising PFIs in the areas of (i) rural branch establishment 
by supporting their office furniture, equipment and transportation needs; (ii) technology 
adoption for strengthening the MIS and loan tracking systems, payment systems, 
integrating mobile banking and agent banking services; (iii) limited operations costs support 
to new rural branches of PFIs before they break even by financing partial staff costs, 
specially agribusiness development staff, for 1-2 years. All assets will be procured by 
IAMDP following IFAD procurement guidelines and delivered to the PFIs in kind. 
(g) Facilitate PFIs partnerships to refinancing and extension services. IAMDP will 
facilitate partnership between the PFIs and the refinancing partners such as CBS-MFU, 
SMDC and commercial banks. It will also facilitate, on a pilot basis, PFIs partnerships with 
the guarantee agency and micro insurance agencies where relevant, without direct 
project financial support to them. 
(h) CBS-MFU and SMDC. IAMDP will broker the PFIs’ refinancing partnerships with CBS-MFU 
and the SMDC to ensure that the PFIs have sufficient access to portfolio funds for meeting 
27 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
the crop loans targets in the project area for 4-5 cycles. IAMDP will build on the 
partnerships already established between previous IFAD projects and CBS-MFU/SMDC 
during the development of ABSUMI and Bara’ah. The CBS-MFU is will refinance PFIs from 
two sources, repayments collected on the US$100 million disbursed so far to the MFIs and 
additional financing of US$100 expected from the Islamic Development Bank and the Arab 
Fund for Economic and Social Development over the next 5 years. SMDC is willing to use a 
part of its US$10 million investment capital.  
 (i) The RF coordinator at the PCU will broker the portfolio financing partnerships between 
PFIs and CBS-MFU and SMDC. CBS-MFU and SMDC will be invited to participate in the 
selection of the PFIs, fine tuning the PFIs’ business plans and developing refinancing 
MOUs based on the business plans. IAMDP may support the refinancing partners to 
improve their supervision processes and M&E systems through technology adoption and 
assist them to participate in exposure, capacity building and training events, based on 
performance. They will also be invited to participate in supervision missions and to witness 
the crop financing success stories in the project area. Knowledge sharing workshops and 
publication of information booklets will be supported to promote the diffusion of the 
successful financing models amongst other MFIs through the refinancing partners. 
 (j) Guarantee agency. The CBS has recently established the Guarantee Agency (GA) as an 
autonomous entity to provide up to 75% wholesale guarantee to MFIs seeking refinancing 
from commercial banks or farmers’ organisations seeking loans from commercial banks. 
Where relevant and without project funding, IAMDP will facilitate partnerships between the 
GA and PFIs (also farmers’ organisations) to enable the latter to borrow from commercial 
banks. The guarantee agency has been newly established and still has limited outreach. 
Depending on its responsiveness to the project needs. 
(k) Micro insurance services. Without direct funding from the project, IAMDP will facilitate 
linkage between the PFIs and micro insurance companies to enable credit guarantees to 
the PFIs for its crop production loans. The focus of this pilot initiative would be on a 
simple limited credit insurance scheme. The role of the project will be to facilitate better 
terms and conditions for the credit guarantee for the PFIs considering; bulk demand for 
such insurance and lowered risks due to adoption of improved technologies, enhanced 
extension services and adoption of appropriate crop varieties e.g. pest and drought 
resistant.  
 (l) Extension services. IAMDP will ensure strong implementation level coordination between 
the Credit Officers (COs) from the PFIs and the State and Locality Rural Credit Officers 
(RCOs) from the project. The Rural Finance Specialist (RFS) in the SPIUs will train the 
State and Locality RCOs to facilitate (i) mobilisation of improved crop loan applicants; (ii) 
PFIs linkages to input suppliers, services providers and buyers; (iii) community sensitisation 
on PFIs’ services, terms and conditions and group formation and financial literacy training; 
(iv) group formation (refer SCG development) and their training on financial literacy, 
business management and marketing development topics to facilitate linkage to the PFIs. 
PFIs will be responsible for loan appraisal, disbursements, credit monitoring and repayment 
collection. 
133.
Informal loans from village savings and credit groups (VSCGs). The rural finance 
environment in the project area is fragile with limited graduation options for MFI clients. External 
MFIs have been known to stop lending to even to strong clients after the last loan cycle. 
Secondly, for some household the entry level credit requirement for adoption of new crop 
technologies is very low (SDG 300-600). In such cases dependence of the financial institution 
has affected adoption when the FI rejected of failed to lend on time. To overcome these 
challenges the IAMDP will promote entry level crop financing specially for very poor households 
through loans from internal capital of VSCGs which have been very successful in WSRMP.  
28 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
134. The project will develop men and women’s VSCGs each comprising up to 20 members saving 
regularly SDG 20-30 per month. The accumulated savings will be used to finance individual 
member activities and collective group activities. The profit margins earned on the investments 
will be ploughed back for increasing the group capital. Strong adoption of VSCGs in a village of 
around 100 households has shown (in WSRMP) to generate internal capital of SDG 100,000-
150,000 over 4 to 5 years which could easily finance improved crop loans for 50-60 
smallholders. Some of the SCGs can choose to operate as Producers Associations (PA) and 
will be registered accordingly. From the onset these will function as strong institutions founded 
of a culture of member discipline, regular savings, business orientation and focus on internal 
capital generation.  
135. The Locality RCOs will be responsible for SCG formation. Building on the experience of 
WSRMP in SCG development, the RCO will develop 1-2 SCGs in a village in the process 
training up to two SCG facilitators to replicate these groups in the rest of the village. Once the 
SCGs in the village show positive results the project will actively support the dissemination of 
these success stories to neighbouring villages. This will indirectly support the adoption of the 
crop technologies in the surrounding villages. The project will support pay limited service 
charges and allowances to the SCG facilitators for their services in the project villages and 
surrounding areas (refer annex 4 for detailed VSCG implementation guidelines).   
Financing MSPs and agro input suppliers 
136. Seeds and agrochemicals dealers, retailers, machinery service providers, village level spraying 
service providers and integrated pest management agents have limited access to finance which 
has restricted the availability of these services to the smallholders. IAMDP will facilitate their 
credit linkage to FIs in response to increased demand for their services generated through the 
improved crop production loans from PFIs to smallholders. The loans to agro input suppliers 
are expected to range from SDG 10,000-40,000 and loans to MSPs are likely to range from 
SDG 10,000 – 150,000 depending on the nature of the agricultural machinery. 
137.
In coordination with interested financial institutions (ABS, other commercial banks) IAMDP will 
mobilise bulk credit application from MSPs and agro input suppliers in the project area at the 
beginning of the season and submit these to FIs for shortlisting. The project will assist the 
shortlisted applicants to develop of detailed business/investment proposals and feasibility 
plans. These plans will indicate the (i) the demand for the inputs/services created by project 
activities; (ii) the training and capacity building inputs by the project to the MSPs and agro input 
suppliers; (iii) direct financing of the smallholders facilitated by the project to assist the payment 
for the services/inputs. Based on these factors the project will assist the applicants to negotiate 
lower physical collateral needs (where relevant for loans higher than SDG 50,000). It will also 
utilise the partnership with the guarantee agency to develop to cover up to 75% of the collateral 
requirements of MSPs and agro-dealers.  
Financing post-harvest marketing activities 
138. Post-harvest shared marketing contracts with ABS. This will be initially piloted on a limited 
scale. The project will facilitate contracts between the farmers and ABS agreeing that at harvest 
a specified number of crop sacks will be stored in the ABS storage facilities for 3-4 months after 
which the two parties will jointly on selling the stock based at prevailing market prices. At the 
time of the contract the ABS will pay a 30-50% of the current market price (at harvest) to the 
farmers. This access to cash will support the farmers to meet emergency expenses faced 
immediately after harvest without resorting to distress selling of the produce. After selling the 
stock and the net profits (deducting storage costs, marketing expenses by ABS) from the 
proceeds will be shared between the farmers and the ABS at 70:30 ratio. ABS will pay out the 
share of the farmers after deducting the amount already paid at the time of the contract. The 
project will support this arrangement by assisting the development of guidelines and contract 
formats, sensitising and training farmers and ABS branches on the modalities, brokering the 
29 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
contracts between the ABS branches and farmers, supporting the development of collection 
centres and smooth delivery of the produce by farmers to ABS.  
139. Financing against crops stored in community level storage facilities. This mechanism will 
also be implemented on pilot basis. Taking advantage of the presence of community level 
storage facilities developed in component 1, IAMDP will collaborate with ABS and other FI to 
develop post-harvest financing models against crops stored in these storage facilities. At the 
time of harvest the farmers will store their crops in the local storage facility and will approach 
the financial institution for loans against the stored crops as collateral. The FI will secure the 
collateral by putting a lock and potentially by deploying a guard at the facility. It will then supply 
in kind loans to meet the consumption needs and other requirements of the farmers after 
harvest. These contracts will usually be for 3 to 4 months after which the prices of the stored 
products are expected to rise. At this point the farmers will sell the produce with assistance 
from the bank if needed and settle their loans from the revenue generated. The average loan 
size will be US$15,000 for four pilots one in each state. The project will support this also as 
revolving matching equity.  
E.  Lessons learned and adherence to IFAD policies and the SECAP 
140. The implementation of different IFAD and other financiers’ co-funded projects has generated a 
series of lessons that guide the present project design and implementation. The key lessons of 
relevance to IAMDP have been incorporated in the design process and are summarised below. 
They are detailed in Appendix 3.  
141. Service providers must have necessary inputs, equipment, and technical/business skills, and, 
be available and ready when inputs/services are required by farmers. Missing planting season 
is detrimental to the smallholders livelihoods.    
142. Private companies will invest in marketing inputs and equipment targeted for smallholders, 
when (i) convinced that these farmers are a significant market; and (ii) government input 
subsidies are focused only on the poor subsistence farmers who would not be able to afford 
inputs.  
143. Private companies do not find it cost-effective to invest into structures to directly provide 
inputs/services to smallholders; but they are interested in building the capability of local or 
village based input/service providers.   
144. Smallholders need technical knowledge and business skills to organize themselves to be more 
attractive and profitable customers for local service providers, and to negotiate better prices 
and terms.   
145. The IFAD financed development projects have focused on delivery of extension and advisory 
services and implementation of demonstrations. It was assumed that adoption will follow 
systematically with little or no post-demonstration technical support to ensure effective adoption 
and scaling up of the proposed technologies. There is need to include demonstration and 
scaling up processes. 
146.
Increasing climate risk necessitates a focus on resilience and adaptation.  Increasing drought 
frequency and worsening climate change are magnifying risks to rural communities in rainfed 
areas. 
147. Financial institutions consider first cycle loans as most risky.  Although financial institutions 
have access to portfolio funds they are reluctant to invest in crop production activities due to the 
inherent risks under rainfed production systems.  
148. To ensure project sustainability there is need to (i) promote strong partnerships with the private 
sector for the provision of highly required agricultural machinery services to increase efficiency 
through economies of scale; and (ii) develop the capacity of the locality extension services and 
30 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
community based organisations to ensure smooth post completion and sustainability of the 
project activity.   
149.
In particular, there is need to build farmer business skills and strengthen the nascent system of 
Farmer Producer Associations recently mandated and being supported by the Federal 
government. The Farmer Producer Associations need capacity building on managerial skills 
improvement to provide better services to the members and to sustain their support without 
dependency on government support. “Farming as a Business” training for the associations 
would cover planning, budgeting, marketing strategies, negotiating for finance, services, 
markets, collective versus individual activities, cropping/livestock/collection/off-farm integration. 
Adherence to IFAD policies 
150. The design of IAMDP is aligned to all relevant IFAD strategies and policies, including. 
Strategic Framework 2016-25; Targeting Policy – Reaching the Poor; Gender Strategy; Rural 
Finance Policy, Climate Change Strategy; Environment & Natural Resource Management 
Policy; Policy on Supervision & Implementation Support; and Environmental & Social 
Assessment Procedures. 
151. The 2011 Environment and Natural Resource Management (ENRM) Policy. Resilient 
livelihoods through the sustainable use of natural assets distil lessons learned in previous IFAD 
initiatives that have sought to reduce rural poverty through interventions related to the 
environment. The ten core principles of the IFAD ENRM Policy encapsulate both the main 
issues to be addressed and suggested approaches. 
152. Of particular relevance to Sudan, IAMDP is also fully in line with IFAD's policy on  Engagement 
in Fragile and Conflict-affected States and Situations, as follows: (i) project design is 
based on proven evidence from earlier projects (SUSTAIN, SDP, WSRMP, and Gum Arabic 
Production and Marketing Project) within the local context of the states of Sinnar, North, South 
and West Kordofan; (ii) project design addresses limited access of the rural poor to natural 
resources (land and water), and limited state and community capacities, as the main drivers of 
fragility in project area, through promotion of conservation agriculture and capacity building; 
(iii) fragility related outcomes are included in the project log frame to be monitored during 
implementation. These include resilience to Climate Change, rural women empowerment 
trough access to training, markets and finance, total land brought under conservation 
agriculture, etc. 
III. Project implementation 
A.  Approach 
153.
IAMDP will be implemented over five years.  Implementation arrangements for IAMDP will be 
set out in a Project Implementation Manual (PIM) to be finalised at project start up.  Guiding 
principles for implementation will be: (i) a flexible approach in response to the needs of the 
target group and value-adders; (ii) competitive private sector led activities, driven by effective 
national and international market demand; (iii) inclusiveness of rural poor, women and youth, 
and synergies with government and donor funded programmes in project area. 
154. Potential synergies and partnership. Synergy with IFAD-funded Livestock Marketing and 
Resilience Project (LMRP):  covering the same project area as IAMDP, the LMRP is a recently 
approved seven-year IFAD-supported project, seeking to tackle rural poverty by raising the 
incomes of poor households whose livelihoods depend on livestock production and marketing. 
LMRPP aims at transforming the rural economy from subsistence to an increasingly efficient 
market-based system founded on the small-scale livestock sector that promotes livelihood 
improvement and decreases pressure on natural resources. To this end, the LMRP is helping 
31 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
GOS and stakeholders on resolving various closely-interlinked problems hindering the 
sustainable socio-economic rural development of Sudan: 
(a) the poorly-developed domestic and export value chains that generate very low real (cash) 
demand for livestock; 
(b) the limited and declining productivity and economic carrying capacity of lands used for 
rainfed farming and extensive livestock husbandry;  
(c) the combination of increased climatic shocks and policies that are posing an increasing 
threat to the livelihoods of livestock communities; 
(d) the decreased availability of ecologically healthy and climate resilient rangelands and the 
altering of  the traditional balance between pastoralists, agro-pastoralists and crop farmers, 
as well as disputes over the ownership and use of the dwindling natural resources; and 
(e) barriers to the poor in developing viable enterprises by mobilising their own and communal 
resources.  
155. Of particular importance on synergy between the two projects, Component 2 of LMRP 
(Community-led NRM and enhanced adaptive capacities), aims at supporting a community lead 
visioning process to prioritise priority NRM investments for building the sustainability of the 
livestock system. LMRP subcomponent 2.1 community-led NRM supports measures to install 
response systems and innovative solutions for climate risk mitigation.  The project promote 
community-based natural resource management and remediation to reduce the vulnerability of 
settled and nomadic pastoralists by (i) establishing 300 Community Adaptive Plans (CAPs) 
incorporating the needs and priorities of poor women and men in all target villages; and (ii) by 
investing in more productive/improved rangelands and reduced resource-based conflict, 
through rainfall capture, rangeland rehabilitation, the eradication of invasive species, livestock 
water supplies, stock route restoration and dispute mediation. Under LMRP Subcomponent 2.2 
Climate Change Preparedness and Policy Facilitation, pastoralists and decision makers will 
benefit from the establishment of robust information and response systems to increase the 
resilience of natural resource users to environmental shocks. 
156. The strong synergy with LMRP would enable IAMDP target group to further enhance their 
livelihoods and resilience in relation to their livestock development aspects. The elements and 
modality of such synergy would be specified at project start-up workshop.  
157.
In addition, IAMDP would build synergies with the recently approved ENABLE Youth Sudan 
programme of the AfDB. The objective of the program is to create business opportunities and 
decent employment for young women and men along priority agricultural value chains in 
Sudan. The program is expected to train and empower 2,000 Agricultural Entrepreneurs 
(Agripreneurs) in Youth Agri-Business Incubation Centres (YABICs) in five states in the country. 
The program is expected to start in 2017 with a duration of five years. Another potential project 
with the AfDB but in the pipeline is the upcoming Agriculture Value Chain planned for Board 
consideration in 2018. 
158. Another opportunity for synergy could be built with UNDP-GEF for the promotion of smallholder 
solar pumping irrigation systems. The project “Promoting the use of electric water pumps for 
irrigation in Sudan” is a four-year project under implementation by the UNDP and Ministry of 
Water Resources and Electricity since early 2017, through a US$4.4 million grant from GEF. 
The project aims at testing a model for using photo voltaic irrigation pumps by the smallholder 
farmers in Northern State, to be scaled up to other states, including IAMDP project areas. 
159. Within the context of Rome-based Agencies cooperation, an important partnership would be 
promoted with FAO through South-South-Cooperation (SSC) involving FAO, IFAD and China. 
Under this programme, the decision makers at the federal and state levels and the stallholders’ 
producers in rainfed areas will be supported through study tours to China and on the job 
training by Chinese expertise in IAMDP project areas. In addition, Chinese Government would 
32 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
promote transfer of appropriate technologies to smallholder producers through on-farm 
demonstrations of machinery suitable to the fragile conditions of these poor producers. A joint 
IFAD-FAO-China mission will be visiting Khartoum and IAMDP project areas in September to 
establish an action plan for such SSC.   
B.  Organizational framework 
160. The Inter-Ministerial Steering Committee for the IFAD co-financed projects is a standing 
committee that oversees all IFAD co-financed projects in the country. Specifically, for the 
IAMDP, its role and functions are primarily to review and approve policy recommendations 
emanating from the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) pertaining to the project, and steer the 
replication of the activities in other states. The Undersecretary of Federal Ministry of Agriculture 
and Forestry (MOAF) or his representative chairs this committee; the membership in this 
committee includes the representative of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, 
Ministry of Irrigation and Water Resources, the State Ministries of Agriculture where IFAD 
co-financed projects are on-going, the Central Coordination Unit for IFAD co-financed projects. 
The rapporteur of the Inter-Ministerial Steering Committee is the Directorate of International 
Cooperation in the Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry. The Inter-Ministerial Steering 
Committee meets twice a year and reviews the status of the whole IFAD co-financed project in 
Sudan.  
161. A project steering committee (PSC) shall orient the strategy of the project, oversee planning, 
review progress and impact, and ensure linkages with related projects, government services 
and relevant VC stakeholders.  The PSC shall be chaired by Minister of Agriculture and 
Forestry and shall meet at least twice a year. 
162. Lead project agency. The lead project agency will be the Federal Ministry of Agriculture and 
Forestry. 
163. Central Project Coordination Unit. A Project Coordination unit (PCU) will be established in 
El Obeid in North Kordofan State to provide overall leadership and oversight of implementation 
activities.  The lead PCU would include the following key staff: principal project coordinator, a 
technical team led by a private sector engagement/marketing specialist, production specialist, 
and rural finance specialist as well as the finance manager, senior M&E and KM officer, 
community and gender development officer, procurement officer, and an accountant.   
164. State Project Implementation Units. The implementation activities will be conducted by the 
four State Project Implementation Units (SPIU), to be established one in the Sinnar State and 
one each in North Kordofan, South Kordofan and West Kordofan.  In each State SPIU, the key 
project staff would consist of a State project coordinator, M&E and KM officer, private sector 
coordinator, marketing coordinator, crop protection specialist, mechanization specialist, 
community and gender development officer, accountant, and rural finance officer.  
165. At the field level, thirteen multidisciplinary LET (4 SK, 3 in NK, 3 in WK, 3 in Sinnar) will play a 
key role in the project implementation at the village level. At the field level, the LET will play a 
key role in the project implementation at the village level. Each LET consists of the following 
staff: locality private sector officer/team leader, locality crop protection officer, locality 
mechanization officer, locality agroforestry officer, locality marketing officer, locality rural 
finance and community gender development officer. Most of these teams have been trained by 
SUSTAIN, SDP and WSRMP on targeting and gender focus, participatory transfer of 
technology, management of demonstrations, and liaison with private operators but much more 
will need to be done by IAMDP to deepen their knowledge. Each extension agent will be 
responsible for the implementation of a monthly programme and the preparation and 
submission of monthly progress reports. Extension team leaders will prepare a consolidated 
monthly report. The staff of the Rural Agricultural Units (RAU) extension teams, to which LET 
belong, were selected competitively among the staff of the MAAWI. They will continue applying 
33 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
their current modus operandi introduced by SUSTAIN, SDP and WSRMP. A monthly inter and 
intra team coordination meeting will be organized at the RAU level. Monthly meetings at the 
SPIU level will be chaired by the M&E officer with the participation of the extension team 
leaders. The meetings at the RAU and state levels should discuss the progress made, 
difficulties encountered and remedies for addressing emerging problems. Detailed project 
staffing is presented under Section III.B. 
166.
In order to take advantage of their experience and for a fast take-off of project implementation, 
it would be preferable to retain the good performing and competent staff of the above 
mentioned positions currently in charge of management of SUSTAIN and SDP. Other required 
staff would be recruited on a competitive basis, including secondment from relevant 
government state offices. 
Central Level  
(in PCU at El-Obeid) 
•  Project coordinator,   
•  Private Sector 
Engagement/Marketing 
specialist, 
•  Production Specialist,  
•  Rural Finance Specialist  
•  Finance manager,  
•  Senior M&E and KM officer, 
• 
 community and gender 
development officer,  
•  procurement officer,  
•  Accountant 
State level (in each of the 4 
SPIUs; Sinnar, NK, SK, WK) 
•  State project coordinator,  
•  M&E and KM officer,  
•  private sector coordinator,  
•  marketing coordinator,  
•  crop protection specialist,  
•  mechanization specialist, 
• 
 community and gender 
development officer,  
•  accountant,  
• 
rural finance officer 
Locality Level (in each of the 13 
Locality Extension Teams)  
•  Locality Private Sector Officer 
• 
 Locality Crop Protection 
Officer,  
•  Locality Mechanisation 
Officer,  
•  Locality agroforestry officer,  
•  Locality Marketing Officer,  
•  Locality rural finance and 
community gender 
development officer. 
C.  Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management 
Planning 
167. At inception, the PCU will review and update the logical framework during IAMDP start-up 
workshops with the participation of representatives from all stakeholders groups and fine-tune 
the first annual work plan & budget (AWPB).  Thereafter, the PCU will prepare each year a 
consolidated AWPB incorporating the four State AWPBs generated by SPIUs for review and 
approval by the PSC and IFAD. 
168.
IAMDP decision-making will be founded on a unified PCU/SPIUs management information 
system (MIS) capturing data, generating reports and informing management decisions.  The 
views and priorities of beneficiaries will be determined through interaction with economic 
interest groups and community structures.  These planning functions will be the responsibility of 
the principal project coordinator and four State Project Coordinators, with the main burden of 
data analysis, reporting, monitoring and evaluation shared by the KM/M&E Officers.  
Beneficiaries will be drawn in to participatory planning and M&E processes.   
169. Each SPIU will monitor progress in its intervention zone within the standardised IAMDP M&E 
framework and agreed set of indicators.  The PCU will be responsible for consolidating the 
quarterly summary progress reports generated by each SPIU using a standard format preceded 
by a checklist of outstanding issues, if any, and actions taken.   
170. Alongside the AWPB cycle, a comprehensive mid-term review will be conducted in PY3 to 
reassess the IAMDP design in the light of implementation experience.  The reviewers may 
propose adjustments to the approach, activities and/or implementation arrangements for the 
remaining life of IAMDP and suggest revisions to project scope, objectives, components, logical 
framework, M&E plan, cost tables and the PIM. 
171. Towards the end of IAMDP implementation, the PCU will prepare a comprehensive project 
completion report (PCR), to summarise achievements set against design intentions and assess 
34 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
overall impact and prospects for sustainability of gains in the economic and social resilience of 
the target population.  The PCR process will feature a validation workshop to provide an 
opportunity for stakeholders themselves to evaluate performance, to promote accountability, to 
identify and elaborate upon factors that will improve sustainability and to lay out key success 
factors and shortcomings. 
Monitoring and evaluation 
172. Based on lessons learned from previous and ongoing projects, IAMDP has to have its own core 
M&E staff at the (PCU) ; and state (SPIU) levels to supervise field activities and maintain data 
and records; relying on locality extension teams or staff from the State Ministries or depending 
on outsourcing proved to be one of the shortfalls of the system, the merit of a core team is as 
follows: (i) It allows the project to invest a lot on the training and orientating the teams on 
project goals, outputs and activities; and (ii) Guarantees accountability to the project and 
furthermore ensure the quality of data and timeliness, as well as feedback to management.  
173. An IAMDP M&E framework will provide information on implementation progress and constant 
feedback into the MIS for decision-making, identifying any problem areas, evaluate the 
performance of implementing agencies and assess achievements at the levels of outcomes and 
impact.  All M&E data will be disaggregated by gender, age and locality.  
174. A thorough baseline survey will be conducted by a qualified service provider in a representative 
sample of communities within the targeted localities.  The research will concentrate on 
benchmarking those aspects in which IAMDP is intended to make a difference.  Interim 
post-implementation evaluation studies will be carried out by a contracted independent body 
under the overall responsibility of the State cadres on the completion of selected clusters of 
group and community interventions, concentrated on the satisfaction of beneficiaries and the 
number of women and youth with increased access to assets, incomes or services resulting 
from project support.  A substantial final impact evaluation will be commissioned from an 
independent service provider at the end of implementation, mirroring the scope and 
methodology of the baseline study to the extent possible, to detect changes in selected 
indicators and to attempt to attribute observed changes to project interventions and/or to other 
factors. 
Learning and knowledge management 
175.
IAMDP’s overall learning and knowledge management strategy to capture and disseminate 
knowledge at various levels will focus on five priorities: (i) generating trust and fostering 
linkages between partners within the PPPP (Public-Private-Producer-Partnership) framework 
promoted by the project; (ii) managing and sharing information, knowledge and experiences; 
(iii) improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the private sector in adding value; 
(iv) conducting analysis that can provide the evidence base for policy dialogue; and (v) creating 
conditions for replication, further scaling up and sustainability.   
176. Annual IAMDP planning workshops will provide fora for documenting lessons learned and 
identifying promising areas for knowledge generation, providing stakeholders with an 
opportunity to express needs, successes and constraints, as well as fostering collaboration and 
brokering partnerships.  The project will collaborate and share valuable lessons with other 
projects by sponsoring knowledge networking through learning events, publication of “how-to” 
leaflets relevant to all work undertaken.  Special emphasis will be placed on knowledge 
regarding PPPP, climate change adaptation and disaster-risk development planning. 
177. Building on previous experience with IFAD-supported projects, universities and research 
institutions, particularly ARC, will be the major IAMDP partners for learning and KM.  For 
example, these centers have been and still are capable of developing and showcasing crop 
varieties, crop protection chemicals, fertilization, and equipment that are not in common use in 
the locality for the rainfed sector. 
35 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
D.  Financial management, procurement and governance 
Financial management organization and staffing 
178. As mentioned in Section III.B staffing in charge of financial management will comprise of the 
following position at both PCU and SPIU levels: 
179. At the PCU level (i) one financial manager- qualified accountant, with at least 15 years of 
experience in financial management, including experience in donor funded development 
projects; and (ii) one senior accountant – Bachelor in Accounting, with a minimum 10 years of 
experience in the accounting field, including experience in donor-funded development projects 
and their financial reporting requirements.  
180. At the SPIU level, one dedicated accountant at each SPIU – Bachelor in Accounting. The 
accountants will be retained from on-going projects, based on performance or hired 
competitively from the local market. While the finance assistants are going to be sourced 
through secondment from respective departments of MoAF/ MoFEP. To ensure segregation of 
duties exists, the procurement function will be separated from those of finance. Consequently, it 
will be carried out by dedicated procurement staff.  
181. As a condition of disbursement, the key staff (project coordinator, finance manager, and 
M&E Officer) should be appointed and in place before disbursements begin. In order to kick-
start the implementation shortly after effectiveness, it is being agreed with MoFEP to retain key 
staff, based on performance, of on-going SDP and SUSTAIN projects. 
182. Detailed job descriptions for each member of finance team will be included in the PIM, planned 
for finalisation at project start up. The ToRs of the key position will be granted IFAD no-
objection prior to starting of the recruitment process or confirmation of currently in charged staff.  
The position will be hired with annual contracts renewable on satisfactory performance.  
Changes to seconded staff may be at the request of IFAD or GoS with agreement from the 
other. 
Budgeting 
183. The project will follow bottom-up approach in preparation of annual work plan and budget 
(AWPB). AWPB will be initiated at the community/locality level based on beneficiaries needs. 
These will be presented to the respective SPIU which will consolidate and format for 
submission to the PCU. All project activities will be included in the AWPB that will indicate what 
activities and expenditures will be implemented at Locality, State and PCU levels, and by each 
financing source (IFAD, counterpart funds and beneficiaries in kind and in cash contribution).  
Budgets will be presented in a format that presents separately the amounts on quarterly basis 
and by each financier.  The PCU will ensure that all budgets are prepared in a consistent and 
timely manner for submission to the project steering committees (at local and federal levels), 
MoFEP and IFAD.  AWPBs, once approved, will be available to all project parties.  To ensure 
transparency, project related documentation will be circulated by PCU to all concerned staff in 
PCU and SPIUs.  
184. The accounting system will include a budget module that will allow uploading yearly budget at 
the start of each financial year and consequently facilitating tracking of actual against budgeted 
expenditures on monthly basis and aid course corrections by management for significant 
variations from the budget. 
Disbursement arrangements and flow of funds 
185. The project will use available disbursement methods of replenishment, reimbursement and 
direct payments.  It is expected that most expenditures will be through the designated/operating 
account using the Imprest mechanism.  The ceiling authorized allocation will be based on 
budgets for six months.  IFAD Client Portal (ICP) is expected to be rolled-out in country before 
the effectiveness date of the project. Consequently, the project will use much faster on-line 
submission of Withdrawal Applications (WA). 
36 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
186. The project is viewed as a continuation of the on-going SDP and SUSTAIN projects, in light of 
this, and in order to facilitate immediate start of the project upon effectiveness, 2017 AWPB of 
SDP can be amended to include the costs of procuring an accounting software system and 
preparation of the draft PIM and submit it for IFAD concurrence.  Alternatively, such costs can 
be included as part of the start-up costs to be incurred before the satisfaction of the general 
conditions precedent to withdrawal. These costs shall not exceed an amount of US$150,000. 
The start-up costs are intended to cover the recruitment of key personnel, the purchase and 
installation of appropriate accounting software, preparation of the financial management section 
of the Project Implementation Manual, all of which are conditions for disbursement. 
187. A EUR-denominated designated account will be opened for project to receive IFAD Grant at the 
Central Bank of Sudan/commercial bank acceptable to IFAD with an authorised allocation to 
allow for six months of projected project expenditures.  PCU will also open an SDG account, in 
a commercial bank acceptable to IFAD, into which the EUR will be converted on an as needed 
basis to meet eligible expenditures. Counterpart contribution will be transfer to the same 
account.  This SDG account pool account will be the same from which all transfers to SPIUs will 
be affected. 
188. Each of the four SPIUs will open SDG accounts in commercial banks acceptable to IFAD. 
Withdrawal applications will be prepared on quarterly by the PCU, on receipt of statements of 
expenditures and reconciliations from SPIUs. 
189. The project will be allowed to use Direct Payment only for expenditures that are made in a hard 
currency, to parties rendering services outside of Sudan, and where the contract has been 
signed for payment in the hard currency to an account outside of Sudan.  All goods, works and 
services rendered within Sudan will use the SDG for payment. 
190. Replenishment Applications prepared by the PCU will be submitted to IFAD, at a minimum 
every quarter or when 30 percent of the designated account has been utilized for eligible 
expenditures, whichever occurs earlier.  Details regarding the designated account allocations 
and SoE thresholds will be found in the Letter to the Recipient. 
191. The funds flow arrangements to meet eligible project expenditures are as follow, (and set out in 
a chart in Appendix 7.1). 
(a) A Designated Account in EUR will be held at a bank acceptable to IFAD from which 
drawdowns will be made to the SDG operational account. 
(b) Project Operational Account A in SDG will be opened and managed by the PCU, shall 
receive funds transferred from the Designated Account. 
(c) Project Operational Account A will be used to transfer all sources of funds to State Project 
Operational Accounts. 
(d) States will open an SDG Project Operational Account for receipt of funds from the PCU. 
(e) States will be responsible for advances and expenditures of the State Teams. 
 (f) The PCU, who is responsible for managing Project Account A, will ensure a timely flow of 
funds to the State Project Operational Account based on realistic quarterly or every six 
months’ cash forecast. 
(g) All bank accounts in the project will have at least two authorised signatories.  All payments 
will be by bank transfers or checks, except for petty cash expenditures or expenditure 
related to activities implemented at community/locality level where it is not possible to pay 
in checks. The payment will be made through an advance to responsible staff and cleared 
with all supporting documents as soon as the activity is concluded. No more than one 
advance can be given to an individual at given time without the preceding advance is 
settled, unless in exceptional circumstances and upon prior approval of management. The 
expenditures/activities that can only be paid in cash will be reflected clearly in the PIM. 
37 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
(h) The fund flow under revolving matching equity will be channelled upon by the project to the 
respective partner financial institutions (PFI) upon the receipt of the following: (i) The 
signed agreement between the project and PFIs managing the revolving matching equity 
for which no-objection should had been granted by IFAD and has been dully formalised; 
and (ii) a request from the respective PFI managing the fund specifying the amount and the 
bank details for the payment. 
 (i) Mechanism of measurement, recognition of beneficiary’s and private sector cash 
contribution; co-financing of partner financial institutions (PFIs) towards ISMGF and 
revolving matching equity ; and in kind contribution are to be clearly reflected in the PIM.    
 (j) Counterpart fund is to be made available for the project in advance and on quarterly basis. 
The Central Coordination Unit to follow up with MoFEP for the timely release of funds 
Internal Controls 
192. Sufficient staffing at the SPIUs and the PCU will allow for appropriate segregation of duties to 
ensure that the following tasks are separated between staff: 
(a) custody of assets; 
(b) authorization or approval of related transactions affecting those assets; and 
(c) recording or reporting of related transactions. 
193. All internal control mechanism will be detailed within the financial management arrangement of 
PIM which to be prepared before disbursement begins, including those for competitive 
Innovation Challenge Grant Programme for private sector, producer, or private sector/producer 
partnership; and revolving matching equity support to partner financial institutions and its 
mechanism. The external audit will report any internal control weaknesses within the 
management letter.  
194. PCU to engage a firm which is familiar in donor’s procedures to prepare financial management 
arrangement of the PIM. 
Accounting systems, policies and procedures 
195. The PCU will procure well-tested LAN-based accounting software; the ToR will be cleared by 
IFAD.  The software will be dual language and able to record and report in SDG and EUR.  The 
accounting system will include a budgeting module, procurement and reporting module.  
Training on the software will be provided by the supplier to all finance and procurement staff at 
PCU and SPIU that will use the system.  The data will be backed up on a server/ hard disk on a 
daily basis. 
196. All accounting policies and procedures, related to the project will be clearly documented in the 
financial management manual, (as part of the overall PIM). The project will adopt Cash basis 
for accounting standard. 
197. The PCU will record advances to the SPIUs as an outstanding advance, and the SPIU will book 
the same as an advance.  The SPIU will record all expenditures as they are incurred and 
submit on a monthly basis, certified SoEs and reconciliations, which will liquidate the advance 
provided.  Such advances will qualify as eligible expenditure for IFAD once the expenditure has 
been recorded and not at the time of payment of the advance. Beneficiaries in kind 
contributions will be recorded under a separate fund set up within the accounting system.  
Financial reporting 
198. The PCU will prepare monthly financial reports for the dissemination to the project management 
team (principle coordinator and state coordinators).  These will be consolidated further into 
quarterly unaudited financial reports to be submitted to IFAD.  The financial statements will be 
in formats acceptable to IFAD and samples of the same will be available within the financial 
38 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
management manual.  The financial reports will provide information to management, financiers 
and related parties to facilitate decision-making processes. 
199. The PCU will consolidate its accounts with those of PIUs and produce audited and unaudited 
financial statements which, in line with IFAD’s General Conditions, will be submitted to IFAD 
within six and four months of the end of the fiscal year respectively.  The financial Statements 
will be prepared in accordance with the cash basis for accounting standard. 
Internal Audit 
200. Given the complexities and risks arising from the wide geographical spread of project activities 
in 17 localities/100 communities, the various implementation levels a, a full time qualified 
internal auditor will need to be assigned to the project by the General Directorate of Internal 
Audit of MoFEP. 
201.
Internal audit reports will be made available to PCU and SPIUs, Steering committees and 
MoFEP.  Financial procedures (including procedures required at locality and community level) 
will be documented in a financial implementation manual, which will be a condition for 
disbursement.   
202. A complaints handling system for community members will be prepared and implemented, to be 
monitored centrally at PCU. 
External Audit 
203. As the Supreme Audit Institution (SAI), the National Audit Chamber (NAC) has sufficient 
capacity to conduct audits based on ISA; they will be performing the external audit of the 
project at the Coordination unit and State/Locality and community’s levels.  To ensure that 
IFAD’s requirements are met, the project will share the Terms of Reference for the audit, which 
will be agreed to by the NAC prior to commencement of the annual audit.  The auditor and on 
annual basis will provide an audit report with a management letter on audit observations on 
internal controls.  The revolving match equity fund will be audited by the external auditor as part 
of their annual audit and PFIs shall make available to the auditors all necessary financial 
information and supporting document related to the use of the fund including financial reports, 
bank account information and supporting documents. To ensure that audit reports are 
submitted to IFAD within six months after the end of the fiscal year, engagement of the auditor 
will commence three months before the end of each fiscal year to ensure that the NAC has 
scheduled the audit soon after fiscal year end.   
Anticorruption and good governance framework 
204. The primary responsibility of detecting fraud and corruption lies with the recipient.  However, 
the project should note IFAD applies a Zero Tolerance Policy towards fraudulent, corrupt, 
collusive or coercive actions in projects financed through its loans and grants.  “Zero Tolerance” 
means that IFAD will pursue all allegations falling under the scope of this policy and that 
appropriate sanctions will be applied where the allegations are substantiated.  IFAD shall take 
all possible actions to protect from reprisals individuals who help reveal corrupt practices in its 
project or grant activities and individuals or entities subject to unfair or malicious allegations.  
Given IFAD’s Zero Tolerance described above, it is important that the staff and all stakeholders 
of the project are familiar with IFAD’s as well as national anticorruption policies and whistle 
blowing procedures.  The IFAD anticorruption policy is available on the IFAD website at 
www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/index.htm).  The IFAD website also provides 
instructions on how to report any alleged wrongdoing to the Office of Audit and Oversight 
(http://www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/how.htm). 
205. Taxation.  IFAD Grant proceeds cannot be utilized for the payment of taxes and custom duties. 
39 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Procurement 
206. The Majority of the procurement activities under IAMDP are expected to be small in nature and 
value.  Therefore, the project will not have big value procurement packages and specialized 
nature of procurement activities to attract ICB, except for procurement of vehicles, should there 
be any.  The majority of procurement activities will be within the thresholds of NCB, national 
shopping (quotations), community procurement and direct procurement.  Considering the 
relatively weak capacity at present, close monitoring by ICO will be exercised to guide the 
process.  The project will follow the procurement thresholds as set out in the Letter to the 
Borrower/Recipient and in the approved Procurement Plan. Whenever possible, procurement of 
goods and works will be bulked into sizeable bid packages to attract adequate competition thus 
resulting in cost-effective and efficient procurement. Further information on procurement, 
related to procurement methods applicable to civils works, goods, and services, thresholds for 
prior and post review, etc. are presented in Appendix 8. 
E.  Supervision 
207.
IFAD would directly supervise the project at least once a year and focus on fiduciary and 
implementation support functions in collaboration with CPMT. In addition, and given the project 
challenges close technical supervision and implementation support missions would be jointly 
conducted by IFAD and the representatives of the federal ministry of agriculture and the four 
state ministries of agriculture at least once a year but also on demand. The presence of the 
IFAD Country Office in Khartoum will expedite these processes. The Central Coordination Unit 
in Khartoum would also be involved as much as possible. The supervision plan for the project’s 
first year will be devised and validated at start-up.  The first implementation support mission will 
take place soon after effectiveness and first disbursement, and will include an M&E specialist to 
help improve the M&E at central and state levels. 
F.  Risk identification and mitigation 
208. Below are the main risks to achieving project objectives and associated mitigation measures. 
Risk  
Risk Mitigation 
Climate Change related risks: 
Severe drought, crop failure, and 
desertification negatively affecting 
the livelihoods of the target group, if 
agricultural practices are not handled 
properly taking into consideration the 
fragility of environment. 
The technical packages (soil disturbance to break 
hardpan and store water in root zone, introduction 
of leguminous crops in rotation and compost in 
home garden, introduction of drought resistant 
varieties and Gum Arabic, etc.), and (ii) and 
climate risk insurance promoted by the project 
should enhance producers’ resilience to CC 
Limited capacity of MAAWI in 
coordination, management and 
promoting project sustainability 
The project shall build on and take advantage of 
the experience gained by extension staff in the 
implementation of SUSTAIN, and SDP and will 
train staff at LET for further improvement of 
performance. 
Social capital and capabilities of the 
communities in new villages are 
limited. 
Project will invest in building capacity of Saving 
and Credit Groups  and Farmers Producers 
Associations  
rating 
High 
Low 
low 
Reluctance of private partners and 
PFI to invest on demand side or lend 
to the private sector and VC actors 
IAMDP will build the capacity of small producers 
as rural entrepreneurs; thus facilitating linkages 
with value adders/ processors and finance 
institutions at state and national level.  
Medium 
Risk of male takeover if women’s 
economic activities increase in value 
and/or become more profitable 
IMDP will build women associations capacities for 
better gender equity and advocacy, making us of 
GALS system. 
low 
40 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
IV.  Project costs, financing, benefits and sustainability 
A.  Project costs 
209. The total project costs, for a period of six years, are estimated at US$47.5 million (equivalent to 
SDG 1.2 billion). All costs have been estimated on the basis of prices prevailing in Sudan in 
August 2017 and on the basis of expected local inflation rate (around 10 percent per year over 
the six-year implementation period) and international inflation rate (2 percent per year over the 
six-year implementation period).  All assumptions and parameters are presented in Appendix 9 
and Appendix 10.  
Table 1:  Components project cost summary 
(SDG '000)
(US$ '000)
Local
Foreign
Total
153 907
79 742
292 428
84 903
610 979
11 445
337 834
960 259
101 401
55 249
12 432
11 434
180 515
5 475
65 943
251 933
255 307
134 991
304 860
96 336
791 495
16 920
403 777
1 212 192
% Total
%
Foreign
Base
Exchange Costs
Local
Foreign
Total
% Total
%
Foreign
Base
Exchange Costs
40
41
4
12
23
32
16
21
32
17
39
12
100
2
51
153
8 152
4 224
15 489
4 497
32 361
606
4 252
37 220
5 371
2 926
658
606
9 561
290
443
10 295
13 523
7 150
16 147
5 103
41 922
896
4 696
47 514
40
41
4
12
23
32
9
22
32
17
39
12
100
2
11
113
1. Enhanced crop productivity and production
2. Market linkage and value addition
3. Enabling environment
4. Project implementation
Total BASELINE COSTS
Physical Contingencies
Price Contingencies
Total PROJECT COSTS
B.  Project financing 
210. Project cost is financed as follows:  IFAD DSF grant of US$26 million, Government 
US$8.8 million equivalent, private sector (agridealers, mechanised service providers) 
US$10.2 million and beneficiaries US$2.5 million equivalent. A complete set of summary tables 
and detailed costs tables is presented in Appendix 9. 
Table 2:  Components by financiers (US$ '000) 
Private Sector
IFAD
Am ount
%
Am ount
%
Beneficiaries
%
Am ount
Governm ent
%
Am ount
Total
Am ount
%
For.
Exch.
Local
(Excl.
Taxes)
Duties &
Taxes
1. Enhanced crop productivity and production
2. Market linkage and value addition
3. Enabling environment
4. Project implementation
Total PROJECT COSTS
94
215
9 894
-
10 203
0.6
2.7
54.0
-
21.5
12 564
5 963
3 277
4 214
26 017
81.8
74.5
17.9
72.5
54.8
4
465
2 046
-
2 515
-
5.8
11.2
-
5.3
2 701
1 360
3 116
1 602
8 779
17.6
17.0
17.0
27.5
18.5
15 363
8 003
18 333
5 815
47 514
32.3
16.8
38.6
12.2
100.0
5 837
3 126
689
642
10 295
7 919
4 047
14 626
3 635
30 228
1 606
829
3 018
1 538
6 992
C.  Summary benefits and economic analysis 
211. The project would directly benefit around 27,000 households whose livelihoods depend on 
production and marketing of rainfed crops. To illustrate such benefits, three models, reflecting 
the target group situation in project area were developed.   
Sinnar and South Kordofan:   
(a) Model 1 (5 feddans per household) presents 20 percent of the total households (2,700 HH) 
and will serve 13,500 feddans; 
(b) Model 2 (10 feddans per household) presents 40 percent of the total households (13,500 
HH) and will serve 135,000 feddans; and 
(c) Model 3 (15 feddans per household) presents 40 percent of the total households (10,800 
HH) and will serve 162,000 feddans. 
West Kordofan and North Kordofan:  
(a) Model 1 (5 feddans per household) presents 20% of the total households (5,400 HH) and 
will serve 27,000 feddans; 
41 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
(b) Model 2 (10 feddans per household) presents 40% of the total households (10,800 HH) and 
will serve 108,000 feddans; and 
(c) Model 3 (15 feddans per household) presents 40% of the total households (10,800 HH) and 
will serve 162,000 feddans. 
212. The models cover all aspects from production to marketing directly or through producer’s 
associations. Both the financial and economic analyses are based on four crop budgets and 
three farm budgets. The four crops are sesame, sorghum, groundnuts and gum Arabic. The 
main sources of quantified benefits of IAMDP are expected to be: (i) improved production and 
productivity of the three models (four crops) due to the application of improved inputs and 
improved agricultural mechanization; (ii) improved storage facilities for sesame, sorghum, and 
groundnuts; and (iii) improved sales of gum Arabic to be sold to wholesalers and benefit from 
the price differences.  
213. The three models targeted productivity and marketing improvements have been analyzed: 
(a) Model 1 (model of 5 feddans farm) planted by 1.5 feddans of sesame, 2.5 feddans of 
sorghum, 1.0 feddan of groundnut and receive 50 seedlings of high yield variety gum 
Arabic. 
(b) Model 2 (model of 10 feddans farm) planted by 3 feddans of sesame, 5 feddans of 
sorghum, 2 feddans of groundnut and receive 100 seedlings of high yield variety gum 
Arabic. 
(c) Model 3 (model of 15 feddans farm) planted by 4.5 feddans of sesame, 7.5 feddans of 
sorghum, 3 feddans of groundnut and receive 150 seedlings of high yield variety gum 
Arabic. 
214. Despite applying conservative rates of yield improvement and adoption of new techniques, the 
project support resulted into tangible benefits to the smallholder producers. Better 
mechanization services and access to rural finance, storage facilities and market, would 
contribute to an average yield increase of 20 percent under fragile climate conditions. 
Village-based extension services and access to improved seeds and credit to meet operation 
cost would result into a progressive adoption rate as follows:  20 percent annually starting from 
the second year progressive of the project, i.e. first year: zero adoption, second year: 
20 percent, third year: 40 percent, fourth year: 60 percent, and fifth year: 80 percent. 
215. The streams of incremental benefits show highly profitable cash crops especially with high yield 
varieties and the use of mechanization and better storage processes. The average FIRR is 
around 20 percent for production and marketing, as detailed in Appendix 10.  
Economic analysis of the project 
216. The objectives of the economic analysis are: (i) to assess the overall program viability; (ii) to 
estimate the program impact by estimating the economic rate of return (EIRR) and the 
economic net present value (ENPV). The computation of economic costs is derived from 
financial project costs, by excluding transfers such as duties, taxes, and price contingencies. 
217. Project economic analysis shows an initial EIRR of around 20.54 percent. The sensitivity 
analysis shows that the project is still feasible even the investment costs increased by 
10 percent, cost of production increased by 10 percent, the revenue decreased by 10 percent 
or benefits delayed up to three years.  The detailed assumptions and estimates are presented 
in Appendix 10.  
Project impact on employment  
218.
IAMDP will create more than 3 million work-days of casual labor to work in the project area (i.e. 
more than 23,000 annual jobs of casual labour 13 during the five years of the project. Ranking 
13 Created jobs are estimated by assuming that a season requires 146 of work days. 
42 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
the four crops based on their job creation: sorghum is the highest (more than 1.7 million work-
days), groundnuts come second (more than 1.2 million workdays), then sesame is the third 
(more than 0.2 million work-days), and gum Arabic is the lowest one that generates casual 
labor (about 0.2 million work-days).   
D.  Sustainability 
219. The project has many built-in aspects that are likely to secure its sustainability as follows. The 
project approach is to develop the competence and confidence of communities to engage in 
common marketing through their associations, and to strengthen private sector commercial 
linkages, at the same time building up the capacity and institutional know-how of Government 
services to interact with villagers as partners. 
220. Linkages between producers and service providers. The project will enable the business 
linkages between producers and agriculture machinery operators since the demonstration 
phase of the technical packages. The barriers to farmers’ access to timely machinery services 
are removed thanks to producers’ organization, training of producers on how to contract and 
supervise the quality of works of the machinery operators, and producers’ access to credit 
where needed to finance machinery services. The mugawala (see Appendix 4 for definition) 
agreement envisaged in this project is a common product proposed by banks for financing 
agricultural services. Group organization and availability of insurance make smallholders 
eligible for credit as per banks’ current procedures.  
221. Access of producers to markets at a more profitable basis. The project would promote 
Smallholder farmers to produce for the market at a profitable price. This would help them build 
a business-oriented relationship with processors and exporters.  
222. Management of physical facilities. Marketing and storage facilities, such Sinnar crop market 
and village storage facilities would be owned by the Government, but leased to a private sector 
company with professional management and with a board consisting of private sector, 
FPA/GAPAs, and state government. 
223. Access of producers to rural finance through promotion of Crop loan portfolio start-up 
matching grants to PFIs. In order to address the reluctance of the PFIs to lend to risky rainfed 
smallholder producers, the project will use a crop portfolio start-up fund for de-risking the 
investments of the financial institutions in crop loans. The project will use this fund to finance 
the PFIs to support the first cycle of crop production loans to target group farmers in the project 
villages specifically for the adoption of the project promoted improved agricultural packages. 
Such innovative initiative would help build more lasting relationship between the PFIs and the 
borrowers, triggering additional borrowing for production and marketing. In addition, the project 
will promote climate risk-based crop insurance to further mitigate PFIs risk aversion towards 
smallholder producers.  
224. Outreach of extension services. The project will make use of the capacity of the extension 
agents achieved by SUSTAIN, SDP and WSRMP, in terms of logistics, work organization and 
competencies. Although the project is financing fully the recurrent costs of the teams, 
consideration is given to recover part of these costs from service fees charged to either farmers 
and their associations or private sector machinery operators.  
225. Rainfed production systems sustainability would be enhanced through the following 
features: (i) farm operations (chisel ploughing, minimum tillage, etc.) would lead to better water 
retention and, hence, spreading the risk of shortage in rainfall; and (ii) the gum Arabic trees will 
modify the micro-climate and reduce the evapotranspiration, in addition to arresting and 
reversing the downward spiral of natural resource degradation. 
43 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
Appendix 1:  Country and rural context background 
 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.
Country context.  The Sudan’s total area is estimated at 1,881,000 km2 neighboured by seven 
countries: Chad and Central African Republic to the West, South Sudan, Ethiopia and Eritrea to 
the South and East, and Egypt and Libya to the North.  The border with the Republic of South 
Sudan is the longest at 2,000 km.  The population of the country is estimated at 36.2 million 
inhabitants (FAO and GOS statistics). 
The country is endowed with 61 million ha of arable land, of which 17.4 million ha is cultivated, 
14 million ha natural pasture, and 21 million ha forests (covering about 11.6% of the total area 
of the country), and the livestock population is estimated at 104 million heads. More than 80% 
of the Sudan land area is now classified as arid land, which is forcing the Government and the 
Agriculture population to develop drought resilient production systems and livelihoods. The high 
Agriculture potential areas are either suffering from conflict or they are at risk of insecurity. 
These areas are also referred to as the transition areas as they border the Republic of South 
Sudan and encompass the States of South Darfur, South Kordofan, White Nile, Sinnar and 
Blue Nile. 
The secession of the South in mid-2011 caused Sudan a loss of 75% of the oil export 
revenues. Away from oil, agriculture and livestock are essential to Sudan’s economic 
diversification and could contribute to medium-term macroeconomic stability. While these 
sectors presently contribute approximately 35%–40% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP), they 
could contribute significantly more with greater investment and better governance. Sudan now 
recognizes the need for greater attention to agriculture and livestock, as reflected in its Interim 
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (I-PRSP) and the Five-year Program for Economic Reforms 
approved by its parliament in December 2014 (WB overview, April 2017).  The 2010 National 
Baseline Household Survey (NBHS, Sudan Central Bureau of Statistics) indicated a high 
poverty incidence of 46.5% (an estimated 14.4 million people; 26% rural and 74% urban), and 
an unemployment rate reaching 16.8%. 
Comprehensive US sanctions on Sudan, levied in 1997 and expanded in 2006, were eased in 
January 2017, allowing for financial and trade transactions between US citizens and entities, 
and their Sudanese counterparts. However, the order to ease sanctions is under six-month 
review and could either be rescinded or made permanent.  
According to the AfDB latest report (AfDB, African Economic Outlook, 2016), inflation declined 
to 16.9% in 2015, while real GDP growth remained buoyant at 5.3%, supported by agriculture, 
minerals, services, oil-transit fees and foreign direct investment (FDI). Growth is expected to 
strengthen to 6.2% in 2016 and 6% in 2017, despite the fall in oil prices, reduced gold 
purchases by the Central Bank and the unstable security situation. 
45 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
A.  NATIONAL POVERTY AND GENDER ANALYSIS 
 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
Official figures quote the results of the 2009 National Baseline Survey which puts the national 
poverty ratio at 46.5%. Rural poverty in Sudan remains high and poverty rates are substantially 
higher in rural areas, with 57.6% compared to 26.5% in urban areas. The incidence of rural 
poverty is largest among agricultural households in the Red Sea State, Greater Darfur, Greater 
Kordofan, Blue Nile, White Nile, and Gadaref. Living standards are the main contributor to 
poverty, followed by health and education. These aspects are covered in the UNDP 
Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) for 2015 which estimates that in Sudan about 53.1% of 
the population are multi-dimensionally poor while 17.9% live near multidimensional poverty. 
Rural poverty is closely associated with the livelihood system of rainfed agriculture. Small-scale 
farmers and livestock herders in the traditional rainfed sector, the landless and internally 
displaced people, households without assets and people in areas affected by drought and 
conflict are most at risk of poverty. The main constraints on rural livelihoods are access to 
markets, access to financial services, unpredictability of rainfall and water shortages, barriers 
on migratory routes for livestock, pest and disease outbreaks, and conflicts. The root causes of 
poverty and food insecurity includes persistent conflicts, urban bias of development, poor 
productivity of rural factors of production, lack of employment opportunities and the 
concentration of socio
economic development in a few areas. Government supported rural 
development projects often fail to achieve the desired results due to gaps in private sector 
involvement, market linkages and sustainable rural finance supply.  
‐
Underlying the high poverty rates is the country’s relatively undiversified economy, which 
makes the Sudan highly vulnerable to exogenous risks such as increasingly erratic rainfall, the 
decline in trade and regional instability. Farmers often have to sell part of their produce 
immediately after harvest, when prices are at their lowest, and to buy back grain at high prices 
during the food insecure season (May – August). Other reported causes include the rising cost 
of living, particularly children’s schooling and medical care, and the lack of alternative income-
generating opportunities. Poor rural HHs are in a vicious circle of poverty-related low income, 
risk aversion, use of low input-low output technologies and resulting low incomes. The rural 
poor are generally obliged to produce for home consumption and sell any surpluses at low 
prices.  
Food security and Nutrition. Food and nutrition security is fragile and undernourishment is 
widespread in Sudan. The Global Hunger Index (GHI) calculated each year by the International 
Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) rated the food security in Sudan as alarming in 2013 
and 2014.  Sudan could not be included in the 2015 and 2016 GHI scores because of lack of 
sufficient data. According to the Sudan Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) from 2014 the 
prevalence of child malnutrition is high in Sudan: 33% of under-five children are underweight, 
38.2% of children under-five years are stunted (too short for their age), and 16.3% of children 
are wasted (too thin for their height). The prevalence of underweight is 23.2% in urban area as 
compared to 37.1% in rural areas. There is also a very wide gap in child stunting between rural 
areas (43%) and urban areas (27.1%). Very high prevalence of children under weight can be 
found in the the three Darfur states, West Kordofan (38.7%) and Kassala state (42%). 
According to FAO Sudan Plan of Action 2015-2019 approximately 2 million children in Sudan 
are suffering from acute malnutrition, while 500,000 childen are severly acutely malnutritioned. 
Overall, 81% of the households surveyed in the 2014 MICS were having acceptable food 
consumption score.  
 5.
Gender status. Sudan is ranked 140 out of 159 countries in the UNDP Gender Inequality Index 
(GII). The GII looks at three dimensions of inequality between men and women: reproductive 
health, empowerment, and economic activity. Another gender indicator, the UNDP Gender 
47 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
 6.
 7.
Development Index (GDI) shows residual disparities between male and female. In Sudan 
women live longer than men (65 years versus 62.2 for men) but spend less time at school (3 
mean years of schooling versus 4.1 for men) and earn less than males (1 902 compared to 
5,775 GNI per capita for men). Female participation in the labor market is 24.3% compared to 
72.2% for men. Nevertheless, women's empowerment is hindered by:(i) a high rate of illiteracy 
among women, (ii) deeply rooted cultural and traditional values that manifests, reinforce, and 
regenerates women subordination and men domination (iii) a customary law that attributes 
specific gender and age differentiated roles; (iii) marriage practices that push women into early 
marriages; and (iv) heavy workloads among rural women. 
In rural areas women are generally the main contributors to the household’s income and food 
production. Women comprise 78% of the economically active population who work in 
agriculture compared to only 57% of men. Their productive activities are mainly 
subsistence-based for home consumption. Women are also active in horticultural production, 
which generates relatively good income but is often ploughed back into the maintenance of the 
HH. Women’s limited capacity and skills to embark on viable agro-based and entrepreneurial 
activities, lack of ownership and control over key resources like land and modern agricultural 
equipment, coupled with the triple roles of women, impede all efforts for rural women to 
graduate into the mainstream livelihood economy. The key challenges and priority needs 
identified by women in pastoral and agro-pastoral communities relate to marketing processes, 
which is carried out by men in most of the times. A major bottleneck for women is selling their 
processed by-products as trade in pastoral areas is very limited, mainly in weekly markets, 
where it is bought by consumers or retailers. 
Rural women and youth in Sudan form the majority of the extremely poor people in the country. 
Due to relatively high birth rates (estimation of population growth is 2.83 in 2008 population 
census) children and young people constitute a large proportion of the poor in Sudan. In 2008, 
almost 60% of the poor were under the age of 20. Furthermore, 55% of youth aged 15 to 24 are 
classified as poor. This age category constitutes 23% of the entire population and makes up 
21% of the total poor (2012 Interim PRSP).  Women and youth poverty is closely linked to their 
subordinate position and the substantial gender gap which has resulted in a shortage of 
economic opportunities and inadequate access to productive resources, including credit, land 
ownership, cattle, skills and support services. The MICS 2014 survey shows that 11.9% of 
women aged 15-49 years were married before the age of 15. About 59.8% of young women in 
Sudan are literate and the literacy status varies greatly by area (79.8% in urban areas and 50% 
in rural areas). According to the MICS survey only 43.7% of women who stated that primary 
school was their highest level of education were able to read a simple statement shown to 
them. 
B.  POVERTY AND GENDER ANALYSIS IN PLANNED PROJECT AREAS 
Poverty and livelihood analysis for Sinnar state 
 8.
Socioeconomic context. While the State of Sinnar is not among the poorest in comparison to 
the rest of the fifteen states of Sudan, it ranks below the average of Sudan for such indicators 
as postnatal mortality, children immunisation, and chronic diarrhoea for children less than five 
years of age, access to potable water, access to sanitation, and access to primary education. 
The state population is estimated at 1.6 million. The total number of the rural population in 
Sinnar is 1.2 million, about 75% of the total population, living in 7 localities consisting of 700 
villages. The total number of rural households is 195,800 HHs. About 44% of the state 
population is classified as living below the poverty line, compared to the national poverty level 
of 46.5%. About 51% of the population in Sinnar have agriculture and livestock as their main 
livelihood. The total cultivated land in Sinnar state is 5.5 million feddans divided into 3,630,621 
feddans for sorghum, 600,000 feddans for millet, 676,100 feddans for sesame, 177,984 
feddans for groundnuts and 415,295 feddans for gum Arabic. 
48 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
 9.
 10.
 11.
 12.
Village poverty profile for Sinnar state. Due to lack of updated state level data regarding 
rural poverty and livelihoods of the rural population in Sinnar, the design mission collected 
primary data through focus group discussions and interviews with households (women, men, 
youth) and authorities at the village and locality level (village leaders). However, this data is 
purely indicative and does not carry any statistical significance.  
The main source of livelihood among rural populations in Sinnar state is traditional rainfed 
agriculture (crop production, animal husbandry (mainly of small ruminants)) and, to a limited 
extent, forest-based activities. The crop mix that is widely practiced in the project area is a 
combination of staple crops, mainly sorghum and millet, plus sesame and groundnut as cash 
crops. Wage labour is another main source of income during the rainy season. The base rate 
varies for women and men (men get SDG 30/25 per day compared to women SDG 20/15 per 
day). Livestock production is the main coping mechanism to meet unexpected demands or crop 
failure. 
The livelihood opportunities available to farming women, particularly women headed 
households (WHH) are limited to the rainy season only, when they cultivate an average area of 
10 feddans with sorghum, sesame, millet, and groundnut. Most women have access to home 
gardens (jubraka), where vegetables are grown partly for home consumption and partly for 
sale. Women also collect wild okra from the fields for drying and storage. Dry okra is an 
important ingredient in the household diet. In the dry season, women economic activities are 
restricted to tending the small ruminants, making handicrafts and petty trading, collecting wood 
for selling and charcoal production. Women generate income from the sale of sesame, 
groundnut, and nearly about 50% of the production of the home garden.  
The number of HHs within an average village in Sinnar state is 200-300 with an average of 6-9 
HH members per family. Approximately 60% of village populations are women, while youth 
represent around 65 to 70%. The average of female headed households per village is 31. 
According to the SUSTAIN Baseline survey from 2012 about 54% HHs in an average village 
population falls within the category Very Poor and Poor, while 26% are Moderately Poor but just 
barely above the poverty line. 
Poverty and livelihood analysis for the Greater Kordofan region 
 13.
 14.
 15.
Socioeconomic context. The Greater Kordofan region, consisting of the three states of North, 
West and South Kordofan, has a total area of approximately 380,000 km2. The total population 
is estimated to be 4.3 million inhabitants. The total number of localities and rural communities in 
the three states is as follows (i) NK – 8 localities and 1,308 rural communities; (ii) SK – 17 
localities and 712 rural communities; (iii) WK – 14 localities and 1,490 rural communities. The 
large majority of the population is classified as rural, deriving their livelihood from agriculture 
and pastoral production.  
The percentage of the population living in rural areas is estimated to be 80% for North Kordofan 
and 77% for South Kordofan. In 2009 the poverty head count per state was 58% for NK and 
60% for SK. West Kordofan was included as a part of North Kordofan when the data was 
collected.  
Crop farming and pastoralism are the two major livelihood systems in Kordofan. Millet is main 
subsistence crop in North Kordofan and the Western sector of South Kordofan where sandy 
soils dominate. On the sandy soils sesame and ground nuts are also grown as cash crops. 
North Kordofan is also widely known as the main producing area of gum Arabic in the world. In 
South Kordofan the Nuba of the Nuba Mountains are farming communities. South Kordofan is 
also one of the main areas where mechanized farming is practiced in Sudan. In recent years 
areas have increased dramatically owing to population growth, declining capabilities of land 
because of land degradation, transition to market economy, and the accelerated introduction of 
modern agricultural technology, namely tractors. This, together with mechanized farming, has 
turned to be one of the main causes of conflict between pastoralists and farmers in the region. 
While South Kordofan is a conflict affected state with high levels of deprivation and poor 
49 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
 16.
 17.
standards, North and part of West Kordofan are drought prone and are characterized by a 
limited agriculture potential. Yet, agriculture incomes are comparatively higher in North and 
West Kordofan compared to South Kordofan due to a larger orientation in the former towards 
cash crops, and proximity to main commodity and livestock markets.14  
Kordofan region suffers a severe problem of land degradation. Main indicators include, 
deterioration of water sources, removal and destruction of forests, deterioration of range and 
pastures, soil erosion, loss of biodiversity and conversion of vast tracts of land that were 
previously agricultural and pastoral into desert or desert-like conditions. The creeping process 
of desertification remains a major source of poverty, especially among women and children and 
the decreasing resilience to drought. Land degradation, together with climate change, has also 
brought about enormous challenges to customary land tenure regimes while contributed to the 
erosion of relations between social groups. The increased tendency towards arid climatic 
conditions along the southern margins of the Sahara has also initiated a marked shift in 
population and economies southwards into the savanna adding to the pressure over already 
degrading natural resource base. 
Village poverty profile for greater Kordofan state. Due to lack of updated state level data 
regarding rural poverty and livelihoods of the rural population in greater Kordofan region, the 
design mission collected primary data through focus group discussions and interviews with 
households (women, men, youth) and authorities at the village and locality level (village 
leaders). However, this data is purely indicative and does not carry any statistical significance. 
The number of HH within an average village is 232 with an average of 6.2 HH members per 
family. Almost 52% of village population are women, while youth represent around 45%. The 
average of female headed households per village is 6%. It is noted that about 55% of the 
average village population falls within the category Very Poor (VPHH) and Poor (PHH) and 
34% are Moderate Poor (MPHH) but just barely above the poverty line. 
Gender analysis for Sinnar and Kordofan states 
 18. Gender construction varies between completely segregated and rigid patriarchal communities 
to more open communities with space for women to maneuver and more flexible gender 
segregated community. It is observable that gender construction is more flexible in Kordofan 
than in Sinnar state. Child marriage is practiced in all four states; girls get married between 
11 to 14 years old. An average village has no health clinic or reproductive health services or a 
clinic with very limited service. Hospitals are very far away. There is at least one trained midwife 
available per village. Boys and girls attend primary school in the villages. Boys continue with 
their secondary school education, outside the village, while most girls drop out and get married. 
Overall, education level is very low. Illiteracy rate is very high and relatively higher among 
women and girls compared to men and boys. Mobility of women is limited and conditioned with 
the permission of men (husband, father, brother, or son, in some cases neighbor in case of 
absenteeism of the previous guardians) 15. This restricted women's movement hinders their 
access to the market. It was observed during filed visits that women are involved in village 
development committees and serve as demonstration farmers. Women generally attend the 
meetings and participate in the discussions but remain inactive in decision making level at 
these meetings.  
 19.
The most common problems faced by rural women and girls are (i) fetching water and firewood 
which overloads women's domestic activities and are considered as health hazards; (ii) the lack 
of health services including reproductive health and midwifery; (iii) lack of financial resources, 
and knowledge to increase agricultural production. Income opportunities, especially off-farm 
activities are often offered at better price for men compared to women; (iv) income 
opportunities, especially off-farm activities are often offered at better price for men compared to 
women; and (v) harvest, marketing and control of income is done exclusively by men.  
14 Population Census 2008.  
15 Typically, and restrict practices in Sinnar state more than in Kordofan. 
50 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
C. 
TARGETING STRATEGY FOR THE IAMDP 
Geographical targeting 
 20.
 21.
IAMDP will be implemented in the four states of North Kordofan (NK), South Kordofan (SK), 
West Kordofan (WK) and Sinnar state. The IAMDP project area has been determined in close 
consultation with Government and project staff of the on-going IFAD supported Western Sudan 
Resources Management Project, the Seeds Development Project (SDP) and the Supporting 
Traditional Rainfed Small-Scale Procedures in Sinnar State (SUSTAIN). Emphasis has been 
given to areas where IFAD projects are ongoing. IAMDP will in particular build on the 
experiences of the SDP which is aimed at promoting the adoption and marketing of 
improved/certified seeds in the Kordofan region and the SUSTAIN project which is focused on 
promoting conservation agricultural practices and strengthening links between the private 
sector and small holder farmers in Sinnar state. 
Localities and villages have been selected on the following criteria: (i) high poverty levels and 
sufficient numbers of potential beneficiaries, particularly women and youth; (ii) coverage under 
the on-going IFAD co-financed projects and potential to capitalize on successful approaches; 
and (iii) potential for crop production and marketing of Groundnuts, sesame, sorghum and gum 
Arabic. Based on the above-mentioned selection criteria the IAMDP will intervene in 129 
communities (66 old and 63 new) including 27,000 households over a period of 5 years.  The 
consultations have resulted in the selection of 13 localities, in each state as follows: (i) North 
Kordofan: El Rahad, Sheikan, Um Rawaba; (ii) West Kordofan: Abu Zabad, El Khowai, Elsunut; 
(iii) South Kordofan: Elgoz, Rashad, Tadamon, Abassiya; and (iv) Sinnar state: Dinder, 
Dali&Mazmoum, Abu Hujar. 
Table 1:  Proposed IAMDP localities and communities in Sinnar state and Kordofan region 
Locality 
Males 
Elrahad 
Sheikan 
Um Rawaba 
North Kordofan 
Elgoz 
Rashad 
Tadamon 
Abassiya 
South Kordofan 
Abu Zabad 
El Khowai 
Elsunut 
West Kordofan 
Dinder 
Dali& Mazmoum 
Abu Hugar 
Sinnar state 
GRAND TOTAL 
3 599 
3 655 
3 637 
10 891 
4 467 
4 200 
2 608 
9 003 
20 278 
1 204 
1 458 
1 969 
4 631 
25 381 
11 534 
3 306 
40 221 
76 021 
Females 
Total 
Population 
3 497 
7 096 
3 462 
7 117 
3 562 
7 199 
10 521 
21 412 
4 184 
8 651 
4 024 
8 224 
2 563 
5 171 
8 966 
17 999 
19 737 
40 045 
1 146 
2 350 
1 437 
2 895 
1 851 
3 820 
4 434 
9 065 
26 416 
51 797 
12 005 
23 539 
3 440 
6 746 
82 082 
41 861 
75 553  152 604 
# of HHs 
# of targeted 
communities 
1 102 
1 150 
1 091 
3 343 
1 358 
1 329 
823 
2 516 
6 026 
355 
440 
633 
1 428 
9 215 
5 483 
1 178 
15 876 
26 673 
9 
7 
10 
26 
8 
7 
7 
13 
35 
7 
8 
7 
22 
26 
12 
8 
46 
129 
# of old 
communities 
6 
7 
6 
19 
0 
3 
2 
10 
15 
0 
0 
0 
0 
14 
12 
6 
32 
66 
# of new 
communities 
3 
0 
4 
7 
8 
4 
5 
3 
20 
7 
8 
7 
22 
12 
0 
2 
14 
63 
 22.
Target Group. The IAMDP will intervene in 129 villages (66 old and 63 new) targeting about 
27,000 smallholder households, including small producers, rural women and youth (engaged as 
mechanised service providers, and agro dealers at the village level). In North Kordofan state 
the IAMDP targets 3,343 rural HHs, of which 671 are women headed HHs. The total number of 
village population targeted is estimated to be 21,412, of which 50% are women and 30% are 
youth. In West Kordofan IAMDP targets 1,428 rural HHs, of which 344 are women headed. The 
total number of village population targeted in WK is estimated to be 9,065 of which 50% are 
women and 30% are youth. In South Kordofan IAMDP targets 6,026 rural HHs, of which 1,508 
are women headed HHs. The total number of village population targeted in SK is estimated to 
51 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
 23.
be 40045 of which 50% are women and 30% are youth. In Sinnar state IAMDP targets 15,876 
rural HHS, of which 2,381 are women headed HHS.  The total population in villages targeted by 
the IAMDP in Sinnar state is estimated to be 82,082. Of these about 51% are women and 60% 
are youth. In all the project interventions, there is a  strong focus on women who represent a 
specific target for IFAD, due to their traditional relevance in agricultural production, their 
growing social and economic responsibility, and their vulnerable position in societies 
Poor smallholder farmer households. The target smallholder farmer HHs live in clay and 
sandy plains and usually grow food and cash crops in fields located both close and far from 
their homestead, generally within a radius of 10 km. The women members of the HH have 
home garden (jubraka) land located close to the homestead where, horticulture crops and millet 
are grown for home consumption (including food security) or sale. Women also have access to 
land to plant field crops for home consumption. The main crops grown are sorghum, millet (on 
sandier soils), sesame, groundnut, and gum Arabic. Major challenges of smallholder HHs in all 
fours states include low agricultural productivity due to the limited availability of good quality 
seeds, erratic rainfall, pest infestations, and declining soil fertility. In the targeted States, 
smallholder HHs also face drought and water shortages during the dry season due to the 
limited supply of water and the high cost of purchasing water when it is available. Furthermore 
the lack of adequate access to sufficient productive assets prevents smallholder HHs from 
making maximum use of the land (draught power/machinery, good quality seeds, fertilizer, and 
labour). Poor households face food insecurity during about 5-6 months a year. Poor households 
have low or limited access to extension services and are often poorly organised. HHs usually 
receive low prices from the sale of their products due to absence of organized commodity 
markets and the fact that the HHs need to sell their products as quickly as possible after 
harvest to gain cash and therefore weaken their bargaining power. Lack or limited access to 
credit together with poor savings is one the main constraints that  prevents HHs from 
purchasing inputs and accessing hired machinery and labour for the more expensive and 
labour intensive farming activities - weeding and harvesting. As a result, HHs leave part of their 
available land uncultivated and engage in off-farm wage labour, for example gold mining, 
handicrafts and petty trade, or charcoal making and sale.  
 24. Women in agriculture. In the pastoral and traditional rainfed sector, women provide a 
remarkable contribution to the household’s wellbeing and food security. Women’s specific 
responsibilities include: (i) in settled farming communities women practice farming, both on the 
HH fields together with their husbands and on the jubraka land, generally 2 feddans (0.84 ha), 
where they mainly grow green vegetables, tomatoes, cowpeas, okra, millet and maize for both 
HH consumption and sale; (ii) all HH work, which includes preparing food, collecting fire wood 
and fetching water; (iii) childcare; (iv) rearing small animals; and (v) petty trade. The varied 
tasks mean that women generally work longer hours than men. In spite of their responsibilities, 
women have access to smaller plots of land and generally can control cash income coming 
from petty trade and poultry rearing, but are rarely involved in decisions concerning key 
productive assets, such as land and livestock sale. Women also have limited decision-making 
power in the household or within the community. Their empowerment is hindered by a high rate 
of illiteracy, persisting gender inequalities perpetuated by the customary law, and early 
marriage. Compared to men, women earn lower incomes, but tend to allocate more of their 
earnings to buy food items for their HH. Women headed HH are particularly vulnerable. They 
can be categorized in four main groups: (i) polygamous HH, which represent the largest 
segment; (ii) widows, in which the wife and the children remain attached to the late husband’s 
relatives; (iii) women whose husbands have left; and (iv) households whose male head left 
temporarily to take up non-farm employment opportunities or enrolled in the army. In the 
absence of the husband, the HH are still under the nominal supervision of a male head, 
although it is up to the women to earn a livelihood and look after the children.  
 25.
Rural youth, particularly unemployed youth, and young women. The majority of the young 
people live in rural areas with no access to basic services or sustainable livelihood 
opportunities, limited or no employment opportunities, as well as limited access to capacity 
52 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
building or microfinance services that would enable them to establish their own businesses. 
Conflict in the country has prejudiced the chances of a whole generation of youth for 
educational and developmental opportunities.  
Targeting strategy  
 26.
 27.
 28.
 29.
 30.
 31.
The targeting mechanism for IAMDP will build on the IFAD gained experiences through the 
SDP, SUSTAIN, and WSRMP in reaching the more vulnerable categories of the rural 
population in the Sudan. The entry point for the project will be organized groups of farmer 
producer organisations, with an emphasis on including women and youth. Females would be 
targeted through women and rural development dedicated organizations (saving and credit 
groups, ABSUMI, etc.) as these institutions facilitate independent access to land, farm 
equipment, credit and training for their members.  
The targeting strategy of the project involves a number of steps and iterations. These steps 
include the selection of poor villages using a village socio-economic survey, a self-targeting 
criterion where the communities within the selected villages will identify the poorest households 
among them; and monitoring of the poverty targeting and gender mainstreaming strategies. 
Main criteria for beneficiary selection are:   farm size (small holders of less than 15 feddans), 
potential for higher production, willingness to adopt new technologies, willingness to establish 
farmer producers associations. 
Selection of the poorest villages. This process will ensure that 129 among the poorer villages 
are selected by means of a structured and comprehensive socio-economic survey covering all 
the villages in the project areas. The survey will use a detailed questionnaire consisting of 
several modules. Each module contains a number of key indicators and each indicator within 
the module will have a minimum and maximum score. The indicators will be scored, a total 
score for each village calculated, villages ranked, and the first one hundred villages with the 
highest score will be selected 21 (the criteria which will be used in the selection of the villages 
is presented in Appendix 2). The villages will be rated against the following indicators: 
(i) percentage of poor households in the village; (ii) number of women headed households; 
(iii) access to drinking water for potable and livestock uses; (iv) reliance on rainfed farming and 
herding as the main source of livelihoods; (v) quality of the agricultural land and degree of 
erosion as manifested in the infestation with noxious weeds; (vi) access to health services; 
(vii) access to basic education; (viii) level of social capital; (ix) positive feedback to project menu 
of activities. 
Self-targeting measures. The self-targeting of communities will involve in-depth discussion 
with the community members and their traditional authorities within the selected villages in 
order to identify the poorest members in the village. This selection will be triangulated by the 
village authorities and other entities active at village level such as the Zakat Chamber, 
Women’s Union, Farmers Associations, Village Development Committees.   
The targeting and self-targeting of youth, women, and rural poor and small-scale farmers will be 
achieved though: (i) promotion of activities with a relatively low barrier of entry which is not 
attractive to large-scale agricultural enterprises; and (ii) facilitation, empowerment and capacity-
building measures to encourage active participation. These measures include: (i) information 
and mobilisation campaigns through producer organisations); (ii) group-based approaches and 
schemes to lower entry thresholds for the rural poor; (iii) linkages with the microfinance sector 
to leverage their investment capacity; and (iv) institutional strengthening of groups and 
management training of their members. 
Empowerment and capacity-building measures. Rural community institution building 
activities would include: (i) mobilisation and strengthening of framer producer organizations, 
with a focus on including women and youth, amongst others, to enable them to negotiate win-
win deals with off-takers; (ii) sensitisation of leaders at grassroots levels in understanding and 
overcoming gender and youth issues that hinder development, in particular related to land 
tenure; (iii) functional literacy training for women; (iv) sensitisation of youth on employment 
53 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 2:  Poverty, targeting and gender 
opportunities in the agriculture sector, sharing of experience among youth, and organisation of 
exchange visits using a peer-to-peer approach; (v) application of minimum quotas for women 
(50%) and youth (15%) to serve on project supported producer organizations; and (vi) facilitate 
access to biogas cookers as labour saving devices for women through rural finance.  
 32. Gender and youth strategy. The analysis of women, men and youth management of 
productive activities reveals that women in particular face specific constraints in weeding of field 
crops, conserving food crops, feeding small ruminants and overall high workload.  The gender 
mainstreaming strategy of the project aims to enable women to access extension services and 
rural finance as well as participate in relevant training, demonstration and scaling up activities. 
The gender mainstreaming strategy rests on the following: 
 33.
 34.
 35.
 36.
Tailoring the technical packages to women’s needs: This justifies the inclusion of the jubraka, 
poultry and the focus on animal nutrition; herbicides were removed from the minimum tillage 
packages as women strongly opposed their use for environmental, production and safety 
reasons. 
Introducing post-harvest handling techniques that will enable women to extend the shelf-life of 
food products as well as sell these at the market during the off season thus increasing the 
income generated from such activities. 
Introducing gas stoves to save on women’s labour and conserve trees. The use of gas stoves 
will also save women’s time as they will not be going to fetch fuelwood. 
A quota system will be established whereby the project will support the inclusion of youth in 
rural enterprise development. In addition, minimum quotas of 50% women and 15% youth will 
be applied to all project-related decision-making bodies and committees to protect the interests 
of those target groups. 
 37. Gender training will be delivered at community level to the village development committees, to 
the extension teams, the project management office, the locality coordination committees, the 
State coordination committee and the Board of Directors.  
 38.
 39.
 40.
The project M&E system will monitor the project outreach to women and results on their 
livelihoods, access to resources (namely extension services, demonstrations, training, 
insurance schemes, revolving funds established through the community environment 
conservation fund). In this regard, appropriate gender disaggregated indicators were included in 
the project logframe. 
The extension team leaders will have both women and men staff. Women and men will be both 
involved in the technical subjects of extension as well as community mobilization, group 
organization and gender mainstreaming. Such an organization of extension teams is not new 
and is adopted across the various IFAD co-financed projects with satisfactory results in terms of 
gender mainstreaming. 
Adoption of Gender Action Learning System (GALS). The GALS aims at increasing awareness 
of gender roles in the households and communities by improving their capacity to negotiate 
their needs and interests and find innovative, gender-equitable solutions in livelihoods planning 
and value chain development. The IAMDP project will finance training at three levels of 
implementation: First for facilitators, the IAMDP project staff and extension teams will be trained 
to become GALS facilitators. Over the first two years of the project, there will be two GALS 
trainings for facilitators with a set of 15 participants in each one. Second for champions, each 
facilitator will in turn train five GALS champions in each farmer producer organization. Third, the 
introduction of gender awareness training among new communities, refresher gender courses 
for project staff and implementation of the Gender Action Learning System methodology. The 
process of piloting GALS under IAMDP will be documented under KM activities, lessons 
learned and results will be disseminated with other IFAD projects in Sudan as well as other 
NEN countries. 
54 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.
 6.
Since 1979, IFAD has funded 19 projects for a total cost of US$596.2 million, of which 42% 
were IFAD loans, reaching 455,500 poor households (some three million people).  The 
completion of SKRDP and GSLRP in 2012, and the transfer of one project to the South Sudan 
country project, reduced the portfolio to six projects in 2013: Western Sudan Resources 
Management Project (WSRMP), Seeds Development Project (SDP), Rural Access Project 
(RAP), Supporting Small-scale Traditional Rainfed Producers in Sinnar State (SUSTAIN), 
Butana Integrated Rural Development Project (BIRDP) and Revitalizing the Sudan Gum Arabic 
Production and Marketing Project (RSGAMP). 
The RB-COSOP (2013-2018), which was extended to 2021 identified two inter-related SOs.  
Under SO1, the productivity of crops, livestock and forestry in rainfed farming systems were to 
be enhanced and made more resilient. While under SO2, the access of the poor rural 
households to sustainable rural finance services, markets and profitable value chains were to 
be increased. The performance of IFAD supported projects contributing to the two SOs has 
been significant. 
Projects main achievements 
Achievements and impact of SUSTAIN and SDP on productivity and production  
A variety of improved agronomic practices have been promoted as follows:  
(a) Seed Improved varieties.  Certified seed every year for sorghum, certified seed every 3 to 
5 years for sesame and groundnuts, Certified and other improved seed leads to greater 
resistance to disease, greater drought tolerance, and a superior response to inputs in 
higher potential areas. 
(b) Land Preparation.  Conservation Agriculture, Heavy chisel in heavier soil, Light chisel in 
lighter soils, Conservation Agriculture land preparation improves water infiltration and 
reduces erosion. 
(c) Soil Fertility. Crop rotation, added fertilizer (manure and purchased), both lead to higher 
yields, greater resilience to disease. 
(d) Planting, mechanized planter, conserves seed, plants in even rows easy to weed, allows 
easy fertilizer micro-dosing16, less expensive (particularly groundnuts). 
(e) Weed control, mechanized weeding, rapid, thorough, relatively cost-effective, but requires 
tractor, and only practical for fields with well laid out rows. Herbicide weeding, rapid, 
thorough, relatively low cost-effective, does not require tractor. 
 (f) Harvesting, mechanized, rapid, less expensive, requires a tractor. 
Exposure Results. Both SDP and SUSTAIN have done a very good job at the exposing 
farmers to improved agronomic technologies, through project-managed as well as farmer-
managed demonstrations.   
Table 3 shows the number of farmers exposed to new technologies by the projects as of the 
2016/7 agricultural season. When reviewing Table 2, it is important to note that SDP focused 
entirely on seed technologies until the mid-term review of late 2014, and only began very 
limited demonstration of chemical weed control starting in the 2015/6 agricultural season, and 
slightly larger demonstrations of chemical weed control in the 2016/7 agricultural season. 
SUSTAIN has focused on improved seed, mechanized land preparation, and crop rotation 
since 2012 but has not demonstrated weeding technologies. 
16 In lower rainfall areas, ARC recommends “micro-dosing” fertilizer which gives the best balance between cost and yield 
increases.   
55 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
Table 2:  Exposure to New Agronomic Practices -- SUSTAIN and SDP – as of the 2016/7 season 
Technology Demonstrated 
SUSTAIN Farmers  
SDP Farmers 
Improved Seed 
Mechanized Land Preparation 
41,975 
41,975 
Mechanized Planting 
Not demonstrated 
Chemical and Mechanical Weed Control 
Not demonstrated 
Mechanized Harvesting 
Not demonstrated 
20,000 
 3,000 
 3,000 
1,700 
850 
 7.
 8.
Initial Adoption. The level of initial adoption of improved practices has been impressive in both 
SUSTAIN and SDP, although in most cases, supported by some element of project logistical 
support or subsidization.  The average adoption rate reached around 65% for Sorghum, 
groundnuts, and sesame.  
Improved Productivity through adoption.  Table 3 below shows average increases in yield 
from technology adoption reported by SUSTAIN and SDP for the three main crops in 2016.  
There are limitations on the quality of the data collected, so the reported yield increases should 
be interpreted as indicative of a trend rather than completely reliable statistics. 
Table 3:  Average Yield Increases Reported for SUSTAIN and SDP farmers, 2016/7 season 
Crop 
Sorghum 
Sesame 
Groundnut 
SUSTAIN 
152% 
74% 
Not demonstrated 
SDP 
428% 
5% 
96% 
 9.
 10.
 11.
Scale-up. Neither SUSTAIN nor the SDP were originally designed with realistic, complete 
models of commercial scale-up.  Nonetheless, there have been some encouraging results of 
scale-up from the SUSTAIN project.  The SUSTAIN project has reported commercial scale-up 
(i.e. farmers paying full commercial prices) of heavy chisel land preparation for 53,627 feddans 
as of the 2016/7 season.  This is quite impressive, but most of this increase has come from 
large-scale farmers who have ready access to finance and required services.  However, the 
large-scale farmer scale-up has provided positive impacts.  The large-scale farmer scale-up is 
an important role model for smaller farmers, it has led to positive environmental benefits, and it 
has led to increase in service provision that can be accessed by smallholders, as many of the 
adopting large-scale farmers have become service providers themselves.   
Both projects have piloted initiatives to increase the likelihood of scale-up that will be 
incorporated into IAMDP’s scale-up strategy. 
Involvement of the Private Sector. Neither SDP nor SUSTAIN were designed to work through 
private sector service providers, nor develop partnerships with private companies 17.  During the 
course of implementation, however, the project managers and supervision/mid-term review 
missions for both projects came to the conclusion that private service providers, and private 
sector partnerships – at the village, locality, and national level - would be the most effective and 
sustainable means of encouraging technology adoption and addressing low productivity. 
 12.
SDP has pioneered the inclusion of private companies in demonstrations of new seed varieties, 
agrochemicals, and equipment. This process took extensive discussions and negotiations with 
17 The original SDP did incorporate a plan for partnerships with private seed companies.  However, the original design was not 
feasible, and partnerships were not developed until major changes in partnership design were made after the mid-term review.   
56 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
companies. Initially, the private companies rejected the idea of collaboration, as they believed 
that smallholders were not a viable commercial market, for one or more of the following factors: 
(i) traditional mindset oriented towards subsistence farming as a way of life, rather than farming 
as a business; (ii) lack of technical understanding of how to properly use improved inputs and 
services; (iii) low purchasing power; (iv) government interference in the market, particularly 
through the free/subsidized seed distribution programs of governments and donors; and (v) the 
seed companies believed that the only viable way to serve the smallholder market was to 
respond to donor or government seed tenders.  
 13. When the seed companies were convinced that SDP was taking realistic steps to encourage 
and empower smallholders to adopt improved inputs and services, they agreed on a provisional 
basis to participate. In the case of SDP, private companies and the project jointly identified the 
demonstration locations.  The companies provided seeds, chemicals, equipment, and 
training/equipment operation.  The project provided logistics, supervision of demonstrations, 
and promotional activities to ensure that the demonstrations are broadly publicized, with well-
attended field days.   
 14.
The participation of private companies has offered smallholders a much wider technology 
choice for their production systems.  Previously, SDP demonstrations had focused exclusively 
on open pollinated seed varieties available in the public domain.  With the inclusion of private 
sector companies, farmers have been exposed to a much broader range of production and 
productivity technologies.  Where there has been strong farmer interest (e.g., for the Z2 
sorghum variety with striga-tolerant traits 18 developed by the Nile Sun company), the private 
sector will take steps to develop the supply chain to the farmer.   
Table 4:  Private Sector Participation in SDP Demonstrations  
Company 
Seeds 
Agrochemicals 
Equipment 
CTC 
Hybrid Sorghum 
Herbicides – selective/non-
selective 
Dal Engineering 
n/a 
ASSCO 
Sorghum OPV 
Pigeon Pea 
n/a 
n/a 
El Douma 
n/a 
Nour Agroscience 
n/a 
Herbicides 
selective/nonselective 
Herbicides 
selective/nonselective 
Groundnut Planter 
Groundnut Harvester 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
-  
-  
Katbase 
n/a 
n/a 
Small-scale 
tractors, 
chisels, planters, harvesters 
Nectar Africa 
Sorghum proprietary OPVs 
Nile Sun 
Sorghum Proprietary OPVs 
and Hybrids 
Sunflower 
Herbicides – selective/non-
selective 
Herbicide – selective 
n/a 
n/a 
 15.
Despite the successes of the SDP/private sector demonstrations in exposing farmers to a much 
wider variety of new technologies, there have been many logistical and organizational problems 
during implementation of demonstrations.  Mostly, these were due to the heavy reliance on the 
state locality extension teams (LETs) for implementation, as mandated by the project design.  
Also, there was an insufficient emphasis on training farmers in the business aspects of adopting 
technology, and, in ensuring that farmers from surrounding villages had an opportunity to visit 
during field days.  These shortcomings are to be addressed by SDP in the 2017/18 agricultural 
18 Striga (or witch weed) is a genus of parasitic weed that is a serious economic pest for sorghum in Sudan.  
57 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
season, but there is a need for more improvements for these demonstrations to have maximum 
impact.  
 16. Mechanized service provider programmes.  SUSTAIN pioneered identifying and working 
with village or locality based mechanized service providers (MSPs) to provide services for on 
farm demonstration of deep chisel land preparation (18,575 feddans demonstrated as of 2016/7 
season).  The use of village mechanized service providers was not by design, but by necessity. 
The original SUSTAIN design had sought to contract the nationally-based service providers 
who normally provide services to the government and large-scale farmers.  The larger service 
providers were interested in providing service to smallholders.  However, even village-based 
MSPs have tended to give priority to their own fields, and those of their larger neighbors.  
 17.
 18.
 19.
 20.
 21.
SDP adopted and greatly expanded the concept of village mechanized service providers 
pioneered by SUSTAIN.  The innovations included: (i) light chisel land preparation for the 
lighter, sandy soils that prevail in North Kordofan; (ii) mechanized planting (mechanical and 
pneumatic planters); (iii) mechanical weed control (inter-row cultivators); (iv) mechanical 
harvesting (groundnuts and sesame); and (v) mobile threshing using the tractor power take-off 
in 2017/2018 season.   
Despite many difficulties faced in identifying and properly training MSPs by both SUSTAIN and 
SDP, farmer acceptance of MSP services is widespread and enthusiastic because of time and 
labor savings, lower costs, and higher yields.   Looking across both projects, the two services 
with the clearest improvement so far over traditional practices are:  (i) heavy chisel land 
preparation in clay soils for sorghum and sesame, leading to greater water infiltration and 
higher yields greatly outweighing the extra costs compared to the use of the traditional 
wide-level disc; and (ii) mechanical planting of groundnuts in sandy soils.  This has proven 
much faster, enabling farmers to catch more of the rains in the growing period, uses less seed 
and places it at the optimal depth for germination and emergence, and produces regular 
furrows easier to weed; all leading to greater yield and lower costs.  The inter-row cultivator for 
the mechanical removal of weeds has proved problematic. The operation could only be done in 
fields that had completely straight and regularly spaced crop rows.  
SDP experience in the first year of the MSP activity (2016/7 agricultural season) identified a 
number of factors that were not completely addressed by the MSP selection process and 
training program that will need to be factored into IAMDP design: (i) MSP tractors were of 
inadequate size, or poor condition, or missing key functions such as functioning hydraulics 
required for certain operations; (ii) the LET mechanization specialists had difficulty properly 
calibrating the planter to handle light seed, especially sesame seed; (iii) poor linkages were 
established with suppliers and servicers of agricultural equipment, and thus low levels of 
service or technical support, leading to inefficiencies; (iv) MSPs tended prioritized providing 
services to larger-scale farmers, as they were easier and less expensive to serve; and (v) gaps 
in MSP business skills; inadequate marketing, pricing, financial management. 
SDP, in fact, plans to take steps to address the shortcomings with the MSP program during the 
final year of SDP implementation.  These include refining training programs, facilitation of 
linkages with financial institutions to enable purchase of new equipment, and training and 
organized smallholders to clean and consolidate their fields to make it easier to attract MSPs 
and lower the cost of service.    
Spray Service Providers Programme.  SUSTAIN identified village youth, equipped them with 
knapsack sprayers, and trained them to provide insecticide spraying for jubraka 19, stored crops, 
and for household pests.  These youth were referred to as Integrated Pest Management (IPM) 
agents.  They were not trained or equipped to provide weeding services using herbicides.  In 
SUSTAIN, a total of 795 farmer-owned grain stores were treated by IPM agents, with an 8% 
reduction in losses for sesame, and 12% reduction in losses for sorghum.  Over 75% of the 
19 Jubraka are gardens near the homestead. 
58 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
 22.
 23.
 24.
 25.
 26.
IPMs reported purchasing additional pesticides with their own funds, which seems to indicate 
that farmers are paying for the IPM services.  20 
SDP, in contrast, focused on herbicide control of weeding.  SDP trained youth identified by the 
village as potential spray service providers (SSPs).  The youth were trained and equipped with 
knapsack sprayers in the safe and effective use of chemical weed control, using IPM principles, 
with ToT provided by the Sudan Agrochemical Association (SAGA21) working closely with the 
state crop protection units.  SDP also provided business skills training.  In general, the villagers 
had a strongly positive reaction to the herbicide weeding, as it was seen to be quicker and less 
expensive than manual weeding.  The SSPs themselves were optimistic about the business 
potential of providing chemical weed control. 
There were a number of logistical and organizational shortcomings during the initial year of the 
SSP program (the 2016/7 agricultural season) due to inadequate project management, which 
will be addressed by the project in the 2017/18 season.  Common problems that the SSPs 
encountered include: (i) insufficient practical experience in applying chemicals and 
troubleshooting problems, training provided by the project was mostly theoretical; there was no 
actual hands-on training applying herbicides to weeds in the field; (ii) limited availability of LET 
crop protection specialists to supervise spraying; (iii) limited contact and arrangements with 
local agro-dealers for resupply of agrochemicals; (iv) inadequate business skills in pricing, 
marketing, cash management, financing, etc.; and (v) lack of finance for equipment and 
chemical purchases. 
Agrodealer programmes. Agrodealers are locality-based suppliers of seeds, fertilizers, crop 
protection agrochemicals, and other inputs.    
SUSTAIN has undertaken a limited assessment of agro-dealers in the project localities in 
Sinnar state, but has not yet actively supported them.    
SDP has undertaken an assessment of agrodealers in the project localities in preparation for 
involving them in project activities.  The SDP assessment of agrodealers found varying levels of 
skill and experience ranging from traders with primary education to those with agricultural 
degrees.  SDP found that most agrodealers: (i) Stock a narrow variety of seeds and chemicals, 
and are not aware of new seed varieties and agrochemical products that may be of value to 
their smallholder clients.  A few stocked fertilizers, but mostly for vegetable growers not field 
crops; (ii) have little technical expertise, and thus are not able to provide farmers advice, or 
store or handle agrochemicals or seeds safely, and have not been provided much technical 
support from their suppliers or donor/government programs; (iii) have a strong interest in 
learning more about new seed varieties and herbicide types and usage; (iv) have limited 
business skills and capacity (e.g. do not keep business records, no marketing or promotional 
campaigns); and (v) outside of trade credit from some suppliers, have no access to finance.  It 
should be noted that many agrodealers expressed reservations about assuming debt beyond 
trade credits, and most were highly reluctant to extend credit to their customers.  
 27.
SDP provided business skills training (“Agrodealer as a Business”) training to 17 agrodealers, 
which was very well received by the agrodealers.  After the training, they indicated better 
relationships with suppliers and customers.  All started keeping written records, and they 
perceived a need to form a trade association to exchange information, advocate with 
government, and possibly negotiate bulk purchases.    
 28.
SDP sponsored an exposure visit for 13 agrodealers to Khartoum, after the 2016/7 season, to 
meet the national offices of the major seed and chemical suppliers.  The private companies 
greatly appreciated the interest and visit of the agrodealers, and indicated they intended to 
20 WSRMP also trained IPMs, but the approach was to provide a social rather than a business service.  WSRMP IPMs have 
generally not been active after project completion. 
21 SAGA is a member of Crop Life, the international trade association of the agrochemicals industry.  Crop Life has introduced 
an SSP program successfully in a number of African countries including Ethiopia, Zambia, Cote d’Ivoire, and Nigeria.   
59 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
better support the agrodealers technically, so that they may be reliable sources of technical 
advice for smallholders in general, and of course better marketers of their own products. For 
agrodealers with an established track record of sales over more than one season, the 
companies expressed willingness to improve the trade credit terms offered. As a result of the 
visit, many new business relationships were struck between the agrodealers and the larger 
companies.  
 29.
Despite the initial SDP successes, however, there is great room for improvement in agrodealer 
support programs, and ensuring more profitable connections with their smallholder customers 
and large-scale suppliers.  
Achievements and impact of SUSTAIN and SDP on marketing 
 30.
 31.
 32.
 33.
SUSTAIN post-harvest activities focused on improvements in crop storage and physical market 
access.  The project does not facilitate market linkages or value addition for field crops.  SDP’s 
post-harvest activities focused initially on marketing linkages for certified seed, and only since 
2015/6 were efforts made to establish pilot initiatives for grain market linkages.  
Crop storage. SUSTAIN’s primary intervention for storage was the introduction of pesticide 
treatment in grain houses, applied by the project-trained and equipped IPM Agents. A total of 
795 grain stores were treated; over 80% of the grain stored was sorghum, only 4% was sesame 
(groundnuts are not commonly grown in Sinnar state).  The IPMs did not treat grain stored in 
the underground matmuras.    
As a result of the IPM treatment, sorghum losses in storage, on average, declined from 14% to 
2%, and average sesame losses declined from 9% to nearly 0%.  SUSTAIN Impact 
assessment report (2015) concluded that nearly half of the households reported improvements 
in food security, a third reported higher incomes, and over 20% improvements in seed security.  
However, the cost-effectiveness of the storage intervention cannot be assessed, as calculations 
were not made of either the net savings from reduced grain spoilage or the average costs of 
using the IPM agents.  Over 75% of the IPM agents reported that they purchased pesticides 
(after depleting the “starter kit” provided by SUSTAIN), which indicates that farmers view the 
savings from the service worthwhile and worth paying for. 
Physical market access.  SUSTAIN has built 32 wadi crossings that have greatly improved 
access to over 180 villages isolated during the rainy season.  These have reduced travel time 
from 30% to 50% according to the villagers, and over half the farmers interviewed perceived a 
benefit from this.  As a result, the costs of transporting inputs and services to the communities, 
and moving agricultural produce from the communities, have been reduced, but these have not 
been quantified by the project.  Wadi crossing maintenance has been a major issue, with many 
of showing signs of serious erosion after only one rainy season.  Wadi crossing committees 
were established and trained by the project to handle routine maintenance have been formed, 
but the more serious water damage observed could not have been prevented by routine 
maintenance.  The Sinnar State Ministry of Physical Planning and Public Utilities has agreed to 
take over upkeep of the crossings as of early 2017, but this has not yet materialized.   
 34. Market linkages.  SDP has successfully brokered market linkages between smallholder 
producers of certified seed and private seed companies.  Seed growing groups have sold 
nearly 28 tons of certified seed to three seed companies, with lesser but significant quantities of 
seed sold to neighbors.  Two of the seed companies (ASSCO and RANS) provided some input 
finance (seed and field inspection costs), two of the companies provided on-farm collection 
(Nile Sun and RANS), and two entered into firm pre-season contracts (ASSCO and RANS). 
The prices paid to farmers is about 15% above the grain market auction price, with deductions 
made for inputs and transport.  SDP has not analyzed the net benefits to farmers of the certified 
seed market linkage, but both companies and the seed grower groups are pleased and plan to 
increase production in the 2017/2018 season. 
60 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
 35.
 36.
To achieve this, a considerable amount of SDP resources has been invested in organizing and 
providing the specialized training for the seed growing groups, and arranging for the Federal 
Seed Administration to undertake the necessary field inspections for certification.  Seed 
companies are not willing to take on this role.  One of the seed companies, in fact, does not 
work with the smallholder seed grower groups, but from individual medium-scale farmers.   
SDP has made initial attempts to broker linkages between grain growing groups and buyers of 
groundnuts, colored sesame, and sorghum. There was interest at the national level from two 
large processors of groundnuts, and at the state level from a large merchant/exporter in North 
Kordofan.  The main interest of these buyers was in sourcing groundnuts of higher quality, 
especially with lower levels of aflatoxin.  The companies were willing to provide technical 
support on production and storage, guarantee a price based on the auction markets, and send 
trucks to collect the groundnuts provided a critical mass was aggregated.  SDP was prepared to 
help with organizing groups, and providing technical/business training for the grain groups to 
produce high-quality, low-aflatoxin groundnuts.  Because of the high costs from the opaque 
system of state and local taxation, the buyers could not offer a higher price than local traders, 
and in fact would only offer the auction price.  Without a price premium, or other incentive, the 
grain grower groups were not interested in taking the trouble and expense of producing a 
higher quality crop.   
Achievements and impact of SUSTAIN and SDP on farmer association formation and 
strengthening 
 37.
SDP began implementation well before the Farmer Producer Association legislation was 
enacted and implemented, and during the period in which the Sudan Farmers Union was in 
decline due to an adverse relationship with government.  Therefore, SDP focused on 
establishing project-organized Seed Grower Groups and Grain Producer Groups that have no 
legal or formal standing.  These groups were mostly formed as a means to receive training, 
obtain project sponsored resources, and access MFI credit, and have little if any internal 
business motivation.  Groups are formed and sometimes only operate for a year before they 
become inactive.  Currently, there are 8 Seed Grower Groups and 76 Grain Producer Groups, 
but these are only active intermittingly.  The strongest are the Seed Grower Groups that are 
growing certified seed for sale to private seed companies, as there is a business motivation to 
collaborate closely.  
 38.
The SUSTAIN experience is much the same as SDP.  A total of 496 “interest groups” of 
smallholder farmers were formed with no legal or formal standing.  The interest groups were 
formed to receive training, visit demonstrations, and coordinate access to project services and 
MFI credit.  They have little or no independent activities.   
 39.
The SUSTAIN and SDP project managers, and IFAD, agree that IAMDP should focus on 
mobilizing and empowering FPAs rather than continue with project-driven group formation. 
Achievements and impact of SUSTAIN and SDP on farming as a business (FAAB) 
 40.
The MTR missions for SDP and SUSTAIN (2014 and 2015) observed that uptake of 
demonstrated technologies (and therefore greater productivity) was hindered to a marked 
degree by the lack of business acumen. Both projects had focused on demonstrating the 
agronomic value of improved seed, inputs, and services – e.g., increased yield per feddan. The 
economic value was not addressed. However, improved inputs and services are often more 
expensive or require more cash upfront than using saved seeds and manual labor.  Unless 
farmers are convinced that they will be financially better off by using these improved products 
and services, they will not borrow or invest their own funds.  Most farmers do not have the 
business skills to evaluate the financial impacts of adopting improved seed, other inputs, or 
services except in situations where the agronomic difference is quite dramatic (e.g. use of the 
deep chisel plow in heavy clay soils). 
61 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
 41.
 42.
 43.
 44.
 45.
Since 2015, both SUSTAIN and SPD have introduced “Farming as a Business” (FAAB) training 
for farmers.  As of 2017, SDP had provided FAAB TOT to 33 agriculture economics specialists 
of the NK and SK LETs, who in turn provided FAAB training to over 1300 smallholders, 24 
SSPs, and 17 agrodealers (MSPs were not trained).  
As of 2016, SUSTAIN had provided FAAB TOT to 35 LET officers, who have rolled out the 
FAAB training as part of the general farmer field school training, reaching 41,975 smallholders.  
SUSTAIN has not provided FAAB training to MSPs or IPM agents.   
FAAB training appears to have brought farmers to a higher level of business competency but 
the actual impact has not been adequately quantified.  FAAB training has been enthusiastically 
received by smallholders, and when questioned farmers could cite specific examples of where 
the FAAB training had enabled them to make a better business decision.   Interestingly, 
especially for women, the FAAB training was as helpful for starting or improving non-farm 
business activities as it was for agricultural activities.   
There are shortcomings with the FAAB training.  SDP and SUSTAIN have not developed 
specific business cases for FAAB training that center around making decisions about the 
technologies demonstrated by the projects.  Therefore, the depth of impact of the 
demonstrations has been limited.  Also, the FAAB training materials do not effectively reach 
Illiterate or semi-literate farmers.  
Encouragingly, the concept of FAAB has been accepted at the state level; the government of 
North Kordofan have asked for FAAB training for all the extension teams.  The University of 
Kordofan in El Obied has created a department of Farming as a Business, based on one faculty 
member’s work for SDP on FAAB. 
Achievements and impact of Gum Arabic Production and Marketing Project  
 46.
The Gum Arabic Production and Marketing Project (GAPMP), jointly funded by the World Bank 
and IFAD, was implemented by the Forests National Corporation (FNC) from 2009 through 
2015.  GAPMP covered eight localities in North, South, and West Kordofan states as well as 
Sinnar, Blue Nile, and White Nile states.   Three of the project localities overlap with the IAMDP 
localities.  The Institutional support and capacity building component financed 180 GAPAs 
supported through micro-finance mechanism and 58 GAPAs who had received matching grants 
for implementation of their priority intervention, such as water, tractors, or GA storage facilities. 
Those activities directly benefited more than 17,000 beneficiaries, including 24% of which were 
women. Out of the 180 GAPAs that received grants for micro-finance 10 were implemented by 
pure female members. In addition, about 1,110 GAPAs’ members or technical staffs have been 
trained since the beginning of the project on different topics including agro-forestry, FM, 
business management, etc. and 165 GA producers participated in 11 exchanges visits to learn 
from other GAPAs experiences. GAPMP activities contributed to an increase in the GAPA 
share of the FOB price of gum Arabic from 10% to 65%.  GAPA gum Arabic sales increased 
25%, and net income increased 73%.  GAPMP contributed to improved tapping, grading, and 
storage practices but the quantitative impact of these interventions was not assessed.   
Achievement and impact of rural finance initiatives: ABSUMI, Baraah and SCGs  
 47.
ABSUMI model. The ABSUMI model was developed by IFAD in 2010 in collaboration with 
CBS. It is based on the Sanduq initiative promoted by IFAD in many projects in NENA region. 
Offering Islamic sharia-compliant credit, savings and microinsurance, particularly to women, 
ABSUMI was created within the Agricultural Bank of Sudan through a pilot phase in two 
locations in North and South Kordofan. When it began in 2010, ABSUMI was built upon the 
proven "village sanadiq" model and incorporated a range of strategic innovations and 
unconventional business practices including group guarantees and effective training. It entered 
the microfinance market through the bottom layers of the economic pyramid by providing 
smaller loans and serving the poorest segments of the population. Loans support small 
agricultural activities, livestock fattening and rearing, and a range of microenterprises such as 
62 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
petty trading, tea stalls and brick-making. The improved information-dissemination and training 
paired with the confidence in the model and the presence of enabling regulatory framework 
resulted in the success of the initiative. At present ABSUMI had a total of 10 units spread 
across 10 Localities in 5 states namely North Kordofan, West Kordofan, Sinnar, White Nile and 
Khartoum. They cover a total of 323 villages reaching around 30,000 members through 1,800 
groups. Since inception, these units have disbursed over SDG 150 million through 100,000 
loans a majority of which has supported clients in the IFAD villages. Overall, ABSUMI’s 
repayment performance is almost 98% and most of the units, especially older ones which have 
completed 3-4 years of operations are financially sustainable. ABSUMI’s success has been 
driven by its business plan approach, professional management through managers with 
banking background, doorstep delivery of services, women’s groups, strong group solidarity 
and group guarantee culture. Most of the credit demand by clients was for financing livestock 
activities (75%) due to relatively low risks and high returns in a short period of time.  
Baraah model.  In 2010 Baraah was established by the IFAD supported South Kordofan Rural 
Development Programme (SKRDP. Baraah was established as a licensed, professionally 
managed, central microfinance institution owned by the communities it served. Baraah has also 
partnered with the SDP for disbursing crop production loans to SDP target group farmers for 
the adoption of SDP promoted crop production packages. In general, Baraah has demonstrated 
considerable flexibility in adjusting its products and methodology to farmers’ needs. 
Unfortunately, soon Borah’s area of operation was engulfed in armed conflict and the 
environment of insecurity. However, in spite of these obstacles Baraah has succeeded in 
maintaining its operations and has reached about 7,000 households maintaining a portfolio of 
around US$1.5 million with more than 95% repayment rate. Baraah’s community owned 
structure and management through locally recruited staff contributed to its will to continue 
operations even under adverse circumstances. After the closure of SKRDP, Baraah has 
consolidated its relationship with the CBS-MFU and has received up to US$1 million as portfolio 
financing over the last four years. The Baraah model has been used as a template by the CBS 
for developing business plan of several other MFIs that were licensed over the last 3-4 years 
The SCG model has been successfully implemented by Western Sudan Resources 
Management Programme (WSRMP) in the Greater Kordofan Region. In this model voluntary 
groups of up to 20 members were formed for the purpose of mobilising savings and internal 
credit. At present SCGs include 23,000 members [90% women], organised into 1,357 SCGs in 
264 communities spread across 19 localities in the North, South and West Kordofan States. 
Together they have mobilised around SDG 3 million as internal savings and have cumulatively 
disbursed around SDG 85 million as internal credit from group funds maintaining a repayment 
rated of 99%. Initially each member saved around SDG 5 - 20 per month across different 
groups which has now increased to 20-30 SDG. The SCG have demonstrated excellent results 
with some villages mobilising internal capital as high as SDG 150,000 from 3-4 SCGs that could 
be used for financing crop production activities.  
 48.
 49.
Lessons learned from IFAD portfolio  
 50.
 51.
 52.
Some key lessons arising from projects under the current RB-COSOP period, that are 
applicable to IAMDP, are as follows: 
For smallholders to benefit from private service providers (i) the service providers must have 
necessary inputs, equipment, and technical/business skills, and, be available and ready when 
inputs/services are required by farmers; and (ii) smallholders need to be organized to be more 
attractive and profitable customers, and have ready access to finance.   
Private companies will invest in marketing inputs and equipment targeted for smallholders, 
when they are convinced (i) smallholders have the knowledge and purchasing power to be a 
significant market; and (ii) government input subsidies are focused only on the poor 
subsistence farmers who would not able to afford inputs.  
63 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
 53.
 54.
 55.
 56.
 57.
 58.
Private companies, however, largely do not find it cost-effective to invest into providing 
inputs/services to smallholders; but are interested in investing in the capability of local or village 
based input/service providers.   
Free or subsidized input/service provision by the federal or state governments is inefficient and 
unsustainable.  When applied indiscriminately, it (i) crowds out village-based service delivery; 
and (ii) discourages private investment in the supply chain.  
The government and university research institutes have been and still are capable of 
developing valuable new seed varieties (particularly open pollinated varieties) and other 
technologies for the rainfed sector, but are not able or willing to invest in the steps to bring 
these to market to benefit smallholders.    
The increasingly high costs and scarcity of labor availability are major constraints to increased 
production and productivity, and have led to a strong interest in MSP and SSP services.   
Access to land for expansion is rarely a significant constraint, and mechanization and spray 
service provision will help expand production as well as productivity. 
Inputs and services must be tailored for the agro-climactic conditions and smallholder 
aspirations in the localities.  For example, lower-potential areas where agroforestry is important 
may find animal powered services (e.g. the “curiat plow”) more appropriate than mechanization.  
Similarly, areas with scattered smaller fields may best be served by smaller tractors than the 
standard 70-80 hp tractor.    
 59. GAPA structure and leadership were crucial to success.  Some GAPAs turned out to be 
controlled by powerful families not actually involved in gum Arabic collection, that were merely 
interested in matching grants or microfinance.  The best performing GAPAs were those with 
100% women members. 
 60.
 61.
 62.
 63.
 64.
 65.
Financial constraints limited the ability of GAPAs to purchase gum Arabic from members, so 
that members needed immediate cash they had to sell to traders offering lower prices.   
Self-reliance was not inculcated in all of the GAPAs.  Many GAPAs continued to request project 
support, and did not use the matching grants/microfinance as seed capital to ensure their own 
commercial sustainability. 
Post-project sustainability of services and infrastructure requires private delivery mechanisms 
and community ownership.  Unpredictable public financial support and problematic operation 
and maintenance create risks for sustainability of public services, (extension and infrastructure).  
Projects should promote local extension networks with payment for services and private sector 
partnerships, and build up local capacity and ownership. 
Increasing climate risk necessitates a focus on resilience and adaptation.  Increasing drought 
frequency and worsening climate change are magnifying risks to rural communities in rainfed 
areas. 
Community Based Organisations (Producers’ associations). The formation and/or strengthening 
of local institutions such as the village development committees (VDCs), GAPAs and crop 
producers associations  is critical in empowering the intended beneficiaries to exploit fully the 
economic and financial potential of the project, mobilise and/or attract funding/investment for 
their communities, manage common infrastructure facilities and engage in income generating 
activities. 
Financial institutions consider first cycle loans as most risky: Experiences of SDP and 
SUSTAIN indicates that although financial institutions have access to portfolio funds they are 
reluctant to invest in crop production activities due to the inherent risks. This hesitation is 
especially directed at small farmers in the rainfed areas who are considered riskier as they 
follow traditional agricultural methods and do not have any prior banking experience. 
Consequently, financial institutions are deterred from financing the first cycle loans to such 
64 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 3:  Country performance and lessons learned 
 66.
 67.
 68.
 69.
 70.
 71.
clients. This can be overcome by financing the first loan cycle using project funds according to 
the demand of the clients and supplying subsequent repeat loans to these farmers, on 
successful repayment of the first cycle, using portfolio funds belonging to the financial 
institutions.  
In addition, project partnership with a single financial institution restricts flexibility: Experiences 
of SDP indicates that project partnership with a single financial service provider is restrictive 
and does not allow flexibility for greater access to financial services by target group. The lack of 
competition amongst MFIs allows the interest rate to the borrowers to go unchallenged. 
Investments in wadi crossing that allow year round access on crucial feeder roads have 
lowered the costs of market access and input supply.  A concrete and realistic program of 
upkeep is essential to ensure these investments continue to benefit farmers.  
The traditional means to store crops post-harvest are satisfactory in terms of physical protection 
of the commodity, although improvements in management can result in economically significant 
savings in crop losses.  The traditional village level storage facilities are not suitable for post-
harvest financing using crops as collateral.  Without this type of post-harvest finance, farmers 
are not able to hold cash crops in anticipation of price increases, due to indebtedness to Sheil 
merchants or MFIs, and the pressing need for cash for household and other requirements.    
Farm gate prices for crops are reasonable when compared to the major auction and wholesale 
market prices (less logistical and other costs and normal trader margins).  Similarly, the auction 
and wholesale prices reflect international market prices (less logistical and other costs and 
normal trade margins).  Farmers are well aware of auction and wholesale market prices at any 
given time, this information can be obtained by any villager with access to a mobile phone.  
Most farmers have a general conception that prices immediately after harvest are increasingly 
higher with each passing month, and do not appreciate the high degree of volatility.  Storing 
crops in anticipation of higher market prices can be risky and incurs expense, and could lead to 
foregoing other more lucrative opportunities such as animal fattening. 
Increased production of sorghum, sesame, groundnuts, and gum Arabic can be absorbed by 
local, national or international demand.  International demand for Sudan crops would likely 
increase further if US sanctions against Sudan are lifted.  The Agricultural Bank of Sudan 
Strategic Reserve buying operations are scheduled to continue in the medium term, and this 
will serve as a further source of demand, especially for sorghum22.   
There are a number of value-addition activities that could be undertaken at the village level that 
if structured effectively, could have the potential to reach national or international markets.  
These include:  village-level pressing of sesame and groundnut for unrefined oil and seedcake 
livestock feed, proper grading for gum Arabic, shelling for groundnuts, and if US sanctions are 
lifted, obtaining internationally recognized certifications (e.g. Organic, Fair Trade).   Some 
value-added products may be exempt from some or all of the local and state road taxes/fees; 
this would increase the likelihood of establishing market linkages with the formal sector.  
However, local markets for value-added products are limited and mostly already captured by 
existing small-scale operations owned by the local merchants or wealthier farmers. 
22 Strategic Reserve sorghum is released on to the domestic market only when there are shortages that threaten food security.  
In other years, the Strategic Reserve exports sorghum to the Gulf States, South Sudan, Somalia and other markets where 
sanctions are not a limiting factor.   In 2017, the Strategic Reserve reports that they plan to export approximately 1 million 
metric tons of sorghum.  
65 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
Component 1: Enhanced Productivity and Production  
 1.
Expected Outcome. The expected outcome of this component is enhanced smallholder 
productivity and production, through activities addressing smallholder farming of the three main 
cash and staple field crops of the region; sorghum, sesame, and groundnuts; and gum Arabic 
agroforestry activities. The outcome will be achieved by increasing smallholders’ access to an 
improved package of inputs and services, demonstrated to be cost-effective under local 
conditions, and supplied by village or locality based input and service providers. 
Background and Rationale 
 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.
Key Crops for IAMDP 
Sorghum is the most important staple crop of South Kordofan and Sinnar State smallholder 
farmers, and the second most important staple crop of North Kordofan and West Kordofan.  
Nationally, smallholder farmers produce less than a third of the sorghum crop, the balance 
comes from the irrigated sector and from large-scale semi-mechanized farmers in the rainfed 
areas.  Sorghum grain is stored at household level throughout the year for food security and as 
a form of savings, and when required some quantities may be sold to meet household 
expenses.  Sorghum finds a ready market at any time of year through local village and locality 
markets, and the larger wholesale markets in El Obied in North Kordofan (serving South 
Kordofan), Nihud (West Kordofan), Gadarif in Gadarif (serving Sinnar), and in Omdurman  
Globally, Sudan is a top five producer of sorghum with nearly 4 million MTs annually, although 
there are large weather-determined variations in supply.  Because of supply variations, and 
high domestic demand as the main staple food and for livestock (sorghum is the most common 
energy source for cattle and poultry feed), sorghum grain is exported only intermittently and 
only to regional markets.  The 2016/2017 season was unusually favorable and there are 
substantial surpluses for exports.  The Strategic Reserve (managed by the Agricultural Bank of 
Sudan) plans to export approximately one million MTs of sorghum grain to South Sudan and 
Somalia for human consumption, and to the Gulf States for animal feed.  Beyond the region, 
there is a large international market for sorghum that could be tapped by Sudan provided that it 
can be produced cost-effectively.  
Private companies are actively interested in developing and marketing new varieties of 
sorghum, as there is a significant market for certified OPV seed, and increasingly for certified 
hybrid seed23.   There is also substantial interest in importing/producing other inputs and 
equipment for sorghum cultivation, harvesting, and processing.  
Sesame is the most important smallholder cash crop in Sinnar and South Kordofan, and the 
second most important cash crop for smallholders in West and North Kordofan. Sesame, with a 
high protein and oil content, contributes to food security and nutrition within the rural household, 
although it is primarily grown as a cash crop.  White sesame varieties are used domestically for 
confectionary products, but mostly white sesame is exported. The colored varieties of sesame 
are crushed for oil, in the village and in larger factories, but increasingly large quantities are 
also exported to India and other destinations. The sesame seedcake remaining after crushing 
for oil is a valuable livestock feed used by villagers as well as by larger commercial livestock 
operations.  
 6.
There is a ready, year-round market for sesame at village markets, at the auction houses in El 
Obied, Nouhud (West Kordofan) and Gadarif, and in the main wholesale market at Omdurman.  
23 Sorghum is significantly cross-pollinating crop, with substantial deterioration of desired attributes in saved seed from one 
generation to the next, so recycling of seed is not recommended.  
67 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
 7.
 8.
 9.
Prices can be quite volatile, because of its strong international demand, and volatile supply 
(globally, it is mostly grown by smallholders in rainfed areas that are subject to considerable 
weather-induced production fluctuations).   
Sesame is primarily a crop of smallholders, in Sudan, and internationally. Sesame is very labor 
intensive during certain parts of the production cycle, and large-scale operations find it difficult 
to mobilize large amount of farm labor required during peak labor demand.   
Sudan is the world’s largest exporter of sesame24, in terms of value of the crop, and equal to 
India and Ethiopia in terms of volume exported.  The quality of Sudan sesame, particularly from 
the project area, has slipped to an extent in recent years.  The main problems are 
(i) inadvertent mixing of higher value white sesame with lower valued colored varieties resulting 
in lower prices received; and (ii) improper use of pesticides post-harvest to prevent insect 
infestation of drying sesame, resulting in higher residue levels than allowed for some of the 
more lucrative markets (e.g. Japan). The US sanctions on Sudan limit the addressable market 
for Sudan’s sesame.  If US sanctions are lifted, and if Sudan can address the problems of color 
grading and pesticide residues, the potential for increased sesame exports are high. Sesame 
oil exports are low, but are on an upward trend. 
There is private sector interest in developing agrochemicals and equipment for sesame 
production, especially for harvesting and threshing.  Private sector interest in improved seed is 
low, outside of limited sales to the GoS and donors for relief efforts.  This is because sesame is 
a largely self-pollinating crop, with low effective demand for certified seed, and there is little 
private seed company interest in improving and marketing seed varieties for the commercial 
market.   
 10. Groundnuts are the most important cash crop for smallholders in the sandy soils of North and 
West Kordofan, and are also important in parts of South Kordofan and Sinnar.  In Sudan, large 
quantities of the smaller Spanish varieties of groundnuts are grown by smallholders in the 
rainfed areas.  Relatively small quantities of the larger Virginia varieties are grown in the 
irrigated sector.  
 11.
There is a ready, year-round market for smallholder groundnuts at village markets, at the 
auction house in El Obied, and in the main wholesale market at Omdurman.  
 12. Groundnuts, high in protein and oil, are important for food security and nutrition for 
smallholders.  Crop residues have a high livestock feed value.  In fact, sales of groundnut “hay” 
made from the crop residue often makes the difference between profitable and unprofitable 
production of groundnuts by smallholders, especially those using less productive traditional 
agronomic systems.   
 13. Most of Sudan’s groundnuts are crushed for oil, both at the village level and in larger factories, 
with lesser amounts processed as a form of peanut butter (dakwa), or roasted and eaten as a 
snack.  The seedcake after groundnut oil crushing is a highly valuable livestock feed, sought 
after by smallholder livestock owners, large livestock operations, and is also exported.  
 14.
In the 1970s, Sudan was among the top two exporters of whole groundnuts.  Sudan’s exports 
dropped precipitously until recently, and Sudan became a minor player in the global groundnut 
market, exporting on average about 1,000 MTs/year.  A major factor that depressed Sudan’s 
exports has been the inability to comply with increasingly stringent aflatoxin regulations, as well 
as the impact of US sanctions which limits the addressable market.  However, this has changed 
dramatically over the past two years. The 2016/2017 season was reported to be exceptionally 
good in terms of quantity and quality (low aflatoxin levels).  Traders estimate that as much as 
100,000 MTs will be exported in 2017, which would likely place Sudan amongst the top five 
groundnut exports globally and would be the highest levels of exports achieved since the 
1970s.  Market reception has been excellent.  Exporters report that exports of 300,000 MTs just 
24 Myanmar is not captured in the official statistics; unofficial estimates place it as a producer/exporter equal to Sudan. 
68 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
for China will be possible in the 2017/8 season.  If sanctions are lifted, the potential for Sudan 
groundnut exports would be much higher.  Sudan’s exports of groundnut oil and seedcake are 
also trending upwards.  
 15.
There is strong private sector interest in developing agrochemicals and equipment for 
groundnut production by smallholders, especially for planting and harvesting, both of which are 
highly labor-intensive operations.  Groundnut seed, however, is strongly self-pollinating, and 
seeding rates are very high, so the effective demand for certified seed is quite low.  As a 
consequence, there is little private seed company interest in improving and marketing certified 
groundnut seed except small quantities for the GoS and donor relief efforts.   
 16. Gum Arabic. Sudan supplies about 70% of the world’s supply of gum Arabic, and it is the 
second most important agricultural export after sesame.  About 160,000 metric tons of gum 
Arabic are produced, with 120,000 exported according to official statistics (significant quantities 
of gum Arabic are smuggled and are not captured in the official export statistics).  
 17.
 18.
 19.
 20.
Collecting or tapping gum Arabic is a significant source of income for communities in all the 
project area, and is especially important livelihood diversification activity in drought years when 
crop harvests are lean.  Up to a million households in Sudan depend partly on gum Arabic for 
their livelihoods, where it contributes up to 40% of household earnings. 
The most important variety of gum Arabic from Sudan is hashab gum, from Acacia 
senegalensis.  There have been extensive planting programs of A. senegalensis since the 
1950s, but plantations have been neglected or removed during periods of low prices (when 
there was heavy state interference in the market) and converted to crop agriculture.  The talha 
variety of gum Arabic from Acacia seyal is also increasingly important, especially for the Indian 
market, although prices are lower.  There have not been significant tree planting programs for 
A. seyal.  Gum Arabic production has a positive impact on the environment as the acacia trees 
maintain natural forest cover.  They are leguminous and fix nitrogen, thus they improve soil 
fertility.  Because of their long lateral root system, water run-off is reduced, and wind erosion is 
mitigated.  
There is a ready, year-round market for both hashab and talha from village traders and at the 
auction markets in El Obied, Nihud (West Kordofan), Gadarif, and in Omdurman.  However, 
major production areas of Sinnar state are not well served, with the closure of the Wad al Nil 
market in the 1990s.  
Sudan had developed a complete protocol of hashab gum Arabic husbandry from seed 
collection, nursery techniques, planting, tending, tapping, collection, grading, processing, and 
marketing but these have not kept up with technology improvements and shifting market 
demands.  Improvements in tapping, collection, and grading for both varieties to better meet 
market requirements will have a large impact on prices received by farmers.  Many gum Arabic 
producer associations (GAPAs) are quite weak (see farmer producer association discussion 
following).  Greater value addition in Sudan (spray-drying) and direct marketing to major 
consumer countries (two French companies dominate gum Arabic value added products and 
re-export very large quantities to other European countries and the US) will have positive 
effects on smallholders. 25 
The key challenge: low productivity 
 21.
A primary barrier to smallholder’s successful participation in these value chains is very low on-
farm productivity.  In Sudan, the primary factor contributing to low productivity is the low uptake 
of agronomic practices that are appropriate for the prevailing agro-climactic conditions.    
25 Even though gum Arabic has been exempted as a product from US sanctions, the general financial sanctions placed on 
Sudan make it difficult for US companies to purchase directly from Sudan.  However, there are reports that a spray-drying plant 
with 5,000 MTs annual production capacity has been commissioned in Khartoum in August 2018.  
69 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
 22.
For the most part, improved agronomic practices are well-known within the local research 
community and in the private sector of Sudan, but have not been adopted and scaled up by the 
rainfed sector, particularly smallholders. In brief, the primary reasons that smallholders have not 
adopted improved agronomic practices include:  (i) lack of knowledge about improvements, 
their benefits and potential risks, and their impact on household incomes; (ii) inadequate access 
to cost-effective inputs and services; (iii) a subsistence-oriented rather than business-oriented 
approach to farming; (iv) inadequate market access leading to low farm gate prices that do not 
sufficiently reward investments in productivity; and (v) inadequate access to finance to apply 
desired improvements to their fields. 
Component 1 - Description of activities 
 23.
Component 1 activities will build the capability of the private sector at the village, state, and 
national levels to ensure sustainable and cost-effective service delivery for smallholders that 
will continue after project support.  Component 1 will support and work through the government 
to improve the enabling environment for private sector service delivery by providing training, 
facilitative, and troubleshooting support services for the service providers. The project will 
encourage government to restrict free or subsidized service delivery for demonstrations or for 
targeting poor subsistence farmers, and to use private sector service providers for this to 
ensure that the public sector is not crowding out the private sector.  Six main activities will be 
supported through Component 1: 
Activity 1.1:  Private Service Provider and Agrodealer Capacity Building  
Activity 1.2:  On-Farm and Innovation Demonstrations  
Activity 1.3:  Engagement with National Private Sector Companies 
Activity 1.4:  Gum Arabic Support 
Activity 1.5:  Climate Change Resilience Building 
Activity 1.6:  Home Garden (jubraka) Cultivation Support 
Activity 1.1:  Private sector service provider and agrodealer capacity building  
 24.
 25.
 26.
Village and locality mechanized service providers and spray service providers, village 
mechanics/blacksmiths, and agrodealers will be supported so that they will become (i) suppliers 
of high quality, cost-effective inputs and services on a commercial and sustainable basis; and 
(ii) trusted advisors to SHFs in their fields of expertise, complementing and supporting the 
public sector extension services.  
Sub-activity 1.1.1:   Agrodealer capacity building 
Agrodealer assessment.  Agrodealers in the project localities will be assessed for their 
technical understanding of the use of inputs, store infrastructure, types of inputs stocked and 
supplied, relationships with national input supply companies, government, or other 
certifications, etc.   The assessments already done for SDP and SUSTAIN will be updated and 
expanded. 
Agrodealer training.  Based on the agrodealer assessment, training and support activities will 
be developed that are tailored to the agro economic conditions and needs of each locality. 
Agrodealers will receive training on (i) technical training based on IPM principles in the safe 
and effective use, storage, and handling of seeds, seed dressing, herbicides, pesticides, 
fertilizers, and other agricultural inputs 26; and (ii) business training covering topics such as: 
financial management, marketing, merchandising, promotions, demonstration, advising 
customers, record keeping, management information systems, and supplier relationships.  
26 All pesticides (including herbicides) must be approved by the Pesticides Council of Sudan, an inter-ministerial body with 
private sector participation.  IAMDP will only promote herbicides and other agrochemicals that have been approved by the 
Pesticides Council, and only for the uses for which the chemicals have been approved.  
70 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
 27.
 28.
Structured agrodealer visits to Khartoum to meet and interact with national seed and 
agrochemical private sector companies with the goal of developing stronger, mutually beneficial 
linkages. From this agrodealers should be able to negotiate better terms of trade, promotional/ 
demonstration support, technical training, and in-shop informational materials that will enable 
them to serve smallholders more effectively and profitably.   
Agrodealer association formation, possibly in partnership and under the umbrella of the 
Sudan Agrochemical Association (SAGA, see Implementation Arrangements below for details 
of this collaboration).  Amongst other activities, the Agrodealer Association could develop a 
Code of Conduct that will cover the key aspects of safe storage and marketing of seeds and 
chemicals.  The Association will represent the interests of the agrodealers in their dealings with 
government and suppliers.  Many smaller agrodealers may not qualify for full inclusion in an 
Agrodealer Association because of not meeting current regulatory requirements (e.g. University 
degree), and in consultations with SAGA, some means of including and upgrading these 
agrodealers in an Agrodealer Association will be incorporated (perhaps as Associate 
members). 
Sub-activity 1.1.2:  Mechanized service provider capacity building 
 29. MSP assessment. Tractor owners in the project localities will be identified and assessed, 
covering key issues such as owner/operator qualifications, years in business, make and types 
of equipment used, service provided and demand, existing relationships with equipment 
suppliers, where equipment is serviced.  Based on this assessment, training will be developed, 
targeted as required to the locality.    
 30. MSP training. Tractor owners or operators will be selected as candidates for MSP training by 
the local communities.  MSPs previously trained by SUSTAIN and SDP may also be covered, 
as their technical and business training was incomplete in many ways. The two most promising 
MSP trainees in each village will be contracted by the project to provide services for the 
Innovation and On-Farm Demonstration activities during the full intervention phase in year two 
(see Activity 2 below).  Mechanized service provider candidates in the selected villages will 
receive: (i) technical training covering topics such as: tractor maintenance and 
troubleshooting, and calibration, maintenance, and proper use of implements, and (ii) business 
training covering topics such as negotiation with suppliers, pricing and market services, using 
village agents, and financial management. 
 31. MSP exposure tours and introductions to the national equipment suppliers for the 
development of stronger linkages including better terms of trade, promotional/ demonstration 
support, technical training, and informational materials. 
 32.
 33.
Sub-activity 1.1.3:  Spray services provider capacity building  
SSP assessment. An initial assessment of spray service providers (SSPs, referred to as IPMs 
by SUSTAIN and WSRMP) will be undertaken in localities and villages where IAMDP will be 
active.  Surveys already undertaken by SDP will be updated.  This may be done in collaboration 
with one or more chemical and equipment suppliers who have expressed interest in 
collaboration.   
SSP training. Each project village will select two to four village youth as candidates for SSP 
training, based on their aptitude, prior experience, and motivation. The agro-climatic and market 
conditions in the locality, will shape the emphasis of the training.  For example, in more 
productive areas with larger farm sizes, SSPs may be trained on the use of motorized 
mist-blowers or tractor-mounted sprayers.  The two most promising SSP trainees will be 
selected to provide services for the innovation and on-farm demonstration programmes (see 
Activity 1.2 below). The SSP training will cover: (i) technical training and certification on the safe 
and effective usage of crop protection chemicals, including: pest scouting techniques, selection 
of the proper chemical and dosage for the job, mixing chemicals and calibrating sprayers, 
optimal spraying conditions, and pre-harvest intervals; and (ii) business skills training, pricing 
71 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
and market services, record-keeping, linking with agrodealers, access to finance.  Active 
existing SSPs in old villages will be eligible for refresher and advanced training as required. 
 34.
Sub-activity 1.1.4:  Village blacksmith and mechanic capacity building   
Village mechanic and blacksmith assessment.  An initial assessment and geo-referencing of 
village blacksmiths in the localities where IAMDP will be active.  This may be done in 
conjunction with one or more equipment suppliers who have expressed interest in collaboration 
and greater linkages with mechanics and blacksmiths.  The assessment will cover capabilities 
in servicing and maintaining tractors, sprayers, and implements as well as fabrication of 
rudimentary spare parts and simple hand tools (e.g. the sonki used for gum Arabic tapping, the 
harvester for gum Arabic harvesting). The assessment will cover years in business, type and 
condition of machinery, financial strength, and motivation in participation in the project.   
 35.
Village mechanic and blacksmith training.  One or more mechanics and blacksmiths in each 
village will be selected, based on the assessment and with community input, for technical and 
business training and linkage with equipment suppliers.  
Activity 1.2:  Innovation and On-Farm demonstrations  
Sub-activity 1.2.1:  Innovation demonstrations 
 36.
 37.
 38.
 39.
Innovation demonstrations will be held in at least one location in each project locality, to 
demonstrate new or improved seed varieties, agro-chemicals, equipment, and methods of 
application 27.  The Innovation Demonstrations will showcase crop varieties, crop protection 
chemicals, fertilization, and equipment that are not in common use in the locality, but which are 
deemed by project specialists, private companies, and ARC to have high potential.  The most 
successful technologies from the Innovation Demonstrations – that is, those technologies 
judged as most appropriate by farmers – will be incorporated in the on-farm demonstrations in 
the following season.  The use of gum Arabic for shelter belts will be encouraged, especially in 
areas where mechanization will require the removal of trees from fields. 
The Innovation Demonstrations will be financed and managed in partnership with the 
participating private companies.  The participating private companies will commit to ensure that 
technologies demonstrated that are accepted by a significant number of farmers will be 
available for sale by local agrodealers or provided by local service providers by the following 
season.   Private companies that do not make a good faith effort to honor this commitment will 
be dropped from participation in future innovation demonstrations, as it is not worthwhile to 
demonstrate products that won’t be readily available to smallholders.  
The LETs will use the Innovation Demonstrations as a primary case study for teaching of 
agronomic and FAAB training of farmers in the locality.  The business case for each innovation 
will be explained, and then evaluated against actual results experienced during the production 
and marketing season.  
Project support for the Innovation Demonstrations will be maintained for three years with an 
increasing level of management and financial responsibility from the private companies (and 
possibly, with in-kind contributions from local service providers).  The guideline for 
project/private cost sharing split is:  PY1 75%/25%, PY2 50%/50%, PY3 25%/75%.  However, 
the actual level of cost sharing will be subject to negotiation, as it will vary depending on 
location of the demonstration, type of technology demonstrated, etc. 
Sub-activity 1.2.2:  On-farm demonstrations 
 40. On-farm demonstrations, at the village level, will demonstrate, on farmer-managed fields, 
proven technologies that are appropriate for the locality.  In the experience of SDP and 
27 In all cases, the technologies demonstrated in the on-farm or innovation demonstrations, will have received approval when 
required, from the appropriate authority, e.g. the Federal Seed Agency for seeds of new crop varieties, and the National 
Pesticides Council for agrochemicals.    
72 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
SUSTAIN, demonstrations that are managed by the farmers on their own fields are most likely 
to lead to adoption.  Early-adopter farmers willing to cost-share with the project and host 
training and field days will be selected for the on-farm demonstrations.  These early adopter 
farmers will manage their fields, use project-trained input and service providers, and share the 
costs with the project.  The On-Farm Demonstration farmers will have full access to the crops 
produced. The on-farm demonstration farmers will be required to plant an appropriate part of 
their land to shelter belts using gum Arabic species where and when appropriate, or other 
beneficial species such as Moringa oleifara.   
 41.
In addition to demonstrations of technologies, the on-farm demonstrations will be used for the 
farming as a business training (part of Component 3) for all project participants in the village, 
with project-guided analysis on budgeting, record keeping, and assessing costs, risks, and 
returns (through the farming as a business activities of Component 3).  Special field days will 
also be organized for nearby villages in the locality at key points in the farming cycle (land 
preparation, planting, weeding, and harvesting).  The information will be collected and analyzed 
by IAMDP and government officials to ensure objectivity and it will be available publicly (e.g. an 
IAMDP website).   
Activity 1.3:  Engagement with national private sector companies  
 42.
 43.
 44.
Project support will accelerate, deepen, and expand private sector engagement with 
smallholder farmers, both directly and indirectly.  Specifically, private sector companies will be 
encouraged to: (i) provide training, technical and financial support to agrodealers, MSPs, SSPs, 
and mechanics/blacksmiths serving SHFs or other service providers, as part of their ongoing 
business relationships; and (ii) develop and market new inputs and services appropriate for 
SHFs 
Sub-activity 1.3.1:  Information sharing  
As noted earlier in the lessons learned section, private companies are willing to invest in 
developing new products and supplying smallholder farmers on a commercial basis, provided 
they are convinced that there is real business potential.  TA national workshop summarizing the 
lessons learned from the private sector partnerships of SDP, SUSTAIN, and other donor 
projects in Sudan and elsewhere will be organized and held in Khartoum. 
To accelerate this learning process, the project will develop and share the information to the 
private sector in the form of concise reports, which will be updated regularly.  Most of the 
information in the reports will be collected in the course of project implementation, but will need 
to be packaged in a manner appropriate for private sector decision making: 
(a) SSP assessment covering experience, training, certification, equipment, volume of 
business, etc.  This report will be prepared after a critical mass of SSPs have been trained 
and are providing services on the ground. 
(b) Agro-dealer assessment covering technical understanding of the use of inputs, store 
infrastructure, types of inputs stocked and supplied, relationships with national input supply 
companies, government, or other certifications, etc.   
(c) MSP assessment owner/operator qualifications, years in business, make and types of 
equipment used, service provided and demand, existing relationships with equipment 
suppliers, where equipment is serviced and updated.   
(d) Village blacksmith and mechanic assessment will identify and assess the skills, 
experience, shop condition, tools, spares etc. of village blacksmiths and mechanics, 
focusing on their ability to provide primary service and simple spares for sprayers, tractors, 
and implements.   
(e) Smallholder farmer productive base assessment at the state and locality level which 
describes the productive capacity of the smallholder and other rainfed sector – 
crops/varieties grown, acreage, soil types, rainfall, roads, and other infrastructure. 
73 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
 45.
Sub-activity 1.3.2:  Technical assistance and training.   Private sector companies will be 
provided technical assistance on an individual as requested based or collectively trained on 
modern methods of developing, producing, packaging, marketing and distribution of goods and 
services designed for the small-scale farmer. Examples include: 
(a) Using inventory, distributor, or customer management software systems.   
(b) Packaging, marketing, and promotions/cross-promotions for smallholders. 
(c) How to sell to or buy from farmer associations.  
 46.
There will be a target 50%/50% cost-sharing for training or technical assistance provided to 
individual companies. Training programs will be developed by the project on as-needed basis, 
requests for technical assistance from private companies will be evaluated by the project.  
 47.
 48.
 49.
 50.
Sub-activity 1.3.2:  The Innovation Scale-up Challenge Grant Facility (ISCGF) 
Sub-Activity 1.3.2 will support individual private sector companies, or partnerships of 
companies and smallholder producers in scale-up initiatives that will have a deep and 
sustainable positive impact on smallholders, or for the village-based service providers that 
directly support smallholders. 
The Innovation Scaling up Challenge Grant Facility (ISCGF) will be the main vehicle for 
project support. The ISCGF will support all three components of the project, but is described in 
detail here. The ISCGF concept evolved from the experiences that the SDP and SUSTAIN 
project had working with the private sector.  The project managers and IFAD support teams 
observed that the degree and speed of private investment and participation in smallholder 
agriculture could be greatly accelerated with seed funding to buy down risk that would unlock 
much greater investments by the private sector.  The design of the ISCGF was developed in a 
way to leverage private sector interest and resources, after a careful review of the experience 
of challenge grant funds.28    
The ISCGF will provide resources for proposals that improve SHF access to inputs and 
services, or strengthen linkages to markets. The private sector will provide at least 25%, but 
proposals that have higher level of private sector matching would have priority.  
ICGMF-funded activities will be selected through an open, publicized, and competitive process.  
A few examples of possible projects that could be funded are outlined below.  These examples 
have been discussed at a conceptual level with private sector companies during the course of 
SUSTAIN and SDP project implementation, as well as during the design missions for IAMDP.  
The examples below only cover Component 1.  Component 2 detailed project description will 
also include examples of possible projects for market access and value addition.  
(a) Accelerated development and release of new seed varieties appropriate for the 
smallholder rainfed sector.  This would include cost-sharing support for training in new 
breeding techniques, access to germplasm outside of Sudan, specialized equipment for 
research and multiplication.  There is particular interest in the development of open 
pollinated and hybrid sorghum varieties that have drought-tolerant, striga-tolerant, or high-
yielding traits.  
(b) Mobile tractor and equipment servicing facilities capable of providing complete 
servicing and repairs at the locality level. These mobile servicing facilities would 
increase the efficiency and profitability of MSP provided services, resulting in better service 
to smallholder farmers, and would be a profit center or marketing activity for equipment 
suppliers.   Currently, only the large scale semi-mechanized sector has ready access. 
28 For a review of challenge funds and recommended best practices, see the following:  1) Pompa, Claudia “Understanding 
Challenge Funds”, ODI, October 2013 ( found at http://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-
files/9086.pdf) and 2) Moeller, O. and Akerbak, J. “Swedish experiences of challenge funds: Case of Innovations Against 
Poverty”, GREAT Insights, Vol. 3, Issue 6, June 2014.  
74 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
(c) Training of village mechanics and blacksmiths to provide simple repairs and stock 
certain types of spares for tractor, implements, and sprayers and linkage to regional (or 
mobile) centers for repairs that cannot be handled at village level.  This would increase the 
efficiency and profitability of MSPs, and create additional business opportunities and jobs 
for village mechanics and blacksmiths.  
(d) Establishment of a seed processing plant based in South Kordofan (where none 
presently exists), with equipment capable of producing smaller package sizes appropriate 
for smallholder farmers. This would result in lower seed prices for South Kordofan farmers, 
and create new opportunities for smallholders that have specialized in seed production 
(e.g. the seed grower groups established by SDP).    
Activity 1.4:  Gum Arabic support 
 51.
 52.
 53.
 54.
The IAMDP gum Arabic activity will build on the accomplishments and draw from the lessons 
learned from the completed IFAD/World Bank GAPMP and the ongoing AFD-financed 
RSGPMP summarized earlier.  The key findings of GAPMP and RSGPMP are: (i) higher farm-
gate prices can be received by producers through measures to improve quality and better 
market access; (ii)  pre-financing of tapping operations allow greater productivity and production 
and higher revenues; and (iii) when producer incomes are high there is a strong incentive to 
protect and expand planting of gum Arabic trees, with a positive impact on the environment and 
climate change.  RSGPMP will likely close before the start of IAMDP, however the project will 
monitor closely and collaborate where possible with a proposed gum Arabic support project 
under development by FAO for seven states in the gum belt (the Darfur and Kordofan states, 
and Sinnar state) that will be submitted for GCF funding late in 2017 or in 2018, and possibly 
effective in 2019.  The Component 1 Activities for gum Arabic will focus on production, 
productivity, and quality in the project localities where gum Arabic production is or could be an 
important contributor to household incomes.  
Sub-activity 1.4.1:  Improved potential of the gum Arabic resource base. Support will be 
given to FNC, the Institute for Gum Arabic and Desertification Research Studies (IGADRS), and 
the private sector to identify and multiply improved landraces of gum Arabic (both the Acacia 
senegalensis producing the premium hashab gum, and Acacia seyal, producing the less 
expensive talha gum will be covered).  Improved landraces may have more or higher quality 
gum production, may be more climate resilient, may mature more quickly, etc.  In all cases 
consultations will be made with private sector exporters and if possible importers as to quality 
requirements.  The seeds and seedlings of improved landraces will be made available to state 
level nurseries of FNC, as well as to community and individual nurseries.  Other research with 
practical impacts on gum Arabic productivity (e.g. agronomic techniques) will be sponsored 
based on requests from FNC, IGARDS, or the private sector.  
Sub-activity 1.4.2:  Technical and financial support for community and farmer based 
nurseries will be provided.  Community-based nurseries may be managed by Gum Arabic 
Production Associations (GAPAs) or an independent income generating opportunities for 
women or youth supplying seedlings for producers as local circumstances dictate.  This will 
also include financial support to rehabilitating the gum nurseries at FNC state level, ensuring 
that they are providing the best genetic material available.  
Sub-activity 1.4.3:  Gum Arabic Innovation Demonstrations.  At least one Gum Arabic 
Innovation Demonstration for gum Arabic similar to the field crops will be held in each project 
locality, either on private or FNC lands at easy to reach localities.  Gum Arabic Production 
Associations will be trained in improved agronomy, tapping (e.g. use of the sonki developed by 
ARC), harvesting (e.g. use of the new harvester developed by IGADRS), grading, and storage 
techniques to maximize the productivity and quality of gum Arabic production., grading, and 
storage.  The gum Arabic Innovation Demonstrations may be financed and managed in 
partnership with private sector partners who will be supporting activities to increase the quantity 
and quality of gum Arabic produced (and whom will guarantee purchase of higher quality gum 
75 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
at a premium to auction levels, in activities described in Component 2).  Separate courses may 
be developed for independent tappers or sharecroppers as appropriate for the production 
systems in the localities (these are independent gum Arabic service providers paid either a 
daily wage or provided a share in the harvest). 29      
 55.
Sub-Activity 1.4.4:  Enhanced productivity and improved quality of gum Arabic. Gum 
Arabic Production Associations will be trained in modern tapping and primary grading 
techniques to maximize the productivity and quality of gum Arabic production.  The training will 
be done in partnership with private sector gum Arabic processors and exporters, several of 
whom have expressed an interest in supporting activities to increase the quantity and quality of 
gum Arabic produced in Sudan (see Component 2).  
Activity 1.5:  Climate change resilience building  
 56.
 57.
 58.
The project climate risk profile was successfully raised from medium to high after consulting 
with the national environmental authority in Sudan and after field proofing the H 
status.  Consequently, it is necessary to take proactive steps to face the threats of CC in the 
project’s areas, namely fragility and vulnerabilities. The objective of this activity is to enhance 
resilience of the target group and their eco systems to CC.  It will also clarify the following: 
(i) who is at risk of what (analyzing vulnerabilities); (ii) who is responsible and for what 
(institutional assessment); and define priorities (coherent and coordinated adaptation action).  
In addition to project support on the promotion of agricultural “good practices”  through 
involvement of the Locality Extension Teams at village level, the project would provide support 
in building capacity of policy and decision-makers and implementers from relevant government 
institutions (e.g. Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Environment, ARC, etc.) through tailored 
training on: (i) current vulnerability in agriculture; (ii) recommended revisions to current policies 
and institutions to integrate adaptation to climate change; and (iii) the standardized approach to 
safeguards and climate risk management.  
In addition, the project would provide support to analyze and synthetize existing strategies, 
policies, programs, reports etc. in climate change adaptation and actualize them by bridging the 
gaps in developing vulnerability assessment (VA) reports for the four States (North Kordofan, 
South Kordofan, West Kordofan and Sinnar). The VA reports would provide information from 
which the climate risk assessment could draw, and so it would be optimal to conduct these prior 
to the climate risk assessment. These VAs would be carried out in as participatory a fashion as 
is possible, and would also serve as capacity development and sensitisation exercises for 
project and other stakeholders on climate resilience, including the socially disaggregated nature 
of climate vulnerability.  Although IAMDP with its CC-related activities will address the adaptive 
capacity of the productive environment/ecosystem and their resistance to CC,  these activities 
would not be sufficient in finding spatial and sustainable solutions to the nexus water -soil – 
biomass in a broader sense. They would act as a demonstration and pilot initiative. On a larger 
scale the GCF project will be needed in parallel /supplement to the IAMDP in rainfed agriculture 
areas and beyond. 
Activity 1.6:  Support to home garden (jubraka) cultivation 
 59.
The project would support jubraka demonstrations in the new villages and scaling up in the old 
and new villages for improving women home gardens. This would be the entry point for 
household nutrition. Other entry points would include: capacity building on good agricultural 
practices; gender and climate mainstreaming, post-harvest handling techniques; time and 
energy saving stoves, and production and productivity of nutrient rich food crops. In order to 
further contribute to enhancing nutrition at the household level, the project would be promoting 
jubraka cultivation through chiselling, improved vegetable seeds, plastic sheet for lining of small 
irrigation pits and technical and nutrition-sensitisation training.  This home based production 
29 The costs of introducing new gum Arabic technologies are minimal; e.g., 30 SDG for a sonki tapping tool.  Therefore, there 
does not appear to be a need for activities parallel to the On-Farm Demonstrations for the field crops.   
76 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
increase would help the households in securing all the home food needs of dried okra and 
tomatoes, and sizeable contribution to neighbours and selling the surplus as well as the cash 
crops like groundnut in the local markets. The average jubraka size is 0.5 feddans. A total of 
150 women in the new villages and 10,000 women in the old and new villages would benefit 
from this activity through demonstrations and scaling up, respectively.  
 60.
Jubraka scaling up in the old villages would take place largely through women training and 
access to rural finance. The purpose of these loans will be to enhance production and income 
from homestead farming. Women interested in these loans can access financing for activities 
that enhance homestead production such as land preparation using the improved mechanised 
services promoted by the project, fencing equipment, digital excavation and lining. The project 
will specially promote the access to these loans for the excavation of ditches that can lead to 
supplementary irrigation for early maturing vegetables resulting in additional income and timey 
repayment.  
Implementation arrangement for component 1 
Activity 1.1:  Private sector service provider and agrodealer capacity building  
 61.
 62.
 63.
 64.
Sub-activity 1.1.1:  Agrodealer capacity building 
Agrodealer assessment survey instruments will be designed by the PCU Experts.  They will 
build on and improve the earlier SDP and SUSTAIN agrodealer survey instruments, and 
obtaining input from private sector agrochemical and input suppliers, SAGA.  The agrodealer 
assessments will be undertaken at locality level by the LET Crop Production Officers, who will 
receive any necessary training from the PCU, with spot checking and troubleshooting support 
from the SPIU Specialists.   
Agrodealer training.  Based on the findings of the assessment, the Agrodealer TOT and 
training materials will be developed by the PCU Crop Protection and Farming as a Business 
National Consultant. The actual agrodealer training will be delivered by a combination of PCU 
and SPIU specialists.  However, training on the safe and effective use and storage of 
agrochemicals will be designed and undertaken by SAGA (see below). 
Structured agrodealer visits to Khartoum will be organized by the PCU Crop Protection 
Officer and crop protection national consultant, after consultations with private sector partners, 
and after the national private sector partnership workshop (see sub-activity 1.3.1).     
Agrodealer association formation will be led by the private sector/marketing officer with the 
support of the other experts and international/national consultants, and will take place after the 
first two years of project implementation. This will be done in close consultation with SAGA and 
with the more active and engaged agrodealers supported by the project.  
Sub-activity 1.1.2:  Mechanized service provider (MSP) capacity building  
 65. MSP Assessment survey instruments will be designed by the national mechanisation 
consultant.  The assessment survey instrument will build on and improve the earlier SDP and 
SUSTAIN mechanised service provider survey instruments, and will obtain input from private 
sector equipment suppliers.  The assessments will be undertaken be at locality level by the LET 
locality mechanisation officers, supervised and guided by the SPIU mechanisation officers.  The 
locality mechanisation officer (LMO) will receive training from the PCU and SPIU, with spot 
checking and troubleshooting support from the SPIU mechanisation officer. 
 66.
The Mechanisation Service Provider (MSP) technical ToT and training program and materials 
will be undertaken by the PCU national Mechanization consultant, who will consult closely with 
the Federal and State level mechanisation departments as well as private sector equipment 
suppliers.  The business ToT training components will be developed by the FAAB national 
consultant.  In each village, the MSPs will be selected for training by the LET LMO, with input 
from the community.  All selected MSPs must own or have access to a suitable tractor (e.g. 
77 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
 67.
 68.
 69.
minimum horsepower, functioning hydraulics, etc.).  Training will be done by the SPIU 
mechanisation officer and LET locality crop protection officer (LCO).   
Sub-activity 1.1.3:  Spray services provider (SSP) capacity building.  The SSP technical 
training and certification program will be designed and implemented by SAGA 30, with whom the 
project will negotiate a grant for this purpose to cover the costs of developing and testing ToT, 
training, and certification materials.  SAGA who will work closely with the federal Pesticides 
Council and state level crop protection departments to ensure their buy-in and support for both 
the training and certification programs.  The SAGA ToT will be delivered to trainers drawn from 
individual private sector companies (members of SAGA) as well as the SPIU and LET crop 
protection officers, assisted by the state crop protection specialists.  These trainers will provide 
the training to SSPs and agrodealers, as well as any interested farmers.   SAGA will handle all 
aspects of implementing the SSP certification program.  
Sub-activity 1.1.4:  Village blacksmith and mechanic capacity building   
Village mechanic and blacksmith assessment.  The village blacksmith/mechanic 
assessment survey instrument will be designed by the national mechanisation consultant.  The 
consultant will obtain input from private sector equipment suppliers.  The assessments will be 
undertaken be at locality level by the LET mechanisation officers, supervised and guided by the 
SPIU mechanisation officer.  The local officers who will receive training from the PCU and 
SPIU.   
Village mechanic and blacksmith training. Technical ToT and training program and materials 
will be undertaken by the PCU national Mechanization consultant, who will consult closely with 
the Federal and State level mechanisation departments as well as private sector equipment 
suppliers.  The business ToT training components will be developed by the FAAB national 
consultant.  In each village, the village mechanics/blacksmiths will be selected for training by 
the LET officers, with input from the community.  All selected blacksmiths/mechanics must have 
a minimum level of experience and capability, which will be determined during project 
implementation.  Training will be done by the SPIU Officer and LET mechanisation officers.   
Activity 1.2:  On-farm and innovation demonstrations 
 70.
 71.
 72.
The PCU Crop Protection Officer will have the lead responsibility for managing the design, 
organization, and implementation of the Innovation and on-farm demonstration activities, 
working through the SPIU specialists and LET officers.  
Sub-activity 1.2.1:  Innovation demonstrations 
The PCU Private Sector Officer will initiate and develop partnerships with the private sector 
companies to develop one or more innovation demonstration plots in each project locality.  The 
innovation demonstration sites will be jointly selected by the project and the private companies, 
and will be located in areas that are easily accessible to other farmers in the locality.  The 
project and private companies will jointly bear costs, in a manner specified in negotiated MOUs, 
following current SDP practice.  
The PCU private sector officer will be responsible for overall design of the innovation 
demonstrations, and negotiation of MOUs with the private companies ensuring the greatest 
level of commitment in terms of inputs, technology assistance, and cost sharing.  The officer will 
consult closely with ARC to obtain their latest guidance.  The SPIU specialist will supervise and 
support the selection of the innovation demonstration sites at locality levels, with support from 
the LETs.  The SPIU will negotiate with project trained agrodealers, MSPs and SSPs will to 
provide the inputs and mechanization and crop protection services.  The innovation 
demonstration plots will be managed on a day-to-day basis by volunteer lead farmers in the 
30 SAGA is a member of the industry association CropLife, which has a world-wide SSP program supporting safe and effective 
use of agrochemicals through the training and certification.  SAGA provided the ToT trainer for the SDP SSP activity in 2016 
and 2017 seasons.      
78 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
village nearest the demonstration, who will be allowed to keep the produce from the fields in 
exchange for their time. The project will bear the costs of the innovation demonstration on a 
declining basis for three years, following the cost sharing guidelines, and based on MOUs 
which will be individually negotiated with each company. 
 73.
 74.
 75.
Sub-Activity 1.2.2:  On-farm field crop demonstrations in project villages 
The on-farm crop demonstrations are done in villages that have an opportunity to follow the 
Innovation Demonstrations or on-farm demonstrations the previous year.  The LET specialists 
will review with the villagers the possible agronomic package options for the on-farm 
demonstrations in the following year.  A target 20 early adopter farmers willing to cost-share will 
be selected for the on-farm demonstrations.   
These early-adopter farmers in each project village will provide 3 feddans of land each for the 
on-farm demonstrations.  The project will finance the improved package for 2 feddans; and the 
farmer will be required to cost-share and pay the costs of an additional 1 feddan (through self-
financing or through a PFI).    
Inputs and service services for the on-farm demonstrations will be organized by the LETs, who 
will arrange contracts with agrodealers for inputs, and SSPs and MSPs for services.  The 
agrodealers, SSPs, and MSPs will be selected by a streamlined competitive process to be 
developed by the PCU, and will be open to those service providers and agrodealers who have 
successfully completed the technical and business trainings described (and in the case of 
SSPs, have been certified by SGA).  The LET officers will supervise the on-farm 
demonstrations, and will escalate any problems to the SPIU specialists and the PCU experts as 
required.  
 76. Other farmers in village, or nearby villages, will be allowed to make their own contracts directly 
with agrodealers, SSPs and MSPs, independent of the on-farm demonstrations.  These farmers 
will not be subsidized by the project, and the LETs will only provide limited supervision, as they 
must focus on the on-farm demonstrations.  These farmers will be encouraged to the extent 
practical to adopt the same package of inputs and services provided to the on-farm 
demonstrations. 
 77.
The LETs will organize field days for the surrounding villages at critical points in the production 
cycle (e.g. land preparation, planting, weeding, harvesting).  The on-farm demonstration 
farmers will be required to keep complete and accurate records of the amount and costs of 
inputs used, as well as yields.  The LETs will use these records for M&E purposes and also for 
farming as a business training sessions (see Component 3).    
Activity 1.3:  Engagement with national private sector companies 
 78.
Sub-activity 1.3.1:  Information sharing.  The PCU Private Sector Officer with support from 
an international consultant, will design and organize the private sector partnership workshop in 
the first year of the project.  The PCU Private Sector Officer with the other Experts and national 
consultants will develop and distribute of assessments and special studies for sharing sub-
activity.  These reports will be concise and oriented towards busy private sector decision 
makers. The exact topics will be determined as an outcome of the national workshop, and may 
include subjects such as: 
(a) Project strategy, activities, and accomplishments. 
(b) Smallholder location, landholdings, production, productivity. 
(c) Lesson learned working through service providers to market to smallholders. 
 79.
Sub-activity 1.3.2:  Technical assistance and training.  The PCU Private Sector Officer will 
identify and develop training programs for private sector companies on modern methods of 
marketing and distribution of goods and services designed for the small-scale farmer. The 
Private Sector may draw upon the support of the other PCU Experts, and national and 
79 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
international consultants.  The topics will be selected as a result of the national conference, and 
as matters arise through project implementation. Technical assistance will be developed at the 
request of individual companies or trade associations.  There will be a target 50%/50% cost-
sharing for technical assistance provided to the private sector. 
 80.
Sub-activity 1.3.3:  The Innovation Scale-up Challenge Grant Facility (ISCGF). The details of 
the ISCGF will be contained in an ISCGF operations manual will be an integral part of the 
project implementation manual.  The following is a brief summary of the main points to be 
included in the ISCGF manual that will be reviewed by IFAD: 
(a) The PCU private sector officer will manage the day to day activities of the ISMGF.  
(b) The PCU will take steps to publicize the ISMGF to encourage relevant proposals from the 
widest possible base of potential promoters.   
(c) Membership of the ISMGF selection committee will include the Federal Ministry of 
Agriculture and Ministry of Finance, participating State Ministries of Agriculture, and 
representatives of producers, private sector companies and civil society (NGOs and 
farmers producers associations).  
(d) The ISMGF Selection Committee will review proposals against the following criteria:  
 •
 •
 •
 •
 •
 •
productivity and production impacts - the degree to which smallholder productivity 
and production will increase);  
innovativeness – the degree in which the activity to Sudan, to the state, to smallholder 
farmers);  
degree of matching contribution by the private sector and farmers - the higher the 
better;  
additionality - the degree to which the grant accelerates, deepens, and broadens what 
the private sector planned to do without the grant;  
scalability - the degree to which positive impacts to continue to grow as a result of 
successful implementation; and  
systemic impacts - the degree to which the grant will have a positive impact on 
systems and the environment, beyond the company and direct smallholder 
beneficiaries.  Examples are positive environmental impacts or reforms in GOS crop 
marketing policy. 
 81.
If the ISCGF funding is disbursing rapidly with good results, and there is continued demand 
through high quality proposals of scaling up activities, the IAMDP project management and 
IFAD may pursue co-financing arrangements with from other donors or financial institutions. 
Activity 1.4:  Gum Arabic production, productivity and quality support 
 82.
 83.
Sub-activity 1.4.1:  Improved potential of the gum Arabic resource base.  The PCU 
agroforestry national consultant will develop the program of support to IGADRS or FNC to 
improve the genetic potential of the gum acacia landraces, consulting closely with private sector 
gum buyers, processors, exports, and farmers.  Distribution of the improved genetic material 
will be coordinated at the state level by the SPIU national agroforestry consultants and at the 
locality level by the LET agroforestry officer.   
Sub-activity 1.4.2:  Establishment of community and individual nurseries.  Under the 
guidance of the PCU and SPIU agroforestry national consultants, the LET Agroforestry Officer 
will work with GAPAs and individual producers who plan to upgrade/replace their trees with 
improved landraces.  The LET private sector coordination officer will explore the business 
potential for woman or youth run nurseries.  The PCU and SPIU national consultants will review 
requests from the state-level FNCs as to rehabilitation of their nurseries, with a view to ensuring 
80 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
that a high quality of seedling and seed production, adequate distribution mechanisms, and 
possibilities of public/private partnerships.  
 84.
Sub-activity 1.4.3:  Gum Arabic Innovation Demonstrations/GAPA trainings.  The Gum 
Arabic Innovation Demonstration sites will be selected by the PCU and SPIU agroforestry 
national consultants, in consultation with stakeholders including active GAPAs.  TOT and 
training materials in improved gum Arabic agronomy, tapping, grading, storing developed by the 
World Bank/IFAD and AFD projects, FNC, and other sources will be updated as required by the 
national consultants in consultation with IGADRS and the private sector.  The private officers at 
the PCU and at the SPIUs will negotiate MOUs with private sector gum Arabic buyers to assist 
with the development of training materials, TOT of LET officers, etc.  Training of GAPAs will be 
done by the LETs and FNC extension agents with support as required by private sector 
partners.  The need for separate training courses for gum Arabic sharecroppers/tappers (i.e. 
those without their own trees) will be assessed by PCU community development national 
consultant in consultation with other technical team members.  
Activity 1.5:  Climate change resilience building  
 85.
The project will hire a consultant on a retained basis for the implementation of CC resilience 
and capacity building activities. The trainings and demonstrations of climate change adaptation 
initiatives targeted at vulnerable groups, that are largely included in component one for 
conservation agriculture, will be conducted by experts specialized in adaptation in full 
coordination with LET officers. They would also be involved in coaching staff from Ministry of 
Environment, Ministry of Agriculture and the Agriculture Research Center (ARC) on using 
climate monitoring equipment and calibration, use of multiple sources of climate data for 
developing of climate change scenarios, impact scenarios and modelling.   
Activity 1.6:  Support to home garden (jubraka) cultivation  
 86.
The extension agents at the LETs would be responsible for demonstration of jubraka at rural 
women households. Scaling up will take place in all project area with LET agents and credit 
officers at the Locality level being in charge of training and facilitation of access to rural 
financing.  
Component 2:  Market linkage and value addition 
 87.
Expected outcome. The expected outcome of this component is higher income for the 
smallholder producers through improved market access, introduction and strengthening of 
village-based crop storage, and introduction of value addition/market linkage activities to 
increase the net returns from the crops grown and gum Arabic collected by smallholder 
producers. Three main in activities will be supported through Component 2: 
Activity 2.1:   Physical market access (wadi crossings). 
Activity 2.2:  Storage facilities development. 
Activity 2.3:  Value addition (village processing) and market linkage. 
Background and rationale 
 88.
Smallholders are not maximizing their income from cash and staple crop production due to 
storage and marketing constraints.  They experience significant amounts of post-storage loss 
for sorghum and millet, the two primary food security crops, due to inadequate physical storage 
facilities.  Both sorghum and millet can be readily sold for immediate cash requirements.  
Financial constraints compel them to sell cash crops immediately after harvest, when prices are 
often the lowest.   A complex and opaque system of taxation of road transport by local 
governments often makes direct linkages between smallholder and processor or exporter 
expensive, and entrenches a network of middlemen who often add little value other than the 
ability to evade taxation.  The great potential for value-addition opportunities for state, national, 
and international markets are not captured.  These issues are explored in more detail below.  
81 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
 89.
 90.
Storage. Because of the prevailing arid conditions in Sudan, post-harvest losses of staple 
crops are not as serious an issue for smallholders as they are in different climates.  The crops 
are commonly stored in simple storage rooms or in the farmer’s house.  Storage methods can 
be improved.  SUSTAIN found that by when an IPM agent applied pesticides to farmers’ grain 
stores, sorghum losses were reduced by about 12% and sesame losses by 8%.    
Larger quantities of sorghum not required in the immediate future are often buried underground 
using the matmuras technique. In this case, physical losses from larger vermin are eliminated, 
and the low oxygen/high carbon dioxide environment greatly reduces insect damage, but the 
quality of the grain as food or feed can deteriorate, particularly if there is water infiltration. The 
Agricultural Bank of Sudan claims that sorghum in matmuras can be stored 10 years or more, 
with no loss in grain quality31.  However, visual inspection of sorghum stored in a village 
matmuras by members of the design team showed a darkening of the grain, and a musty smell 
which could indicate mold damage and the risk of mycotoxins such as aflatoxin, which is 
poisonous to animals and humans in higher doses, and a carcinogen in lower doses.  The 
aflatoxin issue is addressed as a separate topic later.   
 91. Groundnuts present a special risk –when not properly dried and stored, groundnuts can be 
infected by the aspergillus mold, resulting in aflatoxin, a potent carcinogen.  
 92.
 93.
Finance.  Smallholders are often compelled to sell cash crops immediately after harvest, when 
prices are usually lowest, because of pressing financial considerations (loan repayments and 
immediate cash needs). Therefore, they are not able to store part of the crop to wait for better 
prices.  Stored cash crops are in the hands of merchants at the village, locality, or state level.  
Neither the traditional above-ground or matmuras storage methods allow for stored grain to be 
used as collateral for obtaining post-harvest finance.  This would alleviate the pressure on 
smallholder to sell when prices are very low.  In order to accept stored grain as collateral for 
loans, financial institutions require fully secured, above-ground, and modern grains stores either 
under the bank’s control, the control of a trusted third party, or under joint control; e.g., with two 
locks that ensure that both farmer and banker are present when crops are deposited and 
withdrawn.  This kind of secure storage facility is not currently available at the village level.  The 
Agricultural Bank of Sudan and other larger banks can provide a stored crop financing at their 
own warehouses, in exchange for share of the profit when the crop is sold.  The timing and 
nature of the sale is beyond the control of the farmer.  However, most smallholders are not 
aware of this kind of bank financing, would not be organized sufficiently to take advantage of it 
even if they were, and in any event would not likely trust this type of financing because the 
marketing decisions are outside of their control.  
 94.
Prices. Farm gate prices are in line with prices prevailing at the auction markets.  Table 1 
below shows the specific example of sesame prices in Gadarif state.  Using the FOB price as a 
benchmark, the difference between farm gate and Gadarif auction price is only 15 percentage 
points – and half of this is taken up by transport and taxes/fees.  According to this data, the 
farm gate prices received by smallholders are not unfair at the time crops were marketed.  
However, more analysis needs to be done, as this does not reflect price differentials over time – 
it is very likely that the price differential widens considerably during the immediate post-harvest 
period when farmers are forced to sell.   
Table 1:  Farm gate & Auction Prices (Relative to FOB Export Price, Sesame, Gadarif) 
Farm gate Price 
Market Price 
Marketing Costs 
Handling/Grading 
SDG/MT 
11,110  
13,200  
82  
% of FOB Price 
78% 
93% 
1% 
31 The Agricultural Bank of Sudan currently has over 200,000 tons of sorghum in matmuras storage. 
82 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
Packaging 
Certificates 
Transport & Tax 
Handling & Port Fees 
State Export Fee 
Insurance 
Total Cost 
FOB Price 
Source: 
60  
26  
179  
55  
11  
204  
13,817  
14,160  
0% 
0% 
1% 
0% 
0% 
1% 
98% 
World Bank Sudan, Economic Memorandum, 2015 
 95.
Storing crops in anticipation of price increases later in the year involves expense, and can be 
quite risky, especially for unsophisticated smallholders who are not involved in marketing on a 
day to day basis.   Prices can be highly volatile, and depending on the month of sale, 
smallholders can be worse off than if they sold immediately after harvest.  The SDP Value 
Chain Study Analysis addressed this issue.  In Gadarif, a farmer that held sorghum stocks from 
harvest in November 2015, and then sold at the peak price the following year in July 2016 
would have earned a gross return of 19% over an 8-month period. This may seem attractive, 
but if the farmer had financed this storage by borrowing from an MFI at an effective 30% annual 
rate, the interest costs would have been 20%, and the farmer’s net return would have been -
1%.  If storage costs and losses were considered, the return would be even less.  For the 
2014/2015 marketing season, the returns to storage appeared to be even more disappointing. 
The best a farmer could have done was achieving a nominal 14% return on investment by 
storing sorghum and selling in the peak price month of October 2015.  However, the financial 
carrying costs of that investment using MFI funds would have been 30%, resulting in a 16% 
loss.  Sales at any other month would have yielded worse results, and again, this is not 
counting storage expenses and losses.  
 96. When farmers hold grain in storage, they forego potentially more attractive investment 
opportunities such as animal fattening that could bring higher (and more reliable) rates of return 
than speculative crop storage.  For example, SUSTAIN reported that smallholders earned from 
24 to 64% on an annualized basis from their investments animal fattening activities (although it 
is not clear whether the cost of finance was included).  
 97.
Nonetheless, farmers invariably express a strong desire to store at least part of their cash crops 
in anticipation of price increases. 
 98. Market linkages. Large processors have expressed the desire to purchase crops and gum 
Arabic directly from producers for two main reasons: (i) to obtain a level of quality or variety that 
is not readily available from the auction and wholesale market; and (ii) to lower costs by 
removing middlemen that add little or no value.  An important barrier to structuring these market 
linkages has been that the processors are forced to bear the full burden of the state and local 
taxes moving from the farm to the processing plant.  These state and local taxes can be 
avoided by middlemen.  Because of the higher costs, the processors were not able to commit to 
paying a better price to farmer, and thus farmers were not interested in making commitments 
with no reward.  Formal market linkages for these crops may be more likely in the context of 
value-added products that may be exempt or more lightly impacted by taxes. 
 99.
The El Obied and Gadarif auction markets are scheduled for conversion to electronic 
exchanges, and will be managed as a public/private partnership.  The new exchanges may 
offer better opportunities for direct access by smallholders, and improved prices for farmers.  
The El Obied auction will handle sesame, groundnuts, sorghum, and gum Arabic as well as 
unrefined sesame and groundnut oil.  The Gadarif auction will focus on sesame and sorghum.  
The minimum lot size to sell on the electronic changes is 15 MTs, which is beyond the scope of 
individual farmers, but could be achieved by farmer producer associations marketing 
collectively.  
83 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
100. Value addition. There are many opportunities to introduce value addition at the farm or village 
level:  
(a) Grading.  Smallholders are often unaware of how to grade properly to meet market 
requirements.  Perhaps more importantly, they are rarely rewarded by higher prices if they 
do grade properly, as they sell through middlemen who are not willing or prepared to set 
differentiated prices for different grades.    
(b) Shelling (groundnuts).  If groundnuts are shelled at the village level, transport costs per 
sack from village to market would be reduced by approximately 50% (using the Shalaby 
village in West Kordofan as an example, this would save about 550 SDG/MT transporting 
to the El Obied auction).  However, shelling must be done properly or there will be 
significant damage to kernels that will more than offset savings in transport costs.  Also, 
groundnuts are more prone to deterioration and aflatoxin infestation after shelling, 
particularly low-quality shelling and especially if the groundnuts are not properly dried 
before shelling.  As a result, traders do not generally want to buy village-shelled 
groundnuts.   If shelling was done with high quality equipment, and was done immediately 
before marketing, or perhaps in the presence of traders, smallholders would be in better 
position to capture additional value.   
(c) Aflatoxin free.  In principle, aflatoxin-free groundnuts should receive a higher price from 
processors or exporters, because of reduction in grading and disposal costs.  Large buyers 
are willing to provide technical training materials and posters for minimizing aflatoxin.  
However, the value chain as currently structured does not reward farmers for taking the 
effort to produce aflatoxin-free groundnuts; attempts to establish direct village-processor 
linkages run into the local and state tax issue described above.  Nonetheless, Sudan has 
managed to make excellent progress in this area, as noted earlier, and exports of 
groundnuts have expanded dramatically.  
(d) Oil production.  Currently, both sesame and groundnuts are crushed at the village level 
using either small-scale diesel or traditional camel powered oil presses, usually owned by 
local merchants. These village oil presses produce unrefined oil, with the remaining 
seedcake a valuable by-product for livestock feed.  The potential market for both unrefined 
oil and seedcake could be large if efficiency of production and collection systems was 
adequate, as larger oil refineries may be interested in buying the crude oil, and commercial 
livestock operations would be interested in the seedcake.   
(e) Flour production.  Sorghum is milled into flour at many villages using small-scale diesel-
powered mills owned by local merchants.  The market for village-milled flour is limited, local 
and the market is saturated by existing village-based mills.  The larger flour marketing 
companies are not interested in purchasing village-milled flour.  
 (f)
International certification.   Crops and gum Arabic produced and marketed in compliance 
with internationally certified Organic or Fair Trade standards could potentially offer a means 
for farmers to achieve higher farm gate prices.  For certified organic groundnuts, farm gate 
prices can be 100% higher than paid for conventional groundnuts.  The higher farm gate 
prices of certified crops must be weighed against additional expenses and opportunity 
costs (e.g. lower yields) borne by the farmer.  Significant amounts of certified organic 
sesame are produced in the Tigray region of Ethiopia, bordering Sudan.  In Sudan, the only 
known examples of international certification of the IAMDP crops is for Fair Trade Gum 
Arabic, is on a small scale, and for certified organic sorghum, on a very small scale.  If US 
sanctions on Sudan were lifted, this situation could possibly change 32. Towards this end, 
32 US sanctions specifically exempt gum Arabic and other agricultural products can also be exempted.  In practice, however, 
the broad financial sanctions mean that direct trade between the US and many other developed countries and Sudan is 
complex and expensive.   
84 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
IAMDP would conduct a study in year one of implementation aimed at identifying these and 
other opportunities for organic and/or Fair Trade certification. 
Component 2 - Activity description 
Activity 2.1:  Physical market access  
101. Wadi crossings will be constructed to facilitate and ease the transportation of agricultural 
produce to the markets and ensure the supply of agricultural inputs, fuel, spare parts of the 
tractors etc. to farming areas.  
102. The criteria for selecting the wadi crossing sites for the crossings will be: 
(a) On main tracks which passes through farming areas, and connect the largest number of 
villages to market centers, or main paved/raised gravel roads. 
(b) On main tracks which are in a reasonable condition. 
(c) Are in suitable locations for construction i.e. the safest and economical locations. 
(d) Have a low negative impact on environment. 
103. Potential beneficiaries will provide input in the selection process, and must provide firm 
commitment to form wadi crossing committees that undertake routine maintenance (for which 
they will receive training).  State governments need to provide a firm budgetary commitment for 
repairs and upkeep as a condition precedent to initiating construction. 
Activity 2.2:  Storage facilities development 
Sub-activity 2.2.1: Smallholder owned and operated cash crop storage demonstration 
facilities 
104. This sub-activity will support construction of one modern village-level storage facility in each 
locality, capable of safe and cost-effective storage of cash and food security crops.  These will 
serve as demonstrations of the business case for modern crop storage and financing. 
105. The storage facilities will have security systems that will be reviewed and approved by financial 
institutions.  This will allow bank financing on attractive terms, secured by the stored crops.  
The storage facilities will be managed and operated by a registered farmer producer 
association that has undergone IAMDP training in business and technical skills (see 
Component 3).  
106. These project-financed stores will demonstrate to farmers and financial institutions the cost-
effectiveness and risks/rewards associated with crop storage.   
107. The project will provide 80 percent of the construction costs of the secure storage facility.  The 
capacity will be approximately 200 MTs (roughly equivalent to 220 bags of sesame or 100 bags 
of in-shell groundnuts).  The farmer producer association will provide 20 percent of the costs 
through in-kind contributions of inputs and labor. 
108. The final design and construction will depend to an extent on local conditions and materials.  At 
a minimum, it is assumed that the storage will be block-built, with a floor of good quality 
concrete, a door that will fit tightly to prevent entry of rodents and allow a double locking 
system, and ventilation openings screened to keep out birds, with no gaps between the wall 
and the roofing sheets.   
109. All farmer producer associations will receive training on analyzing costs, benefits, and risks of 
crop storage under the FAAB activity of Component 3.  This will include the risks and returns of 
speculative storage of cash crops.   The training will cover how to develop a business plan with 
estimated cash flows to be used for obtaining commercial finance.    
110. The project will arrange for visits from smallholders and their FPAs to the project storage 
facilities, and the FPA managers of the facility will review their experiences with the facilities.  
85 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
The project team will compare the storage facilities’ business plans with actual experiences to 
make an assessment about the feasibility of village-based storage.  If the storage facility 
business case is positive without subsidies, the project will support other FPA to establish 
linkages with financial institutions. 
Sub-activity 2.2.2:  Studies on storage and pricing  
111. The project will commission studies on storage and pricing as required that will help refine 
project implementation activities such as storage structure design, siting, training, etc.  Topics 
will include: 
(a) Analysis of storage and post-harvest financing options at the state and locality level. 
(b) Dynamic price analysis of crop prices and transport costs.  A thorough analysis of 
sorghum, groundnut, sesame, and gum Arabic commodity prices and transport costs, 
moving up the value chain from farm gate, village market, auction/wholesale market, and 
FOB export, over the course of the year.  This will give a better insight into the 
risks/rewards of storing crops in anticipation of higher prices for farmers and financial 
institutions. 
Sub-activity 2.2.3:  Sinnar State crop market rehabilitation 
112. The project will commission a feasibility study for the rehabilitation of the Wad-al-Nil crop and 
gum Arabic market in Wad-al-Nil in Sinnar state.  Wad-al-Nil is south of Sinjah, and strategically 
located in the heart of the gum belts of Sinnar and Blue Nile States, and traditionally has been a 
market center.  As presently conceived, the physical facility would be owned by the 
Government of Sinnar, but leased to a private sector company with professional management 
and with a board consisting of private sector, FPA/GAPAs, and state government.  The local 
government has already located a four hectare parcel of land for this purpose.  
113. The feasibility study would develop a business plan for the sustainable and commercial 
operation of the market.  If the business plan is accepted by the key stakeholders, the project 
would require a firm financial commitment.  The project would then finance 80% of the 
construction costs as well as provide technical assistance and training for management and 
potential users of the market.    
Activity 2.3:  Market linkage/value addition 
114. Market linkage/value addition activities selected for project support will be based on market 
analysis, and usually, if not always, in the context of actual market opportunities with buyers 
(processors or exporters) at the state or national level.  Buyers and farmer producer 
associations will be provided technical, logistical, and financial support to pilot and scale-up 
value-addition/market linkage activities that have a high likelihood of commercial success.  
Project support will be structured through informal MOUs for pilot initiatives, and from the 
Innovation Scaling up Challenge Grant Facility for scaling-up pilot initiatives.  
115. Sub-Activity 2.3.1:  Market assessment studies. As required, market assessment studies will 
be undertaken to identify new markets or market niches appropriate for the field crops and gum 
Arabic.  One important study is analyzing smallholder access and utilization of the main 
wholesale and auction markets in greater Kordofan (Nihud, Rahad, El Obied) and make 
recommendations for improvements.  One example of an international market assessment 
would be an analysis of market potential for Sudan for Fair Trade, Certified Organic, or other 
international certification system.  These studies will guide implementation of other Component 
2 activities.  
116. Sub-Activity 2.3.2:  Direct support for market linkage/value addition.  Buyers and 
FPAS/GAPAs will be provided technical, logistical, and financial support to pilot and scale-up 
value-addition/market linkage activities that have a high likelihood of commercial success.  The 
goals of the market linkage/value addition activities are to provide a combination of one or more 
86 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
of the following:  (i) higher price per unit of crop produced; (ii) greater assured volumes; 
(iii) technical training and support; (iv) production credit on reasonable terms. 
117. For smaller, village or locality pilot demonstrations, project support will be provided for testing 
new systems, tools, technologies and equipment. For scale-up, commercial investment from 
farmers or from the private sector will be expected.  For exceptional situations requiring risk 
reduction, the Innovation Scaling up Challenge Grant Facility will be utilized (see 
Component 1).  
118. Project support will be limited, time-bound, and focused on areas where the private sector has 
little expertise or could not be expected to invest (e.g. in the formation and training of FPAs or 
GAPAs, coordinating access to finance, locating transporters, etc.).  In no case will the project 
play a market actor role (e.g. loan money, take on risk, provide transport services) but should 
focus on facilitating market actor participation in value chain upgrading.   
119. Market Linkage/Value addition activities with potential linkages with external markets can be 
explored by the project are listed below.  These are meant only to guide project managers, final 
selection should be made based on private sector and farmer interest.  
(a) Marketing of unrefined sesame or groundnut oil produced by village based oil 
processors. Larger commercial oil refineries have indicated a possible interest in the 
purchase of unrefined oil from village processors, if minimum quantities can be aggregated 
and if the price is competitive.  One company has expressed interest in sending a tanker 
car directly to the village for collection, and pay farmers on the spot if quality was 
acceptable. The seedcake by-product produced is a valuable livestock feed for local animal 
fattening operations, and surpluses also would find a ready market from large-scale 
livestock operations, which could make arrangements for bulk collection.  Some degree of 
pre-shipment finance could be extended by the unrefined oil buyers.  The El Obied 
wholesale auction plans to add sesame and groundnut oil and seedcake as a listed 
commodity by early 2018; this would create an alternative market outlet for village 
production of these products.  
(b) Marketing of shelled groundnuts from village based shellers. Larger exporters and 
processors have expressed interest in purchasing shelled groundnuts at the village level 
(the normal practice is to buy in-shell groundnuts because of concerns over damage 
caused by low quality shellers and poor storage practices).  The buyer would require that 
the FPAs are using high quality groundnut shellers and with properly dried in-shell nuts, 
with technical training provided by the project with input from the buyer.  The buyers would 
be willing to provide some degree of production finance, collect minimum quantities from 
primary aggregation points, provide input into shelling machine selection and purchase, 
and to pay in cash at prices that would be higher than selling to local traders, and 
comparable to El Obied or Omdurman auction prices (less transport charges and taxes 
incurred). 
(c) High quality gum Arabic. A number of gum Arabic exporters have expressed interest in 
buying direct from GAPAs provided that they could obtain a higher quality product than 
what is available from intermediate traders or the auctions.  They would provide 
pre-financing gum Arabic tapping costs (through a no-interest loan), providing mats and jute 
bags for grading and packing, and paying a cash price at a premium to the El Obied 
auction prices.  In return, the project would organize and train the GAPAs in proper 
harvesting, sorting, cleaning, grading, and packing.   In fact, the RSGPMP project has 
undertaken a small but successful pilot with two gum Arabic companies in North Kordofan 
with 13 hashab gum GAPAs.  This could be scaled up with in all four states with many more 
buyers, and include talha gum as well which is in high demand in India.  
(d) Certified seed production.  There is ongoing interest from seed companies to purchase 
certified seed from smallholder groups in the SDP project areas, which is close to being on 
87 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
a sustainable basis.  IAMDP will support additional FPAs that wish to produce certified 
seed under contract to private seed companies, and for local sale, and to expand the scope 
of to Sinnar and West Kordofan (where at least one seed company is interested in sourcing 
certified groundnut seed). 
Implementation arrangement for Component 2  
120. Activity 2.1:  Physical market access – wadi crossings.  The PCU civil engineering national 
consultant will provide planning and oversight for the wadi crossings.  The wadi crossings 
construction will be supervised by the respective state ministries of physical planning and public 
utilities.  The state’s locality level engineering units will direct and supervise the maintenance 
process, and train the wadi crossing committees on maintenance. Contracting firms will be 
competitively selected to undertake the construction work, with the PCU civil engineering 
providing quality control and oversight on the competitive process, contractor implementation, 
and local community maintenance.   
Activity 2.2:  Storage facilities 
Sub-activity 2.2.1: Smallholder owned and operated cash crop storage demonstration 
facilities 
121. The crop storage demonstration facilities will be owned and operated by registered and active 
farmer producer associations (FPAs) that have successfully completed FAAB training (see 
Component 3).  One FPA per locality will be selected as the recipient of funding for the storage 
unit from the project, partly on the basis of location, but also through a limited competitive 
process.  The competitive process will be designed by the PCU private sector/marketing officer, 
and managed by the SPIU marketing specialist and supported by the LET marketing officers.  It 
will be based on a review of a simplified storage business plan that includes:  
(a) Realistic projections of operating, interest, maintenance, and depreciation costs (including 
the project-subsidized capital costs).   
(b) Realistic projections of revenues from operations.  These would include reduction in crop 
storage losses, and projected returns from price increases. 
(c) Proof of registration as a crop production FPA, with a bank account, active for at least one 
cropping season. 
(d) Commitment to share business records for project monitoring and impact assessment 
purposes, and to host visitors from the locality. 
(e) Commitment to provide 20% of the storage unit cost (this can be donated labor or 
materials).  
122. The PCU rural finance specialist (RFS) will coordinate with financial institutions to ensure that 
the design and operation of the locality-based crop storage facilities are usable for post-harvest 
financing, and liaise with insurance companies about the possibility of obtaining coverage for 
stored crops.   
123. A SAGA-certified SSP will provide pesticide control of the storage facility as required, funded by 
the FPA managers.   
124. The technical TOT and training materials for the technical aspects of storage operations will be 
developed by the PCU Private Sector/Marketing Officer (ME) with the help of state Marketing 
Officer, with input from national consultants as required.  
Sub-activity 2.2.2:  Studies on storage and pricing  
125. The PCU ME will develop the terms of reference for the studies on storage, dynamic pricing, 
and post-harvest financing options with the help of an international consultant, and the studies 
will be undertaken by an international with local consultants.  
88 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
Sub-activity 2.2.3:  Sinnar State crop market rehabilitation 
126. An international and local consultant, assisted by the PCU civil engineering national consultant, 
will undertake the feasibility study for the rehabilitation of the crop and gum Arabic market in 
Wad-al-Nil in Sinnar state.  The team will work closely with the key stakeholders; merchants, 
farmers, gum Arabic producers, and the state and local governments.    
127.
If the feasibility study business plan is accepted by stakeholders, then the necessary technical 
assistance and training will be developed by the private sector/marketing officer with the 
assistance of international and national consultants, and the construction would be overseen by 
the civil engineer national consultant.   
Activity 2.3:  Market linkages/value addition 
128. Sub-Activity 2.3.1:  Market assessment studies. An international consultant will work with 
the CPU to develop the topics and terms of reference for the national and international markets 
for the field crops and gum Arabic.  The studies will be undertaken by a combination of national 
and international expert consultants.  The international market assessment studies should be 
implemented when international sanctions are lifted, or it is clear that such a study would be 
useful under the current sanctions regime.   
129. Sub-Activity 2.3.2:  Support for market linkage/value addition. The CPU private 
sector/marketing officer will initiate contacts with buyers of value-added production that could 
be interested in establishing sourcing from farmer producer associations.  This will start with the 
initial contacts established by SDP (e.g. Savola for sesame/groundnut unrefined oil, Yusuf 
Habibi for shelled groundnuts, RANS for groundnut seed).  An international PPP consultant will 
support the marketing specialist in liaising and structuring pilot initiatives locally if required but 
especially for international markets. 
130. The CPU private sector/marketing officer (ME) will negotiate MOUs with buyers to concretize 
pilot initiatives that will test the viability of the market linkages. The MOUs will clearly specify the 
roles, responsibilities, contributions of buyers, farmers, and the project.  To ensure that 
production meets market requirements, the buyers will help assist in providing technical training 
materials and TOT for the SPIU MS and LET MEs.  Technical assistance and training for 
farmer producer associations will be delivered by the technical and FAAB specialists on the 
LETs, with input as appropriate from the buyers or their agents.  A limited budget for 
procurement of tools and equipment for pilot initiatives will be managed by the Marketing 
officers. 
131. The Innovation Scaling up Challenge Grant Facility (ISCGF) will be the main vehicle for project 
support of scaling-up value addition/market linkage pilot activities.   
Component 3: Enabling environment 
Expected outcome  
132. The expected outcome of Component 3 is improved smallholder access to finance, a higher 
level of smallholder business competency, and strong, active farmer producer associations with 
a purpose and activities that go beyond receiving project support.  This component includes two 
subcomponents:  
(a) Subcomponent 3.1:  Farmers associations strengthening and business development 
(b) Subcomponent 3.2:  Access to rural finance.  
Rationale  
133. Three key enabling environment factors required for successful smallholder value chain 
integration are finance, strong farmer associations, and business skills.   
(a) Sustainable access to rural finance at the level of production, processing and 
marketing. The rainfed areas in Sudan suffer from the wide unavailability of formal loans 
89 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
for supporting agricultural activities. In the SUSTAIN and SDP project areas this gap has 
hardly narrowed even after these projects developed specific linkages with ABSUMI to 
finance the crop production needs of the target group farmers. The focus has been on 
livestock financing.  
(b) Strong farmer associations. Individually, smallholders do not have enough land, crops, or 
purchasing power to be of much interest to suppliers of goods or services, or purchasers of 
their outputs.  Therefore, their costs of production are high, their marketing options are 
limited and they are often subject to predatory action from local merchants.  
(c) Business skills. Smallholders lack the skills to analyze and solve business problems or 
take advantage of business opportunities.  Without these skills, it is difficult for them to 
make the transition from being subsistence-oriented farmers who market occasional 
surpluses, and they remain in poverty.   
Subcomponent 3.1:  Farmers associations strengthening and business development  
134. Two main activities will be covered by the subcomponent:  
(a) Activity 3.1.1:   Farming as a business promotion 
(b) Activity 3.1.2:   Farmer producer association capacity building  
Background 
Farmers associations  
135. The political economy of farmer associations in Sudan has been fraught.  In 2014, the Federal 
government dissolved the Sudan Farmers Union, due to growing concerns about its perceived 
involvement in political activities.  To replace the Sudan Farmers Union, the Federal 
Government passed the Farmer Producer Association (FPA) legislation in 2015.  A minimum of 
seven farmers who jointly pledge assets can form an FPA, and then open a bank account, and 
conduct business as agricultural or livestock focused group.  FPAs can enter into joint ventures 
with private companies.   
136.
In principle, the FPAs are exempt from import duties and export taxes, but it is not clear 
whether these incentives have become operational.  The FPA legislation allows for the creation 
of apex associations, which would give the FPAs an organizational vehicle that could transact 
business at a larger scale, or be an advocate for farmer interests with government at all levels. 
According to the law, a minimum of 11 active FPAs can form a locality association, 5 locality 
associations can form a state level association, and 5 state associations can form the national 
association.  However, the government is not currently encouraging the formation of these apex 
structures, and the Gezira irrigation scheme to be the only area in which an apex association 
has been known to be formed.   
137. The state governments have formed FPA mobilization committees, chaired by the Minister of 
Agriculture, and managed by the Registrar (Ministry of Justice) to facilitate the registration 
process.  These committees have successfully mobilized thousands of FPAs in each of the 
states.  Initially, there was resistance to forming FPAs from the old membership of the 
Sudanese Farmers Union, but now it seems to be widely accepted.  
138. Very little training or support has been provided to the FPAs through the government.  Most of 
the newly formed FPAs are not very active, as many were formed in anticipation of receiving 
government benefits or finance which have not been forthcoming.  The Central Bank of Sudan 
has established a guarantee fund that covers FPAs borrowing from banks, but FPAs are 
required to have a minimum of 20 members, and must borrow a minimum of SDG 1 million.  
The stronger FPAs are livestock rearing groups and farmers on the irrigation schemes.  In both 
cases, the farmers have tangible assets (animals, land) that can be pledged to facilitate 
lending. Land tenure on rainfed lands is ambiguous, with some control with locality authorities 
and some with the local shaykh, and is not useful as collateral. 
90 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
139.
In North Kordofan, nearly 1,500 FPAs have been registered, about 400 involved in livestock 
and the balance in cropping.  As in Sudan generally, the livestock and irrigation scheme FPAs 
are reported to be the most active.  There are notable exceptions, such as the quite active 
groundnut seed growers FPA of Um Sawadeen village in North Kordofan.  The state 
government has an agreement with Nile Bank and the Agricultural Bank of Sudan to provide 
finance and training, but nothing concrete from this agreement has happened as of May 2017.  
Farming as a business skill 
140. Agricultural economics is a well-defined discipline in Sudan, and indeed agricultural economists 
are on many of the locality extension teams.  However, the concept of “Farming as a Business” 
for the smallholder rainfed farmer is new.  Smallholder rainfed farmers have been regarded by 
the government, extension teams, and private companies as primarily subsistence farmers that 
occasionally produce some surplus for the market.   
141.
In fact, most smallholders grow some cash crops exclusively for the market.  They are quite 
interested in moving beyond subsistence and investing in new technologies and services so 
that they may increase productivity, expand production, and receive more value from marketing 
or value-added activities.  Business skills are essential to make the right decisions about crop 
choice, input regime, marketing, storage, etc.  
142. Similarly, village based and locality service providers are essentially small businesses, but often 
have rudimentary or no formal business skills.  Most agrodealers, for example, have no 
records, no marketing programme, no financial management systems. 
Subcomponent  3.1 - Description 
Activity 3.1.1:  Farming as a business promotion  
143. The farming as a business (FAAB) curriculum developed by SDP and SUSTAIN will be 
expanded and improved to give smallholders the analytical tools and concepts to plan, make 
investment decisions, and operate their farming businesses profitably over the entire production 
cycle.  This will cover financing, operations, and marketing.  After training, the smallholders will 
be capable of developing simple farm business plans that will help them raise finance, manage 
their business affairs, and critically evaluate the season’s results, and use the insights to plan 
the next year’s crop. 
144. The FAAB training will use simple mini-case studies to bring together the theoretical concepts, 
so that in a concrete fashion will help the smallholder think through key investment decisions, 
with the following as examples of the mini-case studies. 
(a) Input decision (i) farm-saved seed versus improved OPV or hybrid seeds; (ii) fertiliser 
micro-dosing versus no fertilization; and (iii) production for specialized markets (e.g. seed) 
versus for commodity grain markets. 
(b) Agronomic management decisions. (i) land preparation and planting techniques: 
manual, animal or mechanized; (ii) weed control: manual, animal, mechanized or chemical 
herbicides; and (iii) harvesting methods: manual or mechanized.  
(c) Post-harvest operations. (i) crop storage as a business: risks, costs, and rewards of crop 
storage; and (ii) marketing strategies:  village market versus auction sales; collective versus 
individual. 
(d) Alternative cropping and non-farming business decisions. (i) animal fattening:  using 
surplus grain, stalks, seedcake, etc.; and (ii) value addition: local oil pressing.  
145. An introduction to FAAB training will be provided to officials at the state level.  The project will 
help the state level staff provide FAAB training session to extension teams in non-project 
localities.  
91 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
Activity 3.1.2: Farmer producer association capacity building  
146.
IAMDP will mobilize and support FPAs to become the primary means by which farmers 
coordinate and receive inputs and service delivery, negotiate with buyers, as well as receive 
project services.  Both crop and gum Arabic FPAs will be associated, and existing GAPAs that 
are not registered under the new law will be assisted to convert to FPAs.  Formation of savings 
and credit groups will continue, as these do not conflict with FPAs; these support savings and 
credit for consumption and non-agricultural business activities, and are essential for 
implementation of the microfinance strategy.    
147. FPA capacity building will be primarily implemented through the FAAB training described in 
Activity 2.  However, under Activity 3, FPAs will also receive: 
(a) FPA mobilization and organizational training that addresses the business reasons why 
FPAs are formed, how they should be managed, how to select members, how individual 
smallholder and collective FPA businesses should interact, financing, taking advantage of 
incentives, rights, and obligations under the law. 
(b) Apex association formation and capacity building at the locality and state level 
Following the development of strong FPAs, support will be provided to analyze and support 
apex association at the locality and state level.  Topics to be covered include: 
(i) management, governance, and funding of apex organizations; (ii) coordination of large-
scale market linkage/value addition projects; (iii) developing membership services; and (iv) 
government advocacy.   
(c) Exposure tour to country with strong apex farmer producer associations. The leaders 
of FPAs that are considering or have started apex FPAs, and state/federal government 
officials, will participate on an exposure tour in a country with strong apex smallholder 
farmer associations that provide effective membership services and policy advocacy.   
148. The project will work with other entities that are providing or could provide support for building 
the capacity of the FPAs to leverage this assistance.  In North Kordofan, for example, 
discussions will be held with the Agricultural Bank of Sudan and Nile Bank (who have an 
agreement with the state government to build the capacity of the FPAs).  
Implementation arrangement for subcomponent 3.1  
149. Overall supervision of the Farmer as a Business and Farmer Producer Association Support will 
be managed by the national FAAB consultant reporting to the private sector specialist who will 
work through federal, state, and locality structures.  
Activity 2:  Farming as a business 
150. The FAAB TOT and training curriculum will be developed by the FAAB national specialist. 
Inputs will come from international and national consultants for the case studies and for the 
specialized modules (e.g. covering MSPs, FPAs, etc.), as well as from private sector partners. 
The FAAB TOT will be delivered to LET private sector officer or other team members selected 
for their interest and aptitude for business, as well as capability.  These LET members will then 
be responsible for rolling out the training to smallholders, FPAs, and service providers. Training 
sessions will be provided for the federal and state ministries of agriculture to enable them to 
adopt a FAAB approach towards smallholder promotion, and to roll out FAAB training for all 
extension teams (not just the project-supported LETs). 
151. The FAAB and community development specialists will develop materials for FAAB training is 
delivered to effectively reach semi-literate and illiterate farmers while avoiding stigma.  A 
possible source material is the FAO “FAAB Story Book” methodology33 developed for farmers 
with limited literacy.   
33 “Farming as a Business Story Book”, FAO, 2015. 
92 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
Activity 2:  Farmer producer association  
152. FPA mobilization and organizational. TOT and training materials will be developed by the 
FAAB specialist with support from a national farmer association specialist.  The FPA TOT will 
be delivered to the project LET FAAB specialists, as well as agricultural economists from other 
extension teams, and possibly state level officials with the responsibility for mobilizing FPAs.   
153. The FAAB specialist will liaise, through the state implementation units, with the state 
government FPA mobilization committees for delivering the initial parts of the FPA Mobilization 
and Organizational training programme.  
154. The rural finance and private sector specialists will liaise with Nile Bank and the Agricultural 
Bank of Sudan, and any other potential partners in FPA capacity building, concerning ways to 
leverage the impact of FPA capacity building. 
155. Apex association capacity building at the locality and state level training materials will be 
developed by an international farmer organization development specialist, with assistance of 
the FAAB specialist and a national farmer association development specialist.  The 
international specialist will design, organize, and lead the exposure tours to neighbouring 
countries, such as Egypt, Ethiopia, Morocco, etc.     
Subcomponent 3.2:  Access to rural finance  
Background  
156. Acute shortage of formal credit in the project area. There is an acute shortage of formal 
credit supply in the project areas. It is estimated that less than 5% (around 5,000 farmers) 
target group households have accessed formal crop loans in the project area. One major 
reason for this gap is the supply driven approach followed by financial institutions (FIs) such as 
the Agricultural Bank of Sudan (ABS) whereby crop loans were used to finance traditional crop 
production methods without linking them to the adoption of improved practices to increase 
production, profitability and post-harvest returns to smallholder farmers. Historically, the FIs 
suffered heavy losses from this approach due to poor crop production, crop failure, marketing 
failure and wilful non-repayment. For example, ABS has an average repayment rate of only 
70% (50% in Sinnar region) on such loans. The high credit risk along with the remoteness, 
infrastructure gaps and security risks faced in the rural areas have discouraged FIs from 
investing in the rainfed crop production activities. The shortage of formal credit often forces 
smallholder farmers to approach sheil merchants to provide cash advance against forward 
purchase of standing crops at prices much lower than the market price at harvest. Small 
farmers often use a majority of their produce at harvest to settle the sheil advances. The 
revenue earned on the remaining production drastically reduces their own net returns and 
keeps them in poverty.  
157. CBS steps to mitigate the shortage of MF services: The Central Bank of Sudan (CBS) has 
adopted a supply driven approach to mitigate the shortage of microfinance (MF) services in the 
country. It has (i) licensed 35 new microfinance institutions (MFI) over the last 3-4 years 
resulting in 4 MFIs in the Sinnar region namely Sinnar State MFI, Irada MF initiative, Women 
and Youth Association and ABSUMI and 6 MFIs in the Kordofan region namely Mishkat, the 
Sudanese Rural Development Company (SRDC), Al Garrah, Al Massarra, Ibdaa Microfinance 
Bank and ABSUMI. Most MFIs have sufficient liquidity having received SDG 0.5–1.0 million 
from the CBS over the last year as refinancing support; and (ii) instructed all CBs to lend 12% 
of their portfolio for MF activities through direct lending or by refinancing MFIs. However, these 
funds are largely unutilised as CBs do not have rural branches and MFIs lack the collateral 
required to access these funds. To overcome this challenge the CBS has recently established 
the Guarantee Agency as an autonomous entity to provide up to 75% wholesale guarantee to 
MFIs seeking refinancing from CBs or farmers’ organisations seeking loans from CBs; and 
(iii) partnered with the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development and the Islamic 
Development Bank to supply US$100 million to the MFI sector over the last 3 years through the 
93 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
Microfinance Unit of the CBS (CBS-MFU) and another US$100 million investment planned over 
the next 3 to 5 years.  
158. CBS and IFAD project partnerships. In 2007 the CBS established within it a Microfinance 
Unit (MFU) to ensure special focus on MF sector development. The MFU’s main responsibilities 
are policy development, licensing MFIs, supervision and refinancing MFIs. The CBS also 
supplied the initial capital for the establishment of the Sudanese Microfinance Development 
Company (SMDC) as an autonomous entity for refinancing MFIs using government, donor and 
private sector investments. Over the last 5-6 years various IFAD supported projects (WSRMP 
and SKRDP) have partnered with the CBS-MFU and the SMDC to launch three successful rural 
MF delivery models. These are (i) the Agricultural Bank of Sudan Microfinance Initiative 
(ABSUMI, 2011) as a special MF programme within the ABS; (ii) Bara’ah (2009-10) as a 
community owned MF model; and (iii) Village Savings and Credit Groups (VSCGs, 2011-12) for 
internal capital formation in rural communities. The IFAD supported projects contributed 
technical assistance and infrastructure support; CBS supplied portfolio funds, licensing and 
supervision; SMDC provided additional portfolio funds and ABS supported portfolio funds and 
operations costs. 
159. ABSUMI model. ABSUMI’s objective is to provide rural finance services at the bottom layers of 
the rural economic pyramid through strong focus on women, high credit discipline and savings 
habits. At present ABSUMI has 10 units across 10 Localities in 5 states namely North Kordofan, 
West Kordofan, Sennar, White Nile and Khartoum. They cover a total of 323 villages reaching 
around 30,000 members through 1,800 groups. These units have disbursed over US$25 million 
through 100,000 loans a majority of which has supported clients in the IFAD villages. Overall, 
repayment performance is almost 98%. Its loan sizes range from SDG 1,000 - 6,000 for 6-12 
months at 30-36% profit margins (VSCGs, 80-100%; sheil merchants, above 100%) which is 
aimed to cover all costs and make ABSUMI sustainable by assisting new units to breakeven in 
2-3 years. So far 5 out of the 10 units are operationally self-sustainable.  
160. Loans are delivered to individual members organised in solidarity groups of 20 members 
against group guarantee and without any physical collateral. The ABSUMI loans finance crop 
and livestock production activities, petty trading activities, micro-enterprises, butane gas stoves, 
paravets and integrated pest management service providers at the village level. It follows a 
savings led approach offering upfront, compulsory and voluntary savings products. Savings 
funds account for about 10-15% of the lending portfolio. The portfolio is heavily concentrated on 
livestock loans (75%) as crop loans are considered more. ABSUMI units are physically 
separated from the ABS branches and comprises a unit manager who is supported by a group 
of 5 to 10 credit officers. ABSUMI’s experiences with financing crop production loans is 
described later. 
161. Bara’ah model. Bara’ah was established in 2010 by the IFAD-SKRDP as a licensed (by CBS), 
professionally managed, central MFI owned by the communities it served. It is located in the Al 
Rashad locality of South Kordofan State and serves 3-4 neighbouring localities in the State. It 
received initial capital from SKRDP and additional financing from CBS-MFU and SMDC and 
has reached about 7,000 households with a portfolio of around US$1.5 million and around 95% 
repayment rate. Baraah’s community owned structure and management through locally 
recruited staff has contributed to its sustainability even in an environment of insecurity. 
Bara’ah’s loans range from SDG 1,000-6000 and support small agricultural activities, livestock 
related activities and small enterprises at 24-30% profit margins. It is operationally sustainable. 
The Baraa’h model has been used as a template by the CBS for developing business plans and 
licensing several other MFIs. 
162. Village savings and credit groups model. The VSCG model has been successfully 
implemented by IFAD-WSRMP in the Kordofan region. In this model voluntary groups of up to 
20 member were organised and encouraged to practice regular internal savings (US$1-1.5 
savings per month per member) and credit activities (5-10% profit margin per month). Both 
94 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
these activities have cumulatively helped to mobilise internal capital is around US$1 million in 
1,357 VSCGs with 23,000 members [90% women], in 264 communities across 19 localities in 
the North, South and West Kordofan States. They have cumulatively disbursed around US$13 
million as internal credit/investment with 99% repayment rate. In some villages 3-4 VSCGs 
have together accumulated around US$25,000 as internal capital in 3-4 years of operation 
reducing credit dependence on external FIs. They have also started pooling resources to 
finance community level investments such as water points. Men’s VSCGs have started 
emerging. The VSCGs provide loans to members at 5-10% monthly profit margin for 2-
3 months for a variety of activities including crop production, livestock fattening and small 
businesses such as bread making, clothes selling and grocery shops. Their operations costs 
are very limited and thus the profit margins fully cover their costs making them fully sustainable. 
Excess earning are added as group capital and used to disburse additional loans. 
163. WSRMP implemented the VSCG model alongside ABSUMI in order to attract ABSUMI to 
WSRMP villages and form linkages with the already existing VSCGs based on their internal 
credit history. This was a major success and helped ABSUMI to anchor itself easily in around 
50 WSRMP villages followed by expansion in the neighbouring villages. Special conditions 
were established to ensure that VSCGs were linked to ABSUMI within 2-3 months of formation. 
After linkage the VSCGs continued their internal savings and credit activities in parallel to 
ABSUMI activities. Linkage of ABSUMI/MFIs to VSCGs has proven essential for sustainability 
of services. This is because ABSUMI has stopped lending to some old groups after they 
completed the final loan cycle and without the internal capital from the VSCG activities these 
groups would have collapsed. Unfortunately, the SUSTAIN and SDP designs did not include 
the VSCG model. Thus, the smallholders in the target villages are completely dependent on 
external credit which suffers from uncertain supply and rigid terms that affect the full adoption of 
improved crop production technologies. 
164. Experiences with SUSTAIN and SDP on crop production loans. In the Sinnar region 
ABSUMI offered crop production loans (2015 onwards) to assist the scaling-up of conservation 
agricultural practices successfully demonstrated by the SUSTAIN project. In the Kordofan 
region ABSUMI designed and offered a special seasonal crop loan product (2015 onwards) for 
adoption of improved agricultural practices by SDP farmers. This involved loans to men or 
women’s groups, repayment of the loan at harvest that linkage to adoption of improved 
production technologies.  
165. However, in both the cases the off-take of these loans have been very limited (around 2,000 in 
Sennar and 3,000 in Kordofan regions). The main reasons for low off-take is related to the 
limited adoption of the improved technology by the rainfed farmers making the first cycle loans 
to new clients very risky. The risk is enhanced as these loans are not backed by physical 
collateral or crop micro insurance products. The rainfed crop insurance market is not well 
developed and though some insurance companies offer crop insurance products they have 
poor rural outreach which affects verification and settlement of claims. High premium of around 
7% (50% government subsidy available), claim rejections and delay in claim settlements have 
eroded the interest of rainfed farmers in micro-insurance services.  
166. However, once the first cycle linkage is established ABSUMI/MFIs smoothly disbursed the 
following cycles based on repayment performance. Other causes for low-offtake included 
(i) lack of supply of improved crop production inputs and services; (ii) lending only through 
women’s groups (in Sinnar) while farmers were mainly men; (iii) recovery of 50% loan through 
monthly instalments which is linked to crop maturity (in Sinnar); and (iv) poor coordination 
between SUSTAIN/SDP extension officers and ABSUMI credit officers leading to gaps in 
planning and client mobilisation. 
95 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
Subcomponent 3.2 description 
167. This subcomponent will increase smallholder farmers’ access to finance for adopting improved 
agricultural packages. It will support smallholder farmers to meet their financing requirements 
for (i) improved crop production activities and (ii) post-harvest marketing activities.  
(a) Improved crop production activities will be supported by facilitating (i) smallholder 
farmers’ access to crop production financing to increase the demand for improved crop 
production packages; (ii) MSPs and agro dealers access to asset financing (agricultural 
machinery) and working capital loans (seeds, agrochemicals) for increasing the supply of 
improved crop production inputs and services. 
(b) Post-harvest marketing activities will be supported by (i) post-harvest shared marketing 
contracts with ABS; and (ii) access to credit from financial institutions on pilot basis against 
crops secured in village level storage facilities. 
Improved crop production financing 
Increase smallholders’ access to crop production financing  
168.
IAMDP will increase smallholders’ access to finance for adopting improved crop production 
practices by facilitating (i) pre-financing linkages with buyers; (ii) formal crop loans from 
financial institutions; and (iii) informal loans from internal capital of village savings and credit 
groups. These areas are described below. 
Pre-financing linkages with buyers 
169.
IAMDP will strongly promote pre-financing from buyers (advance against future delivery of 
produce) as a major instrument for financing smallholders to adopt improved technologies. 
Buyer pre-financing is already visible in the French supported market focused gum Arabic 
development initiative in the project area. Moreover, the sheil system is an informal pre 
financing mechanism which is widely prevalent but exploitative of smallholders. IAMDP will 
strongly promote pre-financing from buyers while brokering buyer linkages with smallholders. 
The advance received by the smallholders will be settled by deducting it from the value of the 
produce delivered to the buyer at harvest. IAMDP will assist smallholders to negotiate market 
led selling price for their produce to ensure fair returns after the advance settlement. Where 
relevant IAMDP will link the buyer (pre-finance supplier) to MSPs and agro dealers in the 
project area for in-kind supply of quality inputs and services to the smallholders. It is expected 
that buyers will be supportive of pre financing smallholders who are already linked in previous 
seasons. For financing first time linkages IAMDP will support crop loans from PFIs through 
matching equity as described in the next section.  
Formal crop loans from financial institutions 
170.
IAMDP will increase smallholders’ access to formal crop loans by supporting PFIs with 
(i) revolving matching equity funds; (ii) TA, training, capacity building inputs; (iii) infrastructure 
and operations gap financing; and (iv) refinancing and extension service linkages.  
171. Revolving matching equity support: The high credit risk faced by FIs in delivering first cycle 
loans to smallholders, who lack credit history in high risk rainfed areas, is a major reason for the 
shortage of formal crop loans in the project areas. IAMDP will address this gap by providing 
revolving matching equity support to the PFIs specifically to finance first cycle loans of 
smallholders for the adoption of improved agricultural packages. The total credit funds required 
to finance the approved first cycle loans will be shared between the IAMDP matching equity 
(75%) and PFIs own funds (25%). Losses suffered on the first cycle loans will be shared in the 
same proportion and will reduce the PFIs’ credit risk while developing new crop loan linkages. 
IAMDP will contribute its share directly to the PFIs. The PFI will deliver these loans using the 
same mechanisms used for other seasonal loan without any special conditions that subsidise 
smallholders’ cost of funds or principal repayments.  
96 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
172.
It is expected that this mechanism will link 15,000 smallholders to formal credit source with 
average loan size of SDG 1,500, at 24-36% profit margin. PFIs will lend to smallholders against 
repayment cross guarantee by group members. On successful repayment of the first cycle loan 
the PFI will finance repeat loans using its own sources of finance. The project will structure the 
funds flow in a manner that the repayments of the matching equity from clients to the PFI is 
available in a project account at the end of each season. IAMDP will use these funds for 
supporting the existing or new PFI in subsequent seasons based on performance. At 
completion IAMDP will transfer these funds to the CBS-MFU (refer section below on 
partnerships) for possible topping-up and replication across the country.  
Implementation arrangements of Subcomponent 3.3  
173. The project will select at least two PFIs to offer services in each project locality. ABS and 
ABSUMI will be pre-selected as PFIs based on their existing partnerships and investment 
already received from other IFAD projects. Additional PFIs will be selected competitively based 
on (i) call for proposals and shortlisting potential PFIs; and (ii) assessment of detailed business 
plans (BP) submitted by the shortlisted PFIs and final selection based on criteria including 
(i) presence in multiple project localities; (ii) prior experience in delivering crop loans in rural 
areas; (iii) existing refinancing partnership with CBS, SMDC, etc.; and (iv) clear organisational 
strategy for developing crop loan portfolio. MFIs, commercial banks and development banks 
can all respond to the call for proposals.  
174. Partnership with ABS and ABSUMI. IAMDP will give special attention to developing strong 
partnerships with ABS and ABSUMI given ABS’ strategic focus on agricultural loans and 
building on the long history of IFAD projects’ partnership and investments in these institutions. 
The traditional microfinance window of the ABS is active in financing crop loans using the 
salem methodology. However, its outreach to the poor farmers is limited by the lack of 
presence on the ground in rural interior villages which has also affected its credit performance. 
On the other hand ABSUMI has a strong village level presence and better banking relationship 
with the target group clients. However, it does not offer salem loans and is not focused on the 
needs of farmers who require larger loans. Traditional ABS branches are present in almost all 
the localities in the project and their general investment products can support mechanised 
service providers and agro dealers to increase the supply of project promoted inputs and 
services in the project areas. Given these opportunities, the project will promote strong 
collaboration between ABS branches, ABS traditional microfinance window and ABSUMI 
through the following mechanisms; 
175. Promote the linkage of ABSUMI graduate clients to ABS. Stronger collaboration between 
ABSUMI and ABS will be promoted to ensure that the clients graduating from ABSUMI with 
very strong credit history are linked to ABS financing to support the further growth of their 
businesses. The project will encourage mechanisms for greater participation of ABS in tracking 
the growth of the economic activities of ABSUMI financed clients. It will support the 
development of investment plans by promising ABSUMI clients who are in the third or fourth 
cycle detailing their business objectives and growth plans after graduating from ABSUMI and 
specifying the financial requirements from ABS in order to achieve the targets of these 
investment plans. The project will provide technical assistance and training to ABS to develop 
financing packages to support the investment plans of the graduating clients. 
176. Facilitate performing ABSUMI borrowers linkage to ABS for salem loans.  Those ABSUMI 
clients who having successfully completed 2 to 3 cycles of crop production loans based on 
ABSUMI murabaha lending mechanism and are considered less risky for obtaining salem loans 
will be linked to the ABS traditional microfinance window for this service. The ABSUMI credit 
officers will facilitate this process in collaboration with the investment officers in the ABS 
branches. Details of different financing mechanisms are detailed later. 
177. Technical assistance for machinery financing. The project will hold awareness and training 
sessions for the staff in the ABS branches in the project area highlighting the opportunity for 
97 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
financing machinery service providers and agro dealers. It will share the list of MSPs and agro 
dealers compiled by the project with these branches. Additionally the project extension officers 
will promote ABS financing amongst MSPs, agro-dealers and related service providers at the 
village level. The project will support the development of investment plans by MSP and agro 
dealers. These will highlight how credit support from ABSUMI and other PFIs to the target 
group farmers will increase demand for their inputs and services and will also help in generating 
cash flows that can help in the repayment of the loans in a timely manner (refer financing for 
agrodealers and MSPs presented later). 
178. Financing mechanisms. The project will facilitate the PFIs to finance target group farmers 
mainly based on murabaha, salem and mugawala contracts. 
179. Murabaha based financing. The PFIs will support the target group farmers to access 
improved inputs such as seeds, seed dressing and agrochemicals by offering products mainly 
based on murabaha contracts. In this arrangement the PFI will purchase the inputs required by 
the clients from agro dealers and will sell these to the clients after adding a markup. The 
receivables from the client will be collected according to pre-defined repayment terms. It is well 
known that the perception of high credit risk is one of the main factors that deter financial 
institutions from crop production. Murabaha based lending will be emphasised as it involves in-
kind supply of the inputs to the farmers and reduces the risk of diversion of the borrowed funds 
to other activities by the clients. This modality will be emphasised especially for financing new 
clients who do not have prior credit history with crop production loans and are considered more 
risky. Overall, this will assist PFIs to increase their agricultural financing outreach.   
180. Salem based financing. Farmers repeatedly demand loans in cash as it allows them more 
flexibility and also because it makes it easier for them to make labour payment for activities 
such as manual weeding and harvesting. In order to address this demand the PFIs will consider 
providing cash loans as incentive to those farmers who achieve timely repayment over initial 
2-3 credit cycles. The cash loans will be structured mainly based on salem contracts. In this 
mechanism the PFI will disburse cash to farmers against the forward sales of the crop at salem 
prices declared by the government before harvest. After harvest the farmers will deliver the 
produce in kind to the PFI using the salem prices per bag.  
181. Mugawala based financing. The PFIs will support target group farmers to adopt machinery 
services such as tillage, planting, harrowing, spraying, mechanical weeding and harvesting. 
Mugawala contracts will be the preferred arrangement for financing such activities. 
Engagement of manual labour can also be addressed through mugawala contracts. In this 
mechanism the PFI will directly and immediately pay the service provider supplying these 
services to a group of farmers and will then recover the sum from the farmers along with a 
mark-up according to predefined repayment agreement. 
182. Partnership with other PFIs: The target of the project will be to have at least two PFIs 
available to offer services in each project locality. Based on a call for proposals IAMDP will 
shortlist potential PFIs based on the following criteria: 
(a) wide geographical presence across different states and across multiple project localities.  
(b) prior experience in successfully delivering crop loans in rural areas. 
(c) high levels of internal liquidity or existing partnership with refinancing sources such as CBS 
and SMDC that can generate funds for financing target group farmers. 
(d) Flexible and less bureaucratic decision-making process regarding the adoption and 
implementation of fine-tuned crop production loan products and methodologies.  
(e) Experience of partnerships with IFAD projects and understanding of IFAD project policies 
and procedures.  
 (f) Expanding rural portfolio with strong financial performance. 
98 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
(g) Presence of clear organisational strategy and commitment to developing crop production 
financing portfolio. 
(h) Availability of sufficient infrastructure and staff resources to reach between 500-1000 
clients in select project target villages without any infrastructure or operations support from 
the project.  
 (i) Low interest rate relative to other potential partners. 
183.
Investment plan/business plan based approach. The above conditions will be finalised in 
discussion with the CBS-MFU and the SMDC and potential partners will be shortlisted based on 
discussions with the CBS-MFU and the SMDC. The shortlisted MFIs will be invited to an 
information session where they will be presented with the scope of the project and the financing 
requirements for the target group clients. The information session will also be attended by 
representatives of the CBS MFU and SMDC. Based on the information about the project and its 
requirements the shortlisted MFIs will be requested to submit business plans addressing the 
following points: 
(a) overall background information about the ownership, management structure, products and 
delivery methodology, implementation arrangements, partnerships, external funds flows 
and financial performance of the MFI. 
(b) the products and the methodology that will be offered by these MFI for enabling technology 
adoption by the project target group farmers for increasing profitability from crop production 
activities. The nature of contractual arrangements to be supported in order to finance the 
clients should be clearly defined along with the profit margins and profit-sharing 
arrangements. 
(c) The overall engagement plans of the shortlisted MFIs in the project villages including crop 
production loans, other credit products, potential saving services and insurance service 
facilitation.  
(d) Service delivery arrangements including the details of the branch structures, field visits and 
village level service delivery, monitoring and repayment collection methodology that will be 
adopted.  
(e) Projections of the growth in outreach of the services of the MFI in and around the project 
villages over the next 3 to 5 years.  
 (f) Financial plan with projections of growth in the portfolio, operations costs, revenue and 
profitability and credit performance in terms of repayment rate and portfolio at risk to be 
achieved over 3-5 years.  
(g) Volume of portfolio and operations financing that will be required in order to fund the growth 
in outreach, the sources of such financing, infrastructure requirements and human resource 
additions and nature of technical assistance, training and capacity building required for 
achieving the outreach targets. 
184. The project will ensure that the activity of the financial partners is not just confined to crop loans 
but encompass the full range of demand driven services and products in the rural setting. 
These will include savings services, seasonal loans for normal crop production activities, 
livestock production loans and credit for supporting small enterprises and services. In addition, 
the project will facilitate the PFIs to develop methodologies that are sustainable and can 
continue without project support even after the end of the project. 
185. The project will assess the proposals submitted by the MFIs and in discussion with the CBS 
and the SMDC finalise the first set of partners. The selected PFIs will be invited to technical 
session to refine and finalise their investment plans for partnering with the project. The quantum 
of portfolio support required from the CBS and SMDC will be determined. At the end of the 
technical session the partners and the project will sign a memorandum of understanding 
99 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
defining their activities, roles and responsibilities. The CBS and SMDC will also be a signatory 
to this MOU expressing commitment to fund the portfolio financing needs of the PFIs for 
meeting their outreach targets in the project area. The same process will be followed for 
including additional partners in subsequent years of the project depending on the growth in 
credit demand in the project areas. 
186. Access to portfolio funds. The PFIs will be responsible for mobilising the portfolio funds 
according to the investment plans and signed MoUs with the project. These funds will either be 
a part of their existing liquidity or contributed by CBS-MFU/SMDC. The nature of partnership 
between CBS MFU/SMDC is described in later sections in this report. Where required, the 
project will assist the PFIs to develop and strengthen the relationships with CBS-MFU and 
SMDC by providing technical assistance to strengthen the funding proposals to 
CBS-MFU/SMDC, supplying necessary information and data requirements for such proposals 
and brokering negotiations between the PFIs and the apex financing institutions.  
187. Access to operations fund. In general the PFIs will be responsible for bearing all operations 
costs related to the management of their financial operations in the project area including, staff 
salaries, transportation, stationery and other administrative expenses. The projections of the 
operations costs in the investment plans prepared at the beginning of the partnerships will 
serve as the basis of estimating the operations costs involved. If a partner MFI is successful in 
achieving its targets for the first 1 to 2 years including the credit performance targets then the 
project may consider financing a part of its operations costs for further expansion in outreach to 
new areas as a part of the incentive package for developing the crop financing outreach of 
PFIs. IAMDP support to operations costs will not exceed 50% of the incremental costs for 
expanding outreach to new project villages for a maximum of two years. 
188. Technical assistance, training and capacity building of PFIs. IAMDP will organise TA, 
training and capacity building to support PFIs’ to (i) refine their business plans by developing 
products and delivery methodologies to address the full range of MF needs by the target 
households including savings services and crop, livestock and microenterprise loans; and 
(ii) harmonise RF implementation plans with IAMDP implementation structure involving the 
SPIUs and LETs. IAMDP will train the PFIs’ credit officers (CO) on the improved crop 
production packages and provide them with active exposure to the demonstrations of new 
technologies. It will provide the PFIs with total investment estimates, cost benefit estimates and 
credit requirement estimates for different crop models involving the project promoted 
technologies. The RFE in the PCU and the RFS in the SPIUs will anchor TA, capacity building 
and training activities in collaboration with local service providers mainly hired from the pool of 
individuals trained by previous IFAD projects for development and implementation of ABSUMI, 
Bara’ah and VSCG models.  
189. With regards to training of the PFIs, the project will organise training sessions for developing 
basic knowledge and understanding of the PFI credit officers regarding the adoption details and 
benefits of the project promoted improved crop production packages. The project will also 
facilitate strong and active exposure of the PFI management and the credit officers to the on 
and off farm demonstrations particularly the practical application of the improved services and 
inputs including improved land preparation techniques, improved seeds, application of seed 
dressing, weeding using manual and chemical methods, harvesting, threshing and packaging 
inputs. The exposure to these demonstrations should convince the PFIs management and the 
credit officers that (i) it is practically possible for the target group farmers to implement the 
project supported improved crop production practices in their farms; (ii) the adoption of these 
improved technologies can substantially increase the production of the farmers; (iii) the 
increase in production can generate higher cash flows that can reduce the risk of 
non-repayment on crop production loans; and (iv) developing a portfolio of crop production 
loans can be a good business strategy specially when linked to the adoption of the improved 
crop production packages by farmers. Based on training and exposure to the demonstrations 
100 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
the project will assist the PFIs to develop or fine tune existing crop production credit products 
and delivery methodologies.  
190.
Infrastructure support and operations gap financing to PFIs. The lack rural branches, 
inadequate transportation and high initial operations costs are some of the main challenges 
faced by FIs intending to expand their rural outreach. Based on performance in the first 3 years, 
the project may assist promising PFIs in the areas of (i) rural branch establishment by 
supporting their office furniture, equipment and transportation needs; (ii) technology adoption 
for strengthening the MIS and loan tracking systems, payment systems, integrating mobile 
banking and agent banking services; (iii) limited operations costs support to new rural branches 
of PFIs before they break even by financing partial staff costs, specially agribusiness 
development staff, for 1-2 years. All assets will be procured by IAMDP following IFAD 
procurement guidelines and delivered to the PFIs in kind. 
191. Facilitate PFIs partnerships to refinancing and extension services. IAMDP will facilitate 
partnership between the PFIs and the refinancing partners such as CBS-MFU, SMDC and 
commercial banks. It will also facilitate PFIs partnerships with the guarantee agency and micro 
insurance agencies where relevant, without direct financial support to them. 
192. CBS-MFU and SMDC. IAMDP will broker the PFIs’ refinancing partnerships with CBS-MFU 
and the SMDC to ensure that the PFIs have sufficient access to portfolio funds for meeting the 
crop loans targets in the project area for 4-5 cycles. IAMDP will build on the partnerships 
already established between previous IFAD projects and CBS-MFU/SMDC during the 
development of ABSUMI and Bara’ah. The CBS-MFU is will refinance PFIs from two sources, 
repayments collected on the US$100 million disbursed so far to the MFIs and additional 
financing of US$100 expected from the Islamic Development Bank and the Arab Fund over the 
next 5 years. SMDC is willing will use a part of its US$10 million investment capital.  
193. The RF coordinator (PCU) will broker the portfolio financing partnerships between PFIs and 
CBS-MFU and SMDC. CBS-MFU and SMDC will be invited to participate in the selection of the 
PFIs, fine tuning the PFIs’ business plans and developing refinancing MOUs based on the 
business plans. IAMDP may support the refinancing partners to improve their supervision 
processes and M and E systems through technology adoption and assist them to participate in 
exposure, capacity building and training events, based on performance. They will also be 
invited to participate in supervision missions and to witness the crop financing success stories 
in the project area. Knowledge sharing workshops and publication of information booklets will 
be supported to promote the diffusion of the successful financing models amongst other MFIs 
through the refinancing partners. 
194.
 Guarantee agency. The CBS has recently established the Guarantee Agency (GA) as an 
autonomous entity to provide up to 75% wholesale guarantee to MFIs seeking refinancing from 
commercial banks or farmers’ organisations seeking loans from commercial banks. Where 
relevant the project will facilitate partnerships between the GA and PFIs (also farmers’ 
organisations) to enable the latter to borrow from commercial banks. The guarantee agency 
has been newly established and still has limited outreach. Depending on its responsiveness to 
the project needs. 
195. Micro insurance services. The project will facilitate linkage between the PFIs and micro 
insurance companies to enable credit guarantees to the PFIs for its crop production loans. The 
role of the project will be facilitate better terms and conditions for the credit guarantee for the 
PFIs considering; bulk demand for such insurance and lowered risks due to adoption of 
improved technologies, enhanced extension services and adoption of appropriate crop varieties 
e.g. pest and drought resistant.  
196. Extension services. IAMDP will ensure strong implementation level coordination between the 
COs from the PFIs and the State and Locality RCOs from the project. The RFS in the SPIUs 
will train the State and Locality RCOs to facilitate (i) mobilisation of improved crop loan 
101 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
applicants; (ii) PFIs linkages to input suppliers, services providers and buyers; (iii) community 
sensitisation on PFIs’ services, terms and conditions and group formation and financial literacy 
training; and (iv) group formation (refer VSCG development) and their training on financial 
literacy, business management and marketing development topics to facilitate linkage to the 
PFIs. PFIs will be responsible for loan appraisal, disbursements, credit monitoring and 
repayment collection. 
Informal loans from village savings and credit groups (VSCGs) 
197. The rural finance environment in the project area is fragile with limited graduation options for 
MFI clients. External MFIs have been known to stop lending to even to strong clients after the 
last loan cycle. Secondly, for some household the entry level credit requirement for adoption of 
new crop technologies is very low (SDG 300-600). In such cases dependence of the financial 
institution has affected adoption when the FI rejected of failed to lend on time. To overcome 
these challenges the IAMDP will promote entry level crop financing specially for very poor 
households through loans from internal capital of VSCGs which have been very successful in 
WSRMP.    
198. The project will develop men and women’s VSCGs each comprising up to 20 members saving 
regularly SDG 20-30 per month. The accumulated savings will be used to finance individual 
member activities and collective group activities. The profit margins earned on the investments 
will be ploughed back for increasing the group capital. Strong adoption of VSCGs in a village of 
around 100 households has shown (in WSRMP) to generate internal capital of SDG 100,000-
150,000 over 4 to 5 years which could easily finance improved crop loans for 50-60 
smallholders. Some of the SCGs can choose to operate as Producers Associations (PA) and 
will be registered accordingly. From the onset these will function as strong institutions founded 
of a culture of member discipline, regular savings, business orientation and focus on internal 
capital generation.  
199. The locality RCOs will be responsible for VSCG formation. Building on the experience of 
WSRMP in VSCG development, the RCO will develop 1-2 VSCGs in a village in the process 
training up to two VSCG facilitators to replicate these groups in the rest of the village. Once the 
VSCGs in the village show positive results the project will actively support the dissemination of 
these success stories to neighbouring villages. This will indirectly support the adoption of the 
crop technologies in the surrounding villages. The project will support pay limited service 
charges and allowances to the VSCG facilitators for their services in the project villages and 
surrounding areas.  
200. Broadly, the groups will use three approaches for financing improved crop production using 
their internal capital. 
(a) The first approach will involve direct lending to the members and earning a profit margin on 
this investment from the clients mainly through murabaha, mugawala and salem contracts. 
Murabaha contracts will be used for enabling member to purchase inputs such as seeds 
and seed dressing while mugawala will be used for enabling their access to mechanised 
services such as land preparation and spraying. Additionally, in those villages with good 
storage facilities the groups can practice salem lending for financing cash loans mainly for 
hiring manual labour for weeding and harvesting activities.  
(b) The second approach will involve a group collectively investing in a crop production activity 
by hiring a larger land area. The management of this activity will be entrusted to 2-3 
members under musharaka contract whereby the profits will be shared between the group 
and the managers in a fixed ratio.  
(c) The third approach will involve the group members opting for collective but decentralised 
farming, producing the same crop separately in land belonging to each member but each 
adopting the same improved crop production package. This will help to better organise the 
delivery of the project supported services and inputs, potentially lowering their costs. It will 
102 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
also lead to increased production thus contributing to overall increase in the profitability of 
the members. 
201. VSCGs and producers associations. Some of the VSCGs can choose to operate as 
Producers Associations (PA) and will be registered accordingly. From the onset these will 
function as strong institutions founded of a culture of member discipline, regular savings, 
business orientation and focus on internal capital generation. They will also serve as good 
examples to other PAs in the village by demonstrating the benefits of member discipline, group 
cohesion, regular group activities, off-season internal credit practices, regular savings and 
internal capital development. These factors will support the institutional strengthening of the 
PAs. Their strong, vibrant nature and internal credit history will assist in developing external 
linkages to formal financial institutions and will contribute to the sustainability of the PAs after 
the project. 
202. The VSCG implementation process will be as follows: 
203. Selection and training of VSCG facilitators. The rural finance extension officer (RFO) in a 
locality extension team will be responsible for VSCG formation in any village. The person will 
begin the process by selecting two VSCG facilitators in each village and training them on the 
objectives, benefits and process of group formation and management. Details regarding VSCG 
facilitators are presented later in this paper. The RFO will directly form the first two VSCGs in a 
project village assisted by the VSCG facilitator. Thereafter, the VSCG facilitator will be 
responsible for developing additional groups in the village under the supervision of the RFO. 
204. Group formation criteria. Only women’s groups will be promoted during the first year and 
men’s groups will be formed from the second year onwards. The broad criteria for the formation 
of VSCGs will be (i) maximum 20 members; (ii) members drawn from the same neighbourhood; 
(iii) only one member per household; (iv) homogeneous economic conditions of members; and 
(v) members committed to regular savings. Each VSCG will select two office bearers 
comprising a group leader and an assistant group leader using literacy as key criteria and 
rotating the positions periodically.  
205. Group formation process. The group formation process will start with village awareness 
meetings for generating awareness about the VSCG methodology and its benefits. This will be 
followed by presenting the VSCG formation guidelines to community members based on their 
willingness to form VSCGs. The community will be provided with a 2-3 week period for initial 
group formation on voluntary basis strictly following the group formation criteria. Thereafter the 
RFO will verify that the newly formed groups comply with the group formation criteria. Additional 
1-2 weeks will be allowed to the communities for final group formation after addressing the 
gaps identified during group verification.  
206. Group training. The RFO and the VSCG facilitators will train the newly formed groups on 
savings and credit activities and other group functions. This training will orient the members to 
(i) group rules, regulations and byelaws focusing on the importance of financial discipline, 
regular group activities, and development of business orientation; (ii) savings and credit 
activities; and (iii) record keeping mechanisms. The group training will be based on the contents 
of the revised VSCG manual which will incorporate experiences of the WSRMP and the LMRP 
supported VSCG interventions. 
207.
Internal savings guidelines. During the basic group training each group will incorporate in its 
byelaws detailed terms and conditions for internal savings which will include the following 
(i) each group will independently decide the amount to be saved by its members and each 
member will save the same amount agreed upon by the group; (ii) it will be compulsory for each 
group member to save regularly into the group savings fund; (iii) group meetings will be held at 
least once a month during which member savings will be collected; (iv) gap in savings by any 
member or will not be allowed; (v) In dry seasons, when household cash flow reduces, the 
group can jointly decide to reduce the savings per member, but, savings will not be stopped 
103 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
under any circumstance; (vi) the groups will accumulate their savings and not cash-out at the 
end of specific periods; (vii) those groups which want to use the savings for social purposes 
such as marriages and festivals will be encouraged to save additional sums to develop funds 
for social and emergency expenses without reducing the core savings funds; and (viii) financial 
penalties will be imposed for violating group norms.  
208.
Internal credit guidelines. The internal loans from the group funds will be used to finance crop 
production loans as well as other activities depending on member requirements. The project will 
guide the groups on different mechanisms for financing crop production loans specially 
assuring their shariah compliance which is often a primary concern amongst VSCGs. The 
project will also expose the VSCGs to the demonstrations of the technological packages, 
improved crop production techniques and their impact on increasing production.  
209. The project will advise the VSCGs that at least for the first three years the earnings from 
investment activities should be accumulated as group capital. The groups will be free to set 
their own profit margins in negotiation with the clients. Experience shows that this usually 
ranges between 5-10% per month and is accepted by the clients. However, the project will 
guide the groups to offer flexible repayment terms where required depending upon the nature of 
the activities financed and their cash flows.  
210. Group registration. Initially the VSCGs will operate as informal groups undertaking savings 
and credit activities amongst group members. Over time, as they stabilise the project will 
facilitate their registration at the State level preferably as producers associations. The project 
will support the registration costs of those groups which (i) successfully use their internal funds 
for supporting the adopting of improved crop production technologies by individual members; 
and (ii) have some experience of successfully investing the internal funds in collective farming 
activities; (iii) plans to expand their collective farming initiatives. The project will actively link 
these VSCG producers associations to external sources of credit for expanding their farming 
activities. 
211. The project will develop detailed reporting formats which will be used by the locality RFOs to 
capture the performance figures of the VSCGs on a quarterly basis. The village level VSCG 
facilitators will assist the extension officers to collect the data from the VSCGs. 
212. Development of VSCG facilitators. At the village level the project will develop VSCG 
facilitators who will be responsible for the replication of the VSCGs within the village and also 
for providing business services to the groups especially assisting in their market linkage. The 
Key responsibilities of VSCG facilitators will be as follow: 
213. Replication of the groups in the project villages. The first 1-2 groups in any project village 
will be formed by the RFO. After this the VSCG facilitators will be responsible for formation of 
additional VSCGs in the village with close guidance and monitoring by the RFO. The 
development of the groups through the facilitators will not only reduce the cost of VSCG 
development but will also improve ownership of the group by the communities. It will make 
management support to the groups available from within the community and in the process will 
support their sustainability after the project. In general, VSCG facilitator will act on voluntary 
basis for replicating the groups within the project villages. However, the project will actively 
promote a system of payment by groups for the services of the VSCG facilitators.  
214. Replication of the groups in neighbouring villages. Once the VSCGs in the village show 
positive results the project will actively support the dissemination of these success stories to 
other villages resulting in demand for this intervention in these surrounding villages. The VSCG 
facilitators from the project villages will be a key resource person for working together with the 
RFO to select VSCG facilitators in the surrounding villages and for facilitating training 
workshops for the facilitators in the surrounding villages. Furthermore, the facilitators from the 
project villages will carry out follow-up visits to the neighbouring villages to assist the newly 
trained VSCG facilitators to develop the first 1 to 2 VSCGs in their villages.  
104 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
215. Marketing services to VSCGs. Where relevant the VSCG facilitators will provide marketing 
services to the VSCGs and to the individual members. For example, the person will organize 
transportation, broker supply of inputs, assist in fetching the best price for marketable produce, 
organize the supply of inputs and generate orders/marketing linkages for clients against the 
payment of service fees or commission. The presence of the VSCG facilitators would also 
potentially allow their utilisation as agents by mechanised service providers and agro dealers 
intending to expand their market in the project villages. 
216. Assist in village level data collection.  The VSCG facilitator will also be the focal point for the 
RCO in coordinating rural finance related activities at community level. The person will be 
trained on data collection formats related to rural finance and other relevant aspects of the 
project which will finally support the project M and E system. 
217. VSCG facilitator selection criteria. Up to two VSCG facilitators per project village will be 
selected by the RCO just after village selection. The criteria used for this selection will include 
(i) resident of the same community; (ii) good interpersonal skills; (iii) respected by the 
community; (iv) good relationship with community members; (v) preferably youth, physical fit to 
visit different parts of the community and also other surrounding communities; (vi) willingness to 
develop the VSCG system at the village level; and (vii) preferably owning a motorbike or animal 
drawn transport for facilitating movement within and between the communities. 
218. Training and exposure of the VSCG facilitator. The RCO will train the VSCG facilitators on V 
objectives, development process and management procedures for key savings and credit 
activities including VSCG book keeping and reporting, loan appraisals and conflict resolution 
mechanisms. The VSCG facilitators will be sent on exposure visit to WSRMP villages with 
strong VSCGs to interact with the experienced VSCG facilitators in these villages. After going 
through these steps the VSCG facilitators will closely assist the RCO to develop the first 1-2 
groups in any project village. After this the VSCG facilitator will be responsible for formation of 
additional VSCGs in the village with close guidance and monitoring by the RCO. 
Financing MSPs and agro input suppliers 
219. Seeds and agrochemicals dealers, retailers, machinery service providers, village level spraying 
service providers and integrated pest management agents have limited access to finance which 
has restricted the availability of these services to the smallholders. IAMDP will facilitate their 
credit linkage to FIs in response to increased demand for their services generated through the 
improved crop production loans from PFIs to smallholders. The loans to agro input suppliers 
are expected to range from SDG 10,000-40,000 and loans to MSPs are likely to range from 
SDG 10,000 – 150,000 depending on the nature of the agricultural machinery. 
220.
In coordination with interested financial institutions (ABS, other commercial banks) IAMDP will 
mobilise bulk credit application from MSPs and agro input suppliers in the project area at the 
beginning of the season and submit these to FIs for shortlisting. The project will assist the 
shortlisted applicants to develop of detailed business/investment proposals and feasibility 
plans. These plans will indicate the (i) the demand for the inputs/services created by project 
activities; (ii) the training and capacity building inputs by the project to the MSPs and agro input 
suppliers; and (iii) direct financing of the smallholders facilitated by the project to assist the 
payment for the services/inputs. Based on these factors the project will assist the applicants to 
negotiate lower physical collateral needs (where relevant for loans higher than SDG 50,000). It 
will also utilise the partnership with the guarantee agency to develop to cover up to 75% of the 
collateral requirements of MSPs and agro-dealers.  
Financing post-harvest marketing activities 
Post-harvest shared marketing contracts with ABS  
221. This will be initially piloted on a limited scale. The project will facilitate contracts between the 
farmers and ABS agreeing that at harvest a specified number of crop sacks will be stored in the 
105 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 4:  Detailed project description 
ABS storage facilities for 3-4 months after which the two parties will jointly on selling the stock 
based at prevailing market prices. At the time of the contract the ABS will pay a 30-50% of the 
current market price (at harvest) to the farmers. This access to cash will support the farmers to 
meet emergency expenses faced immediately after harvest without resorting to distress selling 
of the produce. After selling the stock and the net profits (deducting storage costs, marketing 
expenses by ABS) from the proceeds will be shared between the farmers and the ABS at 70:30 
ratio. ABS will pay out the share of the farmers after deducting the amount already paid at the 
time of the contract. The project will support this arrangement by assisting the development of 
guidelines and contract formats, sensitising and training farmers and ABS branches on the 
modalities, brokering the contracts between the ABS branches and farmers, supporting the 
development of collection centres and smooth delivery of the produce by farmers to ABS.  
Financing against crops stored in community level storage facilities  
222. This mechanism will also be implemented on pilot basis. Taking advantage of the presence of 
community level storage facilities developed in component 1, IAMDP will collaborate with ABS 
and other FI to develop post-harvest financing models against crops stored in these storage 
facilities. At the time of harvest the farmers will store their crops in the local storage facility and 
will approach the financial institution for loans against the stored crops as collateral. The FI will 
secure the collateral by putting a lock and potentially by deploying a guard at the facility. It will 
then supply in kind loans to meet the consumption needs and other requirements of the farmers 
after harvest. These contracts will usually be for 3 to 4 months after which the prices of the 
stored products are expected to rise. At this point the farmers will sell the produce with 
assistance from the bank if needed and settle their loans from the revenue generated. The 
average loan size will be US$15,000 for four pilots one in each state. The project will support 
this also as revolving matching equity. 
106 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation 
arrangements 
 1.
Numerous ministries and government institutions at the federal and state levels are involved in 
the development of rainfed agriculture.  
Federal Institutions 
 2.
 3.
Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning. MOFEP is the designated representative of the 
Government of Sudan for international economic relations, donors’ coordination, borrowing and 
provision of counterpart funding to projects including IFAD-supported projects. MOFNE also 
provides funds to the states for their recurrent operation and maintenance and to localities 
through the state governments for similar purposes. 
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry. MOAF is responsible for formulating national 
agricultural policy including that for gender equity, forests through the Forestry National 
Corporation, coordination between the state ministries of agriculture and acting as a technology 
authority and transfer agent for crop production, range and pastures. 
State Institutions 
 4.
 5.
 6.
Ministry of Finance and Manpower. The states’ MFMP have four main departments, each 
headed by a director: finance, economic planning, investment and trade. The finance 
department is responsible for budgeting and financial resource allocation including salaries of 
civil servants. The economic planning department is responsible for development planning at 
state level, supervision of development projects with multi-sector components, and projects 
implemented by NGOs and UN agencies. The financial base of the states comprises land 
sales, fees and commodity price differentials. These fall far short of the states’ recurrent budget 
requirement, which needs to be supplemented by the Federal Government’s transfers through 
the State Support Fund. 
Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Wealth and Irrigation. The MAAWI in each state has overall 
responsibility for rural resource development in the fields of agricultural services, extension, 
horticulture and plant protection as well as natural resources management including the 
development of, animal resources, range and pastures, and forestry. It functions independently 
except for activities related to plant protection, animal epidemic disease control, conservation 
and forestry, and research where staffs are seconded from the Federal MOAF, MOAR, ARC 
and FNC. 
Extension and technology transfer. In 2001, the Minstry of Agriculture and Forests upgraded 
the extension department into a Technology Transfer and Extension Administration (TTEA). 
This measure was taken in recogntion of the cenral role of extension in improving agricultural 
production and food security. The main objective was to bridge the gap between agricultural 
research and extention. In accordance with the decentralization of local government, the TTEAs 
were established at state level, with extension staff based in localities and rural administrative 
units. The MAAWIs are now responsible for the provision of extension services, but their 
capacity to do so is limited. While they do have some staff with technical training, they lack 
logistic support, appropriate equipment, and means of transportation. The Agriculture Revival 
Programme (ARP) – the main Government investment programme to boost agricultural growth 
- went further in the decentralization process, and called for the establishment of extension and 
other agricultural services at the village level through a network of community-based extension 
services and other service providers 
 7.
Ministry of Engineering Affairs and Physical Planning. The MEAPP has overall 
responsibility for state civil works including rural roads and rural water supply. Of special 
interest is the state water corporation (SWC) in each state, which is responsible for boreholes 
107 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
 8.
 9.
operation and maintenance and its supply through pipelines to the towns in the project area and 
hand pump installations in villages. It is also responsible for issuing licenses for water facilities, 
for setting the water prices, for regulating the water sector, and for arbitrating conflicts with 
users. MEAPP capacity is limited and there is a general deterioration in the rural facilities under 
its control, and there are problems of transparency in its operations. 
State Commission for Strategic Planning. This Commission meets semi-annually at state 
level and is composed of state ministers, parliamentary leaders and local leaders. Its main aim 
is to develop long term strategy for the development of the state and review the state 
investment and budget projects for their consistency with the long term strategy. This 
Commission has the potential to become the forum for state wide coordination among the 
executive, legislative and civil society bodies on policy, budgetary and operational issues. 
Farmer Producer Organisations (FPO). In the past farmers in Sudan were organised in 
different farmer unions (pastoralist union, horticulture union, mechanised farmers union, rainfed 
producers unions etc.) led at a higher level by the general Farmer's Union at Federal level. In 
2011 the Farmer's Union was replaced by a Council for Agricultural and Livestock Producers. 
Similarly, farmers were encouraged to register as Producer organisations under the Owners of 
Animal and Agricultural Production Professions (Organisations) Act under the auspices of the 
Federal Ministry of Justice. The Act stipulated the organisation of farmers under the following 
groups (i) Agricultural producer organisations; (ii) Livestock producer organisations; (iii) Water 
user organisations. A new law on the registration of agricultural and livestock producer 
organisations was adopted in 2015, which is expected to be beneficial for farmers mainly with 
regard to finance opportunities and insurance.  According to figures from the Federal Ministry of 
Agriculture and Forestry up to date around 45% of the Sudanese farmers are registered in 
farmer producer organisations. At Federal level the number of registered producer 
organisations are 21,200 (as of June 2017). Of these, 20% are livestock producer organisations 
and 80% are agricultural producer organisations. The federal law is applicable at state level. In 
Sinnar state the number of registered producer organisations are 2,035. The SUSTAIN project 
has so far registered 155 farmer producer organisations. In greater Kordofan, the number of 
registered farmer organisations are 1,190 (700 in South Kordofan, 143 in West Kordofan, and 
347 in North Kordofan. The SDP project has so far registered 272 farmer producer 
organisations 
 10.
 11.
Village Development Councils (VDCs) have been implemented widely in IFAD project in 
Sudan as the community level as village-based institutions registered under the State Law for 
Community Development Committees. They consist of about 10-15 members, 30% being 
women. They have a variety of responsibilities across IFAD projects such as community 
development, operation and maintenance of community services, management of the sanduq 
as the microfinance arm in each village. They often lack market/profit and sustainability 
orientation. Although they are effective in developing an enabling environment for the smooth 
delivery of project services they are less successful in the delivery of financial services and in 
the handling of financial resources.  
Rural finance institutions. Agriculture Bank of Sudan Bank owned microfinance model 
(ABSUMI): This model was piloted by the Agricultural Bank of Sudan (ABS) in North and South 
Kordofan in the WSRMP project. In addition, Community owned apex microfinance institution 
model (Baraah): Baraah was established as a licensed, professionally managed central 
microfinance institution owned by the communities it served in the region. The development of 
the Baraah model was supported through the rural finance component of the IFAD-funded 
project SKRDP and additional Swedish funds.  
 12.
Lead project agency. The lead project agency will be the Federal Ministry of Agriculture and 
Forestry. A lean Project Coordination unit (PCU) will be established in El Obeid in North 
Kordofan State to provide overall leadership and oversight of implementation activities. The 
implementation activities will be conducted by the four State Project Implementation Units 
108 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 5: 
Institutional aspects and implementation arrangements 
 13.
 14.
 15.
(SPIU), to be established one in the Sinnar State and one each in North Kordofan, South 
Kordofan and West Kordofan.   
Central Project Coordination Unit.  A Project Coordination unit (PCU) will be established in El 
Obeid in North Kordofan State to provide overall leadership and oversight of implementation 
activities.  The lead Project Coordination Unit would include the following key staff: principal 
project coordinator, a technical team led by a private sector engagement/marketing specialist, 
production specialist, and rural finance specialist as well as the finance manager, senior M&E 
and KM officer, community and gender development officer, procurement officer, and an 
accountant.  . 
State Project Implementation Units. The implementation activities will be conducted by the 
four State Project Implementation Units (SPIU), to be established one in the Sinnar State and 
one each in North Kordofan, South Kordofan and West Kordofan.  In each State SPIU, the key 
project staff would consist of a State project coordinator, M&E and KM officer, private sector 
coordinator, marketing coordinator, crop protection specialist, mechanization specialist, 
community and gender development officer, accountant, and rural finance officer.  
At the field level, thirteen multidisciplinary LET (4 SK, 3 in NK, 3 in WK, 3 in Sinnar) will play a 
key role in the project implementation at the village level. At the field level, the multidisciplinary 
Locality Extension Teams (LET) will play a key role in the project implementation at the village 
level. Each LET consists of the following staff: locality private sector officer/team leader, locality 
crop protection officer, locality mechanisation officer, locality agroforestry officer, locality 
marketing officer, locality rural finance and community gender development officer. Most of 
these teams have been trained by SUSTAIN, SDP and WSRMP on targeting and gender focus, 
participatory transfer of technology, management of demonstrations, and liaison with private 
operators but much more will need to be done by IAMDP to deepen their knowledge and to 
take care of the high levels of staff turnover. Each extension agent will be responsible for the 
implementation of a monthly programme and the preparation and submission of monthly 
progress reports. Extension team leaders will prepare a consolidated monthly report. The staff 
of the Rural Agricultural Units (RAU) extension teams were selected competitively among the 
staff of the MAAWI. They will continue applying their current modus operandi introduced by 
SUSTAIN, SDP and WSRMP. A monthly inter and intra team coordination meeting will be 
organized at the RAU level. Monthly meetings at the SPIU level will be chaired by the M&E 
officer with the participation of the extension team leaders. The meetings at the RAU and state 
levels should discuss the progress made, difficulties encountered and remedies for addressing 
emerging problems. 
 16.
In order to take advantage of their experience and for a fast take-off of project implementation, 
it would be preferable to retain the good performing and competent staff of the above 
mentioned positions currently in charge of management of SUSTAIN and SDP. Other required 
staff would be recruited on a competitive basis, including secondment from relevant 
government state offices 
109 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge 
management 
Planning 
 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.
 6.
Planning processes.  At inception, the PCU will review and update, if necessary, the Logical 
Framework during IAMDP start-up workshops with the participation of representatives from all 
stakeholder groups, including communities, prepare the Overall Work Plan & Budget and fine-
tune the first Annual Work Plan & Budget (AWPB). 
Thereafter, the PCU will prepare each year a consolidated AWPB incorporating the five State 
AWPBs generated by SPIUs for review and approval by the PSC.  These AWPBs will provide a 
detailed description of activities to be carried out during the coming year, and the sources and 
uses of funds.  The process will take into account the utilisation and achievement of plans from 
previous years and link clearly the proposed budgetary envelope with physical results to be 
achieved.  AWPBs will be submitted in advance of the GoS annual budgeting process to ensure 
that sufficient counterpart funds are made available. 
Performance-based contracts and MoUs with non-governmental service providers will stipulate 
clearly the results to be achieved.  Final payments will be contingent both on acceptance of the 
works or services and on receipt of a certified report quantifying the results achieved. 
Progress reporting.  Each SPIU will monitor progress in its intervention zone within the 
standardised IAMDP M&E framework and agreed set of indicators.  For day-to-day operations, 
the counterpart State Development and Adaptation Teams will generate the data and track 
outcomes and outputs.  The PCU will be responsible for the consolidation of M&E reports at 
federal level.  This decentralized data collection structure will allow project management to 
benefit from the provided information and avoid duplication of effort. 
Mid-Term Review.  Alongside the AWPB cycle, a comprehensive Mid-Term Review will be 
conducted in Mid PY3 to reassess the IAMDP design in the light of implementation experience. 
The main objectives will be to assess: (i) project achievements against targets, including 
numbers of expected beneficiaries (women and youth); (ii) interim project impact; (iii) efficiency 
and effectiveness of project management; and (iv) sustainability arrangements. 
Project Completion Report.  Towards the end of IAMDP implementation, the PCU will prepare 
a comprehensive internal Project Completion Report (PCR), to summarise achievements set 
against design intentions, and, drawing on intermediate and final evaluation studies, to assess 
overall impact and prospects for sustainability of gains in the economic and social resilience of 
the target population.  The PCR will include a stocktaking of innovations, lessons learned and 
good practice, and an assessment of the extent to which project knowledge and experience 
have been captured, analysed and documented for wider dissemination and possible upscaling.   
Monitoring and evaluation 
 7.
Role of M&E in results-based Project management.  The main objectives of IAMDP M&E 
are: (i) to provide timely and accurate information on implementation progress and constant 
feedback into project management and decision makers for decision-making and addressing 
potential plan deviations and problem areas; (ii) to evaluate the performance of implementing 
agencies and service providers; and (iii) to assess achievements at the levels of outcomes and 
impact.  All M&E data will be disaggregated by gender, age and locality.  A manageable 
number of key indicators will inform the M&E design, taking into account IFAD’s Results and 
Impact Management System (RIMS). 
 8.
Baseline and impact studies.  A thorough Baseline Survey will be conducted in PY1 by a 
qualified service provider in a representative sample of communities within the targeted 
Localities, with a small statistical control group selected in adjacent areas.  The survey will 
111 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 6:  Planning, M&E and learning and knowledge management 
concentrate on benchmarking those aspects in which IAMDP is intended to make a difference, 
including household assets and incomes, economic activity, social capital, social exclusion, 
private sector involvement, etc.    
 9.
Final impact evaluation.  The internal PCR will provide the basis for a substantial Final Impact 
Evaluation commissioned from an independent service provider at the end of implementation to 
assess (i) project effects and impact; (ii) sustainability of those effects; (iii) potential for 
upscaling project activities; (iv) lessons learned from implementation and recommendations for 
follow-up interventions; and (v) IAMDP’s outcomes and impact contributing to the achievement 
of national objectives in the rural sector.  The research will mirror the scope and methodology of 
the baseline study to the extent possible, to detect any changes in precisely the same 
indicators selected and to attempt to attribute observed changes to project interventions and/or 
to other factors. 
Learning and knowledge management 
 10.
 11.
Project knowledge products and learning processes.  IAMDP will address three particular 
issues to ensure effective implementation: (i) building brand recognition and visibility, primarily 
to rural women and youth and their organisations; (ii) extending beneficiary access to enterprise 
development and value addition information, lessons learned and best practices; and 
(iii) facilitating the collection, sharing and dissemination of enterprise development and the PPP 
arrangement, lessons learned and best practices. 
Annual IAMDP planning workshops will provide fora for documenting lessons learned and 
identifying promising areas for knowledge generation, providing stakeholders with an 
opportunity to express needs, successes and constraints, as well as fostering collaboration and 
brokering partnerships.  The main anchoring points for knowledge management will be 
identified, including research institutions, civil society, regional KM networks and specialised 
service providers.  The project will package and disseminate information to the respective 
stakeholders in appropriate formats, such as brochures, studies, articles, newsletter, TV and 
radio, and social media. 
 12.
Building on previous experience with IFAD-supported projects, universities and research 
institutions, particularly ARC, will be the major IAMDP partners for learning and KM.  For 
example, these centers have been and still are capable of developing and showcasing crop 
varieties, crop protection chemicals, fertilization, and equipment that are not in common use in 
the locality for the rainfed sector. 
112 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement 
arrangements 
A.  Financial management risk assessment 
Inherent risks: country issues, entity risks and project design 
 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.
 6.
A comprehensive financial risk assessment has been carried out for the proposed project.  
Inherent country and entity risk and the control risk as reflected in Appendix 7.2.  The initial risk 
has been rated as high and residual risk as medium after the implementations of the mitigation 
measures.  Financial management arrangements, as they existed for the on-going projects of 
Seed development Project (SDP) and Supporting Small Scale Traditional Rainfed Producers in 
Sinnar State (SUSTAIN) were assessed.  
The inherent financial management risk and country risk is rated as HIGH.  Transparency 
International’s Corruption Perception Index ranked Sudan 170 of 176 countries in 2016, with a 
score of 1.4 in 2016, showing very slight improvement as compared to 1.2 in 2015. 
The latest PEFA assessment for Sudan was carried out in 2010 and no further financial 
management assessment was carried out since then. However, recent reports done by 
international organizations provide insight into Sudan's public financial management (PFM). In 
the Public Financial and Macroeconomic Management Capacity Building Appraisal Report done 
in 2013, the African Development Bank reported the PFM is characterized by inadequate 
internal control and accounting systems, limited transparency in government processes, the 
ineffectiveness of procurement and audit, shortage of qualified accounting and auditing staff, 
absence of a robust legal framework and less than optimal governmental financial control 
systems. Other issues identified include public expenditure controls, public procurement, cash 
and treasury management, internal and external audit at both federal and state levels. 
Further, the Global Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation's Country Brief: Sudan 
for 2015, reported that the government is taking numerous steps to strengthen their PFM, along 
with other measures such as the adoption of Treasury Single Account (TSA), in parallel with the 
introduction of Accrual-based, instead of Cash-based budgetary accounting. The Government 
with the assistance of the IMF has drawn a PFM Reform Action Plan. The Ministry of Finance 
and Economic Planning (MoFEP) expressed its desire to re-engineer the PFM business 
process through the acquisition of an Integrated Financial Management Information System 
(IFMIS) as part of its PFM reform agenda. Specifically, the government considers the 
implementation of IFMIS as an essential element of the PFM reform agenda. Putting in place 
an IFMIS at Federal level would enable the government to control spending, deficits and 
achieve greater efficiencies and accountability in the budgeting process. The implementation of 
IFMIS system is currently underway. 
Strengths are noted in the External Audit function, which is well developed and well respected 
in Sudan.  As this project will build on the on-going SDP and SUSTAIN project, the FM 
assessment showed that capacity within the context, built up over five years, exists to ensure 
that funds are used for the purposes intended. 
In November 2016, the Central Bank of Sudan lowered the commercial exchange rate that 
banks and foreign-exchange rate bureau are allowed to use from around SDG 6.7:USD 1 to 
SDG 15.8:USD 1, more or less the same as the black-market rate in the two preceding months. 
The new exchange rate amount consists of fixed rate part and an incentive part. The incentive 
part is around 130% of the fixed rate. IFAD projects with designated accounts at commercial 
banks receive the incentive part; however projects were instructed by MoFEP to not use the 
incentive without MoFEP's prior approval.  IFAD engaged in dialogue with relevant 
stakeholders in GoS, advocating for the full exchange rate to be made available to projects to 
enable maintaining the purchasing power and achieve projects' development objectives 
113 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
including those with bank accounts held at central bank. Before disbursement can began, 
current treatment of exchange rate should be resolved by MoFEP. 
 7.
 8.
The quality of financial management of the current on-going projects of SDP and SUSTAIN has 
been rated as moderately satisfactory, weakness were noted in the budgetary control and lack 
of sophisticated accounting system.  
IAMDP inherent and Programme control financial management risks and proposed mitigating 
actions are detailed in Appendix 7.2 available on desk, to be included in the PIM. 
B. 
Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Financial management organization and staffing 
 9.
The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in El Obied - Kordofan (currently the managing unit of the 
on-going SDP) and the State Project Implementation Units (SPIUs) will be either staffed by 
retaining staff members in charge of the respective position under the on-going projects, based 
on performance; or through competitive hiring from local market. Terms of references of the key 
positions will be approved by IFAD prior to starting of the recruitment process or confirmation of 
those in charge into the new jobs.  Staffing will comprise of the following position at both PCU 
and SPIU levels. 
PCU level 
(a) One financial manager- qualified accountant, with at least 15 years of experience in 
financial management, including experience in donor funded development projects; 
(b) One senior accountant – Bachelor in Accounting, with a minimum 10 years of experience in 
the accounting field, including experience in donor funded development projects and their 
financial reporting requirements.  
SPIU level 
(a) One dedicated accountant and one finance assistant at each SPIU – Bachelor in 
Accounting. The accountants will be retained from on-going projects, based on 
performance or hired competitively from the local market. While the finance assistants are 
going to be sourced through secondment from respective department of MoAF/MoFEP. To 
ensure segregation of duties exists, the procurement function will be separated from those 
of finance. Consequently, will be carried out by dedicated procurement staff.  
(b) As a condition of disbursement, the key staff should be appointed and in place before 
disbursements begin. In order to kick-start the implementation shortly after effectiveness, it 
was agreed with MoFEP to retain key staff, based on performance, of on-going SDP and 
SUSTAIN projects. 
(c) Detailed job descriptions for each member of finance team will be included in the PIM. The 
ToRs of the key position will be approved by IFAD prior to starting of the recruitment 
process or confirmation of currently in charged staff.  The position will be hired with annual 
contracts renewable on satisfactory performance.  Changes to seconded staff may be at 
the request of IFAD or GoS with agreement from the other. 
Budgeting 
 10.
The project will follow bottom-up approach in preparation of Annual Work Plan and Budget 
(AWPB). AWPB will be initiated at the community/ locality level based on beneficiaries needs. 
These will be presented to the respective SPIU which will consolidate and format for 
submission to the PCU. All project activities will be included in the AWPB that will indicate what 
activities and expenditures will be implemented at Locality, State and PCU levels, and by each 
financing source (IFAD, counterpart funds and beneficiaries in kind and in cash contribution).  
Budgets will be presented in a format that presents separately the amounts on quarterly basis 
and by each financier.  The PCU will ensure that all budgets are prepared in a consistent and 
114 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
timely manner for submission to the Project Steering Committees (at local and federal levels), 
MoFEP and IFAD.  AWPBs, once approved, will be available to all project parties.  To ensure 
transparency, project related documentation will be circulated by PCU to all concerned staff in 
PCU and SPIUs.  
 11.
The accounting system will include a budget module that will allow uploading yearly budget at 
the start of each financial year and consequently facilitating tracking of actual against budgeted 
expenditures on monthly basis and aid course corrections by management for significant 
variations from the budget. 
Disbursement arrangements and flow of funds 
 12.
 13.
 14.
The project will use available disbursement methods of replenishment, reimbursement and 
direct payments.  It is expected that most expenditures will be through the designated/operating 
account using the Imprest mechanism.  The ceiling authorized allocation will be based on 
budgets for six months.  IFAD Client Portal (ICP) is expected to be rolled-out in country before 
the effectiveness date of the project. Consequently, the project will use for submission of 
Withdrawal Applications (WA). 
The project is viewed as a continuation of the on-going SDP and SUSTAIN projects, in light of 
this, and in order to facilitate immediate start of the project upon effectiveness, 2017 AWPB of 
SDP can be amended to include the costs of procuring an accounting software system and 
preparation of the draft PIM and submit it for IFAD concurrence.  Alternatively, such costs can 
be included as part of the start-up costs to be incurred before the satisfaction of the general 
conditions precedent to withdrawal. These costs shall not exceed an amount of US$150,000. 
The start-up costs are intended to cover the recruitment of key personnel, the purchase and 
installation of appropriate accounting software, preparation of the financial management section 
of the Project Implementation Manual, all of which are conditions for disbursement. 
A EUR-denominated designated account will be opened for project to receive IFAD Grant at the 
Central Bank of Sudan/ Commercial bank acceptable to IFAD with an authorised allocation to 
allow for six months of projected project expenditures.  PCU will also open an SDG account, in 
a commercial bank acceptable to IFAD, into which the EUR will be converted on an as needed 
basis to meet eligible expenditures. Counterpart contribution will be transfer to the same 
account.  This SDG account pool account will be the same from which all transfers to SPIUs will 
be affected. 
 15.
Each of the four SPIUs will open SDG accounts in commercial banks acceptable to IFAD. 
 16. Withdrawal applications will be prepared on quarterly by the PCU, on receipt of statements of 
expenditures and reconciliations from SPIUs. 
 17.
 18.
 19.
 20.
 21.
The project will be allowed to use Direct Payment only for expenditures that are made in a hard 
currency, USD or EUR, to parties rendering services outside of Sudan, and where the contract 
has been signed for payment in the hard currency to an account outside of Sudan.  All goods, 
works and services rendered within Sudan will use the SDG for payment. 
Replenishment Applications prepared by the PCU will be submitted to IFAD, at a minimum 
every quarter or when 30% of the designated account has been utilized for eligible 
expenditures, whichever occurs earlier.  Details regarding the designated account allocations 
and SoE thresholds will be found in the Letter to the Recipient. 
The funds flow arrangements to meet eligible project expenditures are as follow, (and set out in 
a chart in Appendix 7.1). 
A Designated Account in EUR will be held at the Central Bank of Sudan from which drawdowns 
will be made to the SDG operational account. 
Project Operational Account A in SDG will be opened and managed by the PCU, shall receive 
funds transferred from the Designated Account. 
115 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
 22.
Project Operational Account A will be used to transfer all sources of funds to State Project 
Operational Accounts. 
 23.
States will open an SDG Project Operational Account for receipt of funds from the PCU. 
 24.
States will be responsible for advances and expenditures of the State Teams. 
 25.
 26.
 27.
The PCU, who is responsible for managing Project Account A, will ensure a timely flow of funds 
to the State Project Operational Account based on realistic quarterly or every six months’ cash 
forecast. 
All bank accounts in the project will have at least two authorised signatories.  All payments will 
be by bank transfer or checks, except for petty cash expenditures or expenditure related to 
activities implemented at community/locality level where it not possible to pay in checks. The 
payment will be made through an advance to responsible staff and cleared with all supporting 
documents as soon as the activity is concluded. No more than one advance can be given to an 
individual at given time without the preceding advance is settled, unless in exceptional 
circumstances and upon prior approval of management. The expenditures/activities that can 
only be paid in cash will be reflected clearly in the PIM. 
The fund flow under revolving matching equity (estimated amount $1.5 million equivalent) will 
be channelled upon by the project to the respective partner financial institutions (PFI) upon the 
receipt of the following: (i) The signed agreement between the project and PFIs managing the 
revolving matching equity for which no-objection should had been granted by IFAD and has 
been dully formalised; and (ii) a request from the respective PFI managing the fund specifying 
the amount and the bank details for the payment. The unitised balance upon the completion of 
the project will be transfer from PFIs to Micro Finance Unit in Central Bank of Sudan.  
 28. Mechanism of measurement, recognition of beneficiaries and private sector cash contribution; 
co-financing of Partner Financial institutions (PFIs) towards ISMGF and revolving matching 
equity; and in kind contributions are to be clearly reflected in the PIM.   
 29.
Counterpart funds is to be made available for the project in advance and on quarterly basis. 
Central Coordination Unit to follow up with MoFEP for the timely release of funds 
Internal Controls 
 30.
Sufficient staffing at the SPIUs and the PCU will allow for appropriate segregation of duties to 
ensure that the following tasks are separated between staff: 
(d) custody of assets; 
(e) authorization or approval of related transactions affecting those assets; and 
 (f)
recording or reporting of related transactions. 
 31.
All internal control mechanism will be detailed within the financial management arrangement of 
PIM which to be prepared before disbursement begins, including those for competitive 
Innovation Challenge Grant Programme for private sector, producer, or private sector/producer 
partnership;  and credit funds to partner financial institutions and its mechanism. The external 
audit will report any internal control weaknesses within the management letter.  
 32.
PCU to engage a firm which is familiar in donor’s procedures to prepare financial management 
arrangement of the PIM. 
Accounting systems, policies and procedures 
 33.
The PCU will procure well-tested LAN-based accounting software; the ToR will be cleared by 
IFAD.  The software will be dual language and able to record and report in SDG and EUR.  The 
accounting system will include a budgeting module, procurement and reporting module.  
Training on the software will be provided by the supplier to all finance and procurement staff at 
116 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
PCU and SPIU that will use the system.  The data will be backed up on a server/ hard disk on a 
daily basis. 
 34.
All accounting policies and procedures, related to the project will be clearly documented in the 
financial management manual, (as part of the overall PIM).   
 35.
The project will adopt Cash basis for accounting standard. 
 36.
The PCU will record advances to the SPIUs as an outstanding advance, and the SPIU will book 
the same as an advance.  The SPIU will record all expenditures as they are incurred and 
submit on a monthly basis, certified SoEs and reconciliations, which will liquidate the advance 
provided.  Such advances will qualify as eligible expenditure for IFAD once the expenditure has 
been recorded and not at the time of payment of the advance. 
 37.
Beneficiaries and private sector in kind contributions will be recorded under a separate fund set 
up within the accounting system.  The contributions will be collected and reporting through M&E 
system. 
Financial reporting 
 38.
 39.
 40.
The PCU will prepare monthly financial reports for the dissemination to the project management 
team (Principle Coordinator and State Coordinators).  These will be consolidated further into 
quarterly unaudited financial reports to be submitted to IFAD.  The financial Statements will be 
in formats acceptable to IFAD and samples of the same will be available within the Financial 
Management Manual.  The financial reports will provide information to management, financiers 
and related parties to facilitate decision-making processes. 
The PCU will consolidate its accounts with those of PIUs and produce audited and unaudited 
financial statements which, in line with IFAD’s General Conditions, will be submitted to IFAD 
within six and four months of the end of the fiscal year respectively.  The financial Statements 
will be prepared in accordance with the cash basis for accounting standard. 
PFIs shall provide a periodic financial report signed by authorised representative disclosing 
revolving matching equity reconciliation, resources and use of fund and list all payment made 
for lending and losses on default , beneficiaries names and other documents such as minutes 
of lending committee.   
Internal Audit 
 41. Given the complexities and risks arising from the wide geographical spread of project activities 
in 17 localities/129villages, the various implementation levels a, a full time qualified internal 
auditor will need to be assigned to the project by the General Directorate of Internal Audit of 
MoFEP. 
 42.
 43.
 44.
Internal audit reports will be made available to PCU and SPIUs, Steering committees and 
MoFEP.  Financial procedures (including procedures required at locality and community level) 
will be documented in a Financial Implementation Manual, which will be a condition for 
disbursement.   
A complaints handling system for community members will be prepared and implemented, to be 
monitored centrally at PCU. 
External Audit.  As the Supreme Audit Institution (SAI), the National Audit Chamber (NAC) has 
sufficient capacity to conduct audits based on ISA; they will be performing the external audit of 
the project at the Coordination unit and State/Locality and community’s levels.  To ensure that 
IFAD’s requirements are met, the project will share the Terms of Reference for the audit, which 
will be agreed to by the NAC prior to commencement of the annual audit.  The auditor and on 
annual basis will provide an audit report with a management letter on audit observations on 
internal controls.  The revolving match equity fund will be audited by the external auditor as part 
of their annual audit and PFIs shall make available to the auditors all necessary financial 
information and supporting document related to the use of the fund including financial reports, 
117 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
 45.
bank account information and supporting documents. To ensure that audit reports are 
submitted to IFAD within six months after the end of the fiscal year, engagement of the auditor 
will commence three months before the end of each fiscal year to ensure that the NAC has 
scheduled the audit soon after fiscal year end.   
Anticorruption and good governance framework.  The primary responsibility of detecting 
fraud and corruption lies with the recipient.  However, the project should note IFAD applies a 
Zero Tolerance Policy towards fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive actions in projects 
financed through its loans and grants.  “Zero Tolerance” means that IFAD will pursue all 
allegations falling under the scope of this policy and that appropriate sanctions will be applied 
where the allegations are substantiated.  IFAD shall take all possible actions to protect from 
reprisals individuals who help reveal corrupt practices in its project or grant activities and 
individuals or entities subject to unfair or malicious allegations.  Given IFAD’s Zero Tolerance 
described above, it is important that the staff and all stakeholders of the project are familiar with 
IFAD’s as well as national anticorruption policies and whistle blowing procedures.  The IFAD 
anticorruption policy is available on the IFAD website at 
www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/index.htm).  The IFAD website also provides 
instructions on how to report any alleged wrongdoing to the Office of Audit and Oversight 
(http://www.ifad.org/governance/anticorruption/how.htm). 
 46.
Taxation. IFAD Grant proceeds cannot be utilized for the payment of taxes and custom duties. 
Table 2: Summary of actions needed to mitigate FM risks 
Action 
Responsible 
party/person 
Recruitment of key financial staff at PCU and 
SPIUs. 
MoAF and MoFEP 
Target date/Covenants 
Disbursement condition in the 
Financing Agreement. 
Accounting software at PCU and SPIUs is 
installed. 
PCU/CCU 
Disbursement condition. 
Financial Implementation Manual (including 
formats for all transactions). 
PCU 
Disbursement condition. 
Full time internal auditor to be assigned to the 
project by MOEFP. 
General Directorate of 
MoFEP 
Mid-year in first year of 
implementation. 
118 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Appendix 7.1: 
Flow of funds chart  
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
(IFAD) (Grant) 
EUR Designated Account 
Government of the Sudan 
PCU SDG Bank Account 
SDG Account held at a 
commercial bank by 
SPIU in Sinnar 
SDG Account held at a 
commercial bank by 
SPIU in West Kordofan 
SDG Account held at a 
commercial bank by 
SPIU in South Kordofan 
SDG Account held at a 
commercial bank by 
SPIU in North Kordofan 
Civil works, vehicles & equipment, technical 
assistance & training, grants & recurrent costs 
Private Sector 
Suppliers and service providers bank 
accounts for Matching Grant Facility 
Revolving matching equity fund 
to PFIs 
Lending 
Suppliers and service providers, 
outside Sudan above EUR 200,000 
e
c
n
a
a
B
l
Beneficiary 
End of  project 
Central Bank of Sudan 
Micro Finance Unit 
119 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Appendix 7.2:   Summary of financial management risks and 
mitigating actions 
FM risk category 
A. 
Inherent Risks 
Country Level 
1.  Transparency International rating 
in 2016 put Sudan at 6th from the 
bottom of the list, with a score of 
1.4. 
2.  Economy of Sudan is suffering 
from high inflation and wide 
currency fluctuations. 
Entity and Project design 
1.  Project spread over five States 
and 129 village. 
2.  Implementation will happen at the 
village levels through State 
Implementation Units and service 
providers. 
B.  Project Control Risks 
1.  Organization & Staffing 
a)  Adequate qualified staff, with prior 
knowledge of IFAD's  procedures, 
are difficult to find within 
Ministries. 
b)  Finance Staff are made 
responsible for procurement 
function   
c)  Project/Project Organizational 
structures created within 
Ministries are significantly 
influenced by the Ministry. 
d)  Coordination between Central 
PCU and States Implementing 
Units. 
2.  Budgeting 
a)  Project budget will follow a bottom 
up approach, however capacity at 
the beneficiary levels in creation 
of a budget is weak. 
b)  Lack of knowledge of IFAD 
procedures. 
c)  Too many layers within the 
budget creation and approval 
process. 
d)  Overruns and unrealistic budgets. 
Initial 
risk 
rating 
Proposed FM risk mitigating measures 
Residual 
risk 
rating 
High 
--- 
High 
a)  The Central Coordination Unit will be ring-
fenced and hire key staff on competitive 
basis or through retaining performing staff of 
on-going SDP and SUSTAIN projects, and 
State implementing units will be within the 
structure of MoA and hired from the 
market/ministry on a competitive basis. 
b)  Each State has an implementing unit that 
High 
has been allocated key staff for the 
implementation of this project. 
Medium 
a)  Criteria for staff is prior experience on donor 
funded projects and (preferably) training 
received by IFAD/IFIs on financial 
management and disbursement. 
b)  Independent PCU, ring-fenced; semi-
independent SIU. 
c)  Staff ToR to be cleared by IFAD before 
recruitment. A provision has been made to 
recruit separate procurement staff. 
d)  Finance staff (manager and assistants) at 
CPU to be recruited from the market or 
through retaining those with good 
performance , and SIU Accountants from 
market and Finance Assistant from Ministry.  
All contracts will be performance based. 
e)  Overall coordination  for financial 
High 
management issues will remain within the 
ToR of the Financial Manager at the PCU. 
High 
a)  Budget coordination will remain with the 
CPU. 
a)  State and Locality levels will receive 
assistance to ensure that the budgets are 
prepared in a realistic and appropriate 
manner. 
b)  Training will be provided on regular basis to 
all staff – including procurement and subject 
specialists on the preparation of budgets. 
c)  Budgets to include all sources of financing 
separately and to show estimates by 
quarter. 
High 
Medium 
121 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
FM risk category 
Initial 
risk 
rating 
3.  Funds Flow & Disbursements 
a)  Limited abilities to forecast fund 
use leading to slow disbursement. 
b)  Management of funds between 
the different States could result in 
liquidity issues, delayed fund flow 
and disbursement because of the 
multi-layer structure. 
c)  Counterpart funds may not flow to 
the Project, per the commitment, 
which will impact and increase the 
risk on project account funds, 
which could be utilized in lieu of 
counterpart funds. 
d)  Implementation delays due to lack 
of knowledge of IFAD procedures. 
High 
4.  Internal Control 
a)  Weak control structures magnified 
with vast distances between 
Centre and States. 
b)  Remoteness of villages where 
expenditures are going to take 
place. 
Residual 
risk 
rating 
Medium 
Proposed FM risk mitigating measures 
d)  PMU will present to the IAMDP Steering 
Committee and IFAD and ensure that 
timelines are maintained. 
e)  Interim financial reports, prepared by each 
SIU and consolidated by CPU, showing 
progress against budgets to be submitted to 
IFAD quarterly. 
IFAD office in Sudan will provide 
implementation support on processes and 
procedure. 
f) 
a)  Budgeting issues will be mitigated, thereby 
facilitating the forecast of funds utilization. 
b)  Clearly detailed fund flow arrangements and 
continuous follow-up of the same during 
implementation to ensure any course 
corrections will be made to mitigate risk of 
liquidity problems. 
c)  CPU will maintain control of funds disbursed 
to SIUs, based on levels of activity. 
d)  Counterpart funds will be included in the 
budget which will be submitted to GoS prior 
to the annual budgeting process and CPU 
and Central Coordination Unit of IFAD 
funded projects to regularly follow up with 
MOFEP for timely release of funds. 
e)  GoS funds should be pre-paid into the 
dedicated account every quarter. 
f)  Training will be provided to all staff, 
including senior managers, on IFAD 
financial management and disbursement 
procedures. 
g)  A mid-year follow up on implementation will 
be conducted in the first year to ensure that 
things are on track. 
h)  Fund flow to equity matching grant will be 
released upon satisfaction of some 
conditions as specified in appendix 7 above. 
i)  Financial implementation manual will be a 
condition for disbursement and knowledge 
of the same will be mandatory for all staff 
involved in finance. 
a)  An internal auditor will be assigned to the 
project. The role will be: to ensure controls 
(as defined in the manual) are in place at 
Central and State levels; to test the 
functioning of the controls; report control 
weaknesses; and recommend corrections. 
b)  Internal auditor will play a role in ensuring 
funds were utilized efficiently and effectively 
and for the purposes intended through 
frequent visit villages based on sample 
basis. 
High 
c)  Compliant mechanism to be put in place. 
High 
5.  Accounting Systems, Policies & 
Procedures 
a)  Manual or Excel based 
accounting prevails. 
High 
a)  A reliable accounting system linking the 
CPU with the five States, on which training 
will be mandatory, will be a disbursement 
condition. 
Medium 
122 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 7:  Financial management and disbursement arrangements 
Initial 
risk 
rating 
FM risk category 
b)  Policies and procedures are 
created but are not adhered to by 
accounting staff. 
c)  Lack of consistency with different 
layers within the Project structure 
in application of accounting 
policies and procedures. 
6.  Reporting & Monitoring 
a)  Unable to produce financial 
management reports. 
b)  Linkages through all levels to 
ensure that funds are properly 
tracked, recorded and reported. 
c)  Periodic monitoring of financial 
reports does not exist. 
High 
7.  Internal Audit 
a)  Internal auditor assigned to 
project is on part time job 
b)  Ex ante check of each 
transaction, therefore the true 
nature of the function does not 
exist. 
c)  Internal audit function does not 
exist at the locality/village levels. 
High 
8.  Auditing 
a)  National Audit Chamber (NAC) is 
not in compliance with IFAD Audit 
Guidelines and TORs. 
b)  Revolving matching equity to PFIs 
is not audited  
Medium 
Project Fiduciary Risk at design: 
OVERALL FM RISK 
HIGH 
Proposed FM risk mitigating measures 
b)  Financial manual will be prepare as part of 
the overall PIM. 
c)  All finance staff will be encourage to take 
and pass IFAD’s e-learning on financial 
management. Financial Management 
Division conducted a training for all project 
FM staff in Feb 2017. 
a)  Accounting software to be able to produce 
financial reports. 
b)  Reporting and monitoring requirements will 
be detailed within PIM. 
c)  PFIs will be required to provide periodic 
financial reports on sources and uses on 
revolving match equity. 
d)  CPU manage finances with IFAD 
procedures and all processes documented 
in the PIM and in any subsidiary 
agreements with the States. 
a)  Internal Audit Chamber  at the MoFEP to 
assign a full time, certified Internal Auditor 
to the Project (Central PMU and the four 
states). 
b)  IFAD mission will assess the quality and 
scope of the internal auditor during the 
course of implementation, and in case 
arrangement not found adequate, mitigation 
measure will be recommended.   
a)  Continue the dialogue with NAC and invite 
them to any future FM training to Sudan 
portfolio  to ensure that IFAD requirements 
are fulfilled. 
b)  TOR to include a specific requirement to 
audit revolving matching grant.  
Residual 
risk 
rating 
Medium 
Medium 
Low 
MEDIUM 
123 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
A.  Procurement capacity and governance 
 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.
 6.
The Sudan Public Procurement, Contracting and Disposal of Public Assets Act (the Act) was 
issued by Government of Sudan in year 2010, drawing on experiences of regional countries, 
such as Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Tanzania and Uganda. The act also benefited from studies and 
remarks made by the World Bank and the Common Market for Eastern and South Africa. The 
Sudan Government has also issued the Regulations/Procedures for Public Procurement, 
Contracting and Disposal of Public Assets in March 2011 and the Comprehensive Manual for 
Procurement and Contracting Procedures, to guide the procurement process. 
The General Directorate of Public Procurement, Contracting and Disposal of Public Assets (“the 
Directorate”), an autonomous unit under the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning 
(MoFEP), reporting to the Minister of Finance, is mandated with the Public Procurement 
Reform.  It is staffed with approximately fifty procurement and administrative personnel who are 
currently undergoing training.  At present, the directorate is focusing on implementing the Act, 
public procurement methods and procedures, formation of procurement committees in the 
major Governmental units, prohibited actions, review and appeal procedures, ethical behaviour, 
offences, penalties, capacity building and a chapter regulating the disposal of public assets.  
(The Act contains fifteen chapters and eighty three articles.)  So far, procurement guidelines 
and standard bidding documents in Arabic (drawing very much on WB documents) have been 
prepared and distributed to Government Agencies.  In future, it is expected that this directorate 
will shift its focus from implementer of the law to monitoring and oversight. 
Procurement in donor supported projects is currently governed by the regulations of the donors. 
However, for IFAD co-financed projects, procurement is agreed to be carried following 
Government Guidelines as far as they are in line with the Donors Guidelines.  In this regard, the 
Central Coordination Unit for IFAD co-financed projects (CCU) is undertaking all projects' 
related procurement falling under the ICB and NCB methods.  However, the procurement 
function at CCU will require further streamlining/strengthening of its capacity. 
In terms of Sudan’s overall procurement capacity, recent assessments by IFAD indicate that 
the procurement capacity is extremely weak in particular, in the areas of managing the bidding 
process, procurement planning and contract management.  There is no evidence of recent 
assessments undertaken for The Sudan by other donors. But the mission was informed that 
training has/is being delivered to the staff of procurement units at the state ministries on the 
Act, the Regulations, the Manual and the standard documents. However, similar training was 
not provided to procurement committees at the line department levels.  
Coupled with the interviews, IFAD’s new procurement assessment tool was the main 
instrument utilised in this validation exercise.  This assessment covered the various phases of 
the procurement cycle, including planning, soliciting and bidding, evaluation and contract 
management, documentation and staffing. 
Under the Act, investment projects financed by an international agency are not required to 
follow the national procurement procedures.  But as indicated in paragraph 3 above, project 
procurement will follow Government Guidelines as far as they are in line with the IFAD 
Guidelines. Close monitoring from the ICO will be made to ensure no deviation occurs.   
B.  Arrangements for procurement under the project 
 7.
Procurement.  Majority of the current procurement activities under IAMDP is expected to be 
small in nature and value.  Therefore, the project will not have big value procurement packages 
and specialized nature of procurement activities to attract ICB, except for procurement of 
125 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
vehicles, should there be any.  The majority of procurement activities will be within the 
thresholds of NCB, national shopping (quotations), community procurement and direct 
procurement.  Considering the relatively weak capacity at present, close monitoring by ICO will 
be exercised to guide the process.  The project will follow the procurement thresholds as set 
out in the Letter to the Borrower/Recipient and in the approved Procurement Plan. 
 8.
Whenever possible, procurement of goods and works will be bulked into sizeable bid packages 
to attract adequate competition thus resulting in cost-effective and efficient procurement. 
Procurement methods 
 9.
 10.
 11.
 12.
Generally, the methods which are permitted for the procurement of works and goods are: 
(i) international competitive bidding (ICB); (ii) limited international bidding (LIB) or restricted 
tendering; (iii) national competitive bidding (NCB); (iv) international or national shopping or 
requests for quotations; (v) direct contracting; and (vi) procurement with community 
participation. 
The methods which are permitted for the procurement of consulting services are: (i) quality and 
cost-based selection; (ii) quality based selection; (iii) selection under a fixed budget; 
(iv) selection based on consultants’ qualifications; (v) least cost selection; (vi) single-source 
selection; and (vii) selection of individual consultants. 
For each contract to be financed from IFAD proceeds, the types of procurement methods, 
estimated cost, prior review requirements and time-frame are agreed between the project and 
IFAD respectively in the Procurement Plan. 
IFAD financed procurement of works, goods and consultancy services.  While eventually 
the specific thresholds for procurement financed under the project will be stipulated in the Letter 
to the Borrower/Recipient, following are the recommended thresholds (these are subject to 
confirmation at design completion). 
 13. Works estimated to cost more than US$ 300,000 equivalent will be procured through 
International Competitive Bidding (ICB) method using the WB’s applicable Standard Bidding 
Documents (SBD).  Works estimated between US$ 50,000 and US$ 300,000 equivalent will be 
procured through the NCB.  While works estimated below US$ 50,000 will be procured through 
National Shopping or Community Participation.  Direct contracting will have to be identified and 
approved by IFAD in advance for those cases which justify use of such method. 
 14. Goods estimated to cost more than US$ 200,000 equivalent per contract will be procured 
through the International Competitive Bidding (ICB) method using the WB’s applicable SBDs.  
Goods estimated to cost between US$ 25,000 and US$ 200,000 equivalent per contract will be 
procured through National Competitive Bidding (NCB).  Goods estimated to cost less than 
US$ 25,000 equivalent per contract will be procured through the Shopping method.  Direct 
contracting will have to be identified and approved by IFAD in advance for those cases which 
justify use of such method. 
 15.
 16.
Consulting services estimated to cost more than US$ 100,000 equivalent for firms, will be on 
the basis of Quality and Cost Based Selection and for services costing less than US$ 100,000 
may be on the basis of Consultants’ Qualifications.  For individuals, it will be on the basis of 
Individual Consultants selection procedures.  However, the specific nature of the assignment 
will finally determine the method of procurement to be followed and will be pre-determined in 
each approved annual procurement plan. 
Prior to proceeding with the procurement phase of a public private partnerships or private 
sector participation project, if any, a feasibility study should be undertaken.  If the feasibility 
study indicates that the proposed project will not provide value for money or improve the quality 
of public service, the project will not proceed with the procurement phase of the PPPP.  The 
procurement procedures to be followed under the PPPP will be in accordance with the IFAD 
Procurement Regulations. 
126 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
 17.
Prior review thresholds.  For the purposes of Appendix I, Paragraph 2, of IFAD’s 
Procurement Guidelines, the following shall be subject to prior review by the Fund: 
(a) Award of any contract for goods and equipment estimated to cost US$ 50,000 equivalent or 
more; 
(b) Award of any contract for works estimated to cost US$ 100,000 equivalent or more; 
(c) Award to a firm of any contract for consultancy services estimated to cost US$ 100,000 
equivalent or more; 
(d) Award to an individual of any contract for consulting services estimated to cost US$ 25,000 
equivalent or more; and 
(e) Award of any contract through direct contracting, single source selection, including 
selection of United Nations agencies, irrespective of the amount.  Furthermore, for 
consultancy services, all Terms of Reference, Short-listing (if applicable) and draft 
contracts will be subject to IFAD prior review. 
The aforementioned thresholds may be modified by the Fund during the course of project 
implementation. 
Post-review.  All other contracts will be subject to post-review and may be subject to 
procurement audit by the Fund.  The project staff will maintain accurate records of all 
procurement activities and documents related to the project.  The procurement files will be 
maintained for review by IFAD supervision missions and independent audits.  Staff will also 
consolidate procurement activities into quarterly and annual progress reports. 
Ex post review.  The project will retain all documentation up to five years after the closing date 
of the financing for examination by IFAD or by independent auditors.  This documentation 
includes, but is not be limited to, the signed original contract, the evaluation of the respective 
proposals and recommendation of award.  IFAD does not finance expenditures for goods, 
works or consulting services that have not been procured in accordance with the procedures 
specified in the financing agreement.  In such cases, IFAD may, in addition, exercise other 
remedies under the financing agreement, including cancellation of the amount in question from 
the financing.  Even if the contract was awarded after obtaining a “no objection” from IFAD, 
IFAD may still declare miss-procurement if it concludes that the “no objection” was issued on 
the basis of incomplete, inaccurate or misleading information furnished by the project or the 
terms and conditions of the contract had been modified without IFAD’s approval. 
Register of contracts. Procurement carried out at project level is to be recorded and 
registered against the Procurement Plan.  In addition, all contracts, with or without prior IFAD 
approval will be listed in the Register of Contracts maintained by the procuring entity with the 
dates of approval as provided by IFAD.  When a contract is amended, the amendment will be 
recorded in the Register of Contracts.  If a contract is cancelled or declared ineligible for 
financing by IFAD, this information will be written in the Register of Contracts.  As this register 
facilitates the review and approval of payment requests on contracts, it is to be updated and 
submitted to the IFAD Country Programme Manager on a quarterly basis.  The sample form to 
be used and instructions are detailed in Annex 6 of IFAD’s Loan Disbursement Handbook and 
the Project Implementation Manual (PIM).  It will also be necessary that the PMU prepare 
annual statistics disaggregated by type and methods of procurement, for the overall 
procurement transactions carried out. 
 18.
 19.
 20.
 21.
 22.
Bidding documents.  All bidding documents for the procurement of goods, works and services 
shall be prepared by the procurement officer (PO) with the support of the technical experts, who 
will supply specifications, terms of reference, bills of quantities and so forth as required. 
Approved templates will be used when possible and available. These templates will receive 
IFAD no objection before they can be used. 
127 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
 23.
 24.
 25.
Responsibilities.  The overall responsibility of procurement of works, goods and consulting 
services rest with the project manager.  The procurement officer at the PMU level will be 
responsible to the project manager for: (i) consolidation of the procurement plans; (ii) overall 
oversight and monitoring of procurement activities; (iii) provide technical advice and training to 
the State Coordination Units (SCUs) as required; (iv) review bidding documents prepared by 
the SCUs; and (v) interface with IFAD for procurement reporting.   
The following basic principles will guide the project while processing the procurement activities: 
(i) economy and efficiency; (ii) giving equal opportunities to all eligible bidders; (iii) encouraging 
the development of domestic capacity to provide goods, works and consulting services; 
(iv) fairness, integrity, transparency and good governance; and (v) selecting the most 
appropriate method for the specific procurement. The procurement officers at SCUs will be 
responsible for (i) implementing and executing procurement functions at the SCU level; 
(ii) monitoring and management of contracts; and (iii) assisting with development of 
procurement plans to be submission to PMU for consolidation.  The PMU will implement works 
procurement estimated to cost US$ 50,000 and below, community procurement and shopping.  
When procurement is undertaken the CCU on behalf of the project for contracts which fall 
under the ICB and NCB methods, the project will have full participation of the project 
procurement officer. 
Staffing and capacity development.  A procurement officer will be recruited at the PMU and a 
procurement assistant at each of SCU offices.  It is highly recommended that the positions are 
to be filled competitively and will be on performance-based contracts.  GoS staff will be eligible 
to compete and if selected, will be hired as project staff and it will be their responsibility to take 
all necessary arrangements in accordance with the labour laws of the country.  The SCU 
procurement assistant will be selected from among the pool of available state employees 
through comparison of 3 CVs and will be paid top-up. In order to establish sound procurement 
management system in the project and given the current assessment, there will be a need for 
intensive capacity development of these staffs.  Further details will be elaborated in the PIM 
and annual procurement plans. 
 26. Governance.  While there is still room for improvement in the implementation of the 
Anti-Corruption Law in Sudan, measures have been taken to reinforce the compliance with the 
law.  The Act (aforementioned) provides for provisions on probity and anti-corruption.  It 
provides for sanctions and penalties in the event of discovery, which applies to both individuals 
and companies and can lead to temporary or permanent debarment, depending on the severity 
or frequency of the crimes.  In the event of criminal activity, the Act provides for action by the 
public prosecutor and the criminal authorities. 
 27.
 28.
In accordance with the Business Anti-Corruption Portal of the Global Advisory Network (GAN) 
Integrity Solutions, Legislation, Corruption in the form of active and passive bribery is covered 
by the Sudan Penal Code 2003.  Additionally, the major forms of corrupt activity, including 
attempted corruption, extortion, bribing a foreign official, and money laundering are 
criminalised.  Moreover, Sudan signed the United Nations Convention Against Corruption 
(UNCAC) in 2005 and the African Union Convention on Preventing and Combating Corruption 
in 2008, but has not yet ratified either of them.  Overall, the institutional setup for countering 
corruption remains weak in Sudan. 
In a positive light though, an Anti-Corruption Agency was established in January 2012.  A 
former Under-Secretary of Sudan’s Ministry of Finance and National Economy, was appointed 
to head the agency.  As of August 2013, it is still at too early to evaluate the effectiveness of the 
newly established anti-corruption agency.  However, an article published in December 2012 by 
Sudan Tribune points out that nothing has yet emerged from the agency on its corruption 
investigation.  President Bashir recently sacked the head of the agency because of this, 
according to All Africa in August 2013. 
128 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
 29.
 30.
Public procurement.  According to Global Integrity 2006, Sudan drafted and passed a Public 
Procurement Law in 2006 and the Act was revised in 2010.  The law demands that major public 
procurement projects go through a competitive bidding process.  According to the law, 
companies that violate procurement rules can be barred from participating in future tenders.  
Unsuccessful bidders may challenge the procurement decision in court.  However, the 
enforcement is very weak, according to the U4 Anti-Corruption Resource Centre 2012.  The 
public procurement law also covers conflicts of interest for procurement officials.  According to 
Global Integrity 2006, major public procurements are typically advertised in Khartoum daily 
newspapers, but in most cases not for more than a week due to the cost of advertisement. 
In particular, good governance measures built in to the project will include: (i) undertaking all 
necessary measures to create and sustain a corruption-free environment for activities under the 
project; (ii) instituting, maintaining and ensuring compliance with internal procedures and 
controls for activities under the project, following international best practice standards for the 
purpose of preventing corruption, and shall require all relevant ministries, agents and 
contractors to refrain from engaging in any such activities; (iii) complying with the requirements 
of IFAD’s Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities and Operations; and 
(iv) ensuring that the Good Governance Framework is implemented in a timely manner. 
129 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Appendix 8.2:  18 Months procurement plan 
Appedix 8.2: 18 Months Procurement Plan
Component 1. Enhanced Crop Productivity and Production
Bid 
Package 
Ref.
1. Equipment and Materials
1.1
1.2
Description
Set
Set
Unit
Spray Service Equipment (knapsack sprayers)
Spray Service Equipment (knapsack sprayers)
25 (hp) Agricultural Equipment for mechanised 
service demos GPG
25 (hp) Agricultural Equipment for mechanised 
service demos GPG
70 (hp) Agricultural Equipment for mechanised 
service demos producer groups
Agricultural Equipment (self-propelled) for 
mechanised service demos GPG
Agricultural Equipment (self-propelled) for 
mechanised service demos GPG
Materials/equipment for demo (FFS)
Materials/equipment for demo (FFS)
Certified seeds for demo plots
Certified seeds for demo plots
GAPA Tools
Set
Set
Set
Set
Set
Set
Set
MT
MT
Tool Kit
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
1.10
1.11
1.12
Quantity
 Total Cost 
(USD) 
Procurement 
Method
Prior 
Review Start Date
Bid 
Opening 
Date
Responsible 
Entity
End Date
Remarks
44
42
9
9
9
4 946
4 816
Shopping
Shopping
296 808
ICB
302 795
ICB
195 575
NCB
10
96 182
NCB
10
15
15
0.5
0.75
47.0
98 161
4 186
4 343
703
1 171
18 284
NCB
Shopping
Shopping
Shopping
Shopping
Shopping
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Apr-18 May-18
Dec-18
Nov-18
Jun-18 PMU/SCUs
Jan-19 PMU/SCUs
Dec-17
Jan-18
Aug-18 PMU/CCU
Procurement process starts before project 
effectiveness
Sep-18
Oct-19 May-19 PMU/CCU
Oct-18
Nov-18
Feb-19 PMU/CCU
Jan-18
Feb-18
Jun-18 PMU/CCU
Apr-19 PMU/CCU
Dec-18
Nov-18
Apr-18
Jun-18 SCUs
Apr-18
Jan-19
Jan-19 Mar-19 SCUs
Mar-18 Mar-18 May-18 SCUs
Feb-19 SCUs
Jan-19
Nov-18
Jan-19
Dec-18 Mar-19 PMU/SCUs
2. Civil Works
2.1
Construction of grain storage at community level
Village
47.0
16 037
Shopping
No
Jan-19
Feb-19
Jun-19 PMU/SCUs
Activity will carried out by CBOs in 
collaboration with project
3. Training
3.1.a
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
Locality extension staff 
Technical training for locality agro dealers
Business training for locality agro dealers
Technical training on grain storage
Business training on grain storage
Technical training for MSP
Business Training for MSP
GAPA training
Locality
Locality
Training
Training
Training
Training
Training 
4. Technical Assistance
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
Locality
Assessment of Locality Agro dealers
Locality
Assessment of Locality MSP capacity
Assessment of PSE (Agro dealer, SSP, MSP)
Report
Assessment of PSE (Blacksmith & Productive capReport
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9
4.10
4.11
4.12
4.13
4.14
4.15
4.16
4.17
4.18
4.19
Rental of SSP motorised sprayers
Rental of MSP implements
Gum Arabic Study Materials
Development of GAPA training material
Motorised 
Sprayer
MSP
Study
Training 
Material
Agro dealer Business - national consultant
Person/mths
MSP business - national consultant
Person/mths
Gum Arabic - national consultant
Business training specialist - international 
consultant
Person/mths
Person/mths
Gum Arabic - international consultant
Person/mths
PPP - international consultant
International environment expert
Climate change consultancy - institutional 
capacity 
Person/mths
Person/mths
Person/mths
Climate change consultancy - adaptation options Person/mths
Climate change consultancy - developing/funding 
strategy & implementation
Person/mths
National environment/climate change staff
Person/mths
10
10
4
10
10
4
47
10
10
3
2
44
44
1
1
2
2
4
3
1
1
4
4
3
4
4
68 243
34 121
13 649
34 121
68 243
27 297
32 074
CQS
CQS
IC
CQS
CQS
IC
CQS
61 480
61 480
3 689
18 444
CQS
CQS
IC
IC
5 045
15 013
12 296
RFQ
RFQ
IC
2 459
IC
8 517
IC
8 517
IC
17 035
IC
107 780
CQS
35 927
IC
35 927
IC
143 706
CQS
143 706
CQS
107 780
CQS
143 706
CQS
17 035
IC
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Oct-18
Dec-18
Apr-19 PMU/CCU
Sep-18
Nov-18
Jun-19 PMU/SCUs
Feb-19 Mar-19 May-19 PMU/SCUs
Apr-19
Mar-19
Jun-19 PMU/SCUs
Oct-18 Mar-19 PMU/SCUs
Sep-18
Jan-19 May-19 PMU/SCUs
Dec-18
Jan-19 Mar-19 May-19 PMU/SCUs
If aged as stipulated in the project design 
report (PDR), that the training will be 
conducted by SAGA, then procurement 
method shall be SSS. Thus the process should 
receive prior approval form IFAD. The project 
will be required to draw the ToR for the 
assignment and that ToR should receive IFAD 
Mar-18
Apr-18
Apr-18 May-18
Jul-18
Jun-18
Jul-18
Jun-18
Jun-18 PMU/CCU
Jul-18 PMU/CCU
Sep-18 PMU
Sep-18 PMU
Dec-18
Dec-18
Jun-18
Jan-19
Jan-19
Jul-18
Apr-19 PMU
Apr-19 PMU
Sep-18 PMU
May-18
Jun-18
Aug-18 PMU
Mar-18
Apr-18
Jun-18 PMU
Mar-18
Apr-18
Jun-18 PMU
Mar-18
Apr-18
Aug-18 PMU
Mar-18
Apr-18
Jul-18 PMU
Mar-18
Apr-18
Jun-18 PMU
Mar-18
Apr-18
Jun-18 PMU
Mar-18
Apr-18
Aug-18 PMU
Mar-18
Apr-18
Aug-18 PMU
Mar-18
Apr-18
Jul-18 PMU
Mar-18
Apr-18
Aug-18 PMU
Mar-18
Apr-18
Aug-18 PMU
131 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Component 2. Market Linkage and Value Addition
Bid 
Package 
Ref.
1. Equipment and Materials
2.1.c.2.1
Tools & equipment - Pilot initiative
Description
Quantity
 Total Cost 
(USD) 
Procurement 
Method
Prior 
Review Start Date
Bid 
Opening 
Date
End Date
Responsible 
Entity
47
134 727
NCB
Yes
Nov-18
Dec-18 Mar-19 PMU/CCU
Unit
Set
2. Civil Works
2.1.a.2
2.1.a.3
2.1.c.2.3 Establishment of crop markets (2 in each state) Market
Construction of pipe culverts
Construction of box culverts
Number
Number
4. Technical Assistance
2.1.a.1
Survey and design of wadi crossings
Supervision of wadi construction works
2.1.a.4
2.1.b.1.1
Grain storage study - national consultant
2.1.b.1.2.1 Grain storage study - national consultant
2.1.b.1.2.2 Grain storage design - national consultant
2.1.b.2.1 Dynamic pricing study
2.1.b.2.2 Storage Study
2.1.c.1.1 Un-refined oil/seed cake
2.1.c.1.2 Mobile groundnuts shelling
2.1.c.1.3 Gum Arabic packaging/grading
2.1.c.4.1 Storage national consultant
2.1.c.4.2 Gum Arabic - national consultant
2.1.c.4.3 Oil & livestock feed consultant
2.1.c.4.4 Groundnut marketing - national consultant
2.1.c.4.6 Crop marketing specialist - international
2.1.c.4.7 PPP consultant - international
2.1.c.4.8 Gum Arabic consultant - international
Lump sum
Lump sum
Person/mths
Person/mths
Person/mths
Study
Study
Study
Study
Study
Person/mths
Person/mths
Person/mths
Person/mths
Person/mths
Person/mths
Person/mths
15
15
2
367 122
423 602
175 664
ICB
ICB
NCB
2
1
3
2
3
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
2
2
2
1
1
84 957
47 443
12 776
9 454
14 181
2 928
2 928
5 855
2 928
3 250
12 168
12 168
8 112
8 112
67 628
30 914
30 914
CQS
CQS
IC
IC
IC
IC
IC
IC
IC
IC
IC
IC
IC
IC
CQS
CQS
CQS
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Nov-18
Nov-18
Dec-18
Jan-19
Jan-19
Feb-19
Jun-19 PMU/CCU
Jun-19 PMU/CCU
Jun-19 PMU/CCU
Dec-18 PMU/CCU
Jul-19 PMU/CCU
Jul-18
May-18
Jan-19
Nov-18
Aug-18
Jul-18
Nov-18 PMU
Feb-19
Jan-19
Apr-19 PMU
Mar-19
Apr-19
Jul-19 PMU
Apr-18 May-18
Jul-18 PMU
Jun-18
May-18
Jul-18 PMU
Oct-18
Sep-18
Dec-18 PMU
Dec-18 PMU
Oct-18
Sep-18
Jan-19 Mar-19 PMU
Dec-18
Apr-18 May-18
Jul-18 PMU
Aug-18 PMU
Jun-18
May-18
Dec-18 PMU
Oct-18
Sep-18
Dec-18 PMU
Oct-18
Sep-18
Dec-18 PMU/CCU
Oct-18
Aug-18
Dec-18 PMU/CCU
Nov-18
Sep-18
Aug-18 PMU/CCU
Jul-18
May-18
Component 3. Enabling Environment
Bid 
Package 
Ref.
1. Equipment and Materials
3.1.c.4
Description
Supply of rub halls for collection centres
Unit
Quantity
 Total Cost 
(USD) 
Procurement 
Method
Prior 
Review Start Date
Bid 
Opening 
Date
End Date
Responsible 
Entity
Rub hall
2.0
61 392
NCB
Yes
Nov-18
Dec-18
Apr-19 PMU/CCU
3. Training
3.1.a.1.1
Training od SCG facilitators on SCG methodology
3.1.a.1.1.1 Training od SCG facilitators on SCG methodology
3.1.a.1.2
3.1.a.3.1
3.1.a.3.4 Workshops at regional level
Development of SCG facilitators in neighbouring 
villages
Workshop
ToT for SCG facilitators in surrounding villages Workshop
Workshop
Workshop
Workshop
Training and capacity building (formal production 
financing)
3.1.b.1.2
Training and capacity building (Apex FIs)
3.1.b.2.1
Workshops on financing storage loans
3.1.c.1
3.1.c.1.1 Workshops on financing storage loans
3.1.d.2.1
3.1.d.2.2
3.1.d.2.5
3.1.e.2.1
Farmers/FPAs training
Illiterate/semi literate - training
Introduction to Government officials
FPAs training
Sessions
Sessions
Workshop
Workshop
Village
Village
Locality
Village
4. Technical Assistance
3.1.a.2.1 Updating savings and credit manual
3.1.a.3.2 Publicity of SCG methodology
3.1.c.2
3.1.d.1.1
3.1.d.1.2
3.1.d.1.5
3.1.e.1.1
3.1.f.1
3.1.f.2
3.1.f.5
Amendment of manual by partners adopting 
storage loans
Farmers/FPAs - curriculum & materials
Illiterate/semi literate - curriculum & materials
Introduction to Government officials
Farmer Producer Associations - 
curriculum/materials
FAB - international consultant
PPP - international consultant
Farmers associations specialist - national
Lump sum
Lump sum
TA
Document
Document
Document
Document
Person/mths
Person/mths
Person/mths
1
3
1
6
2
1
1
1
1
22
22
4
47
1 549
5 157
1 719
4 911
6 548
IC
IC
IC
IC
IC
8 849
9 823
2 950
3 274
12 882
12 882
4 684
30 547
IC
IC
IC
IC
IC
IC
IC
CQS
1
0.5
2 323
10 232
IC
IC
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
11 711
11 711
586
IC
IC
IC
2 928
58 883
29 442
8 112
ic
CQS
CQS
IC
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Apr-18 May-18
Feb-19
Jan-19
Jun-18 PMU
Apr-19 PMU
Feb-19 Mar-19 May-19 PMU
Mar-19
Apr-19
Apr-19 May-19
Jun-19 PMU/SCUs
Jul-19 PMU/SCUs
Jun-18
May-18
Feb-19
Jan-19
Feb-18
Jan-18
Feb-19
Jan-19
Apr-18
Mar-18
Mar-18
Apr-18
Apr-18 May-18
Feb-18 Mar-18
Aug-18 PMU
Apr-19 PMU
Apr-18 PMU
Apr-19 PMU
Jun-18 PMU/SCUs
Jun-18 PMU/SCUs
Jun-18 PMU/SCUs
Jun-18 PMU/CCU
Jul-18
Jan-19
Aug-18
Feb-19
Sep-18 PMU
Apr-19 PMU
Jan-18
Jan-18
Jan-18
Feb-18
Feb-18
Feb-18
Apr-18 PMU
Apr-18 PMU
Apr-18 PMU
Jan-18
Feb-18
Mar-18 May-18
Mar-18 May-18
Mar-18 May-18
Apr-18 PMU/SCUs
Jul-18 PMU/CCU
Jul-18 PMU/CCU
Jul-18 PMU
Component 4. Project Management
Bid 
Package 
Ref.
1. Equipment and Materials
4.1.a.3.1.3.1/4WD Vehicles (3 SW, 7 DC, 2 HT 5 door)
4.1.a.3.1.3.5 Motor Bikes
4.1.a.4.1.4.1 Power Generator 80KVA
4.1.a.4.1.4.2 Computers & Accessories
4.1.a.4.1.4.3 Photocopiers
Description
Number
Number
Number
Set
Number
3. Training
4.1.a.2.1.2.3 Gender sensitization training for new communities Course
4.1.a.2.1.2.4 GALS training for facilitators
Course
4.1.a.2.1.2.5 GALS champions training
Course
4. Technical Assistance
4.1.a.1.2 Comprehensive baseline study
4.1.a.1.3 Develop KM strategy and PIM
Technical and thematic studies
4.1.a.1.7
4.1.a.1.10 Technical advisors/consultants (national)
Study
Person/mths
Person/mths
Person/mths
Unit
Quantity
 Total Cost 
(USD) 
Procurement 
Method
Prior 
Review Start Date
Bid 
Opening 
Date
End Date
Responsible 
Entity
12
10
2
22
3
1
1
1
1
4
3
10
523 000
56 207
27 789
45 987
12 911
ICB
NCB
NCB
NCB
Shopping
13 549
24 592
12 296
IC
IC
IC
61 480
17 036
18 444
42 567
CQS
IC
IC
IC
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Feb-18 Mar-18
Apr-18 May-18
Apr-18 May-18
Apr-18 May-18
Apr-18 May-18
Oct-18 PMU/CCU
Aug-18 PMU/CCU
Aug-18 PMU/CCU
Aug-18 PMU/CCU
Jun-18 PMU
Jan-19
Feb-19 May-19 PMU
Feb-18 Mar-18 May-18 PMU
Jun-18 PMU
Mar-18
Apr-18
Feb-18 Mar-18
Feb-18 Mar-18
Jun-18
Jul-18
Jan-18 Mar-18
Jun-18 PMU/CCU
Jul-18 PMU 
Nov-18 PMU
Dec-18 PMU
NB: 
Training activities are planned to be carried out by:
1.  Individual consultants or firms, where the project may provide logistical support where needed, or
2. Where indicated in PDR by SAGA and similar entities on SSS basis
3. Where training activities are being carried out by the project extension staff, this is not included under the procurement plan.
132 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 8:  Procurement 
Bid 
Package 
Ref.
1. Equipment and Materials
Description
Unit
Quantity
 Total Cost 
(SDG) 
Procurement 
Method
Prior 
Review Start Date
Bid 
Opening 
Date
Responsib
le Entity
End Date
Remarks
2.1.a.1
2.1.a.2
2.1.a.3
2.1.a.4
2.1.a.5
2.1.a.6
2.1.a.7
2.1.a.8
2.1.a.9
2.1.b
2.1.b.1
2.1.b.2
2.1.b.3
2.1.b.4
2.1.b.5
2.1.b.6
2.1.b.7
2.1.b.8
2.1.b.9
1.1 Spray Service Equipment/material
1.2
1.3
25 (hp) Agricultural Equipment for mechanised 
service demos GPG
70 (hp) Agricultural Equipment for mechanised 
service demos producer groups
Agricultural Equipment (self-propelled) for 
mechanised service demos GPG
1.4
1.5 Equipment for contact farmers
1.6 Materials/equipment for demo (FFS)
1.7 Certified seeds for demo plots
1.8 Agro-chemicals for demo plots
Set
Set
Set
Set
Set
Per annum
MT
Per annum
1.9 Office equipment and furniture - extension teams
Set
2. Training
2.1.a
Locality extension staff 
Training on mechanised services
Training on agro-chemicals
Training on FAAB and rural finance
Training on data collection, analysis and reporting
Training on documentation and KM
Training on GPS and Geo-location
Training on Gender Action Learning System (GALS)
Business development training
Exposure visit and external training
person
person
person
person
person
person
person
course
person
Producer Groups
Publicity and demonstrations on use of improved seeds 
and input packages
Training producer groups on FAAB
campaigns
person
Training illiterate farmers of FAAB using GALS methods person
Selection of and training contact farmers on extension 
messages and communication skills
Selection of and training village agents to support MSP, 
MF and SSP
Support field crops demonstration to increase adoption 
of improved practices
trainee
agent
site
Establish and support farmer field schools
Mechanised service for demo plots
Filed days for producer groups exposure to improved 
practices
2.1.b.10
Internal exchange visits between producer groups
2.1.b.11 Harvest day
2.1.c
2.1.c.1
2.1.c.2
2.1.c.3
2.1.c.4
2.1.c.5
Linking Producer Groups to Private Sector
Technical training for spray service providers
Training mechanised service providers on technical 
aspects
Training spray service providers on providing as a 
business
Selection of and training mechanised service providers 
on providing as a business
Exposure visits for service providers outside Sudan
3. Technical Assistance
3.1
Community/village survey
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
Selection and phasing of communities
Community mobilisation campaign
Registration of producer groups
Sensitization training/awareness on gender issues
Training producer groups on group management and 
book-keeping
Training of village-based extension agents
site
per annum
number
number
per annum
person
person
person
person
person
survey
village
campaign
groups
course
groups
agent
May-18
Jun-18
Sep-18 PMU/CCU
Feb-18
Apr-18
Aug-18 PMU/CCU Tendering process to start before EB approval
Oct-18
Dec-18 Mar-19 PMU/CCU
Aug-18 PMU/CCU
Jun-18
May-18
Mar-18 Mar-18 May-18 SCUs
Mar-18 Mar-18 May-18 SCUs
Mar-18 Mar-18 May-18 SCUs
Mar-18 Mar-18 May-18 SCUs
May-18
Jun-18
Aug-18 PMU/CCU
Jun-18
Jun-18
Jul-18
Jul-18
Jul-18
Aug-18
Aug-18
Aug-18
Sep-18
Jun-18
Jun-18
Jul-18
Jul-18
Jul-18
Aug-18
Aug-18
Aug-18
Nov-18
Jul-18 PMU/SCUs
Jul-18 PMU/SCUs
Aug-18 PMU/SCUs
Aug-18 PMU/SCUs
Aug-18 PMU/SCUs
Sep-18 PMU/SCUs
Sep-18 PMU/SCUs
Sep-18 PMU/SCUs
Dec-18 PMU
May-18 May-18
Oct-18
Oct-18
Nov-18
Nov-18
Jun-18 PMU
Dec-18 PMU/SCUs
Feb-19 PMU/SCUs
Nov-18
Nov-18
Feb-19 PMU/SCUs
Apr-18 May-18
Apr-18 May-18
May-18 May-18
Jun-18 PMU/CCU
Jun-18 PMU/CCU
Jun-18 PMU
Dec-18 PMU
Dec-18 SCUs
Dec-18 SCUs
Activity to be carried out by CBOs in collaboration with Project
Activity to be carried out by CBOs in collaboration with Project
Activity to be carried out by CBOs in collaboration with Project
Dec-18
Jan-19
Apr-19 PMU/CCU
Nov-18
Nov-18
Jan-19 PMU
Jan-19
Feb-19 May-19 PMU/CCU
Jan-19
Oct-18
Jan-19 Mar-19 PMU
Dec-18 PMU
Nov-18
Mar-18
Apr-18
Jun-18 PMU
Mar-18
Apr-18 May-18
Jun-18 PMU/SCUs
Jun-18 PMU
Tendering process to start before EB approval
The process will be carried out by Project in collaboration with 
the community & localities
Tendering process to start before EB approval
Activity to be carried out by CBOs in collaboration with Project
Nov-18
Nov-18
Dec-18 PMU
Oct-18
Oct-18
Nov-18
Oct-18
Dec-18 PMU
Nov-18 PMU
75
375 000
NCB
9
9
10
50
15
0.5
1.0
5.0
9
9
27
9
9
27
27
18
15
4 185 000
ICB
2 700 000
ICB
1 350 000
52 500
35 250
9 080
35 800
750 000
NCB
LS
LS
LS
LS
NCB
20 250
20 250
60 750
20 250
20 250
60 750
60 750
40 500
510 000
IC
IC
IC
IC
IC
IC
IC
IC
QCBS
4
1 500
500
300 000
150 000
100 000
QCBS
IC
IC
50
30
15
15
1
20
10
1
150
75
150
75
20
1
55
1
30
1
55
35
57 500
IC
34 500
IC
750 000
300 000
85 000
QCBS
QCBS
IC
200 000
150 000
150 000
CQS
IC
IC
172 500
QCBS
86 250
IC
172 500
QCBS
86 250
680 000
IC
QCBS
150 000
IC
55 000
170 000
30 000
50 000
QCBS
IC
275 000
35 000
QCBS
IC
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
133 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
   Table 1:  Components Project Cost Summary 
1. Enhanced crop productivity and production
2. Market linkage and value addition
3. Enabling environment
4. Project implementation
Total BASELINE COSTS
Physical Contingencies
Price Contingencies
Total PROJECT COSTS
(SDG '000)
(US$ '000)
Local
Foreign
Total
153 907
79 742
292 428
84 903
610 979
11 445
337 834
960 259
101 401
55 249
12 432
11 434
180 515
5 475
65 943
251 933
255 307
134 991
304 860
96 336
791 495
16 920
403 777
1 212 192
% Total
%
Foreign
Base
Exchange Costs
Local
Foreign
Total
% Total
%
Foreign
Base
Exchange Costs
40
41
4
12
23
32
16
21
32
17
39
12
100
2
51
153
8 152
4 224
15 489
4 497
32 361
606
4 252
37 220
5 371
2 926
658
606
9 561
290
443
10 295
13 523
7 150
16 147
5 103
41 922
896
4 696
47 514
40
41
4
12
23
32
9
22
32
17
39
12
100
2
11
113
   Table 2:  Components by Financiers (US$ '000) 
Private Sector
IFAD
Am ount
%
Am ount
%
Beneficiaries
%
Am ount
Governm ent
%
Am ount
Total
Am ount
%
For.
Exch.
Local
(Excl.
Taxes)
Duties &
Taxes
1. Enhanced crop productivity and production
2. Market linkage and value addition
3. Enabling environment
4. Project implementation
Total PROJECT COSTS
94
215
9 894
-
10 203
0.6
2.7
54.0
-
21.5
12 564
5 963
3 277
4 214
26 017
81.8
74.5
17.9
72.5
54.8
4
465
2 046
-
2 515
-
5.8
11.2
-
5.3
2 701
1 360
3 116
1 602
8 779
17.6
17.0
17.0
27.5
18.5
15 363
8 003
18 333
5 815
47 514
32.3
16.8
38.6
12.2
100.0
5 837
3 126
689
642
10 295
7 919
4 047
14 626
3 635
30 228
1 606
829
3 018
1 538
6 992
135 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
   Table 3:  Project Components by Year – Base Costs (US$ '000) 
1. Enhanced crop productivity and production
2. Market linkage and value addition
3. Enabling environment
4. Project implementation
Total BASELINE COSTS
Physical Contingencies
Price Contingencies
Inflation
Local
Foreign
Subtotal Inflation
Devaluation
Subtotal Price Contingencies
Total PROJECT COSTS
Taxes
Foreign Exchange
2018
2019
2020
Base Cost
2021
2022
2023
Total
2 153
503
757
1 548
4 961
155
547
18
565
-368
196
5 312
981
1 773
3 218
2 062
1 841
1 270
8 392
218
1 873
84
1 957
-1 378
579
9 189
1 389
2 857
3 573
1 591
4 272
600
10 035
203
3 555
150
3 704
-2 691
1 013
11 251
1 385
3 094
2 426
1 490
4 005
564
8 485
146
4 331
119
4 450
-3 289
1 161
9 792
1 355
1 777
1 315
775
5 090
547
7 726
97
5 545
41
5 586
-4 282
1 304
9 128
1 463
478
839
728
182
574
2 323
77
1 886
33
1 919
-1 477
442
2 842
419
316
13 523
7 150
16 147
5 103
41 922
896
17 738
443
18 181
-13 486
4 696
47 514
6 992
10 295
   Table 4:  Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000) 
2018
2019
Totals Including Contingencies
2021
2022
2020
1. Enhanced crop productivity and production
2. Market linkage and value addition
3. Enabling environment
4. Project implementation
Total PROJECT COSTS
2 323
524
800
1 665
5 312
3 561
2 235
1 993
1 400
9 189
4 029
1 763
4 761
698
11 251
2 836
1 681
4 602
674
9 792
1 584
918
5 960
666
9 128
136 
2023
Total
1 030
882
218
712
2 842
15 363
8 003
18 333
5 815
47 514
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
   Table 5:  Expenditure Accounts by Financiers (US$ '000) 
I. Investm ent Costs
A. Goods and services /a
B. Consultancies /b
C. Trainings & w orkshops
D. Civil Works
E. Equipment and materials /c
F. Grants
Total Investm ent Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Salaries and allow ances
B. Operating Cost
Total Recurrent Costs
Total PROJECT COSTS
Private Sector
IFAD
Am ount
%
Am ount
%
Beneficiaries
%
Am ount
Governm ent
%
Am ount
Total
Am ount
%
For.
Exch.
Local
(Excl.
Taxes)
Duties &
Taxes
45
16
9
5 463
4 621
48
10 203
-
-
-
10 203
1.2
0.3
0.3
44.5
35.6
3.0
26.0
-
-
-
21.5
3 131
4 180
2 882
3 408
4 350
1 272
19 222
6 331
464
6 795
26 017
81.8
82.7
82.7
27.8
33.5
80.0
49.0
81.8
83.0
81.9
54.8
-
-
-
1 322
1 193
-
2 515
-
-
-
2 515
-
-
-
10.8
9.2
-
6.4
-
-
-
5.3
650
859
592
2 088
2 820
270
7 280
1 404
95
1 499
8 779
17.0
17.0
17.0
17.0
21.7
17.0
18.6
18.2
17.0
18.1
18.5
3 826
5 056
3 483
12 280
12 984
1 591
39 220
7 735
559
8 294
47 514
8.1
10.6
7.3
25.8
27.3
3.3
82.5
16.3
1.2
17.5
100.0
373
2 849
961
-
4 686
1 425
10 295
-
-
-
10 295
2 866
1 845
2 074
10 192
6 170
137
23 284
6 479
464
6 943
30 228
587
362
447
2 088
2 129
28
5 641
1 256
95
1 351
6 992
_________________________________
\a TA, Training, Supervision, Audit and Contractual Services
\b It includes studies and TA
\c Including vehicle
137 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
   Table 6:  Expenditure Accounts by Years -- Totals Including Contingencies (US$ '000) 
2018
2019
Totals Including Contingencies
2021
2022
2020
 I. Investm ent Costs
A. Goods and services /a
B. Consultancies /b
C. Trainings & w orkshops
D. Civil Works
E. Equipment and materials /c
F. Grants
Total Investm ent Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Salaries and allow ances
B. Operating Cost
Total Recurrent Costs
Total PROJECT COSTS
309
1 542
251
240
1 508
165
4 015
1 209
87
1 297
5 312
1 125
1 226
749
1 758
2 677
321
7 857
1 242
90
1 332
9 189
1 043
1 161
939
2 897
3 296
546
9 883
1 276
92
1 368
11 251
997
409
674
2 846
2 904
557
8 386
1 311
95
1 406
9 792
287
401
480
4 055
2 473
-
7 696
1 336
97
1 432
9 128
_________________________________
\a TA, Training, Supervision, Audit and Contractual Services
\b It includes studies and TA
\c Including vehicle
2023
Total
65
318
390
484
126
-
1 382
1 361
98
1 460
2 842
3 826
5 056
3 483
12 280
12 984
1 591
39 220
7 735
559
8 294
47 514
   Table 7:  Disbursements by Semesters and Government Cash Flow (US$ '000)) 
Financing Available
Private
Sector
Am ount
IFAD
Am ount
Beneficiaries
Am ount
Total
Costs to
be
Financed
Project
Costs
Governm ent
Cum ulative
Cash Flow Cash Flow
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
81
81
461
461
1 175
1 175
1 586
1 586
1 794
1 794
4
4
1 948
1 948
3 082
3 082
3 282
3 282
2 155
2 155
1 389
1 389
1 153
1 153
1
1
125
125
204
204
315
315
598
598
15
15
2 029
2 029
3 668
3 668
4 662
4 662
4 056
4 056
3 780
3 780
1 172
1 172
2 656
2 656
4 595
4 595
5 625
5 625
4 896
4 896
4 564
4 564
1 421
1 421
-627
-627
-926
-926
-964
-964
-840
-840
-784
-784
-249
-249
-627
-1 254
-2 180
-3 106
-4 070
-5 033
-5 873
-6 713
-7 497
-8 280
-8 530
-8 779
Total
10 203
26 017
2 515
38 735
47 514
-8 779
-8 779
138 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
   Table 8:  Disbursement Accounts by Financiers (US$ '000) 
Private Sector
IFAD
Am ount
%
Am ount
%
Beneficiaries
%
Am ount
Governm ent
%
Am ount
Total
Am ount
%
For.
Exch.
Local
(Excl.
Taxes)
Duties &
Taxes
Civil w orks_DA
Goods & services_DA
Consultancies_DA
Trainings & Workshops_DA
Equipment & Material_DA
Salaries & allow ances_DA
Operating cost_DA
Grants_DA
Total PROJECT COSTS
5 463
45
16
9
4 621
-
-
48
10 203
44.5
1.2
0.3
0.3
35.6
-
-
3.0
21.5
3 408
3 131
4 180
2 882
4 350
6 331
464
1 272
26 017
27.8
81.8
82.7
82.7
33.5
81.8
83.0
80.0
54.8
1 322
-
-
-
1 193
-
-
-
2 515
10.8
-
-
-
9.2
-
-
-
5.3
2 088
650
859
592
2 820
1 404
95
270
8 779
17.0
17.0
17.0
17.0
21.7
18.2
17.0
17.0
18.5
12 280
3 826
5 056
3 483
12 984
7 735
559
1 591
47 514
25.8
8.1
10.6
7.3
27.3
16.3
1.2
3.3
100.0
-
373
2 849
961
4 686
-
-
1 425
10 295
10 192
2 866
1 845
2 074
6 170
6 479
464
137
30 228
2 088
587
362
447
2 129
1 256
95
28
6 992
   Table 9: Local/Foreign/Taxes by Financiers (US$'000) 
Private Sector
IFAD
Am ount
%
Am ount
%
Beneficiaries
%
Am ount
Governm ent
%
Am ount
Total
Am ount
%
I.   Foreign
II.  Local (Excl. Taxes)
III. Taxes
Total Project
342
9 860
-
10 203
3.3
32.6
-
21.5
8 015
18 003
-
26 017
77.9
59.6
-
54.8
375
2 140
-
2 515
3.6
7.1
-
5.3
1 562
225
6 992
8 779
15.2
0.7
100.0
18.5
10 295
30 228
6 992
47 514
21.7
63.6
14.7
100.0
139 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
   Table 10:  Expenditure Accounts by Components - Base Costs (US$ '000) 
Enhanced
crop
productivity
and
production
Market
linkage
and value
addition
Enabling
environm ent
Project
im plem entation
Physical
Contingencies
Total
%
Am ount
2 831
3 169
2 236
5
1 594
1 450
11 285
2 238
-
2 238
13 523
547
4 333
246
4 579
-3 285
1 294
15 363
1 606
5 837
342
681
240
2 698
2 032
-
5 994
1 156
-
1 156
7 150
137
2 338
159
2 496
-1 780
716
8 003
829
3 126
155
144
239
7 980
6 619
-
15 137
1 011
-
1 011
16 147
8
9 048
27
9 075
-6 898
2 177
18 333
3 018
689
-
574
324
-
1 470
-
2 367
2 260
476
2 736
5 103
204
2 020
12
2 031
-1 523
509
5 815
1 538
642
3 327
4 568
3 040
10 683
11 715
1 450
34 782
6 664
476
7 140
41 922
896
17 738
443
18 181
-13 486
4 696
47 514
6 992
10 295
3.6
3.6
3.4
0.9
1.4
4.0
2.0
2.7
4.0
2.8
2.1
-
-
-
-
-
1.8
2.1
2.0
2.9
119
164
104
93
160
58
697
180
19
199
896
-
-
-
-
-
86
982
140
303
 I. Investm ent Costs
A. Goods and services /a
B. Consultancies /b
C. Trainings & w orkshops
D. Civil Works
E. Equipment and materials /c
F. Grants
Total Investm ent Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Salaries and allow ances
B. Operating Cost
Total Recurrent Costs
Total BASELINE COSTS
Physical Contingencies
Price Contingencies
Inflation
Local
Foreign
Subtotal Inflation
Devaluation
Subtotal Price Contingencies
Total PROJECT COSTS
Taxes
Foreign Exchange
_________________________________
\a TA, Training, Supervision, Audit and Contractual Services
\b It includes studies and TA
\c Including vehicle
140 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 1.1:  Enhanced crop productivity and production /a – Quantities and totals including contingencies 
Detailed Costs (USD) 
Unit
2018
2019
2020
Quantities
2021
2022
2023
Total
Unit Cost
(US$)
2018
2019
Totals Including Contingencies (US$)
2021
2020
2022
2023
Total
For. Exch.
Taxes)
Taxes
Total
Breakdow n of Totals Incl. Cont. (US$)
Local (Excl. Duties &
 I. Investm ent Costs
A. Activity One -- PS service provider and agrodealer capacity building
1. SA1: Agrodealer capacity building
Agrodealer Assessments /b
Agrodealer Technical Training /c
Agrodealer Business Training /d
Khartoum Visits /e
Agrodealer Association formation: Training /f
Agrodealer Association formation: Exposure Tour /g
Subtotal
2. SA2: Mechanized Service Provider (MSP) Capacity Building
Assessment /h
Technical Training /i
Business Training /j
Khartoum Visits /k
MSP implement rental /l
Subtotal
3. SA3: Spray Service Provider (SSP) Capacity Building
Assessments /m
SAGA Grant Agreement /n
Technical Training and Certification /o
On Farm Demonstrations /p
SSP Equipment purchased (knapsack/PPE) /q
SSP Equipment Rental Charges (motorized sprayers) /r
Subtotal
4. SA4: Mechanic / Blacksm ith capacity building
Assessments /s
Technical Training /t
Business Training /u
Regional Visits to State capitals /v
Subtotal
Subtotal
B. Activity Tw o -- On farm  and innovation dem onstrations
On Farm Demonstrations /w
Innovation Demonstrations /x
Materials and equipment for demonstration farmer field school /y
Certified seed for demo plots /z
Agricultural implements /aa
Agricultural equipment (25 hp) /bb
Agricultural equipment (self propelled) /cc
Subtotal
C. Activity Three -- Engagem ent w ith national private sector com panies
1. SA1: Inform ation sharing
Service Provider and Agrodealer  reports /dd
Smallholder Productive Capacity Reports
Private sector training courses /ee
Private sector technical assistance /ff
Subtotal
2. Innovation scale-up m atching grant facility (ISMGF)
Establishment and Operations /gg
Grants (for Services) /hh
Grants (for buying materials) /ii
Subtotal
Subtotal
D. Activity Four -- Gum  Arabic support
1. SA1: Im proved Potencial of Gum  Arabic Resource Base
Gum Arabic Genetic Upgrading and Dissemination
Nursery and Plantation Technical Support /jj
Nursery and Plantation Co-Financing /kk
Subtotal
2. SA3: Gum  Arabic Innovation Dem onstrations
Gum Arabic Innovation Dissemination /ll
Gum Arabic Producers Association (GAPA) Training Materials Development /mm  
GAPA Training /nn
GAPA Tools /oo
Subtotal
Subtotal
number
number
number
number
number
number
number
number
number
number
MSP
number
number
number
Training
Knapsack
 Motorized sprayers
number
number
number
number
number
number
set
metric ton
Set
Set
Set
number
number
number
lump-sum
lump-sum
Grants
grant
number
number
number
Set
set
Course
Tool Kit
10
-
-
-
-
-
10
5
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
44
-
10
5
-
-
-
10
15
0.5
6
4
10
4
2
-
-
1
-
-
1
1
-
4
1
-
-
-
10
10
2
-
-
-
10
4
3
44
47
-
4
10
42
44
-
10
4
2
40
10
15
0.75
9
5
10
5
-
2
2
1
3
3
-
1
1
10
-
-
-
4
1
10
10
4
-
42
42
-
4
10
40
42
10
10
4
-
30
10
20
1.5
13
9
10
6
2
2
2
1
5
5
1
1
1
-
13
13
2
-
-
-
10
4
3
40
40
-
4
10
-
40
-
10
4
2
30
10
25
1.5
13
-
-
5
-
2
2
1
5
5
1
1
1
9
-
-
-
-
-
6
10
4
-
-
-
-
4
10
-
-
5
10
4
-
-
10
20
1
13
-
-
5
2
2
2
1
-
-
-
-
1
8
-
47
47
8
1
42
42
6
-
40
40
6
10
-
-
-
6
6
-
-
-
-
5
4
2
-
-
-
2
5
-
-
-
5
4
2
29
29
29
4
4
1
26
50
20
8
126
129
1
18
45
126
126
25
50
20
6
6,000
6,000
3,000
4,000
7,500
216,000
5,000
7,500
7,500
8,000
8,000
250
150,000
5,250
3,250
126
126
3,750
3,250
20,000
4,000
-
-
5
0.5
-
-
-
100
50
100
5.75
54
18
30
5,826.271
17,000
266
1,143.591
5,000
33,100
9,061
-
-
-
2
1
-
-
-
-
-
4
-
-
-
25
6
8
10
6
13
13
3
4
4
1,000
7,500
16,500
16,500
40,000
20,000
80,000
10,000
5,000
52,000
36
12
129
129
3,177.966
2,000
420.551
340
142 
66 158
-
-
-
-
-
66 158
55 132
41 349
-
-
-
96 481
-
165 395
-
-
5 823
-
171 219
41 349
17 918
-
-
59 267
393 124
-
187 448
4 191
630
31 512
139 073
95 177
458 031
4 411
16 540
-
-
20 950
42 016
-
-
42 016
62 966
11 026
5 513
-
16 540
14 017
2 205
-
-
16 222
32 761
-
67 938
33 969
9 058
-
-
110 965
-
84 922
33 969
25 714
398 568
543 172
13 304
-
23 778
36 800
5 670
5 940
85 492
69 791
-
-
-
34 896
236 053
340 740
58 160
87 239
34 896
-
390 832
571 127
12 214
-
24 427
37 804
5 508
5 783
85 735
43 620
-
37 804
36 800
93 055
90 584
-
9 058
174 479
136 441
876 071 1 172 080
263 882
192 490
4 275
971
48 213
177 318
97 080
784 230
5 661
-
35 356
35 356
76 374
42 856
64 284
257 138
364 279
440 653
-
5 661
58 879
64 541
28 787
-
22 381
17 121
68 289
132 830
203 312
197 742
5 814
1 995
71 034
325 556
99 022
904 476
6 979
17 448
36 064
36 064
96 554
43 713
109 284
437 134
590 132
686 686
11 632
5 816
60 486
77 934
29 573
2 326
20 546
15 606
68 050
145 984
-
93 246
46 623
9 564
-
-
149 433
-
89 660
35 864
26 753
382 548
534 824
11 955
-
25 105
38 853
-
5 618
81 530
-
38 853
95 637
9 564
144 053
909 840
208 953
203 229
7 413
2 051
72 455
-
-
494 100
5 977
-
36 785
36 785
79 547
44 588
111 469
445 877
601 934
681 481
11 955
5 977
62 164
80 096
22 795
-
20 110
15 160
58 065
138 161
65 768
-
-
-
-
-
65 768
36 538
91 344
36 538
-
-
164 420
-
-
25 576
39 583
-
-
65 159
22 836
39 583
97 434
-
159 852
455 199
-
207 047
6 049
1 393
73 904
-
-
288 393
6 090
18 269
37 521
37 521
99 400
45 479
-
-
45 479
144 879
-
-
63 332
63 332
23 223
24 358
-
-
47 582
110 914
-
44 678
22 339
-
-
-
67 017
-
46 540
37 232
18 556
-
102 327
-
-
13 031
20 167
-
-
33 198
-
20 167
99 285
9 928
129 381
331 924
-
-
1 542
710
-
-
-
2 252
-
-
-
38 271
38 271
46 389
-
-
46 389
84 660
-
-
-
-
15 776
-
-
-
15 776
15 776
201 717
205 862
102 931
18 622
34 896
236 053
800 081
149 829
441 054
178 498
71 022
1 171 948
2 012 351
37 473
165 395
111 917
173 206
17 001
17 341
522 333
-
-
-
-
-
236 053
236 053
-
-
-
71 022
-
71 022
-
-
-
-
17 001
17 341
34 342
107 805
191 123
475 995
28 551
803 473
4 138 238
-
-
-
-
-
341 417
676 147
987 956
29 284
7 750
297 119
641 947
291 279
-
-
29 284
-
297 119
641 947
291 279
2 931 481 1 259 628
29 118
52 256
145 725
183 996
411 096
-
-
145 725
183 996
329 722
265 042
285 037
265 042
285 037
1 140 150 1 140 150
1 690 229 1 690 229
2 101 325 2 019 951
34 613
22 968
244 861
302 442
134 170
28 890
63 037
47 887
273 984
576 426
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
47 887
47 887
47 887
167 425
170 865
85 433
15 456
28 963
-
468 143
34 292
34 997
17 498
3 166
5 932
-
95 885
201 717
205 862
102 931
18 622
34 896
236 053
800 081
124 358
366 075
148 153
-
972 717
1 611 303
25 471
74 979
30 345
-
199 231
330 026
149 829
441 054
178 498
71 022
1 171 948
2 012 351
31 102
137 278
92 891
143 761
-
-
405 032
89 478
158 632
395 075
23 697
666 883
3 151 361
561 202
820 004
-
6 433
-
-
-
1 387 638
24 168
43 373
-
-
67 541
-
-
-
-
67 541
28 729
19 063
203 235
251 027
111 362
23 979
52 320
-
187 661
438 688
6 370
28 117
19 026
29 445
-
-
82 958
18 327
32 491
80 919
4 854
136 590
645 459
114 945
167 953
-
1 318
-
-
-
284 215
4 950
8 884
-
-
13 834
-
-
-
-
13 834
5 884
3 905
41 626
51 415
22 809
4 911
10 716
-
38 437
89 852
37 473
165 395
111 917
173 206
17 001
17 341
522 333
107 805
191 123
475 995
28 551
803 473
4 138 238
676 147
987 956
29 284
7 750
297 119
641 947
291 279
2 931 481
29 118
52 256
145 725
183 996
411 096
265 042
285 037
1 140 150
1 690 229
2 101 325
34 613
22 968
244 861
302 442
134 170
28 890
63 037
47 887
273 984
576 426
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 1.1:  Enhanced crop productivity and production /a – Quantities and totals including contingencies (cont’d.) 
Unit
2018
2019
2020
Quantities
2021
2022
2023
Total
Unit Cost
(US$)
2018
2019
Totals Including Contingencies (US$)
2021
2020
2022
Breakdow n of Totals Incl. Cont. (US$)
Local (Excl. Duties &
2023
Total
For. Exch.
Taxes)
Taxes
Total
 I. Investm ent Costs
E. Activity Five -- Environm ent and clim ate change (CC)
  Person month
International Enviroment Expert
  Person month
CC Consultancy Services in Institutional Capacity
CC Consultancy Services in adaptation options prioritized and cost benefits analyze  Person month
  Person month
CC Consultancy Services in developing funding strategy and implementation
  Person month
National Enviroment/Climate Change Staff
5
5
3
5
5
5
4
3
4
4
4
-
3
3
4
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
14
9
9
12
13
43,000
33,000
33,000
38,610
3,463.453
Subtotal
F. Activity Six -- Support to hom e garden (Jubraka) cultivation
Jubraka demonstration in the new  villages /pp
Jubraka demonstration in new  villages /qq
Jubraka scalling up in the old villages
Subtotal
G. Consultants for technical assistance
Agrodealer Business National Consultant
MSP Business National Consultant
Crop production National Consultant
Agroforestry National consultant (Gum Arabic Specialist)
Communication Development National Consultant
Agrodealer Association International Consultant
Gum Arabic International Consultant
PPP International Consultant
Subtotal
Total Investm ent Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. SPIU and LET staff salaries
SPIU: Mechanization Specialist (MCS) /rr
SPIU: Crop Protection Specialist (CPS) /ss
LET: Locality Private Sector Officer/ Team Leader (LPSO) /tt
LET: Locality Crop Protection Officer (LCPO) /uu
LET: Locality Mechanization Officer (LMO) /vv
LET: Locality Agro-forestry Officer (LAO) /w w
Locality Extension Teams Topping /xx
State Level Staff Salary (Sinnar State & North, South & West Kordofan States) /yy  
person year
Person year
person year
person year
person year
person year
team year
person year
number
number
number
50
50
1 500
50
50
1 500
50
50
2 000
-
-
2 000
-
-
1 500
-
-
150
150
1 500 10 000
9.11
31.78
2.595
  Person month
  Person month
person month
person month
person month
  Person month
  Person month
  Person month
2
12
12
12
4
-
1
1
4
4
13
13
13
13
4
12
2
12
12
12
4
-
1
1
4
4
13
13
13
13
4
12
2
5
6
6
4
2
1
1
4
4
13
13
13
13
4
12
-
5
6
6
4
-
1
1
4
4
13
13
13
13
4
12
-
5
6
6
4
-
-
1
4
4
13
13
13
13
4
12
-
5
6
6
4
-
-
1
4
4
13
13
13
13
4
12
6
44
48
48
24
2
4
6
24
24
78
78
78
78
24
72
3,462.977
3,462.977
3,462.977
3,462.977
3,462.977
33,000
33,000
33,000
9,533.898
9,533.898
5,296.61
5,296.61
5,296.61
5,296.61
1,493.644
1,271.186
225 836
174 983
104 990
204 245
19 095
729 148
502
1 752
4 089
6 344
230 353
142 786
107 089
166 835
15 687
662 749
516
1 799
4 171
6 486
187 968
-
109 231
127 767
16 115
441 081
530
1 848
5 673
8 051
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
644 157
317 768
321 310
498 847
50 896
644 157
317 768
321 310
422 933
-
1 832 977 1 706 167
-
-
5 786
5 786
-
-
4 426
4 426
-
-
4 515
4 515
1 548
5 400
28 660
35 607
-
-
28 660
28 660
-
-
-
75 914
42 244
118 158
1 285
4 482
-
5 766
-
-
-
-
8 652
8 652
263
918
-
1 181
644 157
317 768
321 310
498 847
50 896
1 832 977
1 548
5 400
28 660
35 607
7 637
45 821
45 821
45 821
15 274
-
34 663
34 663
229 699
-
8 056
21 088
20 141
25 306
24 169
25 306
24 169
16 871
16 112
-
72 127
-
36 064
37 521
36 064
126 091
236 901
1 912 073 3 138 418 3 595 258 2 389 875 1 129 902
-
20 699
24 839
24 839
16 559
-
36 785
36 785
160 507
7 842
47 053
47 053
47 053
15 684
-
35 356
35 356
235 399
-
23 535
-
-
176 291
21 489
-
192 974
25 787
-
192 974
25 787
-
97 692
17 191
72 127
72 127
-
142 868
142 868
-
218 660
218 660
38 271
128 524
433 655
1 117 121
567 651 12 733 176 5 837 365
19 534
146 321
160 169
160 169
81 084
-
-
-
567 277
23 535
4 001
176 291
29 969
192 974
32 806
192 974
32 806
97 692
16 608
72 127
-
142 868
-
218 660
-
1 117 121
116 189
5 736 428 1 159 382 12 733 176
42 050
42 050
75 923
75 923
75 923
75 923
6 588
16 820
411 199
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 323 271 3 560 677 4 029 039 2 835 691 1 584 094 1 030 472 15 363 245 5 837 365
268 954
268 954
485 611
485 611
485 611
485 611
42 136
107 582
2 630 070
43 181
43 181
77 965
77 965
77 965
77 965
6 765
17 272
422 259
47 329
47 329
85 454
85 454
85 454
85 454
7 415
18 931
462 821
45 590
45 590
82 315
82 315
82 315
82 315
7 142
18 236
445 816
44 359
44 359
80 093
80 093
80 093
80 093
6 950
17 744
433 781
46 446
46 446
83 861
83 861
83 861
83 861
7 277
18 578
454 193
268 954
45 722
223 232
268 954
45 722
223 232
485 611
82 554
403 057
485 611
82 554
403 057
485 611
82 554
403 057
485 611
82 554
403 057
42 136
7 163
34 973
107 582
18 289
89 293
2 630 070
447 112
2 182 958
7 919 386 1 606 494 15 363 245
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
_________________________________
\a for Sennar & Kordofan States
\b number of localities
\c number of localities covered by SAGA grant
\d number of localities
\e Groups on Visit
\f number of training courses in four states
\g # of study tours to African country (1 w eek @ 20 people)
\h Locality Assessments
\i Locality Based Training courses
\j State Based Trainings
\k # of study tour groups of 20 persons per visit
\l New  villages only, 2 per village
\m number of villages
\n SAGA Grants
\o State based training courses
\p Locality Based Training
\q new  villages only, 2 per village
\r new  villages only
\s Locality assessments
\t Locality based training
\u State based training
\v Study tours in groups (20 persons per visit
\w  # of Villages w ith On Farm Demonstrations
\x Localities, but costing is complex because MOUs w ith individual companies
\y PS contribution is 33%
\z PS contribution is 33%
\aa For providing producers groups w ith mechanized services as demos
\bb for providing GPGs w ith mechanized services as demos. PS contribution is 33%
\cc for providing GPGs w ith mechanized services as demos. PS contribution is 33%
\dd Assessment reports include information on the market potential to the private sector
\ee PS share is 33%
\ff PS share is 50%
\gg Fully funded by IFAD; 25% domestic and 75% US$
\hh PS share is 33%; these grants are 20% of total grants. this part w ill be used for services and the other 80% w ill be used for importing materials
\ii PS share is 33%. this part (80%) of the grants w ill be used to import materials and goods
\jj 1 per each State
\kk Buying equipment and materials to upgrade nurseries. PS share is 25%
\ll 1 per locality for 2 years
\mm include package of tapping tools for each Gum Arabic Producers Association (GAPA)
\nn 1 per village
\oo 1 tool kit per village
\pp vegetable seeds, 10% of local fencing cost, and plastic sheet
\qq Pouring, 90% of local fencing cost, w eeding, and digging pond
\rr SPIU level
\ss SPIU level
\tt LET level
\uu LET level
\vv LET level
\w w  LET level
\xx It includes: extension officer, secretary and driver to be paid by IFAD. State level staff topping (Sinnar State and North, South and West Kordofan States)
\yy State and Locality levels. Government of Sudan w ill cover 100% of these salaries
143 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 1.2:  Enhanced Crop Productivity and Production /a – Expenditures by financiers 
2018
2019
Private Sector
2021
2020
2022
2023
Total
2018
2019
2020
 I. Investm ent Costs
A. Activity One -- PS service provider and agrodealer capacity building
1. SA1: Agrodealer capacity building
Agrodealer Assessments /b
Agrodealer Technical Training /c
Agrodealer Business Training /d
Khartoum Visits /e
Agrodealer Association formation: Training /f
Agrodealer Association formation: Exposure Tour /g
Subtotal
2. SA2: Mechanized Service Provider (MSP) Capacity Building
Assessment /h
Technical Training /i
Business Training /j
Khartoum Visits /k
MSP implement rental /l
Subtotal
3. SA3: Spray Service Provider (SSP) Capacity Building
Assessments /m
SAGA Grant Agreement /n
Technical Training and Certification /o
On Farm Demonstrations /p
SSP Equipment purchased (knapsack/PPE) /q
SSP Equipment Rental Charges (motorized sprayers) /r
Subtotal
4. SA4: Mechanic / Blacksm ith capacity building
Assessments /s
Technical Training /t
Business Training /u
Regional Visits to State capitals /v
Subtotal
Subtotal
B. Activity Tw o -- On farm  and innovation dem onstrations
On Farm Demonstrations /w
Innovation Demonstrations /x
Materials and equipment for demonstration farmer field school /y
Certified seed for demo plots /z
Agricultural implements /aa
Agricultural equipment (25 hp) /bb
Agricultural equipment (self propelled) /cc
Subtotal
C. Activity Three -- Engagem ent w ith national private sector com panies
1. SA1: Inform ation sharing
Service Provider and Agrodealer  reports /dd
Smallholder Productive Capacity Reports
Private sector training courses /ee
Private sector technical assistance /ff
Subtotal
2. Innovation scale-up m atching grant facility (ISMGF)
Establishment and Operations /gg
Grants (for Services) /hh
Grants (for buying materials) /ii
Subtotal
Subtotal
D. Activity Four -- Gum  Arabic support
1. SA1: Im proved Potencial of Gum  Arabic Resource Base
Gum Arabic Genetic Upgrading and Dissemination
Nursery and Plantation Technical Support /jj
Nursery and Plantation Co-Financing /kk
Subtotal
2. SA3: Gum  Arabic Innovation Dem onstrations
Gum Arabic Innovation Dissemination /ll
Gum Arabic Producers Association (GAPA) Training Materials Development /mm  
GAPA Training /nn
GAPA Tools /oo
Subtotal
Subtotal
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
7 143
-
-
7 143
7 143
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
7 286
7 431
7 580
10 928 18 578 18 950
-
18 214 26 010 26 530
18 214 26 010 26 530
-
-
7 732
-
-
7 732
7 732
7 886
-
-
7 886
7 886
45 057
48 456
-
93 513
93 513
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
54 911
-
-
-
-
-
54 911
45 759
34 320
-
-
-
80 079
-
137 278
-
-
4 833
-
142 111
34 320
14 872
-
-
49 191
326 293
-
155 582
3 479
523
26 155
115 431
78 997
380 166
3 661
13 728
-
-
17 389
27 731
-
-
27 731
45 119
9 152
4 576
-
13 728
11 634
1 830
-
-
13 464
27 192
-
56 388
28 194
7 518
-
-
92 101
-
70 485
28 194
21 342
330 811
450 833
11 043
-
19 736
30 544
4 706
4 930
70 958
-
30 544
75 184
7 518
113 246
727 139
219 022
159 767
3 548
806
40 017
147 174
80 577
650 911
4 699
-
29 346
29 346
63 391
28 285
42 428
213 424
284 137
347 528
-
4 699
48 870
53 569
23 893
-
18 576
14 211
56 680
110 249
57 927
-
-
-
28 963
195 924
282 814
48 272
72 409
28 963
-
324 391
474 035
10 137
-
20 274
31 377
4 572
4 800
71 160
36 204
31 377
77 236
-
144 817
972 827
168 749
164 126
4 826
1 656
58 959
270 211
82 188
750 715
5 793
14 482
29 933
29 933
80 140
28 851
72 127
362 822
463 800
543 940
9 654
4 827
50 203
64 685
24 545
1 931
17 053
12 953
56 482
121 167
144 
IFAD
2021
-
77 394
38 697
7 938
-
-
124 029
-
74 418
29 767
22 205
317 515
443 904
9 922
-
20 837
32 248
-
4 663
67 670
-
32 248
79 379
7 938
119 564
755 167
173 431
168 680
6 153
1 702
60 138
-
-
410 103
4 961
-
30 531
30 531
66 024
29 428
73 570
370 078
473 076
539 100
9 922
4 961
51 596
66 480
18 920
-
16 691
12 583
48 194
114 673
Expenditures by Financiers (US$)
2022
2023
Total
2018
2019
Beneficiaries
2021
2020
2022
2023
Total
2018
2019
2020
Governm ent
2021
2022
2023
Total
54 587
-
-
-
-
-
54 587
30 326
75 816
30 326
-
-
136 468
-
-
21 228
32 853
-
-
54 082
-
37 083
18 541
-
-
-
55 624
-
38 628
30 902
15 401
-
84 932
-
-
10 816
16 739
-
-
27 555
18 954
32 853
80 870
-
-
16 739
82 406
8 241
132 678 107 386
377 815 275 497
-
171 849
5 020
1 156
61 340
-
-
239 366
5 054
15 163
31 142
31 142
82 502
30 016
-
-
30 016
112 518
-
-
52 566
52 566
19 275
20 218
-
-
39 493
92 058
-
-
1 280
589
-
-
-
1 869
-
-
-
31 765
31 765
30 617
-
-
30 617
62 382
-
-
-
-
13 094
-
-
-
13 094
13 094
167 425
170 865
85 433
15 456
28 963
195 924
664 067
124 358
366 075
148 153
58 948
972 717
1 670 251
31 102
137 278
92 891
143 761
14 111
14 393
433 537
89 478
158 632
395 075
23 697
666 883
3 434 737
561 202
820 004
24 306
6 433
246 609
532 816
241 761
2 433 130
24 168
43 373
120 952
152 717
341 210
174 928
188 125
946 324
1 309 377
1 650 586
28 729
19 063
203 235
251 027
111 362
23 979
52 320
39 746
227 407
478 433
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
11 247
-
-
-
-
-
11 247
9 372
7 029
-
-
-
16 402
-
28 117
-
-
990
-
29 107
-
11 549
5 775
1 540
-
-
18 864
-
14 437
5 775
4 371
67 756
92 339
2 262
-
4 042
6 256
964
1 010
14 534
11 865
-
-
-
5 932
40 129
57 926
9 887
14 831
5 932
-
66 441
97 092
2 076
-
4 153
6 427
936
983
14 575
-
15 852
7 926
1 626
-
-
25 404
-
15 242
6 097
4 548
65 033
90 920
2 032
-
4 268
6 605
-
955
13 860
-
7 029
6 605
3 046
16 258
-
1 626
-
10 075
24 489
66 831 148 932 199 254 154 673
-
6 256
15 399
1 540
23 195
7 415
6 427
15 819
-
29 661
-
44 860
34 563
31 866
32 723
33 616
712
727
988
107
165
339
5 357
8 196
12 076
23 642
30 144
55 345
16 834
16 504
16 180
77 865 133 319 153 761
750
2 812
-
-
3 562
7 143
-
-
7 143
10 704
1 874
937
-
2 812
2 383
375
-
-
2 758
5 569
962
-
6 011
6 011
12 984
1 186
2 966
6 131
6 131
16 414
7 580
7 431
7 286
18 950
18 578
10 928
43 713
75 799
74 313
61 927 100 322 102 329
74 911 116 737 115 852
-
962
10 009
10 972
4 894
-
3 805
2 911
11 609
22 581
1 977
989
10 283
13 249
5 027
395
3 493
2 653
11 569
24 817
2 032
1 016
10 568
13 616
3 875
-
3 419
2 577
9 871
23 487
35 522
34 549
1 260
349
12 317
-
-
83 997
1 016
-
6 253
6 253
13 523
11 181
-
-
-
-
-
11 181
6 211
15 529
6 211
-
-
27 951
-
-
4 348
6 729
-
-
11 077
3 882
6 729
16 564
-
27 175
77 384
-
35 198
1 028
237
12 564
-
-
49 027
1 035
3 106
6 378
6 378
16 898
7 732
-
-
7 732
24 629
-
-
10 766
10 766
3 948
4 141
-
-
8 089
18 855
-
7 595
3 798
-
-
-
11 393
-
7 912
6 329
3 154
-
17 396
-
-
2 215
3 428
-
-
5 644
-
3 428
16 878
1 688
21 995
56 427
-
-
262
121
-
-
-
383
-
-
-
6 506
6 506
7 886
-
-
7 886
14 392
-
-
-
-
2 682
-
-
-
2 682
2 682
34 292
34 997
17 498
3 166
5 932
40 129
136 014
25 471
74 979
30 345
12 074
199 231
342 100
6 370
28 117
19 026
29 445
2 890
2 948
88 797
18 327
32 491
80 919
4 854
136 590
703 500
114 945
167 953
4 978
1 318
50 510
109 131
49 517
498 352
4 950
8 884
24 773
31 279
69 886
45 057
48 456
193 825
287 339
357 225
5 884
3 905
41 626
51 415
22 809
4 911
10 716
8 141
46 577
97 992
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 1.2:  Enhanced Crop Productivity and Production /a – Expenditures by financiers (cont’d.) 
2018
2019
Private Sector
2021
2020
2022
2023
Total
2018
2019
2020
Expenditures by Financiers (US$)
IFAD
2021
2022
2023
Total
2018
2019
Beneficiaries
2021
2020
2022
2023
Total
2018
2019
2020
Governm ent
2021
2022
2023
Total
 I. Investm ent Costs
E. Activity Five -- Environm ent and clim ate change (CC)
International Enviroment Expert
CC Consultancy Services in Institutional Capacity
CC Consultancy Services in adaptation options prioritized and cost benefits analyze 
CC Consultancy Services in developing funding strategy and implementation
National Enviroment/Climate Change Staff
Subtotal
F. Activity Six -- Support to hom e garden (Jubraka) cultivation
Jubraka demonstration in the new  villages /pp
Jubraka demonstration in new  villages /qq
Jubraka scalling up in the old villages
Subtotal
G. Consultants for technical assistance
Agrodealer Business National Consultant
MSP Business National Consultant
Crop production National Consultant
Agroforestry National consultant (Gum Arabic Specialist)
Communication Development National Consultant
Agrodealer Association International Consultant
Gum Arabic International Consultant
PPP International Consultant
Subtotal
Total Investm ent Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. SPIU and LET staff salaries
SPIU: Mechanization Specialist (MCS) /rr
SPIU: Crop Protection Specialist (CPS) /ss
LET: Locality Private Sector Officer/ Team Leader (LPSO) /tt
LET: Locality Crop Protection Officer (LCPO) /uu
LET: Locality Mechanization Officer (LMO) /vv
LET: Locality Agro-forestry Officer (LAO) /w w
Locality Extension Teams Topping /xx
State Level Staff Salary (Sinnar State & North, South & West Kordofan States) /yy  
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
_________________________________
\a for Sennar & Kordofan States
\b number of localities
\c number of localities covered by SAGA grant
\d number of localities
\e Groups on Visit
\f number of training courses in four states
\g # of study tours to African country (1 w eek @ 20 people)
\h Locality Assessments
\i Locality Based Training courses
\j State Based Trainings
\k # of study tour groups of 20 persons per visit
\l New  villages only, 2 per village
\m number of villages
\n SAGA Grants
\o State based training courses
\p Locality Based Training
\q new  villages only, 2 per village
\r new  villages only
\s Locality assessments
\t Locality based training
\u State based training
\v Study tours in groups (20 persons per visit
\w  # of Villages w ith On Farm Demonstrations
\x Localities, but costing is complex because MOUs w ith individual companies
\y PS contribution is 33%
\z PS contribution is 33%
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
7 143
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
7 143
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
18 214 26 010 26 530
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
18 214 26 010 26 530
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
7 732
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
7 732
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
7 886
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
7 886
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
187 444
145 235
87 141
169 523
15 849
605 192
417
-
3 394
3 811
191 193
118 512
88 884
138 473
13 020
550 082
428
-
3 462
3 890
156 013
-
90 662
106 047
13 375
366 097
440
-
4 708
5 148
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
534 650
263 748
266 687
414 043
42 244
1 521 371
-
-
4 802
4 802
-
-
3 674
3 674
-
-
3 747
3 747
1 285
-
23 788
25 072
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
6 509
17 180
39 054
20 617
39 054
20 617
39 054
13 744
13 018
-
-
30 531
29 346
30 531
29 346
133 221
195 382
93 513 1 578 423 2 585 179 2 956 520 1 957 066
6 687
16 717
20 060
20 060
13 373
59 866
29 933
29 933
196 628
6 339
38 031
38 031
38 031
12 677
-
28 770
28 770
190 650
-
17 503
21 004
21 004
14 003
-
-
31 142
19 534
-
146 321
17 836
160 169
21 403
160 169
21 403
81 084
14 269
59 866
-
118 581
-
181 488
31 765
927 211
104 656 106 675
930 087 463 264 10 470 541
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
223 232
223 232
403 057
403 057
403 057
403 057
34 973
-
2 093 665
93 513 1 905 758 2 921 319 3 301 832 2 311 958 1 291 647 831 692 12 564 206
39 283
39 283
70 927
70 927
70 927
70 927
6 154
-
361 560 368 428
34 901
34 901
63 016
63 016
63 016
63 016
5 468
-
327 334
37 839
37 839
68 321
68 321
68 321
68 321
5 928
-
354 892
36 818
36 818
66 477
66 477
66 477
66 477
5 768
-
345 311
35 840
35 840
64 711
64 711
64 711
64 711
5 615
-
336 139
38 550
38 550
69 605
69 605
69 605
69 605
6 040
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 454
-
1 454
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 454
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 454
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 493
-
1 493
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 493
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 493
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 534
-
1 534
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 534
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 534
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
38 392
29 747
17 848
34 722
3 246
39 160
24 274
18 205
28 362
2 667
123 955 112 667
-
4 482
-
4 482
85
298
695
1 078
88
306
709
1 103
31 955
-
18 569
21 720
2 739
74 984
90
314
964
1 369
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
984
984
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
752
752
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 585
4 302
4 302
2 868
-
-
6 378
21 435
4 482 325 052 533 531 611 194 406 279 192 083
1 370
3 424
4 109
4 109
2 739
12 262
6 131
6 131
40 273
1 298
7 790
7 790
7 790
2 597
-
5 893
5 893
39 049
1 333
7 999
7 999
7 999
2 666
-
6 011
6 011
40 018
-
3 519
4 223
4 223
2 815
-
6 253
6 253
27 286
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
768
768
109 507
54 021
54 623
84 804
8 652
311 606
263
918
4 872
6 053
4 001
-
29 969
3 653
32 806
4 384
32 806
4 384
16 608
2 922
12 262
-
24 288
-
37 172
6 506
189 911
21 849
96 501 2 164 640
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
45 722
45 722
82 554
82 554
82 554
82 554
7 163
107 582
536 405
4 482 408 917 619 651 699 664 497 203 284 716 190 893 2 701 044
7 148
7 148
12 907
12 907
12 907
12 907
1 120
16 820
83 864
7 341
7 341
13 254
13 254
13 254
13 254
1 150
17 272
86 120
7 541
7 541
13 616
13 616
13 616
13 616
1 181
17 744
88 470
7 750
7 750
13 993
13 993
13 993
13 993
1 214
18 236
90 925
7 896
7 896
14 256
14 256
14 256
14 256
1 237
18 578
92 633
8 046
8 046
14 527
14 527
14 527
14 527
1 261
18 931
94 393
\aa For providing producers groups w ith mechanized services as demos
\bb for providing GPGs w ith mechanized services as demos. PS contribution is 33%
\cc for providing GPGs w ith mechanized services as demos. PS contribution is 33%
\dd Assessment reports include information on the market potential to the private sector
\ee PS share is 33%
\ff PS share is 50%
\gg Fully funded by IFAD; 25% domestic and 75% US$
\hh PS share is 33%; these grants are 20% of total grants. this part w ill be used for services and the other 80% w ill be used for importing materials
\ii PS share is 33%. this part (80%) of the grants w ill be used to import materials and goods
\jj 1 per each State
\kk Buying equipment and materials to upgrade nurseries. PS share is 25%
\ll 1 per locality for 2 years
\mm include package of tapping tools for each Gum Arabic Producers Association (GAPA)
\nn 1 per village
\oo 1 tool kit per village
\pp vegetable seeds, 10% of local fencing cost, and plastic sheet
\qq Pouring, 90% of local fencing cost, w eeding, and digging pond
\rr SPIU level
\ss SPIU level
\tt LET level
\uu LET level
\vv LET level
\w w  LET level
\xx It includes: extension officer, secretary and driver to be paid by IFAD. State level staff topping (Sinnar State and North, South and West Kordofan States)
\yy State and Locality levels. Government of Sudan w ill cover 100% of these salaries
145 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 2.1:  Market linkage and value addition /a - Quantities and totals including contingencies 
Detailed Costs (USD) 
Unit
2018
2019
2020
Quantities
2021
2022
2023
Total
Unit Cost
(US$)
2018
2019
Totals Including Contingencies (US$)
2021
2020
2022
Breakdow n of Totals Incl. Cont. (US$)
Local (Excl. Duties &
2023
Total
For. Exch.
Taxes)
Taxes
Total
 I. Investm ent Costs
A. Physical m arket access (Wadi crossings construction)
Survey and design w orks /b
Construction of pipe culverts
Construction of box culverts
Supervision of civil w orks (6%)
Subtotal
B. Activity Tw o -- Storage Facilities Developm ent
  Lumpsum
  Number
  Number
%
1. SA1: Sm allholder ow ned & operated cash crop storage dem onstration facilities  
Design of grain stores (national consultant) /c
Infrastructure - construction of grain stores at community level /d
Supervision of civil w orks (6%)
 Person month
  Number
percent
Subtotal
2. SA2: Price and Storage Studies
Dynamic pricing study /e
Storage financing study /f
Other studies /g
Subtotal
3. SA3: Sinnar State crop m arket rehabilitation
Feasibility study
Technical assistance
Training
Infrastructure - construction of market infrastructure
Supervision of civil w orks (6%)
Subtotal
Subtotal
C. Activity Three -- Market Linkages / Value Addition
1. SA1: Market Assessm ent Studies
a) Unrefined Oil/Seedcake
b) Mobile Groundnut Shelling
c.1) Gum Arabic Grading and Packing
c.2)  Improving Smallholder access to Wholesale and Auction Markets
d) Certified Seed Production: International Certification -- Fair Trade / Organic
Other International Market Studies
Subtotal
2. SA2: Direct Support for Market Linkage / Value Addition
Tools & Equipment /h
Logistical Support /i
Subtotal
3. SA3: Scale-Up via ICMGF
Innovation Scaling up Matching Grant Facility (ISMGF) /j
4. Consultants for Technical Assistance
PPP Consultant -- International
Subtotal
Total Investm ent Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
SPIU: Marketing Specialist (MS) /k
LET: Locality Marketing Officer (LMKO)
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
_________________________________
\a for Sennar & Kordofan States
\b As per submission by SDP & SUSTAIN
\c As per submission by SDP & SUSTAIN, but note the number of stores to build below
\d 1 per locality, as per SDP/SUSTAIN estimates
\e incidental costs of publicizing, most costs in the consultants
\f incidental costs of publicizing, most costs in the consultants
1
-
-
-
3
-
-
2
1
-
1
-
3
-
-
1
1
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
1
1
10
10
10
-
10
10
10
1
5
5
-
-
1
-
1
3
1
1
-
-
1
1
2
-
47
47
4
1
4
13
1
5
5
-
-
1
-
-
3
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
42
42
5
1
4
13
-
8
8
8
-
3
3
-
-
1
-
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
40
40
6
1
4
13
-
8
8
8
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
30
-
-
1
4
13
-
8
8
8
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
44
44
44
5
13
13
2
1
3
3,463.983
12,637.765
758.263
35,500
35,500
35,500
1
1
12
25,000
15,000
20,000
1 380,730.456
18,275.053
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
5,000
2,500
2,500
35,500
33,000
33,000
20
-
179
129
4,650
2,000
-
1
15
6
80,000
33,000
4
13
24
78
11,335.011
11,335.011
11 459
-
-
11 459
71 710
35 855
-
107 565
25 250
-
60 600
-
-
85 850
204 874
5 301
2 651
-
35 855
-
-
43 807
-
-
-
-
Study
Study
Study
number
number
number
number
percent
number
Study
number
number
Study
number
Set
number
number
 person month
  Person year
  person year
4
13
32,745.604
21,669.386
24,929.82
2,115.89
36 106
-
-
-
36 106
37 078
245 361
282 279
23 958
588 676
-
252 056
289 981
24 612
566 649
-
207 240
238 421
20 236
465 897
-
211 133
242 901
20 616
474 650
-
215 144
247 515
21 008
483 667
73 184
1 130 934
1 301 098
110 429
2 615 646
3 922
71 548
4 128
79 598
-
-
36 572
36 572
-
15 453
61 812
414 518
19 897
511 680
627 851
-
-
2 722
36 572
67 993
-
107 287
4 029
73 501
4 240
81 770
-
-
37 304
37 304
-
-
63 048
-
-
63 048
182 122
-
-
-
-
-
34 677
34 677
-
45 324
2 615
47 939
-
-
38 050
38 050
-
-
21 436
-
-
21 436
107 425
-
-
-
-
-
35 370
35 370
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
19 410
190 373
10 983
220 766
71 710
35 855
111 925
219 490
-
-
21 865
-
-
21 865
21 865
-
-
22 302
-
-
22 302
22 302
25 250
15 453
251 064
414 518
19 897
726 182
1 166 438
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
5 301
2 651
2 722
72 427
67 993
70 047
221 140
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
71 710
35 855
111 925
219 490
25 250
15 453
251 064
-
-
291 767
511 257
-
-
-
72 427
67 993
70 047
210 467
60 743
938 676
1 079 911
91 656
2 170 986
12 441
73 184
192 259 1 130 934
221 187 1 301 098
110 429
444 660 2 615 646
18 773
16 110
158 010
9 116
183 236
3 300
32 363
1 867
37 530
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
19 410
190 373
10 983
220 766
71 710
35 855
111 925
219 490
-
-
-
344 050
16 514
360 564
543 800
-
-
-
70 468
3 382
73 851
25 250
15 453
251 064
414 518
19 897
726 182
111 381 1 166 438
4 400
2 200
2 259
-
-
-
8 859
901
451
463
-
-
-
1 815
5 301
2 651
2 722
72 427
67 993
70 047
221 140
234 156
102 342
336 498
213 431
93 950
307 381
207 333
91 959
299 292
158 610
-
158 610
107 855
-
107 855
921 384
288 251
1 209 635
921 384
-
921 384
-
239 248
239 248
921 384
-
49 003
288 251
49 003 1 209 635
329 664
420 322
514 474
-
-
1 264 459 1 264 459
-
- 1 264 459
34 663
78 470
36 785
885 920
319 450 2 025 332 1 547 214 1 459 242
36 064
798 443
35 356
808 806
52 118
48 071
169 382
156 230
204 300
221 500
523 750 2 235 128 1 762 734 1 680 741
50 711
164 810
215 520
49 364
160 432
209 796
37 521
196 130
692 645
38 271
146 126
652 095
218 660
218 660
2 913 894 2 614 970
6 695 978 3 126 227
-
248 107
2 962 893
-
218 660
50 817 2 913 894
606 858 6 695 978
53 097
172 565
225 662
918 307
54 106
175 843
229 949
882 044
-
307 465
-
999 262
1 306 727
-
8 002 705 3 126 227
255 196
829 387
1 084 583
4 047 476
307 465
52 269
169 874
999 262
222 144 1 306 727
829 001 8 002 705
\g incidental costs of publicizing, most costs in the consultants
\h One "set" per village. Contribution of IFAD is 60% and Beneficiaries is 40%, of w hich: PS is 20% and Farmers is 20%.
\i One "set" per village
\j $80,000 are Goods, w hich 40% from local market and PS contribution is 33%
\k Marketing Specialist
146 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 2.2:  Market linkage and value addition /a - Expenditures by financiers 
 I. Investm ent Costs
A. Physical m arket access (Wadi crossings construction)
Survey and design w orks /b
Construction of pipe culverts
Construction of box culverts
Supervision of civil w orks (6%)
Subtotal
B. Activity Tw o -- Storage Facilities Developm ent
1. SA1: Sm allholder ow ned & operated cash crop storage dem onstration facilities  
Design of grain stores (national consultant) /c
Infrastructure - construction of grain stores at community level /d
Supervision of civil w orks (6%)
Subtotal
2. SA2: Price and Storage Studies
Dynamic pricing study /e
Storage financing study /f
Other studies /g
Subtotal
3. SA3: Sinnar State crop m arket rehabilitation
Feasibility study
Technical assistance
Training
Infrastructure - construction of market infrastructure
Supervision of civil w orks (6%)
Subtotal
Subtotal
C. Activity Three -- Market Linkages / Value Addition
1. SA1: Market Assessm ent Studies
a) Unrefined Oil/Seedcake
b) Mobile Groundnut Shelling
c.1) Gum Arabic Grading and Packing
c.2)  Improving Smallholder access to Wholesale and Auction Markets
d) Certified Seed Production: International Certification -- Fair Trade / Organic
Other International Market Studies
Subtotal
2. SA2: Direct Support for Market Linkage / Value Addition
Tools & Equipment /h
Logistical Support /i
Subtotal
3. SA3: Scale-Up via ICMGF
2018
2019
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
4. Consultants for Technical Assistance
PPP Consultant -- International
Subtotal
Total Investm ent Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
SPIU: Marketing Specialist (MS) /k
LET: Locality Marketing Officer (LMKO)
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
_________________________________
\a for Sennar & Kordofan States
\b As per submission by SDP & SUSTAIN
\c As per submission by SDP & SUSTAIN, but note the number of stores to build below
\d 1 per locality, as per SDP/SUSTAIN estimates
\e incidental costs of publicizing, most costs in the consultants
\f incidental costs of publicizing, most costs in the consultants
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
29 968
-
-
-
29 968
9 511
-
-
9 511
59 519
29 760
-
89 279
20 958
-
50 298
-
-
71 256
170 045
4 400
2 200
-
29 760
-
-
36 360
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 214 958
-
-
- 214 958
- 214 958
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 214 958
Private Sector
2021
2020
2022
2023
Total
2018
2019
2020
IFAD
2021
2022
2023
Total
2018
2019
2020
Beneficiaries
2021
2022
2023
Total
2018
2019
2020
Governm ent
2021
2022
2023
Total
Expenditures by Financiers (US$)
30 774
203 650
234 292
19 885
488 601
-
209 207
240 684
20 428
470 319
3 255
52 230
3 426
58 912
-
-
30 355
30 355
-
12 826
51 304
273 582
16 514
354 226
443 493
-
-
2 259
30 355
56 434
-
89 048
3 344
53 655
3 520
60 519
-
-
30 962
30 962
-
-
52 330
-
-
52 330
143 811
-
-
-
-
-
28 782
28 782
-
-
60 743
-
172 009 175 241 178 570
938 676
197 890 201 608 205 438 1 079 911
91 656
386 694 393 960 401 444 2 170 986
16 796
17 111
17 436
-
33 086
2 170
35 257
-
-
31 581
31 581
-
-
17 792
-
-
17 792
84 630
-
-
-
-
-
29 357
29 357
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
18 148
-
-
18 148
18 148
-
-
18 511
-
-
18 511
18 511
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
16 110
138 972
9 116
164 198
59 519
29 760
92 898
182 177
20 958
12 826
208 383
273 582
16 514
532 263
878 639
4 400
2 200
2 259
60 114
56 434
58 139
183 547
515 975
239 248
755 223
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
7 155
-
7 155
-
7 350
-
7 350
-
4 532
-
4 532
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
70 468
-
70 468
77 623
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
7 350
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
4 532
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
6 138
-
-
-
6 303
41 711
47 987
4 073
6 138 100 075
-
42 850
49 297
4 184
96 330
-
35 231
40 532
3 440
79 202
-
35 893
41 293
3 505
80 691
-
36 575
42 078
3 571
82 223
12 441
192 259
221 187
18 773
444 660
-
19 037
-
19 037
1 948
-
-
1 948
667
12 163
702
13 532
685
12 495
721
13 901
-
-
-
-
12 191
6 095
-
18 286
-
-
6 217
6 217
-
-
-
70 468
-
70 468
89 505
-
4 293
2 627
-
10 508
10 302
70 468
-
3 382
-
14 595
86 986
34 828 106 735
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
463
6 217
11 559
-
18 239
39 807
17 398
57 205
901
451
-
6 095
-
-
7 447
-
-
-
-
-
7 705
445
8 150
-
-
6 468
6 468
-
-
3 644
-
-
3 644
18 262
-
-
-
-
-
6 013
6 013
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 717
-
-
3 717
3 717
-
-
3 791
-
-
3 791
3 791
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 300
32 363
1 867
37 530
12 191
6 095
19 027
37 313
4 293
2 627
42 681
70 468
3 382
123 451
198 295
901
451
463
12 313
11 559
11 908
37 594
-
-
6 342
6 342
-
-
10 718
-
-
10 718
30 961
-
-
-
-
-
5 895
5 895
36 283
15 972
52 255
35 247
15 633
50 880
26 964
-
26 964
18 335
-
18 335
156 635
49 003
205 638
131 127
84 944
216 071
119 521
77 979
197 500
116 106
76 326
192 432
88 821
-
88 821
60 399
-
60 399
63 222
-
63 222
57 626
-
57 626
55 980 42 825 29 121 248 774
-
55 980 42 825 29 121 248 774
-
-
-
32 966
42 032
51 447
-
- 126 446
Innovation Scaling up Matching Grant Facility (ISMGF) /j
- 56 043 71 455 87 461
184 612
235 380
288 105
-
-
708 097
56 043
71 455
87 461
-
-
214 958
-
-
-
-
- 56 043 71 455 87 461
- 56 043 71 455 87 461
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 56 043 71 455 87 461
-
-
-
28 770
65 130
31 765
181 488
92 163 1 828 354
265 143 1 451 171 1 105 724 1 011 750 532 071 512 118 4 877 979
31 142
540 426 119 963
29 346
519 077
29 933
491 594
30 531
255 196
44 908
44 070
39 899
140 587 143 229 145 950
829 387
129 671
169 569
183 845 187 299 190 857 1 084 583
434 713 1 625 302 1 284 606 1 195 595 719 370 702 976 5 962 562
40 972
133 159
174 131
42 090
136 792
178 882
43 258
-
96 189
-
-
-
99 659 107 427 42 825 29 121 375 220
- 173 812 107 009 111 960 42 825 29 121 464 725
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 173 812 107 009 111 960 42 825 29 121 464 725
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
6 011
5 893
37 172
6 253
13 340 137 497 135 735 150 606
495 362
54 306 344 306 263 026 248 071 117 750 110 856 1 138 316
6 378
33 342
6 506
24 841
6 131
52 269
8 860
8 172
169 874
28 795
26 559
34 731
222 144
37 655
89 038 379 972 299 665 285 726 156 112 149 947 1 360 460
9 026
29 336
38 362
8 392
27 273
35 665
8 621
28 018
36 638
9 198
29 893
39 091
\g incidental costs of publicizing, most costs in the consultants
\h One "set" per village. Contribution of IFAD is 60% and Beneficiaries is 40%, of w hich: PS is 20% and Farmers is 20%.
\i One "set" per village
\j $80,000 are Goods, w hich 40% from local market and PS contribution is 33%
\k Marketing Specialist
147 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 3.1:  Enabling environment /a - Quantities and totals including contingencies 
Detailed Costs (USD) 
 I. Investm ent Costs
A. Sub-com ponent one -- farm ers associations strengthening and business developm ent
Unit
2018
2019
2020
Quantities
2021
2022
2023
Total Unit Cost (US$)
2018
2019
Totals Including Contingencies (US$)
2021
2022
2020
1. Activity One -- farm ing as a business (FAAB)
a. SA1: FAAB case studies /b
FAAB for Illiterate/Semi-literate Curriculum /c
Service Provider FAAB modules /d
Introduction to Government Officials
Subtotal
2. Activity Tw o -- farm er producer association capacity building
a. SA1: Curriculum  and Training Materials
FPA training materials /e
FPA Apex Assocation curriculum development
FPA Apex Association Training Materials
Subtotal
b. SA2: Apex Organization Exposure Visit /f
FPAs
Locality Official Training
Apex Organization Exposure Visit /g
Subtotal
Subtotal
Subtotal
B. Sub-com ponent Tw o -- Access to rural finance
1. Activity Three -- Developm ent of savings and credit groups
a. Pre financing by buyers
Pre financing by buyers /h
Pre financing by buyers (Works) /i
Subtotal
b. SA1: Developm ent of village SCG facilitators
Training of SCG facilitators of SCG methodology /j
Exposure visits of the facilitators /k
Allow ances to SCG facilitators to start SCG formation in neighbouring villages /l
Subtotal
c. SA2: Form ation of savings and credit groups
Updating savings and credit manual /m
Formation of saving and credit groups /n
Exposure visits of new  SCG representatives to mature SCGs in WSRMP and LMRP villages /o
Registration costs of SCGs /p
Subtotal
d. SA3: Replication and scaling up of SCGs
ToT of SCG facilitators in surrounding villages /q
e. Activity Six -- Consultants for Technical Assistance
Crop Storage Specialist -- national
Gum Arabic Business Specialist -- national
Farm Association Specialist -- national
Subtotal
Subtotal
2. Activity Four -- Collaboration w ith partnering financial institutions
a. SA1: Crop production loan
Matchnig equity support (crop production)
Matchnig equity support (crop production)
Matching equity support for jubraka
Matching equity support for jubraka
Subtotal
b. SA2: Post-harvest financing
Workshop on financing storage loans /r
Demonstration of post harvest village storage loans /s
Know ledge sharing of results /t
Supply of rub halls for storage in collection centers /u
Subtotal
Subtotal
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
8
2
3
1
3
10,000
2,500
2,500
500
35,500
500
174
10
1
420.551
1,682.203
42,055.085
11 026
11 026
2 757
24 809
530
-
-
530
-
-
-
-
530
25 339
-
-
-
-
-
11 632
2 908
14 540
544
-
-
544
20 363
-
-
20 363
20 907
20 907
559
37 304
559
38 422
18 560
17 677
44 192
80 429
118 851
133 391
-
-
-
-
-
-
575
575
-
-
-
-
-
-
586
586
17 129
-
-
17 129
17 703
17 703
21 609
-
-
21 609
22 195
22 195
1
1
1,407,446.822
2,111,170.18
89 533
-
89 533
291 146
137 911
429 058
695 670
-
503 732
776 562 1 063 111
448 636
952 368 1 472 231 1 063 111
629.714
-
4 114
7 747
7 238
-
9
10
1 270
1,259.428
1,889.195
18.909
1.5
381
12
508
27
2
1
4
1,889.195
62.977
1,259.428
25.212
264.831
264.831
264.831
1
1
1.01
1.01
582,468.008
873,702.013
55,851.218
83,776.801
2
4
2
4
2,518.909
6,297.246
2,518.909
23,615
1 389
-
-
1 389
2 083
-
-
-
2 083
4 278
4 278
5 353
13 909
-
5 348
2 742
2 745
10 835
4 395
6 592
9 898
20 885
1 099
9 889
5 634
5 076
21 698
1 506
6 775
9 042
17 323
-
9 034
5 791
4 637
19 462
1 534
4 602
3 915
10 051
-
3 912
2 950
2 008
8 869
-
-
562
562
93 566
104 983
157 475
17 172
25 758
305 389
2 671
-
-
-
2 671
308 059
577
288
-
865
-
-
-
-
458 781 1 003 291 1 516 255 1 082 031
-
-
592
592
-
-
-
-
139 515
209 272
13 986
20 979
397 392
596 088
30 609
45 913
383 752 1 070 003
2 742
13 712
-
50 603
67 057
-
14 086
2 817
51 615
68 518
450 809 1 138 521
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 950
-
2 950
2 950
number
number
Document
number
number
number
Village
Locality
Study Tour
1
4
1
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
47
-
-
-
4
1
1
1
1
42
10
1
-
-
-
-
-
1
38
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
47
-
-
%
%
0.06
-
0.19
0.06
0.32
0.19
0.43
0.32
-
0.43
Workshop
number
Person day
Lumpsum
number
number
  number of groups
 number of w orkshops
Pew rson month
Person month
Person month
1
-
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
3
2
250
-
75
2
100
6
2
1
-
3
3
450
0.5
135
4
180
1
3
400
-
120
4
160
11
10
-
-
2
%
%
%
%
0.17
0.17
0.29
0.29
0.22
0.22
0.23
0.23
0.61
0.61
0.49
0.49
number
Demonstration
Workshop
Rub halls
1
-
-
-
1
2
-
2
-
2
1
2
1
2
170
-
51
2
68
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
148 
Breakdow n of Totals Incl. Cont. (US$)
Local (Excl. Duties &
2023
Total
For. Exch.
Taxes)
Taxes
Total
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
11 026
22 658
5 665
39 349
1 634
37 304
1 720
40 657
77 661
17 677
44 192
139 529
180 186
219 535
1 580 081
2 426 220
4 006 301
13 101
22 248
28 207
63 556
3 182
28 183
17 117
14 465
62 948
19 099
577
288
1 154
2 019
4 153 923
641 890
962 835
61 767
92 650
1 759 143
5 413
27 799
5 767
102 217
141 196
1 900 339
-
-
-
-
-
37 304
-
37 304
64 459
14 672
36 679
115 809
153 113
153 113
9 152
18 806
4 702
32 660
1 356
-
1 427
2 783
-0
-
-
-0
2 783
35 443
1 874
3 852
963
6 689
278
-
292
570
13 202
3 005
7 513
23 720
24 290
30 979
11 026
22 658
5 665
39 349
1 634
37 304
1 720
40 657
77 661
17 677
44 192
139 529
180 186
219 535
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
102 217
102 217
102 217
1 311 467
2 013 763
3 325 230
268 614
412 457
681 071
1 580 081
2 426 220
4 006 301
10 874
18 466
23 412
52 752
2 641
23 392
14 207
12 006
52 247
2 227
3 782
4 795
10 805
541
4 791
2 910
2 459
10 701
13 101
22 248
28 207
63 556
3 182
28 183
17 117
14 465
62 948
15 853
3 247
19 099
577
288
1 154
2 019
3 448 100
532 769
799 153
51 267
76 900
1 460 089
5 413
23 073
4 787
-
33 273
1 493 361
-
-
-
-
705 824
577
288
1 154
2 019
4 153 923
109 121
163 682
10 500
15 751
299 054
-
4 726
980
-
5 706
304 760
641 890
962 835
61 767
92 650
1 759 143
5 413
27 799
5 767
102 217
141 196
1 900 339
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 3.1:  Enabling environment /a - Quantities and totals including contingencies (cont’d.) 
Unit
2018
2019
2020
Quantities
2021
2022
2023
Total Unit Cost (US$)
2018
2019
Totals Including Contingencies (US$)
2021
2022
2020
SPIU: Rural Finance Specialists (RFS) /cc
LET: Locality Rural Finance and Community Development Officer (LRCO)
Person year
Person year
4
13
4
13
4
13
4
13
4
13
4
13
24
78
11,122.881
9,533.898
Breakdow n of Totals Incl. Cont. (US$)
Local (Excl. Duties &
2023
Total
For. Exch.
Taxes)
Taxes
Total
189 922
-
284 883
-
20 589
-
30 884
-
3 483 673
-
3 839 459
-
985 521
-
-
1 479 189
- 10 314 120
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
157 635
236 453
17 089
25 633
2 891 448
3 186 751
817 983
1 227 727
8 560 720
32 287
48 430
3 500
5 250
592 224
652 708
167 539
251 462
189 922
284 883
20 589
30 884
3 483 673
3 839 459
985 521
1 479 189
1 753 400 10 314 120
ratio
ratio
ratio
ratio
ratio
ratio
ratio
ratio
0.17
0.17
0.29
0.29
-
-
-
-
0.22
0.22
0.23
0.23
0.07
0.06
0.06
0.043
0.61
0.61
0.49
0.49
0.19
0.19
0.19
0.19
-
-
-
-
0.29
0.29
0.32
0.32
-
-
-
-
0.42
0.42
0.8
0.64
1
1
1.01
1.01
0.97
0.96
1.37
1.193
172,340.254
258,510.381
18,617.214
27,925.794
3,127,393.591
3,480,814.989
622,750.477
1,074,485.911
-
-
-
-
117 580
176 370
10 203
15 304
41 280
61 919
4 662
6 993
238 345
227 383
40 681
50 303
-
-
-
-
664 590 1 042 517 1 538 220
739 694 1 160 330 1 712 052
583 433
229 069
132 338
805 318
395 233
228 335
671 566 2 084 414 2 827 150 4 639 023
31 062
46 593
5 724
8 586
-
-
-
-
91 966
8 012
3 976
-
11 988
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
number
ratio
number
1
0.25
-
1
0.25
-
1
0.25
1
-
0.25
-
ratio
0.25
0.5
0.25
-
-
0.25
-
1
0.5
1
-
0.25
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
7,556.674
15,000
18,892
8 227
4 083
-
12 310
8 452
4 194
19 852
32 498
-
4 311
-
4 311
300,000
75 750
154 530
78 810
-
20,000
100,000
10,000
-
-
-
-
87 738
-
25 755
-
25 755
192 595
22 369
52 540
11 185
86 094
197 402
-
26 796
-
26 796
31 106
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
24 691
16 563
19 852
61 106
-
-
19 852
19 852
20 493
13 748
-
34 241
4 197
2 816
-
7 013
24 691
16 563
19 852
61 106
309 090
309 090
-
-
309 090
22 369
105 091
11 185
138 644
508 841
-
105 091
-
105 091
434 033
18 566
-
9 283
27 849
62 090
3 803
-
1 901
5 704
12 717
22 369
105 091
11 185
138 644
508 841
4
4
4
4
4
24
3,462.977
15 081
14 686
16 222
15 493
596 015 1 788 833 4 439 121 4 390 433 5 740 225
621 355 1 809 740 4 572 512 4 408 137 5 762 420
15 923
52 103
49 762
47 171
145 145
138 622
131 405
178 576
197 248
188 383
799 931 1 993 119 4 760 895 4 601 747 5 959 668
48 440
134 940
183 380
51 142
142 468
193 610
16 530
93 934
16 530 16 971 157
16 530 17 190 693
-
77 965
536 250 13 642 237
689 363 13 677 680
15 969
93 934
2 792 671 16 971 157
2 823 650 17 190 693
301 711
53 093
840 481
147 902
200 995
1 142 192
217 525 18 332 885
-
-
-
250 420
697 599
948 019
689 363 14 625 699
51 291
142 882
194 173
301 711
840 481
1 142 192
3 017 823 18 332 885
\p registration under relevant cooperative or PA law
\q Allow ance, hall charges, stationery, refreshment for 1 day ToT w orkshops (30-40 persons) at village level for training the SCG facilitators in surrounding villages.
\r Regional w orkshops for Kordofan and Sennar region in years 1 and 2. 30-40 participants
\s project grants to demonstrate financial product for supporting post harvest financing to the financial partners
\t Regional w orkshops for Kordofan and Sennar region in years 1 and 2. 30-40 participants
\u Supply of rub halls to expand local collection outreach by supporting temporary storage at collection points
\v Includes seasonal loan demonstration for 15000 farmers for the first tw o years. Av loan size SDG 2000 and 2,500 respectively for the tw o years.
\w  Includes TA to the PFIs to develop and refine their business plans and harmonise w ith IAMDP needs. Develop investment estimates, cost benefit estimates and credit requirement
estimates for different crop models involving the project promoted technologies.
\x Includes training on value chain financing and development of product and methodology for value chain financing for PFI staff, ABS branch staff
\y Includes incremental operations costs support, mobility support, rural branch establishment support and technology adoption support
\z Includes incremental operations costs support, mobility support, rural branch establishment support and technology adoption support
\aa Includes training on value chain financing and development of product and methodology for value chain financing
\bb National w orkshop in years 3. 2 days w orkshop for 40-50 participants. Costs include facility charges, allow ances, accommodation, refreshments, stationery charges.
\cc Rural Finance (1 Coordinator, 4 experts at State coordination levels and 10 officer at locality level (1 per locality))
 I. Investm ent Costs
3. Activity Five -- Crop loan portfolio start-up m atching grants to PFIs
a. SA1: Rural finance cycles
First cycle financing from Banks (crop loans) /v
First cycle financing from Banks (crop loans)
First cycle financing from Banks (Jubraka)
First cycle financing from Banks (Jubraka)
2-4 cycle financing by banks (crop loans)
2-4 cycle financing by banks (crop loans)
2-4 cycle self financing by farmer
2-4 cycle self financing by farmer
Subtotal
4. Activity Six -- Technical assistance and capacity building of PFIs
a. SA1: Technical assistance to PFIs /w
Training and capacity building /x
Expousure to the project demonstarion /y
Exposure to value chain financin experiences
Subtotal
b. SA2: Infrastructure and operations gap financing to PFIs to expand outreach
Incentives for expanding outreach /z
c. SA3: Collaboration w ith apex financial institutions CBS, SMDC, Guarantee agency, MFI association
TA for improving supervision process, M and E systems /aa
Support IT infrastructure and technology adoption for strengthening supervision and monitoring
Experience sharing w orkshops on success of the crop production loans & replication strategies at national level /bb  
number
lump sum
number
Subtotal
Subtotal
5. Consultants for technical assistance
Community Development National Consultant
Subtotal
Total Investm ent Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. SPIU and LET Staff Salaries
person month
-
-
-
4
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
_________________________________
\a for Sennar & Kordofan States
\b case studies
\c Materials Production
\d Materials Production
\e training materials
\f 20 members for 1 w eek total
\g 20 members for 1 w eek total
\h this is a 100% PS activity
\i This is a 100% PS activity
\j 2 facilitators per village, 30 participant per w orkshop. 1 day w orkshop including cost of allow ances, hall charges, refreshment, w orkshop facilitated by project staff
\k 15-20 facilitators per exposure visit; 2-3 days local exposure to other villages w ith SCGs; cost includes transportation, daily allow ance, accommodation
\l 10 days per facilitator
\m In year 1 LMRP SCG manual w ill be updated incorporating LMRP experiences and lessons learnt.  In year 3 this manual w ill be fine tuned based on first tw o year experiences.
\n 3 SCGs per village formed directly by the project as an entry level activity. Includes cost of the savings boxes, stationery, initial training
\o 15-20 SCG representatives per exposure visit; 1-2 days local exposure to other villages w ith SCGs; cost includes transportation, daily allow ance, accommodation
149 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 3.2:  Enabling environment /a - Expenditures by financiers 
 I. Investment Costs
A. Sub-component one -- farmers associations strengthening and business development
1. Activity One -- farming as a business (FAAB)
a. SA1: FAAB case studies /b
FAAB for Illiterate/Semi-literate Curriculum /c
Service Provider FAAB modules /d
Introduction to Government Officials
Subtotal
2. Activity Tw o -- farmer producer association capacity building
a. SA1: Curriculum and Training Materials
FPA training materials /e
FPA Apex Assocation curriculum development
FPA Apex Association Training Materials
Subtotal
b. SA2: Apex Organization Exposure Visit /f
FPAs
Locality Official Training
Apex Organization Exposure Visit /g
Subtotal
Subtotal
Subtotal
B. Sub-component Tw o -- Access to rural finance
1. Activity Three -- Development of savings and credit groups
a. Pre financing by buyers
Pre financing by buyers /h
Pre financing by buyers (Works) /i
Subtotal
b. SA1: Development of village SCG facilitators
Training of SCG facilitators of SCG methodology /j
Exposure visits of the facilitators /k
Allow ances to SCG facilitators to start SCG formation in neighbouring villages /l
Subtotal
c. SA2: Formation of savings and credit groups
Updating savings and credit manual /m
Formation of saving and credit groups /n
Exposure visits of new  SCG representatives to mature SCGs in WSRMP and LMRP villages /o
Registration costs of SCGs /p
Subtotal
d. SA3: Replication and scaling up of SCGs
ToT of SCG facilitators in surrounding villages /q
e. Activity Six -- Consultants for Technical Assistance
Crop Storage Specialist -- national
Gum Arabic Business Specialist -- national
Farm Association Specialist -- national
Subtotal
Subtotal
2. Activity Four -- Collaboration w ith partnering financial institutions
a. SA1: Crop production loan
Matchnig equity support (crop production)
Matchnig equity support (crop production)
Matching equity support for jubraka
Matching equity support for jubraka
Subtotal
b. SA2: Post-harvest financing
Workshop on financing storage loans /r
Demonstration of post harvest village storage loans /s
Know ledge sharing of results /t
Supply of rub halls for storage in collection centers /u
Subtotal
Subtotal
Unit
2018
2019
2020
Private Sector
2021
2022
2023
Total
2018
2019
2020
Expenditures by Financiers (US$)
IFAD
2021
2022
2023
Total
2018
2019
2020
Beneficiaries
2021
2022
2023
Total
2018
2019
2020
Government
2021
2022
2023
Total
number
number
Document
number
number
number
Village
Locality
Study Tour
%
%
Workshop
number
Person day
Lumpsum
number
number
  number of groups
 number of w orkshops
Pew rson month
Person month
Person month
%
%
%
%
number
Demonstration
Workshop
Rub halls
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
74 312 241 652
- 114 467
74 312 356 118
577 406
418 098
372 368
644 546
790 466 1 221 952
-
882 382
882 382
- 1 311 467
- 2 013 763
- 3 325 230
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
9 152
9 152
2 288
20 592
440
-
-
440
-
-
-
-
440
21 032
-
-
-
1 153
-
-
1 153
1 729
-
-
-
1 729
-
-
-
-
-
9 654
2 414
12 068
452
-
-
452
16 901
-
-
16 901
17 353
17 353
-
-
-
3 551
3 551
4 443
11 544
-
4 439
2 276
2 278
8 993
464
30 962
464
31 890
15 405
14 672
36 679
66 756
98 646
110 714
-
-
-
3 648
5 472
8 215
17 334
912
8 208
4 677
4 213
18 009
-
-
-
-
-
-
477
477
14 217
-
-
14 217
14 694
14 694
-
-
-
1 250
5 624
7 505
14 378
-
7 499
4 806
3 849
16 153
-
-
-
-
-
-
486
486
17 936
-
-
17 936
18 422
18 422
-
-
-
1 273
3 819
3 249
8 342
-
3 247
2 448
1 666
7 361
-
3 414
6 430
6 008
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
74 312 356 118
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
790 466 1 221 952
-
-
-
-
882 382
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 3 325 230
-
-
562
562
3 443
577
288
-
865
24 817
-
-
592
592
42 367
-
-
-
-
36 539
-
-
-
-
15 704
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
9 152
18 806
4 702
32 660
1 356
30 962
1 427
33 745
64 459
14 672
36 679
115 809
149 555
182 214
-
-
-
10 874
18 466
23 412
52 752
2 641
23 392
14 207
12 006
52 247
15 853
577
288
1 154
2 019
122 870
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
87 136
130 704
14 253
21 380
253 472
2 217
-
-
-
2 217
255 689
115 797
173 696
11 608
17 412
318 514
2 276
11 381
-
42 000
55 658
374 171
329 836
494 753
25 405
38 108
888 102
-
11 692
2 338
42 840
56 870
944 972
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 448
-
2 448
2 448
532 769
-
799 153
-
51 267
-
-
76 900
- 1 460 089
4 493
-
23 073
-
4 787
-
84 840
-
117 193
-
- 1 577 281
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
150 
1 874
1 874
469
4 218
90
-
-
90
-
-
-
-
90
4 308
-
-
-
-
93
-
-
93
3 462
-
-
3 462
3 554
3 554
-
1 977
494
2 472
95
6 342
95
6 532
3 155
3 005
7 513
13 673
20 205
22 676
-
-
-
-
-
-
98
98
2 912
-
-
2 912
3 010
3 010
-
-
-
-
-
-
100
100
3 674
-
-
3 674
3 773
3 773
15 221
-
15 221
85 634 118 264
49 495
23 445
76 268 132 015
72 940 161 903 250 279
-
180 729
180 729
236
-
-
236
354
-
-
-
354
727
727
910
2 365
-
909
466
467
1 842
747
1 121
1 683
3 550
187
1 681
958
863
3 689
256
1 152
1 537
2 945
-
1 536
984
788
3 309
261
782
666
1 709
-
665
501
341
1 508
-
699
1 317
1 231
-
-
-
-
-
15 811
17 847
26 771
2 919
4 379
51 916
454
-
-
-
454
52 370
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
77 846 170 459 257 763
-
-
-
-
23 718
67 557
35 576 101 335
5 203
2 378
3 566
7 805
65 238 181 900
-
466
2 395
2 331
479
-
8 774
8 602
11 648
11 400
76 638 193 549
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
183 945
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
501
-
501
501
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 874
3 852
963
6 689
278
6 342
292
6 912
13 202
3 005
7 513
23 720
30 632
37 321
268 614
412 457
681 071
2 227
3 782
4 795
10 805
541
4 791
2 910
2 459
10 701
3 247
-
-
-
-
705 824
109 121
163 682
10 500
15 751
299 054
920
4 726
980
17 377
24 003
323 058
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 3.2:  Enabling environment /a - Expenditures by financiers (cont’d.) 
2018
2019
2020
Private Sector
2021
2022
2023
Total
2018
2019
2020
Expenditures by Financiers (US$)
IFAD
2021
2022
2023
Total
2018
2019
2020
Beneficiaries
2021
2022
2023
Total
2018
2019
2020
Government
2021
2022
2023
Total
 I. Investment Costs
3. Activity Five -- Crop loan portfolio start-up matching grants to PFIs
a. SA1: Rural finance cycles
First cycle financing from Banks (crop loans) /v
First cycle financing from Banks (crop loans)
First cycle financing from Banks (Jubraka)
First cycle financing from Banks (Jubraka)
2-4 cycle financing by banks (crop loans)
2-4 cycle financing by banks (crop loans)
2-4 cycle self financing by farmer
2-4 cycle self financing by farmer
Subtotal
-
-
-
-
  25 782
  38 673
4 751
7 127
34 262
51 393
3 869
5 804
- 197 827
- 188 728
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
865 289 1 276 723
963 074 1 421 003
-
-
  76 332 481 883 1 430 706 1 828 363 2 697 726
97 592
146 387
8 468
12 703
551 610
613 946
-
-
-
-
157 635
-
236 453
-
17 089
-
-
25 633
- 2 891 448
- 3 186 751
-
-
-
-
- 6 515 010
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
4. Activity Six -- Technical assistance and capacity building of PFIs
a. SA1: Technical assistance to PFIs /w
Training and capacity building /x
Expousure to the project demonstarion /y
Exposure to value chain financin experiences
Subtotal
b. SA2: Infrastructure and operations gap financing to PFIs to expand outreach
Incentives for expanding outreach /z
c. SA3: Collaboration w ith apex financial institutions CBS, SMDC, Guarantee agency, MFI association
TA for improving supervision process, M and E systems /aa
Support IT infrastructure and technology adoption for strengthening supervision and monitoring
Experience sharing w orkshops on success of the crop production loans & replication strategies at national level /bb  
2 163
1 073
-
3 237
2 221
1 102
-
3 324
2 282
1 132
5 360
8 774
-
1 164
-
1 164
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 237
-
6 954
-
6 954
10 278
6 040
14 186
3 020
23 245
32 020
-
7 235
-
7 235
8 399
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
6 667
4 472
5 360
16 499
4 487
2 226
-
6 713
4 607
2 286
-
6 894
4 733
2 349
11 117
18 199
-
2 414
-
2 414
-
62 873
128 260
65 413
-
6 040
28 374
3 020
37 434
53 933
-
-
-
-
69 586
-
14 423
-
14 423
149 576
12 527
29 423
6 263
48 213
131 824
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
13 827
9 276
11 117
34 219
256 545
12 527
58 851
6 263
77 641
368 405
13 464
31 616
50 038
13 720
77 965
13 720 2 146 522
13 720 2 328 736
-
15 005
-
15 005
17 419
13 216
67 175
81 868
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
484 249
- 33 765 109 841 190 127
668 414
- 41 752 189 518 328 044
- 75 517 299 358 518 171 1 152 663
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
817 983
- 1 227 727
- 2 045 709
5 281
7 921
973
1 460
-
-
-
-
-
19 989
7 018
-
29 983
10 526
-
1 735
793
1 189
-
2 602
40 519 112 980 177 228
38 655 125 748 197 256
38 942
22 497
6 916
67 190
38 817
8 552
15 634 114 166 354 350 480 615
-
-
-
-
261 497
291 049
99 184
136 904
788 634
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 362
676
-
2 038
1 399
694
-
2 093
1 437
713
3 375
5 525
12 878
26 270
13 398
-
-
-
-
14 915
-
4 378
-
4 378
32 741
3 803
8 932
1 901
14 636
33 558
-
733
-
733
-
-
4 555
-
4 555
5 288
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
32 287
-
48 430
-
3 500
-
5 250
-
592 224
-
652 708
-
167 539
-
251 462
-
- 1 753 400
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
4 197
2 816
3 375
10 388
52 545
3 803
17 865
1 901
23 570
86 503
-
-
-
  153 881 848 279 2 253 191 3 058 714 3 580 108
  153 881 848 279 2 253 191 3 058 714 3 580 108
-
-
-
-
- 9 894 173
- 9 894 173
12 190
340 907
361 939
12 517
12 859
561 082 1 132 022
578 435 1 242 736
-
-
-
-
- 75 517 299 358 518 171 1 152 663
- 75 517 299 358 518 171 1 152 663
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
  153 881 848 279 2 253 191 3 058 714 3 580 108
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 9 894 173
39 152
109 066
148 218
510 157
40 205
41 302
112 000
115 056
156 358
152 205
730 640 1 399 094
42 448
118 248
160 696
242 565
43 246
120 470
163 716
213 753
44 067
250 420
122 759
697 599
948 019
166 826
180 546 3 276 755
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 75 517 299 358 518 171 1 152 663
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 2 045 709
- 2 045 709
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 2 045 709
2 497
2 564
2 707
101 227 303 954 754 550 746 374
105 535 307 509 777 226 749 383
2 634
2 758
975 838
979 611
2 810
15 969
2 810 2 884 754
2 810 2 922 075
8 019
8 459
8 858
22 339
23 566
24 675
33 532
32 025
30 358
135 893 338 683 809 251 782 297 1 013 144
8 235
22 940
31 175
8 694
24 220
32 914
9 026
51 291
25 143
142 882
194 173
34 169
36 979 3 116 247
Subtotal
Subtotal
5. Consultants for technical assistance
Community Development National Consultant
Subtotal
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. SPIU and LET Staff Salaries
SPIU: Rural Finance Specialists (RFS) /cc
LET: Locality Rural Finance and Community Development Officer (LRCO)
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
_________________________________
\a for Sennar & Kordofan States
\b case studies
\c Materials Production
\d Materials Production
\e training materials
\f 20 members for 1 w eek total
\g 20 members for 1 w eek total
\h this is a 100% PS activity
\i This is a 100% PS activity
\j 2 facilitators per village, 30 participant per w orkshop. 1 day w orkshop including cost of allow ances, hall charges, refreshment, w orkshop facilitated by project staff
\k 15-20 facilitators per exposure visit; 2-3 days local exposure to other villages w ith SCGs; cost includes transportation, daily allow ance, accommodation
\l 10 days per facilitator
\m In year 1 LMRP SCG manual w ill be updated incorporating LMRP experiences and lessons learnt.  In year 3 this manual w ill be fine tuned based on first tw o year experiences.
\n 3 SCGs per village formed directly by the project as an entry level activity. Includes cost of the savings boxes, stationery, initial training
\o 15-20 SCG representatives per exposure visit; 1-2 days local exposure to other villages w ith SCGs; cost includes transportation, daily allow ance, accommodation
\p registration under relevant cooperative or PA law
\q Allow ance, hall charges, stationery, refreshment for 1 day ToT w orkshops (30-40 persons) at village level for training the SCG facilitators in surrounding villages.
\r Regional w orkshops for Kordofan and Sennar region in years 1 and 2. 30-40 participants
\s project grants to demonstrate financial product for supporting post harvest financing to the financial partners
\t Regional w orkshops for Kordofan and Sennar region in years 1 and 2. 30-40 participants
\u Supply of rub halls to expand local collection outreach by supporting temporary storage at collection points
\v Includes seasonal loan demonstration for 15000 farmers for the first tw o years. Av loan size SDG 2000 and 2,500 respectively for the tw o years.
\w  Includes TA to the PFIs to develop and refine their business plans and harmonise w ith IAMDP needs. Develop investment estimates, cost benefit estimates and credit requirement
estimates for different crop models involving the project promoted technologies.
\x Includes training on value chain financing and development of product and methodology for value chain financing for PFI staff, ABS branch staff
\y Includes incremental operations costs support, mobility support, rural branch establishment support and technology adoption support
\z Includes incremental operations costs support, mobility support, rural branch establishment support and technology adoption support
\aa Includes training on value chain financing and development of product and methodology for value chain financing
\bb National w orkshop in years 3. 2 days w orkshop for 40-50 participants. Costs include facility charges, allow ances, accommodation, refreshments, stationery charges.
\cc Rural Finance (1 Coordinator, 4 experts at State coordination levels and 10 officer at locality level (1 per locality))
151 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 4.1:  Project management /a - Quantities and totals including contingencies 
Unit
2018
2019
2020
Quantities
2021
2022
2023
Total
Unit Cost
(US$)
2018
2019
Totals Including Contingencies (US$)
2021
2020
2022
Breakdow n of Totals Incl. Cont. (US$)
Local (Excl. Duties &
2023
Total
For. Exch. Taxes)
Taxes
Total
 I. Investm ent Costs
A. I. Investm ent Cost
1. I. 1 Technical Assistance
Project Start-Up Workshop
Comprehensive baseline study
Develop KM Strategy and PIM /b
Conduct Annual Review  and Planning  Workshops
Mid Term review
Project Completion
Technical and thematic studies
Supervision by PSC, SCC, IFAD & Govt /p
Annual Audit
Mechanization National Consultant
Crop Production National Consultant
Agroforestry National Consultant
Subtotal
2. I.2 Training
Training for PCU and State Level staff  (External)
Training for PCU and State Level staff  (Internal)
Gender sensitization training for new  communities
GALS trainings for facilitators /c
GALS champions training /d
Subtotal
3. I.3 Vehicles
PCU: 4WD Station Wagon /e
PCU: 4WD Double Cab /f
SIUP/LET: Hardtop 5 Doors /g
SPIU/LET: 4WD Double Cab /h
SPIU/LET: Motorbike /i
Subtotal
4. I.4 Equipm ent and Furniture
PCU: Generator 80KVA /j
Computers and accessories /k
PCU: Photocopier /l
Subtotal
Total Investm ent Costs
  Lumpsum
Study
 Person month
lump sum
  Lumpsum
  Lumpsum
 person month
  person year
number
 Person month
 person month
 person month
 Person month
 Person month
number
number
  Course
number
number
  Number
  Number
  Number
  Number
Set
  Number
1
1
4
1
-
-
3
1
1
4
4
4
8
4
-
1
1
3
2
2
5
10
2
22
3
-
-
1
1
-
-
2
1
1
4
4
4
17
6
1
1
1
3
1
1
5
7
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
1
-
2
1
1
4
4
4
7
4
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
3
1
1
4
4
4
5
4
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
4
1
1
4
4
4
2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
1
2
1
1
4
4
4
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
1
5
6
1
1
16
6
6
24
24
24
40
18
1
2
2
6
3
3
10
17
2
22
3
35,000
50,000
3,463.453
6,000
35,000
40,000
5,000
10,000
7,000
3,462.977
3,462.977
3,462.977
3,148.623
3,148.623
10,000
20,000
10,000
66,144
59,359.2
54,271.2
44,520
12,720
38 592
55 132
15 276
6 616
-
-
16 540
11 026
7 718
15 274
15 274
15 274
196 721
27 774
13 887
-
22 053
11 026
74 740
208 433
124 702
114 013
233 819
133 611
814 578
11,300
1,700
3,500
23 739
41 239
11 578
76 555
1 162 594
-
-
3 922
6 794
-
-
11 323
11 323
7 926
15 684
15 684
15 684
88 341
60 608
21 391
11 323
22 646
11 323
127 291
212 602
63 598
58 147
238 495
95 398
668 240
-
-
-
-
883 871
-
-
-
6 979
40 712
-
11 632
11 632
8 142
16 112
16 112
16 112
127 434
25 637
14 650
-
-
-
40 287
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
7 173
-
-
17 932
11 955
8 368
16 559
16 559
16 559
95 106
18 820
15 056
-
-
-
33 877
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
7 308
-
-
24 358
12 179
8 525
16 871
16 871
16 871
102 982
7 670
-
-
-
-
7 670
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
7 446
-
49 642
12 411
12 411
8 687
17 191
17 191
17 191
142 171
3 908
-
-
-
-
3 908
38 592
55 132
19 197
42 315
40 712
49 642
94 195
70 526
49 368
97 692
97 692
97 692
752 754
144 417
64 984
11 323
44 699
22 349
287 772
421 035
-
188 300
-
172 160
-
472 314
-
-
229 009
- 1 482 817
-
-
-
-
167 721
-
-
-
-
128 982
-
-
-
-
110 652
-
-
-
-
23 739
41 239
11 578
76 555
146 078 2 599 899
152 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
32 032
45 759
15 934
35 122
33 791
41 203
78 182
58 536
40 975
81 084
81 084
81 084
624 786
119 866
53 937
9 398
37 100
18 550
238 851
6 561
9 372
3 264
7 194
6 921
8 439
16 013
11 989
8 393
16 608
16 608
16 608
127 968
24 551
11 047
1 925
7 599
3 799
48 921
38 592
55 132
19 197
42 315
40 712
49 642
94 195
70 526
49 368
97 692
97 692
97 692
752 754
144 417
64 984
11 323
44 699
22 349
287 772
175 431
78 458
71 733
196 798
95 420
617 841
23 739
-
-
23 739
641 580
-
-
-
-
-
-
421 035
245 604
188 300
109 842
172 160
100 426
472 314
275 517
133 589
229 009
864 977 1 482 817
-
34 228
9 609
43 837
23 739
41 239
11 578
76 555
907 474 1 050 845 2 599 899
-
7 011
1 968
8 979
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 4.1:  Project management /a - Quantities and totals including contingencies (cont’d.) 
Unit
2018
2019
2020
Quantities
2021
2022
2023
Total
Unit Cost
(US$)
2018
2019
Totals Including Contingencies (US$)
2021
2020
2022
Breakdow n of Totals Incl. Cont. (US$)
Local (Excl. Duties &
2023
Total
For. Exch. Taxes)
Taxes
Total
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Staff salaries & operating costs
1. II.1 Staff Salaries
PCU: Private Sector Expert, Marketing/Technical Team Leader (PSE) /m
PCU Project Coordinator
PCU M&E KM Officer
PCU: Crop Production Expert (CPE)
PCU Finance Manager
PCU: Community Development and Gender Specialist (CDGS)
PCU Rural Finance Expert (RFE)
PCU Procurement Officer
PCU: Accountant /n
Subtotal
2. II.2 Allow ances
Field Allow ances /o
Travelling Allow ances /p
Subtotal
3. II.3 Operating and Maintenance (M&E)
Vehicle O&M /q
Equipment and generator operations and maintenance /r
Guesthouse and office rent /s
Documentation and media editing and advertising /t
Subtotal
4. III.1 SPIU/LET: Staff Salary
SPIU: State Project Coordinator
SPIU: Private Sector Specialist/Unit Leader (PSS)
SPIU: State M&E and Know ledge
SPIU: Community and gender officer
Accountant and Procurement Assistants
SPIU/LET: Accountants /u
Subtotal
5. III.2 SPIU/LET Staff allow ances
SPIU/LET: Field Allow ances /v
Travelling Allow ances /w
Subtotal
6. III.3 SPIU/LET Operating and Maintenance
Vehicle O&M /x
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
  Person year
  Person year
  person year
  Person year
  person year
  person year
  person year
  person year
  Person year
lump sum
lump sum
lump sum
lump sum
  Per annum
lump sum
  Person year
  Person year
  person year
  Person year
  Person Year
  Person year
lump sum
lump sum
lump sum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
4
4
4
4
8
4
1
1
4
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
4
4
4
4
8
4
1
1
4
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
4
4
4
4
8
4
1
1
4
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
4
4
4
4
8
4
1
1
4
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
4
4
4
4
8
4
1
1
4
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
4
4
4
4
8
4
1
1
4
6 14,300.847
6 15,889.831
10,593.22
6
6
10,593.22
6 12,182.203
10,593.22
6
10,593.22
6
10,593.22
6
8,474.576
6
6
6
7,556.674
14,000
6 12,594.439
6
5,000
6 12,594.439
1,250
6
24 13,241.525
11,546.61
24
6,885.593
24
6,885.593
24
6,000
48
6,885.593
24
15 769
17 521
11 680
11 680
13 433
11 680
11 680
11 680
9 344
114 468
8 332
15 437
23 769
13 887
5 513
13 887
1 378
34 666
58 402
50 927
30 369
30 369
52 926
30 369
253 363
16 193
17 992
11 995
11 995
13 794
11 995
11 995
11 995
9 596
117 547
8 556
15 852
24 408
14 261
5 661
14 261
1 415
35 598
59 973
52 297
31 186
31 186
54 350
31 186
260 178
16 635
18 483
12 322
12 322
14 170
12 322
12 322
12 322
9 858
120 755
8 790
16 285
25 075
14 650
5 816
14 650
1 454
36 569
61 610
53 724
32 037
32 037
55 833
32 037
267 278
17 096
18 996
12 664
12 664
14 563
12 664
12 664
12 664
10 131
124 105
9 034
16 736
25 770
15 056
5 977
15 056
1 494
37 584
63 319
55 214
32 926
32 926
57 382
32 926
274 693
17 417
19 353
12 902
12 902
14 837
12 902
12 902
12 902
10 321
126 437
9 203
17 051
26 254
15 339
6 090
15 339
1 522
38 290
64 509
56 252
33 545
33 545
58 460
33 545
279 854
17 748
19 720
13 147
13 147
15 119
13 147
13 147
13 147
10 517
128 839
9 378
17 375
26 753
15 630
6 205
15 630
1 551
39 018
100 858
112 064
74 709
74 709
85 916
74 709
74 709
74 709
59 768
732 152
53 294
98 736
152 030
88 823
35 263
88 823
8 816
221 725
65 734
57 320
34 182
34 182
59 571
34 182
373 547
325 733
194 244
194 244
338 523
194 244
285 171 1 620 536
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
83 712
112 064
74 709
62 009
85 916
62 009
62 009
74 709
49 607
666 744
44 234
81 951
126 185
73 723
29 268
73 723
7 317
184 032
17 146
-
-
12 701
-
12 701
12 701
-
10 160
65 408
9 060
16 785
25 845
15 100
5 995
15 100
1 499
37 693
100 858
112 064
74 709
74 709
85 916
74 709
74 709
74 709
59 768
732 152
53 294
98 736
152 030
88 823
35 263
88 823
8 816
221 725
310 044
-
270 358
-
161 223
-
161 223
-
280 974
-
-
161 223
- 1 345 045
63 503
55 375
33 022
33 022
57 549
33 022
373 547
325 733
194 244
194 244
338 523
194 244
275 491 1 620 536
6 14,483.633
7,000
6
15 970
7 718
23 689
16 400
7 926
24 326
16 847
8 142
24 990
17 315
8 368
25 683
17 640
8 525
26 165
17 975
8 687
26 662
102 147
49 368
151 515
-
-
-
84 782
40 975
125 757
17 365
8 393
25 758
102 147
49 368
151 515
24 11,964.725
52 771
502 726
54 190
516 248
1 665 320 1 400 119
55 669
530 335
698 056
57 214
545 049
674 031
58 288
555 290
665 942
59 396
337 528
565 839 3 215 486
711 917 5 815 385
-
280 148
- 2 727 911
337 528
487 575 3 215 486
641 580 3 635 385 1 538 420 5 815 385
57 380
_________________________________
\m PCU
\a for Sennar & Kordofan States
\n PCU
\b 3 pm for Developing KM Strategy and 2 pm for Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
\c IAMDP staff and extension teams to become GALS - each training 15 participants
\o PCU staff
\d Each facilitator w ill in turn train five GALS champions in each farmer producer organization \p PCU staff
\e for PCU
\f For PCU
\g State and locality extension teams level
\h State and locality extension teams level
\i State and locality extension teams level
\j 2 generators for PCU only
\k 7 for PCU/ 15 for State & Locality Extension levels
\l 3 for PCU only
\q PCU
\r PCU: $3,000 Equipment & $2,000 generator (O&M)
\s PCU
\t PCU: $500 Documentation and media editing and $750 advertising
\u State level staff salary (Sennar State and North, South and West Kordofan States)
\v State and Locality level
\w  State and Locality level
\x State and locality level  (Sennar State and North, South and West Kordofan States)
153 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 4.2:  Project management /a -  – Expenditures by financiers 
 I. Investm ent Costs
A. I. Investm ent Cost
1. I. 1 Technical Assistance
Project Start-Up Workshop
Comprehensive baseline study
Develop KM Strategy and PIM /b
Conduct Annual Review  and Planning  Workshops
Mid Term review
Project Completion
Technical and thematic studies
Supervision by PSC, SCC, IFAD & Govt /p
Annual Audit
Mechanization National Consultant
Crop Production National Consultant
Agroforestry National Consultant
Subtotal
2. I.2 Training
Training for PCU and State Level staff  (External)
Training for PCU and State Level staff  (Internal)
Gender sensitization training for new  communities
GALS trainings for facilitators /c
GALS champions training /d
Subtotal
3. I.3 Vehicles
PCU: 4WD Station Wagon /e
PCU: 4WD Double Cab /f
SIUP/LET: Hardtop 5 Doors /g
SPIU/LET: 4WD Double Cab /h
SPIU/LET: Motorbike /i
Subtotal
4. I.4 Equipm ent and Furniture
PCU: Generator 80KVA /j
Computers and accessories /k
PCU: Photocopier /l
Subtotal
Total Investm ent Costs
2018
2019
2020
IFAD
2021
2022
2023
Total
2018
2019
2020
Governm ent
2021
2022
2023
Total
Expenditures by Financiers (US$)
32 032
45 759
12 679
5 491
-
-
13 728
9 152
6 406
12 677
12 677
12 677
163 278
23 053
11 526
-
18 304
9 152
62 035
86 847
51 959
47 505
97 425
55 671
339 407
19 703
34 228
9 609
63 541
628 261
-
-
3 255
5 639
-
-
9 398
9 398
6 579
13 018
13 018
13 018
73 323
50 305
17 755
9 398
18 796
9 398
105 651
88 584
26 499
24 228
99 373
39 749
278 433
-
-
-
-
457 407
-
-
-
5 793
33 791
-
9 654
9 654
6 758
13 373
13 373
13 373
105 770
21 279
12 159
-
-
-
33 438
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
5 953
-
-
14 884
9 922
6 946
13 744
13 744
13 744
78 938
15 621
12 497
-
-
-
28 118
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
6 065
-
-
20 218
10 109
7 076
14 003
14 003
14 003
85 475
6 366
-
-
-
-
6 366
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
6 180
-
41 203
10 301
10 301
7 211
14 269
14 269
14 269
118 002
3 243
-
-
-
-
3 243
-
-
-
-
-
-
32 032
45 759
15 934
35 122
33 791
41 203
78 182
58 536
40 975
81 084
81 084
81 084
624 786
119 866
53 937
9 398
37 100
18 550
238 851
175 431
78 458
71 733
196 798
95 420
617 841
-
-
-
-
139 209
-
-
-
-
107 055
-
-
-
-
91 841
-
-
-
-
19 703
34 228
9 609
63 541
121 245 1 545 018
6 561
9 372
2 597
1 125
-
-
2 812
1 874
1 312
2 597
2 597
2 597
33 442
4 722
2 361
-
3 749
1 874
12 706
121 586
72 743
66 508
136 394
77 940
475 170
4 036
7 011
1 968
13 014
534 333
-
-
667
1 155
-
-
1 925
1 925
1 347
2 666
2 666
2 666
15 018
10 303
3 636
1 925
3 850
1 925
21 639
124 018
37 099
33 919
139 122
55 649
389 807
-
-
-
-
426 464
-
-
-
1 186
6 921
-
1 977
1 977
1 384
2 739
2 739
2 739
21 664
4 358
2 490
-
-
-
6 849
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 219
-
-
3 048
2 032
1 423
2 815
2 815
2 815
16 168
3 199
2 560
-
-
-
5 759
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 242
-
-
4 141
2 070
1 449
2 868
2 868
2 868
17 507
1 304
-
-
-
-
1 304
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 266
-
8 439
2 110
2 110
1 477
2 922
2 922
2 922
24 169
664
-
-
-
-
664
-
-
-
-
-
-
6 561
9 372
3 264
7 194
6 921
8 439
16 013
11 989
8 393
16 608
16 608
16 608
127 968
24 551
11 047
1 925
7 599
3 799
48 921
245 604
109 842
100 426
275 517
133 589
864 977
-
-
-
-
28 513
-
-
-
-
21 927
-
-
-
-
18 811
-
-
-
-
4 036
7 011
1 968
13 014
24 833 1 054 881
154 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 9:  Project cost and financing 
Table 4.2:  Project management /a -  – Expenditures by financiers (cont’d.) 
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Staff salaries & operating costs
1. II.1 Staff Salaries
PCU: Private Sector Expert, Marketing/Technical Team Leader (PSE) /m
PCU Project Coordinator
PCU M&E KM Officer
PCU: Crop Production Expert (CPE)
PCU Finance Manager
PCU: Community Development and Gender Specialist (CDGS)
PCU Rural Finance Expert (RFE)
PCU Procurement Officer
PCU: Accountant /n
Subtotal
2. II.2 Allow ances
Field Allow ances /o
Travelling Allow ances /p
Subtotal
3. II.3 Operating and Maintenance (M&E)
Vehicle O&M /q
Equipment and generator operations and maintenance /r
Guesthouse and office rent /s
Documentation and media editing and advertising /t
Subtotal
4. III.1 SPIU/LET: Staff Salary
SPIU: State Project Coordinator
SPIU: Private Sector Specialist/Unit Leader (PSS)
SPIU: State M&E and Know ledge
SPIU: Community and gender officer
Accountant and Procurement Assistants
SPIU/LET: Accountants /u
Subtotal
5. III.2 SPIU/LET Staff allow ances
SPIU/LET: Field Allow ances /v
Travelling Allow ances /w
Subtotal
6. III.3 SPIU/LET Operating and Maintenance
2018
2019
2020
13 088
14 542
9 695
9 695
11 149
9 695
9 695
9 695
7 756
95 009
6 916
12 813
19 728
11 526
4 576
11 526
1 144
28 772
13 440
14 933
9 956
9 956
11 449
9 956
9 956
9 956
7 964
97 564
7 102
13 157
20 259
11 836
4 699
11 836
1 175
29 546
48 474
42 269
25 206
25 206
43 929
25 206
210 291
49 778
43 406
25 884
25 884
45 111
25 884
215 948
13 807
15 341
10 227
10 227
11 761
10 227
10 227
10 227
8 182
100 227
7 296
13 516
20 812
12 159
4 827
12 159
1 207
30 353
51 136
44 591
26 591
26 591
46 342
26 591
221 840
IFAD
2021
14 190
15 766
10 511
10 511
12 088
10 511
10 511
10 511
8 409
103 007
7 498
13 891
21 389
12 497
4 961
12 497
1 240
31 195
52 555
45 828
27 328
27 328
47 627
27 328
227 995
Expenditures by Financiers (US$)
2022
2023
Total
2018
2019
2020
Governm ent
2021
2022
2023
Total
14 456
16 063
10 708
10 708
12 315
10 708
10 708
10 708
8 567
104 943
7 639
14 152
21 791
12 731
5 054
12 731
1 264
31 781
53 542
46 689
27 842
27 842
48 522
27 842
232 279
14 731
16 368
10 912
10 912
12 549
10 912
10 912
10 912
8 729
106 936
7 784
14 421
22 205
12 973
5 150
12 973
1 288
32 385
83 712
93 013
62 009
62 009
71 310
62 009
62 009
62 009
49 607
607 686
44 234
81 951
126 185
73 723
29 268
73 723
7 317
184 032
54 559
47 576
28 371
28 371
49 444
28 371
310 044
270 358
161 223
161 223
280 974
161 223
236 692 1 345 045
2 681
2 979
1 986
1 986
2 284
1 986
1 986
1 986
1 589
19 460
1 416
2 624
4 041
2 361
937
2 361
234
5 893
9 928
8 658
5 163
5 163
8 998
5 163
43 072
2 715
1 312
4 027
2 753
3 059
2 039
2 039
2 345
2 039
2 039
2 039
1 631
19 983
1 455
2 695
4 149
2 424
962
2 424
241
6 052
10 195
8 890
5 302
5 302
9 240
5 302
44 230
2 788
1 347
4 135
2 828
3 142
2 095
2 095
2 409
2 095
2 095
2 095
1 676
20 528
1 494
2 768
4 263
2 490
989
2 490
247
6 217
10 474
9 133
5 446
5 446
9 492
5 446
45 437
2 864
1 384
4 248
2 906
3 229
2 153
2 153
2 476
2 153
2 153
2 153
1 722
21 098
1 536
2 845
4 381
2 560
1 016
2 560
254
6 389
10 764
9 386
5 597
5 597
9 755
5 597
46 698
2 943
1 423
4 366
2 961
3 290
2 193
2 193
2 522
2 193
2 193
2 193
1 755
21 494
1 565
2 899
4 463
2 608
1 035
2 608
259
6 509
10 966
9 563
5 703
5 703
9 938
5 703
47 575
2 999
1 449
4 448
3 017
3 352
2 235
2 235
2 570
2 235
2 235
2 235
1 788
21 903
1 594
2 954
4 548
2 657
1 055
2 657
264
6 633
11 175
9 744
5 811
5 811
10 127
5 811
48 479
3 056
1 477
4 533
17 146
19 051
12 701
12 701
14 606
12 701
12 701
12 701
10 160
124 466
9 060
16 785
25 845
15 100
5 995
15 100
1 499
37 693
63 503
55 375
33 022
33 022
57 549
33 022
275 491
17 365
8 393
25 758
13 255
6 406
19 662
13 612
6 579
20 190
13 983
6 758
20 741
14 371
6 946
21 317
14 641
7 076
21 717
14 919
7 211
22 130
84 782
40 975
125 757
Vehicle O&M /x
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
43 800
417 262
  1 045 523
44 978
428 486
885 893
46 205
440 178
579 387
47 487
452 391
559 446
48 379
460 890
552 731
49 299
280 148
469 646 2 668 853
590 891 4 213 872
8 971
85 463
619 796
9 212
87 762
514 226
9 464
90 157
118 670
9 726
92 658
114 585
9 909
94 399
113 210
10 097
96 193
57 380
546 633
121 026 1 601 513
_________________________________
\m PCU
\a for Sennar & Kordofan States
\n PCU
\b 3 pm for Developing KM Strategy and 2 pm for Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
\c IAMDP staff and extension teams to become GALS - each training 15 participants
\o PCU staff
\d Each facilitator w ill in turn train five GALS champions in each farmer producer organization \p PCU staff
\e for PCU
\f For PCU
\g State and locality extension teams level
\h State and locality extension teams level
\i State and locality extension teams level
\j 2 generators for PCU only
\k 7 for PCU/ 15 for State & Locality Extension levels
\l 3 for PCU only
\q PCU
\r PCU: $3,000 Equipment & $2,000 generator (O&M)
\s PCU
\t PCU: $500 Documentation and media editing and $750 advertising
\u State level staff salary (Sennar State and North, South and West Kordofan States)
\v State and Locality level
\w  State and Locality level
\x State and locality level  (Sennar State and North, South and West Kordofan States)
155 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
Appendix 10: Economic and financial analysis 
EFA Assumptions 
Items 
Inflation Rates: 
National1 
International 
Exchange rate:2 
Indicative Exchange Rate (IER) 
Shadow Exchange Rate (SER) 
Standard Conversion Factor (SCF) 
Shadow exchange rate factor (SERF)  
Taxes and Duties:3 
Value added Tax (VAT) 
Custom Duties 
Port fees (SDG) 
Data  
collection 
2017 
PY0 
Project years 
2018 
PY1 
2019 
PY2 
2020 
PY3 
2021 
PY4 
2022 
PY5 
2023 
PY6 
35% 
2% 
14% 
2% 
12% 
2% 
10% 
2% 
8% 
2% 
8% 
2% 
8% 
2% 
18.88  
22.35  
0.84  
1.18  
21.15  
24.62  
0.86  
1.17  
23.26  
26.73  
0.87  
1.15  
25.12  
28.59  
0.88  
1.14  
26.63  
30.35  
0.88  
1.14  
28.23  
32.23  
0.89  
1.13  
29.92  
34.25  
0.89  
1.12  
17% 
140% 
10% 
17% 
140% 
10% 
17% 
140% 
10% 
17% 
140% 
10% 
17% 
140% 
10% 
17% 
140% 
10% 
17% 
140% 
10% 
 Inflation: All the available inflation estimates are based on the historical data before 2017. Starting 
1)
from 2017, the Government of Sudan established the concept of indicative exchange rate with an 
incentive of 123.72%, which increased the inflation rates in the last 6 months to about 34%. As per 
IMF Khartoum Office projections, it is expected that it will go down to 14% in 2018 to settle at 8% per 
year in the medium run. 
2) Exchange rate: The Government of Sudan established the concept of indicative exchange rate with 
an incentive of 123.72%. The Central bank controls the levels of the indicative exchange rate. It is 
assumed that the exchange rate from 2018 will change as the difference between the national and the 
international inflation rates. 
3) Taxes and Duties: the actual rates that applied by the Government of Sudan are applied. 
157 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
A.  Financial analysis of the project 
1. 
Both the financial and economic analyses are based on four crop budgets and three farm 
budgets. The four crops are sesame, sorghum, groundnuts and gum Arabic. The three farm budgets 
are based on 5 feddans, 10 feddans and 15 feddans farm sizes. The financial analysis was applied to 
estimate the value of production suits the inputs and labor costs. Three models targeted productivity 
and marketing improvements in the four states, i.e. Sinnar, South Kordofan, West Kordofan, and 
North Kordofan. The four states are categorized into two sets according to their similarity.  
Sinnar and South Kordofan are relatively close in terms of soil (heavier more fertile soils), 
2. 
cropping patterns, rainfall, and distance to markets. They both are generally higher potential 
agricultural areas. One set of crop models for both states are proposed.  There will not be important 
differences between them. The following is the proposed three models 
(a) Model 1 (model of 5 feddans farm) planted by 2.08 feddans of sesame, 2.0 feddans of 
sorghum, 0.90 feddan of groundnut and 0.02 feddan of high yield variety gum Arabic. 
(b) Model 2 (model of 10 feddans farm) planted by 4.16 feddans of sesame, 4.00 feddans of 
sorghum, 1.80 feddans of groundnut and 0.04 feddan of high yield variety gum Arabic. 
(c) Model 3 (model of 15 feddans farm) planted by 6.24 feddans of sesame, 6.00 feddans of 
sorghum, 2.70 feddans of groundnut and 0.06 feddan of high yield variety gum Arabic. 
Table 3: Three models based on farm budgets in Sinnar and South Kordofan 
Model 
1.  Five feddans 
2.  Ten feddans 
3.  Fifteen feddans 
Sesame 
feddan 
2.08  
4.16  
6.24  
Sorghum 
feddan 
2.00  
4.00  
6.00  
Groundnut 
feddan 
0.90  
1.80  
2.70  
Gum Arabic 
feddan 
0.02  
0.04  
0.06  
Similarly, West Kordofan and North Kordofan have very similar soil types (lighter sandy soils), 
3. 
cropping patterns, rainfall, and market access. They are both generally lower potential agricultural 
areas. So one set of models has been created for both states, there are not important differences 
between them.  
(a) Model 1 (model of 5 feddans farm) planted by 2.50 feddans of sesame, 0.48 feddan of 
sorghum, 2.00 feddans of groundnut and 0.02 feddan of high yield variety gum Arabic. 
(b) Model 2 (model of 10 feddans farm) planted by 5.00 feddans of sesame, 0.96 feddan of 
sorghum, 4.00 feddans of groundnut and 0.04 feddan of high yield variety gum Arabic. 
(c) Model 3 (model of 15 feddans farm) planted by 7.50 feddans of sesame, 1.44 feddans of 
sorghum, 6.00 feddans of groundnut and 0.06 feddan of high yield variety gum Arabic. 
Table 4: Three models based on farm budgets in West and North Kordofan 
Model 
1.  Five feddans 
2.  Ten feddans 
3.  Fifteen feddans 
Sesame 
feddan 
2.50  
5.00  
7.50 
Sorghum 
feddan 
0.48  
0.96 
1.44 
Groundnut 
feddan 
2.00 
4.00 
6.00 
Gum Arabic 
feddan 
0.02  
0.04  
0.06  
Source:   Estimated using the best area combination of the four crops that yield high returns in light of the data from Agricultural 
Statistics Administration; General Administration for Planning and agricultural economics; Ministry of Agriculture and 
field visit to Sinnar and Kordofan States in March 2017 and August 2017. 
In the “with project” situation, per unit crop technical parameters are assumed to augment due 
4. 
to project interventions at the farm level through enhancing competitiveness of smallholder crop 
production (enhancing productivity and marketing activities).  
All activities developed by IAMDP are expected to increase from the “without project – WOP” to 
5. 
the “with project – WP” situation. The use of the improved seeds varieties and the mechanization of 
the agricultural operations will increase the yield with different levels as described in Table 5. The first 
158 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
column of the table includes the results of the available research about the improved crops of the 
project. It has been decided not to use the full percentage supplied by the researchers. Then it is 
reduced in most of the crops to less than half as shown in the second column in Table 5. The third 
column includes the self-consumption of the proposed crops. It was obtained from earlier studies to 
enhance the analysis. 
Table 5: Crop growth rates (GR) as a result of improved production and marketing and the use of 
appropriate mechanization and assumed self-consumptions for selected crops 
Crop 
Sesame 
Sorghum 
Ground Nuts 
Gum Arabic 
GR Recommended by 
Researchers 
50% 
43% 
20% 
60% 
Used GR 
Self-consumption 
20% 
20% 
20% 
20% 
1% 
90% 
1% 
1% 
Source: Field visit to Sinnar and Kordofan States in March 2017. 
6. 
The above mentioned three models in Table 3 and Table 4 are estimated using crop budgets of 
the four crops in Table 5 according to the proposed productivity and marketing improvement activities 
under the project. The improved seeds/seedlings will be applied on the selected four crops. The 
mechanization and storage improvement activities will be applied on sesame, sorghum and 
groundnuts. The marketing of Gum Arabic will be improved though associations that will arrange for 
collecting the gum Arabic in large quantities that fit with the needs of wholesalers. 
Table 6: Four models based on crop budgets 
Activity 
Objective 
1. Improved seeds/seedlings 
2. Mechanization 
3. Storage improvement 
4. Sell directly to wholesalers 
Source: Field visit to Sennar and Kordofan States in March and August 2017. 
* Selling to wholesalers directly is usually done by an association to collect large quantities to a wholesale market. 
Productivity 
improvement 
Marketing 
improvement 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Sesame 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Sorghum 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√* 
Groundnut  Gum Arabic 
The adoption rate of all models is 20% annually starting from the second year of the project, i.e. 
7. 
first year: zero adoption, second year: 20% adoption, third year: 40% adoption, fourth year: 60%, and 
fifth year: 80%. This rate is used in building all of the models including the cost benefit analysis of the 
crop budgets and the farm budgets. This is a conservative method that provides good level of 
accuracy during implementation. 
8. 
The three models will be implemented to serve a total of 27,000 households in the four states. 
The first model (5 feddans per household) presents 20% of the total households (5,400 HH) and will 
serve 27,000 feddans. The second model (10 feddans per household) presents 40% of the total 
households (10,800 HH) and will serve 108,000 feddans. The third model (15 feddans per household) 
presents 40% of the total households (10,800 HH) and will serve 162,000 feddans. 
Table 7: Distribution of the households and area according to the project models 
Models 
Model 1: 5 feddans/HH 
Model 2: 10 feddans/HH 
Model 3: 15 feddans/HH 
Total project 
% of Household 
20% 
40% 
40% 
100% 
Source: Project design team estimates 
Total Area (feddan) 
# of Households 
27,000 
108,000 
162,000 
297,000 
5,400 
10,800 
10,800 
27,000 
The first set of the three models will be implemented to serve total of 22,170 households in 
9. 
Sennar and South Kordofan. The first model (5 feddans per household) presents 20% of the total 
households (4,434 HH) and will serve 22,170 feddans. The second model (10 feddans per household) 
presents 40% of the total households (8,868 HH) and will serve 88,680 feddans. The third model (15 
159 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
feddans per household) presents 40% of the total households (8,868 HH) and will serve 133,020 
feddans. 
Table 8: Distribution of the project area/beneficiaries in Sennar and South Kordofan 
Models 
% of Household 
Total Area (feddan) 
# of Households 
Model 1: 5 feddans/HH 
Model 2: 10 feddans/HH 
Model 3: 15 feddans/HH 
Total project 
Source: Project design team estimates 
20% 
40% 
40% 
100% 
22,170  
88,680  
133,020  
243,870  
4,434  
8,868  
8,868  
22,170  
The second set of the three models will be implemented to serve total of 4,830 households in 
10. 
West & North Kordofan. The first model (5 feddans per household) presents 20% of the total 
households (966 HH) and will serve 4,830 feddans. The second model (10 feddans per household) 
presents 40% of the total households (1,932 HH) and will serve 19,320 feddans. The third model (15 
feddans per household) presents 40% of the total households (1,932 HH) and will serve 28,980 
feddans. 
Table 9: Distribution of the project area/beneficiaries in West & North Kordofan 
Models 
% of Household 
Total Area (feddan) 
# of Households 
Model 1: 5 feddans/HH 
Model 2: 10 feddans/HH 
Model 3: 15 feddans/HH 
Total project 
Source: Project design team estimates 
20% 
40% 
40% 
100% 
4,830  
19,320  
28,980  
53,130  
966  
1,932  
1,932  
4,830  
11.  Table 10 includes the farm gate prices for main and secondary crops for the proposed crops. 
Only gum Arabic has its wholesale market price because gum Arabic can be handled as small amount 
with high value.  
Table 10: Crops Farm Gate (FGP) prices for main and secondary crops in Sinnar and South Kordofan 
Crop 
Sesame 
Sorghum 
Ground Nuts 
Gum Arabic 
Gum Arabic (Wholesale Market) 
Main Crop 
FGP* 
SDG/kg 
7.90  
3.30  
12.10 
18.90 
35.00  
Secondary Crop 
SDG/Unit 
8.0 
250 
12.1 
Unit 
Sack 
feddan 
Sack 
Source: Field visit to Sinnar States in March and August 2017. 
* All prices are at farm level except the last price for Gum Arabic (at the bottom of the column) is price at wholesale market. 
Table 11: Crops Farm Gate (FGP) prices for main and secondary crops in West and South Kordofan 
Crop 
Sesame 
Sorghum 
Ground Nuts 
Gum Arabic 
Main Crop 
FGP* 
SDG/kg 
7.30  
3.01  
11.90 
17.70  
Secondary Crop 
SDG/Unit 
8 
250 
12.1 
Unit 
Sack 
feddan 
Sack 
Gum Arabic (Wholesale Market) 
35.00  
Source: Field visit to Kordofan States in March and August 2017. 
* All prices are at farm level except the last price for Gum Arabic (at the bottom of the column) is price at wholesale market. 
160 
2,979  
1,893  
275  
1.19  
5,148  
5-10 
3.2  
12.8  
19.2  
35.3  
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
12. 
IAMDP will create more than 3 million work-days of casual labor to work in the project area 
(297,000 feddans – see Table 6 above), i.e. more than 32,000 annual jobs of casual labor 34 during the 
five years of the project. Ranking the four crops based on their job creation: sesame is the highest 
(more than 2.7 million work-days), sorghum come second (more than 1.7 million work-days), then 
groundnut is the third (more than 0.2 million work-days), and gum Arabic is the lowest one that 
generates casual labor (about 0.2 million work-days).  Table 12 and Table 13 include a redistribution 
of the total number of casual/work-days by model. 
Table 12: Total number of casual labor for the three models, by model (person'000/day) 
Model 
Sesame 
sorghum 
Groundnuts 
Sum Arabic 
1 
2,706  
1,741  
260  
2.26  
2 
3 
4 
5 
6-10 
2,775  
1,779  
264  
1.07  
2,843  
1,817  
267  
1.07  
2,911  
1,855  
271  
1.66  
2,979  
1,893  
275  
1.19  
Total  
Source: estimated as a result of interviews during field visit to Sinnar and Kordofan States in March 2017 
4,710  
4,818  
4,928  
5,038  
5,148  
Table 13: Total number of casual labor for the three models, by model (person'000/season) 
1 
Model 
Total Model 1 
Total Model 2 
Total Model 3 
Total Project 
Source: estimated as a result of interviews during field visit to Sinnar and Kordofan States in March 2017 
3.1  
12.5  
18.8  
34.5  
3.1  
12.3  
18.4  
33.8  
3.0  
12.0  
18.0  
33.0  
2.9  
11.7  
17.6  
32.3  
4 
3 
2 
* A season days of work is 146 workdays 
13.  Table 14 and table 15 include the financial analysis for the proposed four crops. The analysis of 
sesame and groundnuts included crop production and storage improvements. However, storage is not 
considered in the case of sorghum because more than 90% of the crop is self-consumption. In the 
case of gum Arabic, marketing improvement is considered, i.e. the farmers through their association 
can benefit from the higher price in the wholesale markets. 
Table 14: Financial Analysis for crop production in Sinnar and South Kordofan 
Crop Production 
Sesame 
Sorghum 
Groundnuts 
Gum Arabic 
Return to family labour* 
Discount rate 
NPV @ 0.12 
FIRR 
NPVb 
72  
12% 
72  
16% 
548  
NPVc 
B/C ratio 
Incremental net benefits (yr6) 
Source: Economic and Financial Analysis 
* consider full development year family labor requirements 
476  
1.15  
278  
(14) 
12% 
236  
19% 
656  
421  
1.56  
342  
185  
12% 
473  
42% 
577  
104  
5.53  
257  
1,854  
12% 
1,323  
28% 
2,746  
1,422  
1.93  
779  
34 Created jobs are estimated by assuming that a season requires 146 of work days. 
161 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
Table 15: Financial Analysis for Storage and marketing improvement in Sinnar and South Kordofan 
Storage/marketing enhancement 
Sesame 
Sorghum 
Return to family labour* 
Discount rate 
 NPV @ 0.12 
FIRR 
NPVb 
NPVc 
B/C ratio 
(14) 
12% 
751  
39% 
926  
175  
5.29  
Source:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
              * consider full development year family labor requirements 
            ** about 90% of sorghum is for self-consumption 
Groundnuts 
129  
Gum Arabic 
2,565  
12% 
709  
42% 
643  
(67) 
(9.64) 
12% 
836  
23% 
2,270  
1,434  
1.58  
Table 16: Financial Analysis for crop production in West and North Kordofan 
Crop Production 
Sesame 
Sorghum 
Groundnuts 
Gum Arabic 
Return to family labour* 
Discount rate 
NPV @ 0.12 
FIRR 
NPVb 
78  
12% 
56  
19% 
739  
NPVc 
B/C ratio 
Incremental net benefits (yr6) 
Source: Economic and Financial Analysis 
* consider full development year family labor requirements 
683  
1.08  
239  
(14) 
12% 
(11) 
12% 
539  
550  
0.98  
342  
181  
12% 
359  
38% 
514  
155  
3.33  
228  
1,854  
12% 
1,323  
28% 
2,746  
1,422  
1.93  
740  
Table 17: Financial Analysis for Storage and marketing improvement in West and North Kordofan 
Storage/marketing enhancement 
Sesame 
Sorghum 
Return to family labour* 
Discount rate 
 NPV @ 0.12 
FIRR 
NPVb 
NPVc 
B/C ratio 
(18) 
12% 
556  
36% 
1,007  
450  
2.24  
Source:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
              * consider full development year family labor requirements 
            ** about 90% of sorghum is for self-consumption 
B.  Economic analysis of the project 
Groundnuts 
126  
Gum Arabic 
2,565  
12% 
577  
38% 
582  
5  
120  
12% 
836  
23% 
2,270  
1,434  
1.58  
14.  Cost-benefit streams. The objectives of the economic analysis are: (i) to assess the overall 
program viability; and (ii) to estimate the program impact by estimating the economic rate of return 
(EIRR) and the economic net present value ((ENPV). The computation of economic costs is derived 
from financial project costs, by excluding transfers such as duties, taxes, and price contingencies. 
15.  The cost benefit streams were obtained from crop production in four states of Sudan: Sinnar, 
North Kordofan, West Kordofan, and South Kordofan. The streams of incremental benefits show 
highly profitable cash crops especially with high yield varieties and the use of mechanization and 
better storage processes. 
16.  Assumptions. The economic analysis consists of aggregating all project costs and projected 
benefits from the three models of sesame, sorghum, groundnuts and gum Arabic and improving their 
162 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
storage and marketing facilities in order to evaluate project impact. Details of the Economic analysis 
are presented in Annexes. The following assumptions were used: 
(a) Inflation. All the available inflation estimates are based on the historical data before 2017. 
Starting from 2017, the Government of Sudan established the concept of indicative 
exchange rate with an incentive of 123.72%, which increased the inflation rates in the last 6 
months to about 34%. It is expected that it will go down for a while and then go back again 
once the Government has a dramatic change in the indicative exchange rate again. 
(b) The price contingencies are excluded from the economic analysis but physical 
contingencies are included. Flexible exchange rates per USD have been adopted for the 
next six years lifetime of the project. The indicative exchange rate is estimated using 
August 2017 indicative exchange rate (SDG 18.88) adjusted by the difference between the 
national and international inflation rates through the proposed lifetime of the project also, 
the project cost re-estimated using the calculated shadow exchange rate for the 6 years of 
the project (see Table 18). 
(c) The non-tradable resources including labour wages are discounted using standard 
conversion factor (SCF). The shadow exchange rate factor (SERF) is used to adjust the 
traded inputs. The tradable outputs are estimated using the adjusted shadow exchange 
rates (SER). 
Table 18: Inflation rates and estimated exchange rates 
Items 
Inflation Rates: 
National 
International 
Data 
collection 
2017 
PY0 
35% 
2% 
Project years 
2018 
PY1 
2019 
PY2 
2020 
PY3 
2021 
PY4 
2022 
PY5 
2023 
PY6 
14% 
2% 
12% 
2% 
10% 
2% 
8% 
2% 
8% 
2% 
8% 
2% 
Exchange rate: 
Indicative Exchange Rate (IER) 
Shadow Exchange Rate (SER) 
Standard Conversion Factor (SCF) 
Shadow exchange rate factor (SERF)  
18.88  
22.35  
0.84  
1.18  
21.15  
24.62  
0.86  
1.17  
23.26  
26.73  
0.87  
1.15  
25.12  
28.59  
0.88  
1.14  
26.63  
30.35  
0.88  
1.14  
28.23  
32.23  
0.89  
1.13  
29.92  
34.25  
0.89  
1.12  
17.  The main sources of quantified benefits of IAMDP are expected to be: (i) improved production 
and productivity of the three models (four crops) due to the application of improved inputs and 
improved agricultural mechanization; (ii) improved storage facilities for sesame, sorghum, and 
groundnuts; and (iii) improved sales of gum Arabic to be sold to wholesalers and benefit from the 
price differences. This recommended to be implemented through associations because the 
association can collect larger amount of gum Arabic to fit with the needs of wholesalers and to have 
higher power of bargaining. 
Table 19: Economic prices, world prices and HS codes for the four crops 
Crop 
Sesame 
Sorghum 
Ground Nuts 
Gum Arabic 
Gum Arabic (Wholesale Market) 
Economic Price at 
Farm Gate (SDG/kg)* 
29.51 
10.18 
36.34  
41.79 
45.96  
World Price 
$/Ton 
$1,128.8 
$179.2 
$1,434.7 
$1,678.4 
$1,678.4 
HS Code 
120740 
1007 
1508 
130120 
130120 
Source: UN Com-trade database. 
             * Economic prices derived from world prices using the shadow exchange rate. 
163 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
18.  The base case of the EIRR and the sensitivity analyses on investment in the IAMDP project 
area over 20 years are estimated in Table 20. The sensitivity analysis shows that the project is still 
feasible even the investment costs increased by 10%, cost of production increased by 10% and the 
revenue decreased by 10%. 
Table 20: EIRR base cases and sensitivity analyses 
IRR 
EIRR 
Base case 
20.54% 
Investment Costs 
increased by 10% 
19.2% 
Cost of production 
increased by 10% 
19.5% 
Revenue decreased 
by 10% 
16.2% 
Source: Economic and Financial Analysis. 
19.  The risk of delay in benefit was tested for one, two, and three years. The project is still feasible 
as the EIRR is respectively, 17.0%, 14.2%, but it can be an issue if the project benefits are delayed 
for three years the EIRR will reach 11.9% (Table 21). 
Table 21: The risk of delay in benefits 
IRR 
EIRR 
Base case 
20.54% 
one year 
17.0% 
Revenue lagged: 
two years 
14.2% 
three years 
11.9% 
Source: Economic and Financial Analysis. 
164 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
Annex 1: Crops Financial Analyses 
Sesame Financial Analysis 
Sinnar & South Kordofan:YIELDS AND INPUTS
WITHOUT PROJECT 
WITH PROJECT (1 FEDDAN)
ITEMS 
Main production 
Sesame
Fodder
Self-consumption
Operating costs
Land preparation (Sub-soil plow)
Seeds (traditional)
Seeds (improved)
Land cleaning/preparation
Planting
Weeding 1
Weeding 2
Harvesting
Threshing
Empty sacks
Loading and Transportation
Zakat
Labour
Land cleaning
Planting
Weeding
Harvesting
Thershing
Sub-total labour days
Skilled (paid) labour (S)
Family labour (F)
UNIT
Kg
sack
Kg
per feddan
kg
kg
per feddan
per feddan 
per feddan
per feddan
per Sack
sack
sack
sack
%
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
PRICE 
(SDG)
7.9
8.0
7.9
80
20
30
50
50
50
50
160
10
25
10
10%
S/F
S/F
S/F
S/F
S/F
0
40
1
220
10
2
0
2
1
1
3
2
3
3
3
3
1,738
1.3
1.3
6.3
12.0
0.8
22
0
22
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
238
10
2
1
2
1
3
2
3.24
3.24
4.00
4.00
1,877
0.00
1.25
6.25
12.96
0.81
21.27
0.00
21.27
246
10
2
255
10
3
2
2
1
3
2
3.36
3.36
4.00
4.00
1,947
0.00
1.25
6.25
13.44
0.84
21.78
0.00
21.78
1
3
2
3.48
3.48
4.00
4.00
2,016
0.00
1.25
6.25
13.92
0.87
22.29
0.00
22.29
255
10
3
1
2
0
1
3
2
3.48
3.48
4.00
4.00
2,016
0.00
1.25
6.25
13.92
0.87
22.29
0.00
22.29
255
10
3
255
10
3
2
0
1
3
2
3.48
3.48
4.00
4.00
2,016
0.00
1.25
6.25
13.92
0.87
22.29
0.00
22.29
2
0
1
3
2
3.48
3.48
4.00
4.00
2,016
0.00
1.25
6.25
13.92
0.87
22.29
0.00
22.29
255
10
3
1
2
0
1
3
2
3.48
3.48
4.00
4.00
2,016
0.00
1.25
6.25
13.92
0.87
22.29
0.00
22.29
255
10
3
2
0
1
3
2
3.48
3.48
4.00
4.00
2,016
0.00
1.25
6.25
13.92
0.87
22.29
0.00
22.29
220
10
2
229
10
2
2
2
1
3
2
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
1,217
0.00
1.25
6.25
12.00
0.75
20.25
0.00
20.25
1
3
2
3.12
3.12
4.00
4.00
1,808
0.00
1.25
6.25
12.48
0.78
20.76
0.00
20.76
165 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
FINANCIAL BUDGET
ITEMS 
Main production revenue
Sesame
Fodder
Self-consumption
Total revenue
Total sales
Operating input costs
Land preparation (Sub-soil plow)
Seeds (traditional)
Seeds (improved)
Land cleaning/preparation
Planting
Weeding 1
Weeding 2
Harvesting
Threshing
Empty sacks
Loading and Transportation
Zakat
Sub-total operating costs
Labour costs
Skilled (paid) labour costs
Family labour costs
Sub-total labour costs
Total production costs without family labour
Total production costs with family labour
Income (after labour costs)
Incremental net income
Incremental net benefits
Incremental net costs
WITHOUT PROJECT
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
WITH PROJECT (1 FEDDAN)
1,738
80
17
1,818
1,801
0
40
0
50
50
150
100
480
30
75
30
174
1,179
0
860
860
319
1,179
639
639
1,818
1,179
1,217
80
17
1,297
1,279
1,808
80
18
1,888
1,869
1,877
80
19
1,957
1,938
1,947
80
19
2,027
2,007
2,016
80
20
2,096
2,076
2,016
80
20
2,096
2,076
2,016
80
20
2,096
2,076
2,016
80
20
2,096
2,076
2,016
80
20
2,096
2,076
2,016
80
20
2,096
2,076
0
0
60
0
50
150
100
480
30
75
30
122
1,097
0
0
60
0
50
150
100
499
31
100
40
181
1,211
80
0
60
0
50
150
100
518
32
100
40
188
1,319
0
0
60
0
50
150
100
538
34
100
40
195
1,266
0
0
60
0
50
150
100
557
35
100
40
202
1,293
80
0
60
0
50
150
100
557
35
100
40
202
1,373
0
0
60
0
50
150
100
557
35
100
40
202
1,293
0
0
60
0
50
150
100
557
35
100
40
202
1,293
80
0
60
0
50
150
100
557
35
100
40
202
1,373
0
0
60
0
50
150
100
557
35
100
40
202
1,293
0
810
810
287
1,097
200
(439)
(521)
(82)
0
830
830
381
1,211
676
37
70
32
0
851
851
468
1,319
639
(1)
139
140
0
871
871
395
1,266
761
122
209
87
0
892
892
402
1,293
803
164
278
114
0
892
892
482
1,373
723
84
278
194
0
892
892
402
1,293
803
164
278
114
0
892
892
402
1,293
803
164
278
114
0
892
892
482
1,373
723
84
278
194
0
892
892
402
1,293
803
164
278
114
Net Benefits (liquidity)
1,482
993
1,489
1,471
1,612
1,674
1,594
1,674
1,674
1,594
1,674
166 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
FINANCIAL BUDGET
ITEMS 
Storage
Stored amount of Sesame (bigining)
Storage period
Value of Stored Seasame (begining)
Storage cost
Loan Amount
Storage annual interest
Losses without project
Losses with project
Losses without project
Losses with project
Incremental Cost and losses
Kg
months
months
per kg
%
per year
Kg
Kg
7.9
5
0.05
75%
24%
8%
1%
Stored Sesame (end)
kg
8.9
Total revenue of stored sesame (end)
Increamental net benefit
Total production costs without family labour
Total production costs with family labour
Income (after labour costs)
Incremental net income
Incremental net benefits with storage
Incremental net costs with storage
WITHOUT PROJECT
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
WITH PROJECT (1 FEDDAN)
218
1,721
0
0
0
17.42
138
138
200
1,781
61
456
1,316
465
218
5
1,721
54
41
5
227
5
1,789
57
42
5
235
5
1,858
59
44
5
244
5
1,927
61
46
5
253
5
1,996
63
47
6
253
5
1,996
63
47
6
253
5
1,996
63
47
6
253
5
1,996
63
47
6
253
5
1,996
63
47
6
253
5
1,996
63
47
6
2.18
2.27
2.35
2.44
2.53
2.53
2.53
2.53
2.53
2.53
17.21
17.89
18.58
19.27
19.96
19.96
19.96
19.96
19.96
19.96
77
80
216
224
83
233
86
241
89
250
89
250
89
250
89
250
89
250
89
250
1,361
1,415
2,070
2,147
2,223
2,223
2,223
2,223
2,223
2,223
(360)
363
1,173
188
(277)
(420)
(143)
(374)
460
1,291
124
(340)
(366)
(26)
212
550
1,401
669
204
289
85
220
480
1,352
795
330
366
35
227
490
1,382
841
377
442
66
227
570
1,462
761
297
442
146
227
490
1,382
841
377
442
66
227
490
1,382
841
377
442
66
227
570
1,462
761
297
442
146
227
490
1,382
841
377
442
66
Net Benefits (liquidity)
1,264
1,357
1,329
1,308
1,447
1,506
1,426
1,506
1,506
1,426
1,506
167 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
West & North Kordofan: YIELDS AND INPUTS
WITHOUT PROJECT 
WITH PROJECT (1 FEDDAN)
ITEMS 
Main production 
Sesame
Fodder
Self-consumption
Operating costs
Land preparation (Sub-soil plow)
Seeds (traditional)
Seeds (improved)
Land cleaning/preparation
Planting
Weeding 1
Weeding 2
Harvesting
Threshing
Empty sacks
Loading and Transportation
Zakat
Labour
Land cleaning
Planting
Weeding
Harvesting
Thershing
Sub-total labour days
Skilled (paid) labour (S)
Family labour (F)
UNIT
Kg
sack
Kg
per feddan
kg
kg
per feddan
per feddan 
per feddan
per feddan
per Sack
sack
sack
sack
%
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
PRICE 
(SDG)
7.3
8.0
7.3
80
20
30
40
40
40
40
160
10
25
10
10%
S/F
S/F
S/F
S/F
S/F
0
40
1
205
9
2
0
2
1
1
2
2
2
2
3
3
1,497
1.0
1.0
4.0
9.1
0.6
16
0
16
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
205
9
2
213
9
2
2
2
1
3
2
2.28
2.28
2.28
2.28
1,347
0.00
1.00
5.00
9.11
0.57
15.68
0.00
15.68
1
3
2
2.37
2.37
4.00
4.00
1,556
0.00
1.00
5.00
9.48
0.59
16.07
0.00
16.07
221
9
2
1
2
1
3
2
2.46
2.46
4.00
4.00
1,616
0.00
1.00
5.00
9.84
0.62
16.46
0.00
16.46
230
9
2
238
9
2
2
2
1
3
2
2.55
2.55
4.00
4.00
1,676
0.00
1.00
5.00
10.20
0.64
16.84
0.00
16.84
1
3
2
2.64
2.64
4.00
4.00
1,736
0.00
1.00
5.00
10.57
0.66
17.23
0.00
17.23
238
9
2
1
2
0
1
3
2
2.64
2.64
4.00
4.00
1,736
0.00
1.00
5.00
10.57
0.66
17.23
0.00
17.23
238
9
2
238
9
2
2
0
1
3
2
2.64
2.64
4.00
4.00
1,736
0.00
1.00
5.00
10.57
0.66
17.23
0.00
17.23
2
0
1
3
2
2.64
2.64
4.00
4.00
1,736
0.00
1.00
5.00
10.57
0.66
17.23
0.00
17.23
238
9
2
1
2
0
1
3
2
2.64
2.64
4.00
4.00
1,736
0.00
1.00
5.00
10.57
0.66
17.23
0.00
17.23
238
9
2
2
0
1
3
2
2.64
2.64
4.00
4.00
1,736
0.00
1.00
5.00
10.57
0.66
17.23
0.00
17.23
168 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
FINANCIAL BUDGET
ITEMS 
Main production revenue
Sesame
Fodder
Self-consumption
Total revenue
Total sales
Operating input costs
Land preparation (Sub-soil plow)
Seeds (traditional)
Seeds (improved)
Land cleaning/preparation
Planting
Weeding 1
Weeding 2
Harvesting
Threshing
Empty sacks
Loading and Transportation
Zakat
Sub-total operating costs
Labour costs
Skilled (paid) labour costs
Family labour costs
Sub-total labour costs
Total production costs without family labour
Total production costs with family labour
Income (after labour costs)
Incremental net income
Incremental net benefits
Incremental net costs
WITHOUT PROJECT
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
WITH PROJECT (1 FEDDAN)
1,497
72
15
1,569
1,554
0
40
0
40
40
80
80
364
23
75
30
150
922
0
627
627
295
922
647
647
1,569
922
1,347
72
15
1,419
1,404
1,556
72
16
1,628
1,613
1,616
72
16
1,688
1,672
1,676
72
17
1,748
1,731
1,736
72
17
1,808
1,791
1,736
72
17
1,808
1,791
1,736
72
17
1,808
1,791
1,736
72
17
1,808
1,791
1,736
72
17
1,808
1,791
1,736
72
17
1,808
1,791
0
0
60
0
40
120
80
364
23
57
23
135
902
0
0
60
0
40
120
80
379
24
100
40
156
998
80
0
60
0
40
120
80
394
25
100
40
162
1,100
0
0
60
0
40
120
80
408
26
100
40
168
1,041
0
0
60
0
40
120
80
423
26
100
40
174
1,063
80
0
60
0
40
120
80
423
26
100
40
174
1,143
0
0
60
0
40
120
80
423
26
100
40
174
1,063
0
0
60
0
40
120
80
423
26
100
40
174
1,063
80
0
60
0
40
120
80
423
26
100
40
174
1,143
0
0
60
0
40
120
80
423
26
100
40
174
1,063
0
627
627
274
902
517
(129)
(150)
(20)
0
643
643
356
998
630
(17)
60
76
0
658
658
442
1,100
588
(58)
120
178
0
674
674
368
1,041
707
60
180
119
0
689
689
374
1,063
745
99
239
141
0
689
689
454
1,143
665
19
239
221
0
689
689
374
1,063
745
99
239
141
0
689
689
374
1,063
745
99
239
141
0
689
689
454
1,143
665
19
239
221
0
689
689
374
1,063
745
99
239
141
Net Benefits (liquidity)
1,259
1,129
1,257
1,230
1,364
1,417
1,337
1,417
1,417
1,337
1,417
169 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
FINANCIAL BUDGET
ITEMS 
Storage
Stored amount of Sesame (bigining)
Storage period
Value of Stored Seasame (begining)
Storage cost
Loan Amount
Storage annual interest
Losses without project
Losses with project
Losses without project
Losses with project
Incremental Cost and losses
Kg
months
months
per kg
%
per year
Kg
Kg
7.3
5
0.05
75%
24%
8%
1%
Stored Sesame (end)
kg
8.9
Total revenue of stored sesame (end)
Increamental net benefit
Total production costs without family labour
Total production costs with family labour
Income (after labour costs)
Incremental net income
Incremental net benefits with storage
Incremental net costs with storage
WITHOUT PROJECT
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
WITH PROJECT (1 FEDDAN)
203
1,482
0
0
0
16.24
119
119
187
1,660
178
413
1,040
619
203
5
1,482
51
38
5
211
5
1,541
53
40
5
219
5
1,600
55
41
5
227
5
1,659
57
43
5
235
5
1,719
59
44
5
235
5
1,719
59
44
5
235
5
1,719
59
44
5
235
5
1,719
59
44
5
235
5
1,719
59
44
5
235
5
1,719
59
44
5
2.03
2.11
2.19
2.27
2.35
2.35
2.35
2.35
2.35
2.35
14.82
15.41
16.00
16.59
17.19
17.19
17.19
17.19
17.19
17.19
70
73
201
209
76
217
79
225
81
233
81
233
81
233
81
233
81
233
81
233
1,429
1,319
1,929
2,000
2,072
2,072
2,072
2,072
2,072
2,072
(53)
345
972
457
(162)
(231)
(69)
(222)
429
1,071
247
(372)
(341)
31
329
517
1,176
753
134
269
135
341
446
1,120
880
261
341
79
353
455
1,144
928
308
412
104
353
535
1,224
848
228
412
184
353
455
1,144
928
308
412
104
353
455
1,144
928
308
412
104
353
535
1,224
848
228
412
184
353
455
1,144
928
308
412
104
Net Benefits (liquidity)
1,068
1,137
1,112
1,083
1,213
1,264
1,184
1,264
1,264
1,184
1,264
170 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
Sorghum Financial Analysis  
Sinnar & South Kordofan:YIELDS AND INPUTS
WITHOUT PROJECT 
WITH PROJECT (1 FEDDAN)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
ITEMS 
Main production 
Sorghum
Fodder
Self-consumption
Operating costs
Land preparation (Sub-soil plow)
Seeds (traditional)
Seeds (improved)
Land cleaning/preparation
Planting
Weeding 1
Weeding 2
Harvesting
Threshing
Empty sacks
Loading and Transportation
Zakat
Labour
Land cleaning
Planting
Weeding
Harvesting
Thershing
Sub-total labour days
Skilled (paid) labour (S)
Family labour (F)
UNIT
PRICE 
(SDG)
Kg
per feddan
Kg
3.3
250
3.3
per feddan
kg
kg
per feddan
per feddan 
per feddan
per feddan
per Sack
sack
sack
sack
%
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
60
20
30
40
40
40
40
25
10
30
5
10%
S/F
S/F
S/F
S/F
S/F
0
40
1
735
1
588
0
2
1
1
3
2
8.17
8.17
9.00
9.00
2,426
1.0
1.0
5.0
5.1
2.0
14.1
0.0
14.1
10
853
1
682
853
1
682
2
2
1
3
2
9.47
9.47
11.00
11.00
2,814
0.0
1.0
5.0
5.9
2.4
14.3
0.0
14.3
1
3
2
9.47
9.47
11.00
11.00
2,814
0.0
1.0
5.0
5.9
2.4
14.3
0.0
14.3
735
1
588
2
1
3
2
8.17
8.17
8.17
8.17
2,062
0.0
1.0
5.0
5.1
2.0
13.1
0.0
13.1
764
1
612
1
2
1
3
2
8.49
8.49
9.00
9.00
2,270
0.0
1.0
5.0
5.3
2.1
13.4
0.0
13.4
794
1
635
823
1
659
2
2
1
3
2
8.82
8.82
9.00
9.00
2,620
0.0
1.0
5.0
5.5
2.2
13.7
0.0
13.7
1
3
2
9.15
9.15
9.15
9.15
2,717
0.0
1.0
5.0
5.7
2.3
14.0
0.0
14.0
853
1
682
1
2
1
3
2
9.47
9.47
11.00
11.00
2,814
0.0
1.0
5.0
5.9
2.4
14.3
0.0
14.3
853
1
682
853
1
682
2
2
1
3
2
9.47
9.47
11.00
11.00
2,814
0.0
1.0
5.0
5.9
2.4
14.3
0.0
14.3
1
3
2
9.47
9.47
11.00
11.00
2,814
0.0
1.0
5.0
5.9
2.4
14.3
0.0
14.3
853
1
682
1
2
1
3
2
9.47
9.47
11.00
11.00
2,814
0.0
1.0
5.0
5.9
2.4
14.3
0.0
14.3
171 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
FINANCIAL BUDGET
ITEMS 
Main production revenue
Sorghum
Fodder
Self-consumption
Total revenue
Total sales
Operating input costs
Land preparation (Sub-soil plow)
Seeds (traditional)
Seeds (improved)
Land cleaning/preparation
Planting
Weeding 1
Weeding 2
Harvesting
Threshing
Empty sacks
Loading and Transportation
Zakat
Sub-total operating costs
Labour costs
Skilled (paid) labour costs
Family labour costs
Sub-total labour costs
Total production costs without family labour
Total production costs with family labour
Income (after labour costs)
Incremental net income
Incremental net benefits
Incremental net costs
WITHOUT PROJECT
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
WITH PROJECT (1 FEDDAN)
2,426
250
1,940
2,676
735
0
40
0
40
40
120
80
204
82
270
45
243
1,163
0
566
566
598
1,163
1,512
1,512
2,676
1,163
2,062
250
1,940
2,312
371
2,270
250
2,018
2,520
502
2,620
250
2,096
2,870
774
2,717
250
2,173
2,967
793
2,814
250
2,251
3,064
813
2,814
250
2,251
3,064
813
2,814
250
2,251
3,064
813
2,814
250
2,251
3,064
813
2,814
250
2,251
3,064
813
2,814
250
2,251
3,064
813
0
0
60
0
40
120
80
204
82
245
41
206
1,078
60
0
60
0
40
120
80
212
85
270
45
227
1,199
0
0
60
0
40
120
80
221
88
270
45
262
1,186
0
0
60
0
40
120
80
229
91
274
46
272
1,212
60
0
60
0
40
120
80
237
95
330
55
281
1,358
0
0
60
0
40
120
80
237
95
330
55
281
1,298
0
0
60
0
40
120
80
237
95
330
55
281
1,298
60
0
60
0
40
120
80
237
95
330
55
281
1,358
0
0
60
0
40
120
80
237
95
330
55
281
1,298
0
0
60
0
40
120
80
237
95
330
55
281
1,298
0
526
526
552
1,078
1,234
(278)
(364)
(86)
0
537
537
662
1,199
1,321
(191)
(155)
36
0
549
549
637
1,186
1,684
172
194
22
0
560
560
652
1,212
1,755
243
291
49
0
572
572
786
1,358
1,706
194
388
195
0
572
572
726
1,298
1,766
254
388
135
0
572
572
726
1,298
1,766
254
388
135
0
572
572
786
1,358
1,706
194
388
195
0
572
572
726
1,298
1,766
254
388
135
0
572
572
726
1,298
1,766
254
388
135
Net Benefits (liquidity)
137.55
(180.73) (159.77) 136.95
141.52
26.36
86.36
86.36
26.36
86.36
86.36
172 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
West & North Kordofan: YIELDS AND INPUTS
WITHOUT PROJECT 
WITH PROJECT (1 FEDDAN)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
ITEMS 
Main production 
Sorghum
Fodder
Self-consumption
Operating costs
Land preparation (Sub-soil plow)
Seeds (traditional)
Seeds (improved)
Land cleaning/preparation
Planting
Weeding 1
Weeding 2
Harvesting
Threshing
Empty sacks
Loading and Transportation
Zakat
Labour
Land cleaning
Planting
Weeding
Harvesting
Thershing
Sub-total labour days
Skilled (paid) labour (S)
Family labour (F)
UNIT
PRICE 
(SDG)
Kg
per feddan
Kg
3.0
250
3.0
per feddan
kg
kg
per feddan
per feddan 
per feddan
per feddan
per Sack
sack
sack
sack
%
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
60
20
30
40
40
40
40
25
10
30
5
10%
S/F
S/F
S/F
S/F
S/F
0
40
1
710
1
568
0
2
1
1
3
2
7.89
7.89
8.00
8.00
2,137
1.0
1.0
5.0
4.9
2.0
13.9
0.0
13.9
10
824
1
659
824
1
659
2
2
1
3
2
9.15
9.15
11.00
11.00
2,479
0.0
1.0
5.0
5.7
2.3
14.0
0.0
14.0
1
3
2
9.15
9.15
11.00
11.00
2,479
0.0
1.0
5.0
5.7
2.3
14.0
0.0
14.0
710
1
568
2
1
3
2
7.89
7.89
7.89
7.89
2,009
0.0
1.0
5.0
4.9
2.0
12.9
0.0
12.9
738
1
591
1
2
1
3
2
8.20
8.20
9.00
9.00
2,223
0.0
1.0
5.0
5.1
2.1
13.2
0.0
13.2
767
1
613
795
1
636
2
2
1
3
2
8.52
8.52
9.00
9.00
2,308
0.0
1.0
5.0
5.3
2.1
13.5
0.0
13.5
1
3
2
8.84
8.84
8.84
8.84
2,394
0.0
1.0
5.0
5.5
2.2
13.7
0.0
13.7
824
1
659
1
2
1
3
2
9.15
9.15
11.00
11.00
2,479
0.0
1.0
5.0
5.7
2.3
14.0
0.0
14.0
824
1
659
824
1
659
2
2
1
3
2
9.15
9.15
11.00
11.00
2,479
0.0
1.0
5.0
5.7
2.3
14.0
0.0
14.0
1
3
2
9.15
9.15
11.00
11.00
2,479
0.0
1.0
5.0
5.7
2.3
14.0
0.0
14.0
824
1
659
1
2
1
3
2
9.15
9.15
11.00
11.00
2,479
0.0
1.0
5.0
5.7
2.3
14.0
0.0
14.0
173 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
FINANCIAL BUDGET
ITEMS 
Main production revenue
Sorghum
Fodder
Self-consumption
Total revenue
Total sales
Operating input costs
Land preparation (Sub-soil plow)
Seeds (traditional)
Seeds (improved)
Land cleaning/preparation
Planting
Weeding 1
Weeding 2
Harvesting
Threshing
Empty sacks
Loading and Transportation
Zakat
Sub-total operating costs
Labour costs
Skilled (paid) labour costs
Family labour costs
Sub-total labour costs
Total production costs without family labour
Total production costs with family labour
Income (after labour costs)
Incremental net income
Incremental net benefits
Incremental net costs
WITHOUT PROJECT
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
WITH PROJECT (1 FEDDAN)
2,137
250
1,710
2,387
677
0
40
0
40
40
120
80
197
79
240
40
214
1,090
0
556
556
534
1,090
1,297
1,297
2,387
1,090
2,009
250
1,710
2,259
549
2,223
250
1,778
2,473
695
2,308
250
1,846
2,558
712
2,394
250
1,915
2,644
729
2,479
250
1,983
2,729
746
2,479
250
1,983
2,729
746
2,479
250
1,983
2,729
746
2,479
250
1,983
2,729
746
2,479
250
1,983
2,729
746
2,479
250
1,983
2,729
746
0
0
60
0
40
120
80
197
79
237
39
201
1,053
60
0
60
0
40
120
80
205
82
270
45
222
1,184
0
0
60
0
40
120
80
213
85
270
45
231
1,144
0
0
60
0
40
120
80
221
88
265
44
239
1,158
60
0
60
0
40
120
80
229
92
330
55
248
1,313
0
0
60
0
40
120
80
229
92
330
55
248
1,253
0
0
60
0
40
120
80
229
92
330
55
248
1,253
60
0
60
0
40
120
80
229
92
330
55
248
1,313
0
0
60
0
40
120
80
229
92
330
55
248
1,253
0
0
60
0
40
120
80
229
92
330
55
248
1,253
0
516
516
537
1,053
1,206
(92)
(128)
(37)
0
527
527
657
1,184
1,288
(224)
(203)
21
0
538
538
606
1,144
1,414
117
171
54
0
549
549
609
1,158
1,486
188
256
68
0
560
560
753
1,313
1,416
119
342
223
0
560
560
693
1,253
1,476
179
342
163
0
560
560
693
1,253
1,476
179
342
163
0
560
560
753
1,313
1,416
119
342
223
0
560
560
693
1,253
1,476
179
342
163
0
560
560
693
1,253
1,476
179
342
163
Net Benefits (liquidity)
143.71
12.20
37.26
105.81
120.11
(7.10)
52.90
52.90
(7.10)
52.90
52.90
174 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
Groundnuts Financial Analysis 
Sinnar & South Kordofan:YIELDS AND INPUTS
WITHOUT PROJECT 
WITH PROJECT (1 FEDDAN)
ITEMS 
Main production 
Groundnut
Fodder
Self-consumption
Operating costs
Land preparation (Sub-soil plow)
Seeds (traditional)
Seeds (improved)
Land clearing and preparation
planting
Weeding 1
Weeding 2
Harvesting
Empty sacks
Loading and Transportation
Zakat
Labor
Land cleaning
Planting
Weeding
Harvesting
Sub-total labour days
Skilled (paid) labour (S)
Family labour (F)
UNIT
Kg
sack
Kg
PRICE 
(SDG)
12.10
12.1
12.10
per feddan
kg
60
13.5
per feddan
per feddan
per feddan
per feddan
per Sack
sack
sack
%
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
50
50
50
50
25
30
10
10%
S/F
S/F
S/F
S/F
0
40
1
133
50
1.33
0
20
1.00
1.00
2.00
1.50
5
4
4
1,603
1.25
1.25
4.38
3.13
10.00
0
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
133
50
1.33
138
50
1.38
20
20
1.00
2.00
1.50
5.00
4.00
4.00
1.00
2.00
1.50
5.20
4.00
4.00
1202.44 1500.642
143
50
1.43
1
20
1.00
2.00
1.50
5.40
148
50
1.48
154
50
1.54
20
20
1.00
2.00
1.50
5.60
1.00
2.00
1.50
5.80
154
50
1.54
1
20
1.00
2.00
1.50
5.80
154
50
1.54
154
50
1.54
20
20
1.00
2.00
1.50
5.80
1.00
2.00
1.50
5.80
154
50
1.54
1
20
1.00
2.00
1.50
5.80
154
50
1.54
20
1.00
2.00
1.50
5.80
4.00
4.00
1731.51
5.00
5.00
1795.64
5.00
5.00
1859.77
5.00
5.00
1859.77
5.00
5.00
1859.77
5.00
5.00
1859.77
5.00
5.00
1859.77
5.00
5.00
1859.77
0.00
1.25
4.38
3.13
8.75
0
8.75
0.00
1.25
4.38
3.25
8.88
0
8.88
0.00
1.25
4.38
3.38
9.00
0
9.00
0.00
1.25
4.38
3.50
9.13
0
9.13
0.00
1.25
4.38
3.63
9.25
0
9.25
0.00
1.25
4.38
3.63
9.25
0
9.25
0.00
1.25
4.38
3.63
9.25
0
9.25
0.00
1.25
4.38
3.63
9.25
0
9.25
0.00
1.25
4.38
3.63
9.25
0
9.25
0.00
1.25
4.38
3.63
9.25
0
9.25
175 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
FINANCIAL BUDGET
ITEMS 
Main production revenue
Groundnut
Fodder
Self-consumption
Total revenue
Total sales
Operating input costs
Land preparation (Sub-soil plow)
Seeds (traditional)
Land clearing and preparation
planting
Weeding 1
Weeding 2
Harvesting
Empty sacks
Loading and Transportation
Zakat
Sub-total operating costs
Labour costs
Skilled (paid) labour costs
Family labour costs
Sub-total labour costs
Total production costs without family labour
Total production costs with family labour
Income (after labour costs)
Incremental net income
Incremental net benefits
Incremental net costs
Net Benefits (liquidity)
WITHOUT PROJECT
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
WITH PROJECT (1 FEDDAN)
1,603
605
16
2,208
2,192
0
270
50
50
100
75
125
120
40
160
990
0
400
400
590
990
1,218
1,218
2,208
990
1,602
1,202.4
605.0
16.0
1,807
1,791
1,500.6
605.0
16.7
2,106
2,089
1,731.5
605.0
17.3
2,337
2,319
1,795.6
605.0
18.0
2,401
2,383
1,859.8
605.0
18.6
2,465
2,446
1,859.8
605.0
18.6
2,465
2,446
1,859.8
605.0
18.6
2,465
2,446
1,859.8
605.0
18.6
2,465
2,446
1,859.8
605.0
18.6
2,465
2,446
1,859.8
605.0
18.6
2,465
2,446
0
270
0
50
100
75
125
120
40
120
900
0
350
350
550
900
907
(311)
(401)
(90)
0
270
0
50
100
75
130
120
40
150
935
0
355
355
580
935
1,171
(47)
(103)
(55)
60
270
0
50
100
75
135
120
40
173
1,023
0
360
360
663
1,023
1,313
95
128
33
0
270
0
50
100
75
140
150
50
180
1,015
0
365
365
650
1,015
1,386
168
192
24
0
270
0
50
100
75
145
150
50
186
1,026
0
370
370
656
1,026
1,439
221
257
36
60
270
0
50
100
75
145
150
50
186
1,086
0
370
370
716
1,086
1,379
161
257
96
0
270
0
50
100
75
145
150
50
186
1,026
0
370
370
656
1,026
1,439
221
257
36
0
270
0
50
100
75
145
150
50
186
1,026
0
370
370
656
1,026
1,439
221
257
36
60
270
0
50
100
75
145
150
50
186
1,086
0
370
370
716
1,086
1,379
161
257
96
0
270
0
50
100
75
145
150
50
186
1,026
0
370
370
656
1,026
1,439
221
257
36
1,241
1,509
1,656
1,733
1,790
1,730
1,790
1,790
1,730
1,790
176 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
FINANCIAL BUDGET
ITEMS 
Storage
Stored amount of Sorghum (bigining)
Storage period
Storage cost
Loan Amount
Storage annual interest
Losses without project
Losses with project
Losses without project
Losses with project
Incremental Cost and losses
Kg
months
per kg
%
per year
kg
kg
12
5
0.20
75%
24%
5%
1%
stored Sesame (end)
kg
14.0
Total revenue of stored sesame
Increamental net benefit
Total production costs without family labour
Total production costs with family labour
Income (after labour costs)
Incremental net income
Increamenatl net benefit with full project
Increamenatl Cost with full project
WITHOUT PROJECT
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
WITH PROJECT (1 FEDDAN)
131
1,587
131
98
6.56
79
211
125
1,745
(53)
801
1,201
544
157
1,905
157
118
14
136
1,651
136
102
12
142
1,714
142
106
13
147
1,778
147
110
13
152
1,841
152
114
14
152
1,841
152
114
14
152
1,841
152
114
14
152
1,841
152
114
14
152
1,841
152
114
14
152
1,841
152
114
14
1.57
1.36
1.42
1.47
1.52
1.52
1.52
1.52
1.52
1.52
19
191
156
1,527
(568)
741
1,091
436
(107)
(217)
(110)
17
165
135
1,172
(644)
745
1,100
72
(472)
(572)
(101)
17
172
140
1,964
78
835
1,195
769
225
219
(6)
18
178
145
2,036
81
827
1,192
844
300
292
(8)
18
184
151
2,109
84
840
1,210
899
355
364
9
18
184
151
2,109
84
900
1,270
839
295
364
69
18
184
151
2,109
84
840
1,210
899
355
364
9
18
184
151
2,109
84
840
1,210
899
355
364
9
18
184
151
2,109
84
900
1,270
839
295
364
69
18
184
151
2,109
84
840
1,210
899
355
364
9
Net Benefits (liquidity)
944
786
427
1,129
1,209
1,269
1,209
1,269
1,269
1,209
1,269
177 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
West & North Kordofan: YIELDS AND INPUTS
WITHOUT PROJECT 
WITH PROJECT (1 FEDDAN)
ITEMS 
Main production 
Groundnut
Fodder
Self-consumption
Operating costs
Land preparation (Sub-soil plow)
Seeds (traditional)
Seeds (improved)
Land clearing and preparation
planting
Weeding 1
Weeding 2
Harvesting
Empty sacks
Loading and Transportation
Zakat
Labor
Land cleaning
Planting
Weeding
Harvesting
Sub-total labour days
Skilled (paid) labour (S)
Family labour (F)
UNIT
Kg
sack
Kg
PRICE 
(SDG)
11.90
12.1
11.90
per feddan
kg
60
13.5
per feddan
per feddan
per feddan
per feddan
per Sack
sack
sack
%
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
pers.day
40
40
40
40
25
30
10
10%
S/F
S/F
S/F
S/F
0
40
1
120
45
1.20
0
20
1.00
1.00
2.00
1.50
5
4
4
1,428
1.00
1.00
3.50
3.13
8.63
0
9
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
120
45
1.20
125
45
1.25
20
20
1.00
2.00
1.50
5.20
130
45
1.30
1
20
1.00
2.00
1.50
5.40
134
45
1.34
139
45
1.39
20
20
1.00
2.00
1.50
5.60
1.00
2.00
1.50
5.80
139
45
1.39
1
20
1.00
2.00
1.50
5.80
139
45
1.39
139
45
1.39
20
20
1.00
2.00
1.50
5.80
1.00
2.00
1.50
5.80
139
45
1.39
1
20
1.00
2.00
1.50
5.80
139
45
1.39
20
1.00
2.00
1.50
5.80
4.00
4.00
1336.608
4.00
4.00
1542.24
5.00
5.00
1599.36
5.00
5.00
1656.48
5.00
5.00
1656.48
5.00
5.00
1656.48
5.00
5.00
1656.48
5.00
5.00
1656.48
5.00
5.00
1656.48
0.00
1.00
3.50
3.25
7.75
0
7.75
0.00
1.00
3.50
3.38
7.88
0
7.88
0.00
1.00
3.50
3.50
8.00
0
8.00
0.00
1.00
3.50
3.63
8.13
0
8.13
0.00
1.00
3.50
3.63
8.13
0
8.13
0.00
1.00
3.50
3.63
8.13
0
8.13
0.00
1.00
3.50
3.63
8.13
0
8.13
0.00
1.00
3.50
3.63
8.13
0
8.13
0.00
1.00
3.50
3.63
8.13
0
8.13
1.00
2.00
1.50
5.00
4.00
4.00
1071
0.00
1.00
3.50
3.13
7.63
0
7.63
178 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
FINANCIAL BUDGET
ITEMS 
Main production revenue
Groundnut
Fodder
Self-consumption
Total revenue
Total sales
Operating input costs
Land preparation (Sub-soil plow)
Seeds (traditional)
Land clearing and preparation
planting
Weeding 1
Weeding 2
Harvesting
Empty sacks
Loading and Transportation
Zakat
Sub-total operating costs
Labour costs
Skilled (paid) labour costs
Family labour costs
Sub-total labour costs
Total production costs without family labour
Total production costs with family labour
Income (after labour costs)
Incremental net income
Incremental net benefits
Incremental net costs
Net Benefits (liquidity)
WITHOUT PROJECT
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
WITH PROJECT (1 FEDDAN)
1,428
545
14
1,973
1,958
0
270
40
40
80
60
125
120
40
143
918
0
345
345
573
918
1,055
1,055
1,973
918
1,385
1,071.0
544.5
14.28
1,616
1,601
1,336.6
544.5
14.8512
1,881
1,866
1,542.2
544.5
15.4224
2,087
2,071
1,599.4
544.5
15.9936
2,144
2,128
1,656.5
544.5
16.5648
2,201
2,184
1,656.5
544.5
16.5648
2,201
2,184
1,656.5
544.5
16.5648
2,201
2,184
1,656.5
544.5
16.5648
2,201
2,184
1,656.5
544.5
16.5648
2,201
2,184
1,656.5
544.5
16.5648
2,201
2,184
0
270
0
40
80
60
125
120
40
107
842
0
305
305
537
842
773
(281)
(357)
(76)
0
270
0
40
80
60
130
120
40
134
874
0
310
310
564
874
1,007
(47)
(91)
(44)
60
270
0
40
80
60
135
120
40
154
959
0
315
315
644
959
1,128
73
114
41
0
270
0
40
80
60
140
150
50
160
950
0
320
320
630
950
1,194
139
171
32
0
270
0
40
80
60
145
150
50
166
961
0
325
325
636
961
1,240
186
228
43
60
270
0
40
80
60
145
150
50
166
1,021
0
325
325
696
1,021
1,180
126
228
103
0
270
0
40
80
60
145
150
50
166
961
0
325
325
636
961
1,240
186
228
43
0
270
0
40
80
60
145
150
50
166
961
0
325
325
636
961
1,240
186
228
43
60
270
0
40
80
60
145
150
50
166
1,021
0
325
325
696
1,021
1,180
126
228
103
0
270
0
40
80
60
145
150
50
166
961
0
325
325
636
961
1,240
186
228
43
1,064
1,303
1,427
1,498
1,549
1,489
1,549
1,549
1,489
1,549
179 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
FINANCIAL BUDGET
ITEMS 
Storage
Stored amount of Sorghum (bigining)
Storage period
Storage cost
Loan Amount
Storage annual interest
Losses without project
Losses with project
Losses without project
Losses with project
Incremental Cost and losses
Kg
months
per kg
%
per year
kg
kg
12
5
0.20
75%
24%
5%
1%
stored Sesame (end)
kg
14.0
Total revenue of stored sesame
Increamental net benefit
Total production costs without family labour
Total production costs with family labour
Income (after labour costs)
Incremental net income
Increamenatl net benefit with full project
Increamenatl Cost with full project
WITHOUT PROJECT
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
WITH PROJECT (1 FEDDAN)
119
1,414
119
89
5.94
71
189
113
1,580
(23)
762
1,107
473
119
1,414
119
89
11
124
1,470
124
93
11
128
1,527
128
96
12
133
1,583
133
100
12
138
1,640
138
103
12
138
1,640
138
103
12
138
1,640
138
103
12
138
1,640
138
103
12
138
1,640
138
103
12
138
1,640
138
103
12
1.19
1.24
1.28
1.33
1.38
1.38
1.38
1.38
1.38
1.38
14
144
118
1,153
(405)
681
986
167
(306)
(427)
(122)
15
149
122
1,062
(558)
713
1,023
39
(434)
(518)
(84)
15
155
127
1,778
96
799
1,114
664
191
198
7
16
161
132
1,844
100
791
1,111
733
261
264
4
16
167
136
1,910
103
802
1,127
783
310
330
20
16
167
136
1,910
103
862
1,187
723
250
330
80
16
167
136
1,910
103
802
1,127
783
310
330
20
16
167
136
1,910
103
802
1,127
783
310
330
20
16
167
136
1,910
103
862
1,187
723
250
330
80
16
167
136
1,910
103
802
1,127
783
310
330
20
Net Benefits (liquidity)
818
472
349
979
1,053
1,108
1,048
1,108
1,108
1,048
1,108
180 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
Gum Arabic Financial Analysis 
Sinnar & South Kordofan:YIELDS AND INPUTS
WITHOUT PROJECT 
WITH PROJECT (feddan = 100 TREES)
ITEMS 
Main production 
Gum Arabic (new tree)
Gum Arabic (old tree)
Gum Arabic (Average new & old trees)
Self-consumption (Average new & old trees)
UNIT
PRICE 
(SDG)
Kg
Kg
Kg
Kg
18.9
18.9
18.9
18.9
Investment costs 
Seedling
Planting
Breeding
guarding against animals until established
Operating costs
Land Preparation
Harvesting (New trees)
Harvesting (Old trees)
Empty sacks
Transportation
Zakat
Labour
Planting
Breeding
guarding against animals until established
Harvesting
Sub-total labour days
Skilled (paid) labour (S)
Family labour (F)
per seedling
per feddan
Per feddan
per feddan
6
50
50
1,000
per feddan
per feddan
per feddan
sack
sack
%
pers.day
pers.day
per feddan
pers.day
200
50
50
10
10
10%
S/F
S/F
S/F
S/F
pers.day
pers.day
0
40
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0.00
62.40
62.40
0.62
0
0
0.40
0.20
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1,179
0.00
0.40
0.20
0.50
1.10
0
1.10
0.00
64.80
64.80
0.65
0
0
0.40
0.20
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1,225
0.00
0.40
0.20
0.50
1.10
0
1.10
85.28
67.20
76.24
0.76
0
0
0.40
0.20
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1,921
0.00
0.40
0.20
1.00
1.60
0
1.60
88.56
69.60
79.08
0.79
0
0
0.00
0.2
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1,993
0.00
0.00
0.20
1.00
1.20
0
1.20
91.84
60.00
79.08
0.79
0
0
0.00
0.2
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1,993
0.00
0.00
0.20
1.00
1.20
0
1.20
95.12
60.00
79.08
0.79
0
0
0.00
0
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1,993
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
0
1.00
95.12
60.00
79.08
0.79
0
0
0.00
0
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1,993
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
0
1.00
95.12
60.00
79.08
0.79
0
0
0.00
0
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1,993
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
0
1.00
95.12
60.00
79.08
0.79
0
0
0.00
0
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1,993
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
0
1.00
0.00
60.00
60.00
0.60
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1,134
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.25
1.25
0
1.25
0.00
60.00
60.00
0.60
100
1
0.40
0.20
1.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1,134
1.00
0.40
0.20
0.50
2.10
0
2.10
181 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
FINANCIAL BUDGET
ITEMS 
Main production revenue
Gum Arabic (new tree)
Gum Arabic (old tree)
Gum Arabic (Average new & old trees)
Self-consumption (Average new & old trees)
Total revenue (Average new & old trees)
Total sales (Average new & old trees)
Investment costs (feddan = 100 trees)
Seedling
Planting
Breeding
guarding against animals until established
Sub-total investment costs (1 feddan)
Operating input costs
Land Preparation
Harvesting (New trees)
Harvesting (Old trees)
Empty sacks
Transportation
Zakat
Sub-total operating costs (new & old trees)
total costs (Average new & old trees)
Labour costs
Skilled (paid) labour costs
Family labour costs
Sub-total labour costs
Total production costs without family labour
Total production costs with family labour
Income (after labour costs)
Incremental net income
Incremental net benefits
Incremental net costs
Net Benefits (liquidity)
WITHOUT PROJECT
1
1
2
3
WITH PROJECT (feddan = 100 TREEs)
4
7
5
6
0
1,134
1,134
11
1,134
1,123
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0
0
50
10
10
113
183.4
183.4
0
50
50
133
183
950.6
951
1,134
183
989
0
1,134
1,134
11
1,134
1,123
0
1,179
1,179
12
1,179
1,168
600.00
50.00
20.00
200.00
870.00
0.00
0.00
20.00
200.00
220.00
100
0
25
5
5
57
0
0
25
5
5
59
0
1,225
1,225
12
1,225
1,212
0.00
0.00
20.00
200.00
220.00
0
0
25
5
5
61
1,612
1,270
1,921
19
1,921
1,902
0.00
0.00
20.00
200.00
220.00
0
25
25
5
5
96
1,674
1,315
1,993
20
1,993
1,973
0.00
0.00
0.00
200.00
200.00
0
25
25
5
5
100
1,736
1,134
1,913
19
1,913
1,894
0.00
0.00
0.00
200.00
200.00
0
25
25
5
5
100
1,798
1,134
1,955
20
1,955
1,935
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
25
25
5
5
100
8
9
10
1,798
1,134
1,955
20
1,955
1,935
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
25
25
5
5
100
1,798
1,134
1,955
20
1,955
1,935
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
25
25
5
5
100
1,798
1,134
1,955
20
1,955
1,935
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
25
25
5
5
100
191.7
530.9
94.0
157.0
96.2
158.1
156.1
188.0
159.6
179.8
159.6
179.8
159.6
79.8
159.6
79.8
159.6
79.8
159.6
79.8
0
84
84
1,317
1,401
(267)
(1,217)
0
1,217
0
44
44
333
377
802
(148)
45
194
0
44
44
334
378
847
(104)
91
195
0
64
64
344
408
1,513
563
787
225
0
48
48
332
380
1,613
662
859
196
0
48
48
332
380
1,533
583
779
196
0
40
40
40
80
1,875
924
821
(104)
0
40
40
40
80
1,875
924
821
(104)
0
40
40
40
80
1,875
924
821
(104)
0
40
40
40
80
1,875
924
821
(104)
(194)
835
878
1,558
1,641
1,562
1,895
1,895
1,895
1,895
182 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
FINANCIAL BUDGET
ITEMS 
WITHOUT PROJECT
1
1
2
3
WITH PROJECT (feddan = 100 TREES)
4
6
7
5
8
9
10
kg
35.00
%
Sack
0.5%
2
Sell directly to Wholesale market (association)
Collecting Gum Arabic to be sold in wholesale market
Collecting Cost  (average old & new trees)
Transporation Cost  (average old & new trees)
Total Cost  (average old & new trees)
Total Revenue (average old & new trees)
Total production costs without family labour
Total production costs with family labour
Income (after labour costs)
Incremental net income
Incremental net benefits
Incremental net costs
59.40
10.40
2.00
12.40
2,079.00
145.80
195.80
1,883.2
2,079.0
195.8
59.40
61.78
64.15
75.48
78.29
78.29
78.29
78.29
78.29
78.29
10.40
2.00
12.40
2,079
204.10
1,413.25
665.8
(1,217)
0.0
1,217.5
10.81
2.00
12.81
2,162
106.78
389.79
1,772.4
(111)
83.2
194.0
11.23
2.00
13.23
2,245
109.46
391.34
1,854.0
(29)
166.3
195.5
13.21
2.00
15.21
2,642
171.27
423.24
2,218.5
335
562.7
227.4
13.70
2.00
15.70
2,740
175.34
395.52
2,344.6
461
661.1
199.7
13.70
2.00
15.70
2,740
175.34
395.52
2,344.6
461
661.1
199.7
13.70
2.00
15.70
2,740
175.34
95.52
2,644.6
761
661.1
(100.3)
13.70
2.00
15.70
2,740
175.34
95.52
2,644.6
761
661.1
(100.3)
13.70
2.00
15.70
2,740
175.34
95.52
2,644.6
761
661.1
(100.3)
13.70
2.00
15.70
2,740
175.34
95.52
2,644.6
761
661.1
(100.3)
Net Benefits (liquidity)
1,933.2
1,875
2,055
2,136
2,470
2,565
2,565
2,565
2,565
2,565
2,565
183 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
West & North Kordofan: YIELDS AND INPUTS
WITHOUT PROJECT 
WITH PROJECT (feddan = 100 TREES)
ITEMS 
Main production 
Gum Arabic (new tree)
Gum Arabic (old tree)
Gum Arabic (Average new & old trees)
Self-consumption (Average new & old trees)
UNIT
PRICE 
(SDG)
Kg
Kg
Kg
Kg
17.7
17.7
17.7
17.7
Investment costs 
Seedling
Planting
Breeding
guarding against animals until established
Operating costs
Land Preparation
Harvesting (New trees)
Harvesting (Old trees)
Empty sacks
Transportation
Zakat
Labour
Planting
Breeding
guarding against animals until established
Harvesting
Sub-total labour days
Skilled (paid) labour (S)
Family labour (F)
per seedling
per feddan
Per feddan
per feddan
6
40
40
1,000
per feddan
per feddan
per feddan
sack
sack
%
pers.day
pers.day
per feddan
pers.day
200
40
40
10
10
10%
S/F
S/F
S/F
S/F
pers.day
pers.day
0
40
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0.00
67.60
67.60
0.68
0
0
0.50
0.20
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1,197
0.00
0.50
0.20
0.50
1.20
0
1.20
0.00
70.20
70.20
0.70
0
0
0.50
0.20
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1,243
0.00
0.50
0.20
0.50
1.20
0
1.20
88.40
72.80
80.60
0.81
0
0
0.50
0.20
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1,902
0.00
0.50
0.20
1.00
1.70
0
1.70
91.80
75.40
83.60
0.84
0
0
0.00
0.2
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1,973
0.00
0.00
0.20
1.00
1.20
0
1.20
95.20
65.00
83.60
0.84
0
0
0.00
0.2
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1,973
0.00
0.00
0.20
1.00
1.20
0
1.20
98.60
65.00
83.60
0.84
0
0
0.00
0
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1,973
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.20
0
1.20
98.60
65.00
83.60
0.84
0
0
0.00
0
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1,973
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.20
0
1.20
98.60
65.00
83.60
0.84
0
0
0.00
0
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1,973
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.20
0
1.20
98.60
65.00
83.60
0.84
0
0
0.00
0
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1,973
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.20
0
1.20
0.00
65.00
65.00
0.65
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1,151
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
0
1.00
0.00
65.00
65.00
0.65
100
1
0.50
0.20
1.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1,151
1.00
0.50
0.20
0.50
2.20
0
2.20
184 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
FINANCIAL BUDGET
ITEMS 
Main production revenue
Gum Arabic (new tree)
Gum Arabic (old tree)
Gum Arabic (Average new & old trees)
Self-consumption (Average new & old trees)
Total revenue (Average new & old trees)
Total sales (Average new & old trees)
Investment costs (feddan = 100 trees)
Seedling
Planting
Breeding
guarding against animals until established
Sub-total investment costs (1 feddan)
Operating input costs
Land Preparation
Harvesting (New trees)
Harvesting (Old trees)
Empty sacks
Transportation
Zakat
Sub-total operating costs (new & old trees)
total costs (Average new & old trees)
Labour costs
Skilled (paid) labour costs
Family labour costs
Sub-total labour costs
Total production costs without family labour
Total production costs with family labour
Income (after labour costs)
Incremental net income
Incremental net benefits
Incremental net costs
Net Benefits (liquidity)
WITHOUT PROJECT
1
1
2
3
WITH PROJECT (feddan = 100 TREEs)
4
6
7
5
8
9
10
0
1,151
1,151
12
1,151
1,139
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0
0
40
10
10
115
175.1
175.1
0
40
40
135
175
975
975
1,151
175
1,004
0
1,151
1,151
12
1,151
1,139
0
1,197
1,197
12
1,197
1,185
600.00
40.00
20.00
200.00
860.00
0.00
0.00
20.00
200.00
220.00
100
0
20
5
5
58
0
0
20
5
5
60
0
1,243
1,243
12
1,243
1,230
0.00
0.00
20.00
200.00
220.00
0
0
20
5
5
62
1,565
1,289
1,902
19
1,902
1,883
0.00
0.00
20.00
200.00
220.00
0
20
20
5
5
95
1,625
1,335
1,973
20
1,973
1,953
0.00
0.00
0.00
200.00
200.00
0
20
20
5
5
99
1,685
1,151
1,890
19
1,890
1,871
0.00
0.00
0.00
200.00
200.00
0
20
20
5
5
99
1,745
1,151
1,930
19
1,930
1,911
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
20
20
5
5
99
1,745
1,151
1,930
19
1,930
1,911
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
20
20
5
5
99
1,745
1,151
1,930
19
1,930
1,911
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
20
20
5
5
99
1,745
1,151
1,930
19
1,930
1,911
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0
20
20
5
5
99
187.5
523.8
89.8
154.9
92.1
156.1
145.1
182.6
148.6
174.3
148.6
174.3
148.6
74.3
148.6
74.3
148.6
74.3
148.6
74.3
0
88
88
1,296
1,384
(233)
(1,209)
0
1,209
0
48
48
327
375
822
(154)
46
200
0
48
48
328
376
866
(109)
92
201
0
68
68
335
403
1,500
524
752
228
0
48
48
326
374
1,599
623
822
199
0
48
48
326
374
1,516
541
740
199
0
48
48
26
74
1,856
881
780
(101)
0
48
48
26
74
1,856
881
780
(101)
0
48
48
26
74
1,856
881
780
(101)
0
48
48
26
74
1,856
881
780
(101)
(157)
858
902
1,549
1,627
1,545
1,885
1,885
1,885
1,885
185 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
FINANCIAL BUDGET
ITEMS 
WITHOUT PROJECT
1
1
2
3
WITH PROJECT (feddan = 100 TREES)
4
5
7
6
8
9
10
kg
35.00
%
Sack
0.5%
2
Sell directly to Wholesale market (association)
Collecting Gum Arabic to be sold in wholesale market
Collecting Cost  (average old & new trees)
Transporation Cost  (average old & new trees)
Total Cost  (average old & new trees)
Total Revenue (average old & new trees)
Total production costs without family labour
Total production costs with family labour
Income (after labour costs)
Incremental net income
Incremental net benefits
Incremental net costs
64.35
11.26
2.00
13.26
2,252
148
188
2,063.9
2,252.3
188.3
64.35
66.92
69.50
79.79
82.76
82.76
82.76
82.76
82.76
82.76
11.26
2.00
13.26
2,252
201
1,397
855
(1,209)
0
1,209
11.71
2.00
13.71
2,342
104
389
1,954
(110)
90
200
12.16
2.00
14.16
2,432
106
390
2,042
(22)
180
202
13.96
2.00
15.96
2,793
161
419
2,374
310
541
230
14.48
2.00
16.48
2,897
165
391
2,506
442
644
202
14.48
2.00
16.48
2,897
165
391
2,506
442
644
202
14.48
2.00
16.48
2,897
165
91
2,806
742
644
(98)
14.48
2.00
16.48
2,897
165
91
2,806
742
644
(98)
14.48
2.00
16.48
2,897
165
91
2,806
742
644
(98)
14.48
2.00
16.48
2,897
165
91
2,806
742
644
(98)
Net Benefits (liquidity)
2,104
2,051
2,239
2,326
2,632
2,732
2,732
2,732
2,732
2,732
2,732
186 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
Annex 2: Shadow Prices 
Item
Year
World market price, nominal 2016 a
Quality differential
Equivalent value of SDG Product
Freight and Insurance Cost to SDN port
Value at SDN Port
Conversion to SDN b
Value at SDN Port
Port handling charges, storage & loss
Internal handling, transport costs
Value at wholesale market
Transport costs local to wholesale market
Dealer handling & processing costs
Value at local market
Transport costs: farmgate to local market
Economic value at farmgate
a  Price data derived from UN Comtrade database
b  Estimated Shadow exchange rate June 2017.
HSC
120740
1007
1508
130120
Unit
$/t
$/t
$/t
SDG:$
SDG/kg
SDG/kg
SDG/kg
SDG/kg
SDG/kg
SDG/kg
SDG/kg
SDG/kg
SDG/kg
Adjust-
ment
Sesame
Sorghum Groundnut Gum Arabic
0%
22.35
4.34
2016
1,129
0
1,129
40
1,089
24.3
4.3
11
39.68
3
3
33.7
4
29.51
2017
179
0
179
45
224
5.0
4.3
11
20.35
3
3
14.4
4
10.18
2017
1,435
0
1,435
40
1,395
31.2
4.3
11
46.52
3
3
40.5
4
36.34
2016
1,678
0
1,678
40
1,638
36.6
4.3
11
51.96
3
3
46.0
4
41.79
187 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
Annex 3: Economic Internal rates of return (IRRs) 
Economic Rate of Return (ERR)
Current values (SDG million)
0
EIRR
Present Value
Cost
Revenue
Benefits
# YEAR
1
2018
2019
2
2020
3
2021
4
2022
5
2023
6
2024
7
2025
8
2026
9
2027
10
2028
11
2029
12
2030
13
2031
14
2032
15
2033
16
2034
17
2035
18
2036
19
2037
20
Investment costs
Operational 
costs
Cost of 
production
Total Costs
Revenue
Benefits
108.9
204.0
248.7
194.3
134.9
18.4
909.3
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
483.1
(65.0)
(32.9)
(18.1)
(14.1)
17.4
19.9
8.6
17.7
19.9
8.6
8.6
8.6
8.6
8.6
8.6
8.6
8.6
8.6
8.6
8.6
48.4
68.1
195.3
254.8
204.4
176.5
62.5
32.8
41.9
44.0
32.8
32.8
32.8
32.8
32.8
32.8
32.8
32.8
32.8
32.8
32.8
1,440.8
(166.7)
(276.8)
(118.1)
(11.7)
72.3
186.0
215.6
206.5
204.4
215.6
215.6
215.6
215.6
215.6
215.6
215.6
215.6
215.6
215.6
215.6
2,683.7
(98.6)
(81.5)
136.7
192.8
248.7
248.4
248.4
248.4
248.4
248.4
248.4
248.4
248.4
248.4
248.4
248.4
248.4
248.4
248.4
248.4
4,124.4
189 
20.54% SDG million
56
134
145
97
69
20
9
9
8
5
4
3
3
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
575
0.830
0.688
0.571
0.474
0.393
0.326
0.270
0.224
0.186
0.154
0.128
0.106
0.088
0.073
0.061
0.050
0.042
0.035
0.029
0.024
4.752
SDG million
SDG million
(82)
(56)
78
91
98
81
67
56
46
38
32
26
22
18
15
13
10
9
7
6
576
(138)
(191)
(67)
(6)
28
61
58
46
38
33
28
23
19
16
13
11
9
7
6
5
0
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
Annex 4: Sensitivity Analysis 
# YEAR
1
2018
2019
2
2020
3
2021
4
2022
5
2023
6
2024
7
2025
8
2026
9
2027
10
2028
11
2029
12
2030
13
2031
14
2032
15
2033
16
2034
17
2035
18
2036
19
2037
20
Investment Costs increased by  10%
Current values (SDG million)
Investment costs
Operational 
costs
Cost of 
production
Total Costs
Revenue
Benefits
0
EIRR
18.8%
Present Value
Cost
Revenue
Benefits
SDG million
SDG million
SDG million
(178)
(295)
(142)
(31)
61
185
216
209
205
216
216
216
216
216
216
216
216
216
216
216
2,602
0.842
0.709
0.597
0.502
0.423
0.356
0.300
0.252
0.212
0.179
0.150
0.127
0.107
0.090
0.076
0.064
0.054
0.045
0.038
0.032
5.152
66
151
167
112
79
23
10
10
9
6
5
4
3
3
2
2
2
1
1
1
659
(83)
(58)
82
97
105
89
74
63
53
44
37
31
26
22
19
16
13
11
9
8
660
(150)
(209)
(85)
(16)
26
66
65
53
44
39
32
27
23
19
16
14
12
10
8
7
0
119.8
224.4
273.6
213.8
148.4
20.3
1,000.3
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
483.2
(65)
(35)
(19)
(14)
15
19
9
15
19
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
40
79
213
279
224
188
63
33
40
44
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
1,523
(99)
(82)
137
193
249
249
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
4,125
191 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
# YEAR
1
2018
2019
2
2020
3
2021
4
2022
5
2023
6
2024
7
2025
8
2026
9
2027
10
2028
11
2029
12
2030
13
2031
14
2032
15
2033
16
2034
17
2035
18
2036
19
2037
20
Cost of production increased by  10%
Current values (SDG million)
Investment costs
Operational 
costs
Cost of 
production
Total Costs
Revenue
Benefits
0
EIRR
20.2%
Present Value
Cost
Revenue
Benefits
SDG million
SDG million
SDG million
(173)
(278)
(119)
(13)
73
185
215
207
203
215
215
215
215
215
215
215
215
215
215
215
2,662
0.832
0.692
0.576
0.479
0.398
0.331
0.276
0.229
0.191
0.159
0.132
0.110
0.091
0.076
0.063
0.053
0.044
0.036
0.030
0.025
4.821
62
136
147
99
70
21
9
9
9
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
1
1
590
(82)
(56)
79
92
99
82
68
57
47
39
33
27
23
19
16
13
11
9
8
6
590
(144)
(192)
(69)
(6)
29
61
59
48
39
34
28
24
20
16
14
11
9
8
6
5
0
108.9
204.0
248.7
194.3
134.9
18.4
909.3
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
483.1
(59)
(32)
(17)
(13)
17
21
9
17
21
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
70
75
197
256
206
176
64
34
41
45
34
34
34
34
34
34
34
34
34
34
34
1,463
(99)
(82)
137
193
249
249
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
4,125
192 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
# YEAR
1
2018
2019
2
2020
3
2021
4
2022
5
2023
6
2024
7
2025
8
2026
9
2027
10
2028
11
2029
12
2030
13
2031
14
2032
15
2033
16
2034
17
2035
18
2036
19
2037
20
Revenue decreased by  10%
Current values (SDG million)
Investment costs
Operational 
costs
Cost of 
production
Total Costs
Revenue
Benefits
0
EIRR
17.4%
Present Value
Cost
Revenue
Benefits
SDG million
SDG million
SDG million
(177)
(283)
(131)
(31)
50
162
191
184
180
191
191
191
191
191
191
191
191
191
191
191
2,244
0.852
0.725
0.617
0.526
0.448
0.381
0.325
0.276
0.235
0.200
0.171
0.145
0.124
0.105
0.090
0.076
0.065
0.055
0.047
0.040
5.505
58
140
157
107
78
23
11
11
10
7
6
5
4
3
3
3
2
2
2
1
632
(92)
(65)
76
91
100
85
73
62
53
45
38
32
28
24
20
17
15
12
11
9
633
(150)
(205)
(81)
(16)
22
62
62
51
42
38
33
28
24
20
17
15
12
11
9
8
0
108.9
204.0
248.7
194.3
134.9
18.4
909.3
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
483.1
(65)
(35)
(19)
(14)
15
19
9
15
19
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
40
68
193
254
204
174
62
33
40
44
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
1,432
(109)
(90)
123
173
224
224
224
224
224
224
224
224
224
224
224
224
224
224
224
224
3,676
193 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
# YEAR
1
2018
2019
2
2020
3
2021
4
2022
5
2023
6
2024
7
2025
8
2026
9
2027
10
2028
11
2029
12
2030
13
2031
14
2032
15
2033
16
2034
17
2035
18
2036
19
2037
20
Revenue lagged one year 
Current values (SDG million)
Investment costs
Operational 
costs
Cost of 
production
Total Costs
Revenue
Benefits
0
EIRR
17.0%
Present Value
Cost
Revenue
Benefits
SDG million
SDG million
SDG million
(68)
(292)
(336)
(68)
19
187
216
209
205
216
216
216
216
216
216
216
216
216
216
216
2,444
0.855
0.731
0.625
0.534
0.457
0.390
0.334
0.285
0.244
0.209
0.178
0.152
0.130
0.111
0.095
0.081
0.070
0.059
0.051
0.043
5.635
58
141
159
109
80
24
11
11
11
7
6
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
2
1
642
0
(72)
(51)
73
88
97
83
71
61
52
44
38
32
28
24
20
17
15
13
11
643
(58)
(213)
(210)
(36)
8
73
72
60
50
45
38
33
28
24
21
18
15
13
11
9
0
108.9
204.0
248.7
194.3
134.9
18.4
909.3
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
483.1
(65)
(35)
(19)
(14)
15
19
9
15
19
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
40
68
193
254
204
174
62
33
40
44
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
1,432
0
(99)
(82)
137
193
249
249
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
3,876
194 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
# YEAR
1
2018
2019
2
2020
3
2021
4
2022
5
2023
6
2024
7
2025
8
2026
9
2027
10
2028
11
2029
12
2030
13
2031
14
2032
15
2033
16
2034
17
2035
18
2036
19
2037
20
Revenue lagged two years
Current values (SDG million)
Investment costs
Operational 
costs
Cost of 
production
Total Costs
Revenue
Benefits
0
EIRR
14.2%
Present Value
Cost
Revenue
Benefits
SDG million
SDG million
SDG million
(68)
(193)
(353)
(286)
(37)
131
216
209
205
216
215
215
215
215
215
215
215
215
215
215
2,187
0.876
0.767
0.672
0.589
0.516
0.452
0.396
0.347
0.304
0.266
0.233
0.204
0.179
0.157
0.137
0.120
0.105
0.092
0.081
0.071
6.563
60
148
171
120
90
28
13
14
13
9
8
7
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
712
0
0
(66)
(48)
71
87
98
86
75
66
58
51
44
39
34
30
26
23
20
18
712
(60)
(148)
(237)
(168)
(19)
59
85
72
62
57
50
44
38
34
29
26
23
20
17
15
0
108.9
204.0
248.7
194.3
134.9
18.4
909.3
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
483.1
(65)
(35)
(19)
(14)
15
19
9
15
19
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
48
68
193
254
204
174
62
33
40
44
33
34
34
34
34
34
34
34
34
34
34
1,441
0
0
(99)
(82)
137
193
249
249
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
3,628
195 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 10:  Economic and financial analysis 
# YEAR
1
2018
2019
2
2020
3
2021
4
2022
5
2023
6
2024
7
2025
8
2026
9
2027
10
2028
11
2029
12
2030
13
2031
14
2032
15
2033
16
2034
17
2035
18
2036
19
2037
20
Revenue lagged three years
Current values (SDG million)
Investment costs
Operational 
costs
Cost of 
production
Total Costs
Revenue
Benefits
0
EIRR
11.9%
Present Value
Cost
Revenue
Benefits
SDG million
SDG million
SDG million
(68)
(193)
(254)
(303)
(256)
75
160
209
205
216
216
216
216
216
216
216
216
216
216
216
1,947
0.893
0.798
0.713
0.637
0.569
0.508
0.454
0.405
0.362
0.324
0.289
0.258
0.231
0.206
0.184
0.164
0.147
0.131
0.117
0.105
7.495
61
154
181
130
99
31
15
16
16
11
9
8
8
7
6
5
5
4
4
3
774
0
0
0
(63)
(46)
69
87
101
90
80
72
64
57
51
46
41
36
33
29
26
774
(61)
(154)
(181)
(193)
(145)
38
73
85
74
70
62
56
50
44
40
35
32
28
25
23
0
108.9
204.0
248.7
194.3
134.9
18.4
909.3
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
24.2
483.1
(65)
(35)
(19)
(14)
15
19
9
15
19
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
40
68
193
254
204
174
62
33
40
44
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
33
1,432
0
0
0
(99)
(82)
137
193
249
249
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
248
3,379
196 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 11:  Draft project implementation manual 
Appendix 11:  Project Implementation  
Manual 
1. 
The Project Implementation Manual (PIM) will be prepared at project start up. It will consist of 
updating and adjusting the current PIMs of SUSTAIN and SDP to further emphasise the scaling up, 
marketing and capacity building dimensions of IAMDP. The PIM will have the following Table of 
Contents to guide the PCU and ensure timely implementation on the ground.   
2. 
Implementation plans 
(a) Project readiness activities 
(b) Overall project implementation plan 
(c) Annual Work Plans & Budgets 
3. 
Project management arrangements 
(a) Project implementation organizations – roles and responsibilities 
(b) Key persons involved in implementation 
(c) Project Coordination Unit 
(d) State Project Implementation Units  
(e) LET teams 
4. 
Costs and financing 
(a) Allocation and withdrawal of grant proceeds 
(b) Fund flow diagram 
(c) Detailed cost estimates 
5. 
Financial management 
(a) Financial management assessment 
(b)  Disbursement 
(c)  Accounting 
(d)  Auditing 
6. 
Procurement and consulting services 
(a)  Assessment of procurement capacity 
(b)  Advance contracting 
(c)  Procurement of goods, works and consulting Services 
(d)  Procurement plan 
(e)  Consultants’ Terms of Reference 
7. 
Performance monitoring, evaluation, reporting and communications 
(a)  Project design and monitoring framework 
(b)  Monitoring 
(c)  Evaluation 
(d)  Reporting 
(e)  Stakeholder Communication Strategy 
Gender and social dimensions 
Climate Change and Environmental Dimension.  
8. 
9. 
10.  Safeguards, anticorruption policy and accountability mechanism 
11.  Record of PIM changes 
197 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies 
The project is in line with IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025. The project activities, 
1. 
implementation arrangements and M&E system have been designed in compliance with IFAD 
Targeting Policy, IFAD's policy on Engagement in Fragile and Conflict-affected States and Situations, 
FAD policy on gender equality and women’s empowerment and in line with the approaches outlined in 
the Framework for Gender Mainstreaming in IFAD investment Operations. The project is designed to 
be consistent with IFAD’s Private Sector Development and Partnership Strategy, its Rural Finance 
Policy and the associated Decision Tools for Rural Finance. Finally, the project will be aligned with 
both IFAD’s Climate Change Strategy and its Environment and Natural Resource Management Policy. 
The preliminary Environmental and Social category is B, considering that the project approach will 
promote use of climate resilient technologies and best agricultural practice.  
Strategic Framework (2016-2025) 
IFAD’s Strategic Framework (2016-2025) reiterates its unique mandate of improving rural food 
2. 
security and nutrition and enabling rural women and men to overcome poverty. The framework 
identified three closely interlinked and mutually reinforcing strategic objectives: Increase poor rural 
people’s productive capacities; Increase poor rural people’s benefits from market participation; and 
strengthen the environmental sustainability and climate resilience of poor rural people’s economic 
activities. IAMDP is designed to empower smallholder producers, men and women, and youth by 
strengthening their organizations, capacities, skills, enabling them to enhance their productive 
capacity and enhance their links with markets for production, processing and marketing  
Social Environmental and Climate Assessment Review Note 
The design mission reviewed the Social Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures to 
3. 
determine the status of the IAMDP project with respect to its requirements. It is proposed to classify 
the project as posing moderate socio-environmental risks at this design state, category B. 
IFAD Check lists 
Gender checklist 
Design 
1. The project design report contains – and project 
implementation is based on – gender-disaggregated 
poverty data and an analysis of gender differences in the 
activities or sectors concerned, as well as an analysis of 
each project activity from the gender perspective to 
address any unintentional barriers to women’s 
participation. 
2. The project design articulates – or the project 
implements – actions with aim to: 
• 
Expand women’s economic empowerment through 
access to and control over productive and 
household assets; 
• 
• 
Strengthen women’s decision-making role in the 
household and community and their representation 
in membership and leadership of local institutions; 
Achieve a reduced workload and an equitable 
workload balance between women and men. 
Sex-disaggregated data on poverty has been used in the analysis 
of proposed IAMDP activities, taking into account the specific 
challenges faced by women and youth in rural Sudan. 
IAMDP will enhance women access to financial services and 
thereby enable them to accumulate human, social, physical and 
financial assets. The IAMDP promotes women and youth 
participation in farmer producer organisations. 
The project will enhance women’s participation and voice in 
decision-making by setting a target of 50% female participation in 
farmer producer organisations as well as 15% youth participation in 
all project-related decision-making bodies and committees, for 
example 
IAMDP is designed to enhance women’s access to financial 
services, marketing and value chain development. The project s will 
also invest in building rural infrastructure like crossings which will 
enhance women and youth access to markets.  
199 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies 
Gender checklist 
Design 
3. The project design report includes one paragraph in 
the targeting section that explains what the project will 
deliver from a gender perspective. 
4. The project design report describes the key elements 
for operationalizing the gender strategy, with respect to 
the relevant project components. 
5. The design document – and the project implements – 
operational measures to ensure gender-equitable 
participation in, and benefit from, project activities. 
These will generally include:  
5.1 Allocating adequate human and financial resources 
to implement the gender strategy. 
The gender-related and social inclusion aspects of the project are 
summarized in the section on project area and target group. 
This is summarized in Appendix 2. 
Gender sensitization and gender mainstreaming activities are 
costed for in the PDR and includes capacity building in the GALS 
methodology for extension teams as well as community members. 
All actions identified in the Gender Strategy have been properly 
costed and budgeted for. 
5.2 Ensuring and supporting women’s active 
participation in project-related activities, decision-making 
bodies and committees, including setting specific targets 
for participation. 
At the community level, the participation of women in farmer 
producer organisations is the starting point. Gender sensitization is 
part of the process of engagement with rural communities. A 
minimum of 50% women participation in the farmer organisations 
and a minimum of 15% youth have been set as targets. 
5.3 Ensuring that project/project management 
arrangements (composition of the project management 
unit/project coordination unit, project terms of reference 
for staff and implementing partners, etc. reflect attention 
to gender equality and women’s empowerment 
concerns. 
Gender equitable staffing is been proposed for the project 
management unit. Gender-sensitive language will be used to 
describe staff positions and responsibilities for gender 
mainstreaming will been detailed in TORs of all PMC staff. The 
project Coordinator has overall responsibility for ensuring that the 
gender strategy is prepared and implemented. The Community 
Development Officer is the gender focal point and will be 
responsible for coordinating the implementation of the gender and 
targeting strategies.The Rural Finance Specialist is responsible for 
implementing the gender strategy for his/her respective 
components. The Procurement Officer is responsible for ensuring 
that gender targeting concerns are reflected in the tendering 
process and in all contracts with service providers. The M&E and 
Knowledge Management Officer is responsible for public 
sensitization on gender and financial services and for organizing 
experience sharing workshops to identify, document and 
disseminate good practices on gender mainstreaming. Gender 
sensitization trainings will be given to project staff and 
implementing partners. At field level, the extension team and 
selected community members will be trained to be GALS facilitators 
and trainers.  
5.4 Ensuring direct project/project outreach to women 
(for example through appropriate numbers and 
qualification of field staff), especially where women’s 
mobility is limited. 
The inclusion of women staff members in the extension teams 
responsible for supporting the establishment of farmer producer 
organisations is one way to ensuring direct project outreach to 
women and youth. 
5.5 Identifying opportunities to support strategic 
opportunities with government and other development 
organizations for networking and policy dialogue. 
The PCU will document and capitalize on the experience of 
women’s participation in farmer producer groups and engage in 
high-level policy dialogue with concerned Ministries and 
stakeholders at both state and federal level. 
6. The project’s logical framework, M&E, and learning 
systems specify in design – and project M&E unit 
collects, analyses and interprets sex- and age-
disaggregated performance and impact data, including 
The number of women who would benefit from IAMDP has been 
clearly specified and this is indicated in the logframe. All relevant 
logframe indicators (i.e., all those dealing with people) are sex-
disaggregated. 
200 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies 
Gender checklist 
Design 
specific indicators on gender equality and women’s 
empowerment. 
IFAD Targeting checklist 
Targeting checklist 
Design 
1.  Does the main target group – those expected to 
benefit most – correspond to IFAD’s target group as 
defined by the Targeting Policy (poorer households and 
food insecure)? 
2.  Have target sub-groups been identified and 
described according to their different socio-economic 
characteristics, assets and livelihoods – with attention to 
gender and youth differences (matrix on target group 
characteristics completed)? 
3.  Is evidence provided of interest in and likely uptake of 
the proposed activities by the identified target sub-
groups? What is the evidence (matrix on analysis of 
project components and activities by principal 
beneficiary groups completed)? 
4.  Does the design document describe a feasible and 
operational targeting strategy in line with the Targeting 
Policy, involving some or all of the following measures 
and methods: 
4.1 Geographic targeting – based on poverty data or 
proxy indicators to identify, for area-based projects or 
projects, geographic areas (and within these, 
communities) with  high concentration of poor people; 
4.2 Self-targeting – when good and services respond to 
the priority needs, resource endowments and livelihood 
strategies of target groups; 
The project targets poor rural smallholder farmer households 
including women headed households and youth.  
The project target group is described as (i) small holder farmers, 
(ii) women headed households (iii) rural youth. Their 
socioeconomic characteristics have been described in the PDR. 
There is a huge unmet demand for access to finance, agricultural 
inputs, marketing and value chain development among the 
targeted groups. 
Localities and communities have been selected on the following 
criteria: (i) high poverty levels and sufficient numbers of potential 
beneficiaries, particularly women and youth; (ii) coverage under 
the on-going IFAD co-financed projects and potential to capitalize 
on successful approaches, and (iii) potential for crop production 
and marketing of Groundnuts, sesame, sorghum and gum Arabic. 
In Sinnar state about 80% of the population lives in rural areas 
and about 44 % of the population is classified as poor, compared 
to the national poverty level for Sudan which is 46.5 %. In the 
greater Kordofan region the rural population is estimated at 80% 
in NK (WK included) and 77% in South Kordofan. In 2009 the 
poverty head count was 58% for NK (WK included) and 60% for 
SK, significantly high compared to national poverty levels.  
The targeting and self-targeting of youth, women, and rural poor 
and small-scale farmers will be achieved though: (i) promotion of 
activities with a relatively low barrier of entry which is not 
attractive to large-scale agricultural enterprises; and (ii) 
facilitation, empowerment and capacity-building measures to 
encourage active participation. These measures include: (i) 
information and mobilisation campaigns through producer 
organisations); (ii) group-based approaches and schemes to 
lower entry thresholds for the rural poor; (iii) linkages with the 
microfinance sector to leverage their investment capacity; (iv) 
institutional strengthening of groups and management training of 
their members. 
4.3 Direct targeting – when services or resources are 
Project beneficiaries will be organised in farmer producer groups, 
201 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 12:  Compliance with IFAD policies 
Targeting checklist 
Design 
to be channelled to specific individuals or households; 
including women and youth. 
4.4 Empowering measures – including information and 
communication, focused capacity- and confidence-
building measures, organizational support, in order to 
empower and encourage the more active participation 
and inclusion in planning and decision-making of people 
who traditionally have less voice and power; 
4.5 Enabling measures – to strengthen stakeholders’ 
and partners’ attitude and commitment to poverty 
targeting, gender equality and women’s empowerment, 
including policy dialogue, awareness-raising and 
capacity-building; 
4.6 Procedural measures – that could militate against 
participation by the intended target groups; 
4.7 Operational measures – appropriate project/project 
management arrangements, staffing, selection of 
implementation partners and service providers. 
5. Monitoring targeting performance. Does the design 
document specify that targeting performance will be 
monitored using participatory M&E, and also be 
assessed at mid-term review? Does the M&E framework 
allow for the collection/analysis of sex-disaggregated 
data and are there gender-sensitive indicators against 
which to monitor/evaluate outputs, outcomes and 
impacts? 
Farmer producer organisations are highly empowering to 
members including women and youth; they build social and 
psychological self-confidence hand in hand with economic 
empowerment and build the capacity members to access better 
prices, along with increased market access and value addition 
skills. Through Saving and Credit Groups women learn that they 
can successfully save on a regular basis, borrow and repay, and 
make good profits on petty trading of local products. Savings 
empower them to pay children’s education, smooth consumption, 
improve their homes and diets, and accumulate livelihood assets. 
The GALS methodology will increase gender equality at HH level. 
The gender and targeting strategy of the IAMDP will build on the 
good experiences of the SDP, SUSTAIN and WSRMP projects in 
Sudan. 
Procedural measures are addressed in the PDR to prevent guide 
in the selection of the poorest project areas.  Attention will be 
given to costs/contributions, timing and administrative procedures 
required for effective participation of the various target groups in 
project activities. Transparency and clarity in procedures for 
decision-making will be promoted. All members of groups will be 
encouraged to participate in business ventures. 
Targeting responsibilities are explicitly mentioned in TORs for all 
PCU staff. Project coordinator will be responsible for seeing that 
gender and poverty targeting is effective. All service provider 
contracts make them accountable for targeting. Service providers 
will be assessed on their proven track record with poverty, gender 
and youth targeting.   
The M&E design gives strong emphasis to monitoring of targeting 
performance. Project will collect and report on sex-disaggregated 
data for all project activities. Poverty status of households will also 
be monitored at baseline, MTR and PCR using poverty 
scorecards. 
202 
Republic of the Sudan 
Integrated Agricultural and Marketing Development Project (IAMDP) 
Final project design report 
Appendix 13:  Contents of the project life file 
Appendix 13: Contents of the project life file 
A.  Project-generated knowledge 
 
IAMDP Project Concept Note 
  WP 1:  SECAP report  
 
IAMDP Detailed Design Report 
B.  IFAD knowledge base not generated by the project 
  Result-based Country Strategic Opportunities Project for Sudan (RB-COSOP), 
November 2013. 
  Sudan COSOP Results Review (CRR), IFAD January 2017 
  Value Chain Study: Sesame, Groundnuts, Sorghum, IFAD February 2017   
  Gum Arabic Production and Marketing Project (GAPMP), PCR, IFAD 2015 
 
IFAD Policies and Strategies (IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025, Environmental 
and Social Assessment, Climate Change, Gender, Targeting, Private Sector 
Development and Partnership, Rural Enterprise, Rural Finance, Preventing Fraud and 
Corruption, Procurement, Supervision and Implementation Support, Project M&E, 
Innovation, Knowledge Management, Environment and Natural Resources 
Management Policy). 
  Country portfolio of loans and grants. 
  Country Project Issues Sheets and Project Status Reports. 
  Recent supervision reports and Mid-Term Reviews of projects in Sudan portfolio: 
Western Sudan Resources Management Project (WSRMP); Butana Integrated Rural 
Development Project (BIRDP); and Supporting Small-scale Traditional Rainfed 
Producers in Sinnar State (SUSTAIN), Seed Development Project (SDP) a Western 
Sudan Resources Management Project (WSRMP). 
C.  Knowledge base not generated by the Project 
  Sudan Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, January 2013. 
  Study commissioned by IFAD on Potential Compensating Sectors for the Reduction in 
Oil Resources for the Sudan Economy, HAT Professional Consultancy Team Ltd, May 
2011. 
  Sudan Revitalizing non-oil export: Diagnostic Trade Integration Study for the Integrated 
Framework Project. 
203 
