Tajikistan
Community-based Agricultural Support Project Plus (CASP+)
Project Design Report
Main report and annexes
Mission Dates:
01 April - 09 June 2021
Document Date:
16/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002204
5854-TJ
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
4P
ACTED
ADB
AE
AI
AWPB
CASP
CASP+
CCI
CEP
CES
CI
CIG
CO2e 
COSOP
COVID-19
CsCAP
DRM
DRR
EBRD
ECTAP 
EE
EIRR 
EU
Ex-ACT
FAO
FIRR
FFS
FHH
FP
FSC
GBAO
GCF
GDP 
GHG
GII
GIZ
GLEAM-i
GoT
GTZ
GWP
HDI 
HH
Hydromet
IFAD
IGA
INDC
IGP
IWRM 
JFM
KLSP
LPDP
MoA
MoEWR 
MIS
MSMEs
Public-private-producer partnerships
Agency for Technical Cooperation and Development
Asian Development Bank
Accredited Entity
Artificial insemination 
Annual Work plan and Budget 
Community-based Agricultural Support Project (phase I)
Community-based Agricultural Support Project ‘Plus’ (phase II) 
Chamber of commerce and industry
Committee on Environmental Protection 
Committee of Emergency situations and Civil defence 
Core indicator (GCF) 
Common Interest Group
Carbon dioxide equivalent 
Country strategic opportunities programme
Coronavirus disease of 2019 (official WHO name)
Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans 
Design Review Meeting 
Disaster Risk Reduction
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Enhanced Competitiveness of Tajik Agribusiness Project
Executing Entity (implementing entity for GCF)
Economic Rate of Return 
European Union
EX-Ante Carbon balance Tool
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Financial Internal Rate of Return
Farmers Field Schools 
Female Headed Households 
Funding Proposal (GCF)
Food Security Committee of the Tajik Republic
Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Region 
Green Climate Fund
Gross Domestic Product
Greenhouse Gas 
Gender Inequality Index 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit
Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model
Government of Tajikistan 
Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (former GIZ name)
Global Water Partnership 
Human Development Index
Household
National Agency for Hydrometeorology of Republic of Tajikistan
International Fund for Agricultural Development  
Income generating activities 
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution 
CEP Project Implementation Group 
Integrated Water Resources Management 
Joint Forest Management 
Khatlon Livelihoods Support Project
Livestock and Pasture Development Project 
Ministry of Agriculture 
Ministry of Energy and Water Resources
Management Information System
Micro-small and medium enterprises 
ND-GAIN 
NDA
NIP
NGO
NRM
OIE
PBAS
PCN
PDR
PMF
PMP
PMU
PPL
PSC
PWD
PUU
PUA
RBA
RBC
REACT
RRS
QAG
SDC
SDG
SEPMU
SFA
SI
SMEs
SO
SPEI
SSTC
TAJSTAT 
TBD
UN
UNDP
UNFCCC
USD
VO
WB
WFP
WG
WHH
WHO
WUA
Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative
National Designated Authority (at GCF)
National Agricultural Investment Plan 2021-2030
Non-governmental organization
Natural Resources Management
World Organization for Animal Health 
Performance-based allocation system
Project concept note (IFAD)
Project Document Report (IFAD)
Performance measurement framework (GCF) 
Pasture Management Plans 
Project Management Unit 
Public Procurement Law 
Project Steering Committee 
Persons with Disability 
Pasture Users Union
Pasture Users Associations 
Rome-based Agencies (UN)
River basin council
Rapid Emergency Assessment and Coordination Team 
Rayons under Republican Subordination
Quality Assurance Group 
Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation
Sustainable Development Goal
State Enterprise “Project Management Unit” Livestock and Pasture Development 
State Forest Agency 
Social Inclusion
Small and Medium Enterprises
Strategic Objective
Standardized Precipitation-Evapotranspiration Index 
South-South and Triangular Cooperation
Agency on statistics under the President of the Republic of Tajikistan
To be determined
United Nations
UN Development Programme
UN Framework Convention on Climate Change
United States Dollar 
Village Organization
World Bank
World Food Programme
Women group
Women Head of Households
World Health Organization
Water Users Associations
In line with IFAD11 mainstreaming commitments, the project has been validated as:
☐ Gender transformational ☑ Youth sensitive ☐ Nutrition sensitive ☑ Climate finance
1/40
IFAD Adaptation Finance
IFAD Mitigation Finance
Total IFAD Climate-focused Finance
Executive Summary
$13,011,000
$0
$13,011,000
Tajikistan is the most vulnerable country in Central Asia to climate risks. Temperatures are increasing across the country, with a sharp
increase in the period 1970-2017[1],[2] and there is a clear shift in precipitation patterns, with a net decrease in precipitation during
spring and most of summer. These changes pose a threat to the agricultural Higher temperatures, increased evaporation, and
increased heat extremes negatively affect agricultural productivity, putting at risks irrigated and rainfed agricultural systems and rural
livelihoods. The Climate Adaptation in Rural Development (CARD)[3] analysis predicts how climate change will affect the production
systems, and under the pessimistic risk setting, all crop yields are projected to decrease moderately to 2025 and more severely by
2050. The most affected crops include rice, wheat and sunflower.[4] The likelihood of annual severe droughts is projected to increase
from once every 5 years in 2020, to once every 3 years in 2050. By then, the main crops’ yield could decrease by between 5 and 35
percent, and pastures on which livestock depend will see a reduction in quality and productivity due to higher temperatures and
increased evaporation rates. The climate change vulnerability analyses suggest higher adaptation needs in rural mountainous area,
where there is a predominance of agroforestry and livestock related livelihoods. The country is already prone to frequent natural
disasters including floods, mudflows, landslides and droughts. Climate projections predict a worsening trend in these events, with
significant impacts on ecosystems, livelihoods and the economy. The country’s geographic characteristics as well as its high levels of
poverty and dependence on the agriculture sector present significant challenges for future adaptation.[5]
At a national level, the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan (GoT) has developed a National Climate Change Adaptation
Strategy (NCCAS) which outlines its commitment to climate change adaptation GoT also has made commitments to confront the
challenges of climate change and to implement the commitments made in its Nationally Determined Contribution. At the same time,
the country’s institutional structure for climate change adaptation is weak and requires capacity building and technical support. The
overall goal of CASP+ is to contribute to the country’s shift towards low emission sustainable development pathways and climate-
adaptive agricultural production practices. The development objective of CASP+ is to increase resilience of ecosystems and
adaptation of livelihoods in rural areas affected by climate change. The project will achieve the objective by strengthening public
sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient governance of natural resources, improving community planning and access to
investment resources for climate adaptation, supporting through market-based approaches for diversification of climate resilient
livelihoods. The underlying theory of change of the project is that if investments are made in supportive policy and technical capacity
at the national level, climate resilient plans are developed in participation with communities at the village level and investment in
appropriate skills, inputs, equipment at the household level with access to markets in close engagement with the private sector, then
vulnerable communities and households will adopt more sustainable production practices and make their livelihoods more resilient to
climate risks.
The proposed activities can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project investment and can lead to a paradigm shift in key areas. For
example, the project is designed to transform the approach of GoT through explicit consideration of climate change risks,
vulnerabilities and adaptation measures in state policies and programmes at the national level and in development planning at the
district and village level to assist households in diversifying their livelihoods. At the local level, the project will develop mechanisms to
support locally-led adaptation by building capacities of local agencies to assess climate risks and identify and implement locally-
appropriate solutions that can build a long-term legacy of local capacity for climate change adaptation. The project investment will
encourage several key shifts in paradigm that will include stronger linkages between agricultural producers including linkages to
markets, and a transformation of livestock production to enable more adaptive production practices and technologies at household
and community level (where IFAD has accumulated extensive experience). The project will also facilitate productive alliances with the
private sector to ensure that the local production systems are able to use their resources efficiently in responding to market demand.
The project is expected to have an impact on both mitigation and adaptation. Specifically, the project will contribute to the
sequestration of an estimated 7.46 million tonnes of CO2 equivalent (tCO2e) through improved management and rehabilitation of
degraded forests and pasture, and from improved management of livestock herds. The project will increase resilience and enhance
livelihoods by the adoption of diversified, climate resilient livelihood options for an estimated 100,000 rural households (650,000
individuals) in 21 of the most climate vulnerable districts of the country. The economic analysis of the project indicates an Economic
Rate of Return of 22.4 percent and a Net Present Value of USD 143.4 million with significant co-benefits from economic, social
and environmental factors. Furthermore, preliminary analysis in pilot watersheds has shown that the impact on biodiversity is positive
with the level of biodiversity intactness increasing in all case studies.[6]
Components. In line with the above described approach, the project’s investments and activities will be executed through three
components in addition to Project Management:
C1. Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources
Output 1.1. By year 7, capacities of relevant national institutions for climate-resilient natural resources management are
strengthened
Output 1.2. By year 7, enabling environment for climate adaptive, inclusive and integrated management of pasture, forestry
and livestock resources is enhanced
C2. Investments in community capacity for adaption and resilience to climate change
2/40
Output 2.1. By year 3, 400 Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAP) based on 21 District level Climate Resilience
Diagnostics are developed
Output 2.2. By year 7, 400 Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAP) implemented in 21 districts benefitting at least
100,000 rural households
C3. Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market based approaches
Output 3.1. By end of year 7, 105,600 smallholder livestock farmers receive AI, animal health or training services to increase
productivity of their livestock
Output 3.2. By end of year 4, 9 productive alliances between livestock producers’ groups and private aggregators established
and operational
Output 3.3. By end of year 7, 12,400 smallholders have strengthened climate resilient production practices and private sector
market linkages
Project costs: The total project cost is estimated to be USD 98.2 million. It will be financed by an IFAD loan of USD 6.75 million (6.9
percent of the total project costs), and grant of USD 6.75 million from IFAD 11 allocation. It is expected that: USD 23.3 million (23.7
percent of the total project costs) will be mobilized from IFAD 12 allocation; USD 30.0 million grant and USD 9.0 million loan would be
mobilized from the Green Climate Fund (30.6 percent and 9.2 percent of the total cost); and FAO financing for an amount of USD 0.16
million (0.2 percent). Government contribution in the form of taxes for an amount of USD 15.0 million (15.2 percent); beneficiary
contribution for an amount of USD 4.5 million (4.6 percent). Additional contributions include in-kind contributions from: Ministry of
Agriculture (MoA) for an amount of USD 0.90 million (0.9 percent); Committee on Environment Protection (CEP) for an amount of
USD 0.89 million (0.9 percent), and State Forest Agency (SFA) for an amount of USD 0.89 million (0.9 percent).
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
a. National Context
1.
2.
3.
4.
Tajikistan is a landlocked country with a population of 9,313,800 people in 2020, 74 percent of which live in rural areas.[7] It is
the poorest country among the former Soviet republics, with per capita GDP estimated at USD 874 in 2020.[8] GDP was USD
8.117 billion in 2019, of which 20 percent was from the agriculture sector.[9] Remittances from Tajik nationals working abroad
represent 28 percent of GDP – one of the highest worldwide.[10]
The National Development Strategy of the Republic of Tajikistan (2016-2030) has the objective of raising the population’s living
standards.[11] While poverty levels were substantially reduced in the past decade, mostly driven by labour earnings and
remittances, the country was confirmed as low-income food-deficit since 2019 (World Bank), and there are fears about the
sustainability of Tajikistan’s current remittance-based growth model. Moreover, The COVID-19 pandemic had a significant
adverse impact on the national economy, with the real GDP growth slowing to 4.2 percent in the first nine months of 2020
(compared to the 7.2 percent growth in the previous year). Agriculture, the main employer in the economy, depends on water and
land resources and is therefore heavily exposed to climate variability.
The Human Development Index (2019)[12] ranks Tajikistan in the medium human development category (125 out of 189
countries). Between 1990 and 2018, Tajikistan’s HDI value increased from 0.603 to 0.656. Between 1990 and 2018, Tajikistan’s
life expectancy at birth increased by 12.1 years, mean years of schooling increased by 1.1 years and expected years of
schooling decreased by 0.6 years. Tajikistan’s Gross National Income (GNI) per capita decreased by about 16.0 percent between
1990 and 2018.
Poverty. The poverty headcount ratio on the national poverty line is at 26.3 percent at national level (World Bank), reaching 36.1
percent in rural areas, with extreme poverty at 10.7 percent (Tajstat, 2020)[13].The thresholds of the national poverty line on
monthly consumption is set as less than Tajik Somoni (TJS) 162 for poor, TJS230 for vulnerable, and TJS 294 for those
categorised as middle class (TajStat, 2015)[14]. Poverty is also higher in rural areas (36.1 percent) than in urban households
(23.5 percent). Region-wise, Khatlon accounts for the highest percentage of extreme poverty at 21 percent followed by the
Rayons under Republican Subordination (RRS) with 21.1 percent, the Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Region (GBAO) with 18
percent, and Sughd with 10 percent. The poor are concentrated in rural Tajikistan (81 percent) and in the three regions of
Khatlon, GBAO and RRS. Almost four out of five poor persons live in rural households, and almost two thirds of the poor are in
Sughd (30.2 percent) and Khatlon (36.7 percent). There is substantial spatial and seasonal variation in poverty. Most rural areas
are poorer than urban ones, and poverty and income insecurity are higher during winter and spring.[15] In a recent mapping of
poverty in rural areas (UNDP 2015),[16] it emerged that women accounted for 40 percent of the extreme poor, and about 36.2
percent of extreme poor households are female-headed.
5.
Food security. Tajikistan is on course to meet the global targets for reducing under-five overweight and under-five stunting but is
off course to meet the targets for all other indicators for which there is adequate data to permit the analysis. Although it performs
well against other developing countries, Tajikistan still experiences a malnutrition burden among its under-five population.
6.
7.
8.
9.
According to the Global Nutrition Report (Tajikistan Nutrition profile, 2019)[17] based on latest data on Demographic and
Household Survey (DHS) 2017, the national prevalence of under-five overweight is 3.3 percent, which has decreased from 6.7
percent in 2012. The national prevalence of under-five stunting is 17.5 percent, which is less than the global developing country
average of 25 percent. Tajikistan's under-five wasting prevalence of 5.6 percent is also less than the developing country average
of 8.9 percent. Tajikistan's adult population also face a malnutrition burden. It is estimated that 30.5 percent of women of
reproductive age have anaemia, and 10.3 percent of adult men have diabetes, compared to 9.9 percent of women. Meanwhile,
16.7 percent of women and 11.6 percent of men are obese.
3/40
The COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated the already highly vulnerable conditions, impacting severely on food production
systems. A recent assessment[18] showed high declines in households’ incomes for self-employed, migrant labourers and non-
registered workers. Lack of savings and the presence of loans forced into further indebtedness, with high risks of perpetual
indebtedness and poverty intensification. Three out of five micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) were negatively
affected by the pandemic, with higher impact in rural areas where access to advisory services and markets is lower. Sales
decreased by an estimated 85 percent, pushing MSMEs’ into further indebtedness.
Agriculture and livestock sectors. The agricultural sector contributes 19.8 percent to the national GDP and provides 60.8
percent of the country’s employment.[19] Seventy percent of the USD 1.61 billion agricultural GDP[20] is from crop production.
Despite its critical importance, the agricultural resource base is characterized by limited arable land and a lack of investment in
infrastructure, farm machinery and agricultural equipment. Agriculture comprises two broad farming systems: upland areas -
characterized by wheat, potatoes and horticulture along with rainfed pasture, while irrigated cotton and wheat dominate in the
lowlands. Crop diversification is still underdeveloped, as is sustainable crop intensification, with a current crop production
characterised by low input, rain-fed production. Seeds systems are constrained by a lack of new varieties, lack of access in rural
areas and a reliance on saved seed.
Despite suitable agro-ecological conditions, the country’s fruit, vegetable and livestock subsectors suffer from low productivity.
Production and trade is spread across many very small actors, leading to high transaction costs in marketing and access to
services. The value chains are poorly integrated, and spot market transactions prevail. The smallholder is the dominant livestock
producer, both in terms of number of farms and animals. The veterinary system is inadequate and needs external assistance.[21]
The main feed resource base for their animals is the collective pasture grazed in collective herds all year long. Herds are small (2
to 5 heads of cattle of local breed), the system is dual purpose (dairy and beef), and the productivity is low.[22] In spite of no
growth in productivity, the number of livestock units has been steadily increasing in the last decades, grazing on fragile and low
productive pasturelands affected by climate change and poor livestock practices. To overcome this there is a need for holistic
and ecosystem based adaptive strategies.
The livestock sector plays an important role in the agrarian economy of Tajikistan. Climate change is impacting livestock
production (e.g. reducing milk production), rising temperatures and decreasing water access are the main factors affecting
livestock in Tajikistan[23]. The ruminant population is reported to consist of about 6 million heads (1.8 m cattle, 1.6 m goats, and
2.6 m sheep). It significantly contributes to food security, nutrition and generates income opportunities for rural communities.
More than 92 percent of ruminants are kept by individual households with 2-5 cattle per households with only 0.15 ha of land. As
farmers use land more for cash crops, land available for forage is decreasing year by year. Smallholder farmers face severe
shortage of feed in the critical winter period which coincides with reproduction period. The country has about 3.8 million ha of
natural pasturelands that provides about 75 percent of the feed and forage for the livestock population. Livestock inventories
have grown to levels higher than in the pre-independence period with over 90 percent of inventories held in household farms.
The rise in livestock numbers coupled with the fall in feed supplies mean that feed per animal has fallen dramatically along with
livestock productivity. Extensive livestock production systems can lead to a vicious cycle of ever-lower animal yields and rural
incomes in which the legitimate desire of livestock farmers to increase their production by adding animals creates greater
demand for limited feed, leading to a further deterioration in the feed per animal ratio and a further fall in animal yields.[24]
Breaking the downward spiral of animal yields and poverty requires a concerted effort at the policy and household level and a
paradigm shift in the production system.
10.
Farmers have limited knowledge and technical support in the production and conservation of forages for winter months.
Pasture’s productivity is dependent in turn on climate change and its spatial distribution during the vegetation
period[25]. For instance, rising temperature of 2-4°C in February and March by 2050 could lead to a 20 percent decrease in
winter/spring pasture productivity, further exacerbated during dry spells.
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
11.
Gender. There are marked gender differences in terms of extreme poverty. According to a recent estimate (UNDP, 2015)[26],
among extremely poor households, about one third are led by women. The 2019 female Human Development Index (HDI) value
for Tajikistan is 0.586 in contrast with 0.712 for males, resulting in a Gender Development Index (GDI) value of 0.823, placing it
into Group 5. 2 In comparison, GDI values for Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan are 0.957 and 0.939, respectively (UNDP, 2020). In
Tajikistan, 20.0 percent of parliamentary seats are held by women (UNDP,2020)[27]. Female Headed Households (FHH) are 9
percent of total HHs and represent 30 percent of the total poor households. Women face discrimination and inequality in social,
economic and political life (UN Women). The share of women working in the agriculture sector is higher (75 percent of all
working women). Yet, gender imbalances in access to and control over productive resources, limited decision-making, and
discrimination are also characteristic of agricultural work.
12.
Youth unemployment. Youth unemployment (working age 15-24) is 20.9 percent (World Bank, 2020). According to the World
Bank study on addressing challenges to create more and better jobs in Tajikistan (2017), only 43 percent of Tajikistan’s total
working age population are in the labor force. The majority of those working are in low quality jobs in the informal sector. Inactive
youth, i.e. those who are neither employed nor in education or training (NEET), represent 40 percent of the total youth
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
4/40
population, which is high by international standards (World Bank, 2017)[28]. The outcome of the unfavorable outlook on the labor
market in Tajikistan may comprise exiting the labor force after few failed attempts, or leaving the domestic labor force in favor of
international migration. There is an urgent need to address these high levels of youth labor market discouragement, partly
because this is a wasted resource, but also because the longer youth are in a state of inactivity, the harder it becomes to
reactivate these workers (WB, 2017).[29] The promotion of value chain development, rural SME development and improvement
of education systems are amongst the measures suggested by a recent a recent World Bank report in order to address youth
unemployment issues in rural areas. Issues around youth unemployment became even more urgent during the COVID-19
pandemic. The Tajik ministry of labour indicated that labor migration decreased by 76 percent (401,076 people) in comparison to
2019 figures. This was mainly attributed to COVID-19 and hence calls for a larger scale of (youth) employment interventions
(World Bank, 2020)[30].
Climate profile. Climate change is a serious concern for Tajikistan as the country is highly exposed and has relatively low
adaptive capacity. The country’s climate strongly exhibits aridity, high temperatures and significant inter-annual variability in
almost all the climatic variables. Temperatures are rising across the country. The change in rainfall pattern with the increase in
February-May season and a reduction in June-October season pose a threat to the agricultural cropping calendar and to pasture
productivity.[31],[32] This is changing availability of productive pastures for the extensive livestock grazing, especially the
shortage of winter pastures and cultivated feeds. Climate projections predict a worsening of the trends and events, with significant
impacts on ecosystems, livelihoods and the economy.[33],[34],[35]  Along with a 30 percent increase in irrigation demand (driven
by higher temperatures that push up evaporation) and combined with increased heat extremes that negatively affect crop
productivity, substantial risks for irrigated and rainfed agricultural systems can be expected.
Climate vulnerability analysis. The climate vulnerability index analysis (including both climate and socio-economic variables),
carried out for the design of CASP+ and documented in the SECAP,[36],[37] shows high vulnerability throughout the country, with
hotspots in the Eastern and Central Khatlon and in the South East of Sughd. On the climatic side, these areas are associated
with more adverse climate change impacts on slow onset: increasing temperatures – posing higher challenges for animal health
and agricultural productivity; changing rainfall patterns – modifying the grazing seasons and forcing herders to alternative feeding
and water sources; as well as on the rapid onset: higher risks of droughts, mudslides, landslides – further reducing the
productivity of soils and calling for disaster management measures. From a socio-economic perspective, these areas present
weaker adaptive capacity of the population, lower quality of life (access to water and electricity) and income. These findings are
in line with and complement recent WFP[38] and UNDP[39] The climate change vulnerability analyses suggest higher adaptation
needs in rural mountainous area, with predominance of agroforestry and livestock related livelihoods (requiring optimization of
land and water resources).[40],41]
Emission trends. In Tajikistan, 52.0 percent of greenhouse gas emissions originate from agriculture, 28.5 percent from energy,
10.0 percent from Industry and 9.5 percent from The vast majority of agriculture related emissions (about 5.5 million tonnes of
CO2e in 2018) depend on enteric fermentation and emissions related to manure (FAOSTAT).[42] These are not compensated by
the slightly increasing CO2e absorption capacity of the Land Use and Land Use Change sub-sector (LULUCF) for the period
2004-2014 (with -1576,60 Gg CO2e in 2014).[43]
Social inclusion. Due to prevailing social norms, proactive measures need to be taken in order to ensure that Tajik women are
able to fully participate in rural societies. Youth are mostly faced by limited employment opportunities forcing them to migrate
from rural areas to either urban areas or abroad. Additional underlying issues faced by youth relate to the educational systems,
not allowing them to upgrade their skills. Bearing in mind both factors, CASP+ will be a fully gender and youth mainstreamed
project. Moreover, by mainstreaming gender and youth, CASP+ presents a major opportunity to sustainably enhance climate-
resilient livelihood patterns. Specifically, a gender assessment reveals that rural women play a key role in the natural resource
management as entry points and enablers for sustainable climate change adaptation and mitigation measures.
Over the last decade, the social and gender equality framework has been improved through the adoption of national programs,
amendment of existing laws and adoption of policy frameworks. For example, Tajikistan is a state party for the Convention on the
Elimination of All forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) and the constitution guarantees equal rights on the basis of
sex. Despite a solid legal and policy framework, implementation mechanisms, weak monitoring and evaluation and lack of
dedicated finances hampers de facto gender equality.
Overall, gender and youth will be mainstreamed by applying appropriate responsive development, planning and implementation
methods, ensuring equitable participation of women, youth and other vulnerable groups in decision making process and enabling
direct access to project services. Separate outreach targets for women, women headed-households and youth have been
assigned to each component and output. Specific measures related to the mainstreaming of gender and youth in the project will
include: (i) providing direct support to youth allowing them to acquire additional skills either in the academic domain or in the
vocational domain; (ii) training and awareness raising in (gender) responsive participatory approaches in identification of
development needs with specific focus on social inclusion of women, youth and other vulnerable groups (i.e. women headed
households, elders and persons with disabilities); (iii) leadership training and quotas (30 percent) for inclusion of women and
youth representatives in decision making in Pasture Users Union/Associations (PUU/PUAs) committees, village organisations
(VOs) committees; (iv) equitable participation (50 percent) of women and youth (30 percent) in accessing training for climate
smart practices (FFS) and in economic diversification, business advisory services through CIGs; (v) access to grant financing
(matching grants) giving priority to women and youth, especially those below poverty line and other vulnerable groups, including
youth; and (vi) direct targeting of women and youth as beneficiaries for in academic and employment opportunities. Detailed
information is provided in the SECAP Appendix I.
19.
The project is marked as Youth sensitive and will be Climate Focused and mainstreams gender across all components (see
Table 1. Mainstreaming theme eligibility criteria)
Table 1. Mainstreaming theme eligibility criteria[44]
5/40
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
CASP+ addresses the main drivers of poverty and climate change vulnerability in rural areas in the country. The highly
vulnerable rural livelihoods are facing increasing climate change impacts,[49] including: increasing temperatures, more erratic
rainfall patterns, increased frequency of droughts, floods, mudflows and landslides causing severe economic damage.
The project is fully aligned to the COSOP’s overall goal to reduce rural poverty and enhance food security levels, and its two
strategic objectives of promoting inclusive agricultural-based rural economic growth in poor rural communities and enhance
smallholder producers’ resilience to climate change.
Since 2008, IFAD has invested USD 80 million in four projects in Tajikistan, directly benefiting 128,000 households. Critical
experiences of IFAD in the country include the Khatlon Livelihoods Support Project (KLSP), which introduced the establishment
of Village Organizations (VOs) in 82 communities as the entry point for preparation and implementation of Community Action
Plans (CAPs). A similar approach specifically focused on livestock was then brought to scale by the Livestock and Pasture
Development Project (phase I, 2011-2017; and phase II, 2016-2021), enhancing the CAPs by adding a pasture plan, that allowed
the communities to commence rationalization of the use of common pastures, including intensive pasture rotation.
The comparative advantages gained by IFAD through its portfolio in the country comprise: (a) a large-scale focus on investing in
vulnerable rural populations, (b) supporting access to improved livestock and pasture management practices to small-scale
livestock herders – including collective management of their natural resources, and (c) systematic strengthening and
establishment of rural institutions for more efficient investment at community level. However, these past investments are not
sufficient to address future adverse impacts of climate change on vulnerable rural populations.
CASP+ will leverage IFAD’s experience of supporting community investments in vulnerable rural areas and in the livestock sector
using the methodology of CAPs (see lessons learned) which has proven successful to generate inclusive rural growth and provide
an effective platform for policy dialogue and reform. With support and co-financing from the Green Climate Fund (GCF), and with
synergies with other operations in integrated natural resources management, CASP+ will reinforce the earlier approach with
climate change as the entry point, bringing to a significantly larger scale past and ongoing efforts (also from other smaller scale
operations) with higher climate sensitivity. This will include: (i) contributing to the establishment of an enabling policy framework
that embraces climate adaptation and mitigation in the agriculture and agri-food sector; (ii) enhancing climate resilience of rural
communities; and (iii) improving the access and integration of vulnerable rural communities with remunerative markets for their
products.
25.
Additional relevance for IFAD’s engagement is the potential to complement the important progress achieved by the GoT on the
strategic visions for the water sector and on disaster management. Specifically, the integration of efforts between institutions in
addressing climate change as a cross sectoral challenge is failing to find a place in the sectoral policies and strategies,
especially the ones influencing rural livelihoods dependent on pastures and forests.
26.
Investment georeferencing is also a comparative advantage of IFAD, especially in a context with limited use of georeferenced
information on natural resources and lack of remote sensing analysis to complement the available evidence is hampering the
efficiency of planning, management, and the analysis of the effects of climate change at the ecosystem level.
27.
Investments in rural areas and within rural communities are affected by inadequate understanding of climate change and limited
integration of the natural resource use. Despite ongoing efforts by national and international institutions including NGOs on
management of key natural resources (land, water, pasture, forests), the investment in rural areas and at community levels are
often a narrow entry point, focused on one resource only, instead of considering the ecosystem, or on pure development
6/40
intervention, failing to address climate related challenges with the required comprehensive approach.
28.
The limited productivity of small-scale livestock herders and the increase of their herd sizes represent an ecosystem risk more
than a sustainable source of livelihood. A change of stimuli and incentives is needed to transform the ongoing unsustainable
practices in rural areas into productive and sustainable livelihoods and production systems, contributing to managing climate
risks and to improve ecosystem services (including carbon sequestration potential from forests and pastures and reduced
emissions from livestock).
B. Lessons learned
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
The recent assessment of LPDP[50] provided a very pertinent and diverse set of lessons learned (e.g., from the development of
the Pasture Users' Union and Pasture User's Association model, with high effectiveness on women’s inclusion via creation of
specific women interest groups under the PUUs). These are considered very useful for the region (Central Asia) and countries
that face similar social and economic challenges. The CAPs methodology introduced by IFAD funded KLSP and LPDP I and II
projects involves a participatory process by which village organizations identify their priorities for economic and social collective
investments, and subsequently implement the investments with shared project and village organization funds. Under KLSP,
these interventions led to a 40 percent increase in the household asset index; an average income increase of 41 percent; and a
44 percent increase in the number of households with improved food security. A successful approach at the village level has
been the formation of broad based Village Organizations which can organize local households and help identify village priorities
and participate in the implementation of a range of investments at the village level (a model tested successfully by the Mountain
Societies Development Support Programme (MSDSP). According to the KLSP evaluation,[51] the success of the approach was
to establish and strengthen village organizations as agents for rural development and governance. Such approach as assessed
in the KLSP’s evaluation (IFAD, 2021) showed that the village level institutions are likely to continue playing a role as rural agents
of change. Building on these, CASP+ will complement the successes of community mobilization for a transformative integrated
ecosystem restoration. LPDP has further expanded the bottom up approach of community planning.
LPDP supported the establishment of 203 Pasture User Unions (PUUs) and the preparation and implementation of their CAPs.
The second phase (LPDP II, 2016-2021) was a geographical expansion of LPDP I and contributed to the implementation of an
additional 197 CAPs (exceeding its target of 180). Through these plans and related sub-projects, the project had a real impact on
pasture productivity (+15 percent in average) and degradation, contributing to improve about 74,592 ha of pasture, leaving
substantial lessons for additional similar interventions. The PUUs have been a remarkable success: within a very short time the
introduction they have laid the basis for sustainable village capacity for managing collective resource endowments. The success
was also noted in past assessment of IFAD’s portfolio in the country, noting that village organizations were able to maintain the
community equipment and machineries in order, and to cover operation and maintenance costs from the revenues collected from
users (village residents). Its success is attested by replication by government and other donors (including the World Bank-funded
Tajikistan Resilient Landscapes Restoration Project - USD 80 m, due for board approval in 2021). The PUUs are embossed in a
wider institutional network created by the project comprising the Pasture Law, the Pasture Management Trust for central
management, and Pasture User Associations at district level. This new operating model was instrumental in ensuring a fairer
participation of men and women in decision-making processes at the community level while strengthening their role in controlling
the village natural resources (pasture lands).
The CAPs methodology and results were highly welcomed by the GoT and the communities, and have been providing IFAD
with a platform for knowledge generation and policy dialogue of use also within CASP+. For example, previous results will allow
CASP+ to support an amendment to the Pasture Law, creating a body within MoA responsible for Pasture and a trust fund for
pasture-development investments.
The ongoing Community-based Agricultural Support Project (CASP, 2017-2024) also builds on the CAP methodology.
Compared to KLSP and LPDP I and II, this project addresses specifically the need to improve community access to productive
infrastructure and services leading to sustainable agricultural production and equitable returns. The focus on the agriculture
sector influenced the geographic targeting of the project (mostly with mixed rainfed and irrigated systems), leaving aside
mountainous areas, more affected by climate change and hazards, and to integrate the CAP methodology with the climate
adaptive and mitigation elements.
Concerning crop production, key lesson concern the importance of provision of ad hoc technical assistance to farmers and
agribusinesses, especially to inform their choices of climate-resilient technologies, to ensure efficient use of technologies and
minimization of food loss and waste. Where livestock production is concerned, enhancing access to equipment and managerial
capacities is also critical (e.g., in dairy value chain).
The projects that have provided the most significant support on livestock in the last few years were LPDP I and II, which also
worked on improving animal husbandry and health on top of pasture development, and Enhanced Competitiveness of Tajik
Agribusiness Project (ECTAP),[52] which supported livestock value chains. These projects demonstrated that there is strong
demand and interest from smallholder farmers for techniques that contribute to intensify production systems, including in
particular breeding, fodder production, and animal health.
On animal health services, the provision of veterinary kit and mobility equipment provided as start-up package to local
veterinarians has proven to be a significant incentive to increase of quality and outreach of animal health services, including in
the most remote villages. However, the needs outnumber the current availability of private veterinaries, and adequate coverage
will be provided only by replicating this approach, ensuring also that it is undertaken as a sustainable entrepreneurial private
sector activity. The private licenses are granted by the Food Security Committee (FSC, public body overseeing the animal health
sector). To avoid that animal health services are provided without relevant registration, partnership with the FSC is critical and
accompanying private vets through the process is essential, in addition to the incentive packages.
7/40
36.
The Farmer Field school approach has been implemented for Livestock by Oxfam in Khatlon, and several organizations,
including FAO, on crops. These experiences have confirmed the relevance of the approach in the Tajik context, including for
livestock related issues. One of the lessons generated by Oxfam was that opting for farmers as facilitators was preferable, in
particular for sustainability purposes.
37.
As part of its engagement in the country, IFAD has also contributed to mobilizing public-private partnerships in support of
women-led small business in collaboration with the Aga Khan Foundation, especially in support of women’s groups.
38.
Ecosystem-based approaches to NRM have been undertaken through donor-funded projects, as well as Climate Smart
Agriculture and Sustainable Land Management approaches. Water Sector Reform has established “new” hydrological
boundaries; created governing institutions for ensuring Integrated Water Resources Management, responsible for the
development of River Basin Plans. The establishment of hydrological-based governance institutions can be an opportunity to
consolidate NRM (including climate change) efforts and go beyond just water, considering the ecosystemic aspect of river basins.
While at the national policy level the management strategy of individual natural resources is defined with CEP, MoA and State
Forest Agency (SFA), what is lacking is an integration element to better guide investments on the ground so that outcomes are
managed holistically at the catchment level and whatever trade-offs that may be required are managed in an evidence-based,
consultative and transparent way. Moreover, the country’s vulnerability to natural and climate disasters demands strategies for
climate change adaptation. As noted in the assessment of previous IFAD portfolio, there are opportunities to climate-proof IFAD
funded interventions, which CASP+ has envisaged to ensure (community investments in component 2).
39.
Joint Forest Management (JFM) was piloted at first by the GIZ (GTZ at the time) project on “Sustainable Rehabilitation and
Development of Flood Plain Forests in Gorno-Badakhshan”. Since then, it has been implemented successfully under KfW
financing (CAFT project)[53] in many areas over a number of years, was adapted to the needs of communities with different
forest types, and is now ready for upscaling to the national level. Local communities and forest enterprises have been rating JFM
as an effective and helpful approach. In these projects the JFM approach, upscaled and tested in different climatic zones in
Tajikistan, has proven its advantage as a forest management tool.
40.
Additional lessons from IFAD’s operations in the country and other key partners (FAO, World Bank, Asian Development Bank,
and the European Union) include the following:
As democratically constituted and legally endorsed entities, village organizations are effective partners in community-based
public actions, service provision and agriculture-based livelihood development.
The participation of beneficiaries in planning, implementation, cost sharing, operation and maintenance is a critical driver of
the successes of CAPs.
The CAP approach with a climate and environment driven focus provides an excellent platform for wide and inclusive policy
dialogue and reform, as attested by the drafting and reforms to the Pasture Law and related institutions that sprung from
LPDP I and II.
Awareness-raising at the village organisation level is a crucial part of creating a proper participatory process in prioritisation of
investments.
Poor people can be best reached through geographical targeting by selecting the poorest regions and villages, along with
village-level targeting using self-assessments and village-level wealth rankings.
Projects can ensure the inclusion of smallholders and mitigate against their elite capture through equitable representation of
rural poor people and women in community-based organizations.
Rural Finance is a difficult sector to operate in, in view of the low stability of the banking sector and the high cost of
communications.
Investments in the value chain at echelons higher than production level requires significant local knowledge and presence in
view of the opaque regulations and practices governing the business environment.
Smallholders need technical knowledge and business skills to organize – both individually and through community-based
organizations. This will enable them to become profitable customers for local service providers and input suppliers, and to
negotiate favourable prices and business terms.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
41.
The Community-Based Agriculture Support Programme “Plus” (CASP+) is an expansion in geographic coverage as well as in
scope of the on-going CASP 1. The project builds however on the broader IFAD portfolio in the country and on its successful
experiences of working in a participatory manner with local communities. Specifically, the geographic targeting and rationale of
the project, guided by the increasing vulnerability to climate change, requires CASP+ to draw substantial lessons from the
previous LPDP I and II (see Section B).
42.
The overall goal of the project is to contribute to the country’s shift towards low emission sustainable development
pathways and climate-adaptive agricultural production practices.
43.
CASP+ development objective is to increase resilience of ecosystems and adaptation of livelihoods in rural areas
affected by climate change. The project will achieve the objective by strengthening public sector capacity for transformative
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
climate-resilient governance of natural resources, improving community planning and access to investment resources for
ecosystem management and climate adaptation, supporting through market based approaches the diversification of livelihoods
as an element of climate resilience.
8/40
The project is expected to increase resilience of at least 80 percent of the households in the 400 target villages and reach
100,000 target households (650,000 people). In addition, the project will contribute to the sequestration of an estimated
7.46[54] m tons of CO2 equivalent (tCO2e) from improved rangeland and forest management, afforestation and improved herd
management. The project has also identified opportunities for the engagement of youth in building resilience of communities and
strengthening their livelihoods in view of the growing risks and the limited opportunities for them in rural areas. Moreover, specific
activities will be undertaken for women given their prominent role in agriculture especially livestock production, the high rates of
outmigration of men from rural areas, the high proportion of women headed households and the lack of gender equity in the
country. The identification of target group and priority needs, as well as response is fully aligned with the COSOP.
Geographic targeting. The selection of the target districts was based on a Climate Vulnerability Index including social,
environmental and climatic and infrastructure parameters (documented in the SECAP, Appendix 4).[55] The project area includes
21 districts: 16 in Khatlon region, 3 in RRS region and 2 in the Sughd region (map and list of districts are provided in Figure 1).
The average vulnerability index of the project area is higher than the national average. The selection of districts has also
considered: (i) overlaying with watershed/river basin boundaries; (ii) adjacency of selected districts to facilitate implementation;
(iii) equal representation of the three agro-ecologic zones for inclusion of upstream and downstream communities highly affected
by climate change. The project area represents about 15 percent of the total country area and includes 47 percent of the national
population.[56] Poverty rates in the area are much higher than the national average with a high degree of variation from eight
percent in Gissor District to 43 percent in Mastchoh district.
With more than 50 percent of the total livestock heads at national level, it has around 27 percent of the total pasture area, a large
part of which is degraded.[57] Only 8 percent of the actual forest land is situated in the project area, however it includes more
than 21 percent of the potential area for reforestation of the country.[58] Most of the project area (other than in its high mountain
areas) is also situated where the average maximum temperature is the highest in the country. The area has suffered repeated
droughts[59]in recent years (excluding Farkhor and Danghara). The districts also experience heavy precipitation events,
specifically in Sh. Sholin, Khovaling, Baljuvon, Gissor and Shakrinav districts in Khatlon.
Social targeting. The main target group consists of poor communities and those households whose livelihood is severely
affected by climate change. Specifically, CASP+ will provide programme services for the following groups: (i) extremely poor
men, women and youth living below the poverty line, who are either landless or are producing a minimum subsistence level on
household plots (including people with disabilities and female headed households); (ii) subsistence and semi-subsistence men,
women and youth, in particular those willing to move to more commercial farming; and (iii) rural underemployed and self-
employed youth (including returning migrants). Generally, these target groups are engaged in traditional livelihood systems
based on: (i) pastoralism (livestock rearing: cattle, sheep and goats) or agro-pastoralism/mixed farming; and (ii) combining small
to medium scale livestock production (including sheep and goats, milking cows and poultry) with agriculture activities
(crop/horticultural and fruits). Full description of the target groups is provided in the SECAP Appendix I.
Targeting methods. The programme will apply a combination of self-targeting and direct targeting methods. CASP+ promotes
services in line with needs of all target groups. Some activities will be of interest for the community as a whole: i.e. Climate
Sensitive Community Action Plan (CsCAPs) for productive infrastructures/adaptation and mitigation activities and therefore all
members will be mobilized through existing or newly established strengthened rural institutions and community based
organizations. Direct targeted activities will be designed for specific groups, especially the poorest and most vulnerable ones.
Poor and poorest households will be identified and selected through the participatory wealth ranking exercise and key criteria
related to poverty and vulnerability set for their participation in Common Interests Groups (CIGs) and access to grant financing.
Pro-poor criteria for access to grants (individuals and groups) have been developed.[60]
Social inclusion. identification and selection of beneficiaries will be conducted in a series of steps as follows: (i) mobilization
campaign to present the programme; (ii) wealth ranking exercise conducted by the service provider (SP) and specifically by
Community Facilitators (CF) including support from local CBOs, given their knowledge of poorest and disadvantaged
households, especially recipients of social aid and also PWD;(iii) involvements of the local community leaders/committee to
validate the proposed beneficiaries and avoid risk of elite capture; (iv) verification by programme staff through physical visits to
the households and checking the community validation. The Participatory wealth ranking exercise will be conducted at community
level to identify the poorest and the better off, following the example of the LPDP where such exercise was conducted by Aga
Khan Foundation (AKF)[61] and details for implementation are reported in the Programme Implementation Manual (PIM).
Youth and gender empowerment. Gender equality will be promoted and youth will be mainstreamed in all project activities.
Under component 1 gender sensitive studies will be conducted and both young women as well as young men are benefitting from
support to pursue academic activities. Under component 2, the project will ensure that at least 30 percent of the community
facilitators are women. The facilitators will encourage the participation of women in the identification and planning of the
investments and raise awareness regarding the importance of ensuring that women’s priorities are reflected in the choices made.
The component activities will promote women self-awareness and leadership trainings. It will foster women’s participation on
equal basis (50 percent) in developing the Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans, and will ensure a minimum representation
(30 percent) in newly created PUU and other boards. The component will also support youth mobilization and participation in key
strategic planning processes (CsCAPs) including leadership trainings, climate change awareness and resilience building. Youth
and excess local labour capacity (caused by reduced outward migration due to COVID-19) will be used in the creation of
productive assets such as agroforestry. A specific target of 15 percent youth inclusion will be set for JFM contracts. Finally,
component 3 will build the capacity of women and youth to enhance their climate resilience through market-based approaches.
Under this component youth will be trained on artificial insemination and trained and equipped to operate private enterprises as
private veterinarians. To adapt new climate resilient innovative technologies 50 percent of the participants of FFS will be women
and 30 percent of the FFS beneficiaries will be youth. As part of the matching grant initiatives undertaken under component 3, it
is expected that 30 percent of the beneficiaries will be youth that are currently deprived of sustainable livelihood opportunities.
Some 50 percent of the matching grant beneficiaries will be women who will benefit from gender sensitive economic opportunities
either through individual proposals or as part of common interest groups. To the extent possible, gender transformative
methodologies such as GALS (Gender Action Learning System), emerging from similar contexts[62] will be used to promote
women’s income generating activities.
9/40
Figure 1. CASP+ geographic targeting
D. Components/outcomes and activities
51.
The project has three components which will be implemented at the national level with the public sector institutions, at the
community level to build community resilience and management of common property resources and at the group and household
level to strengthen and diversify livelihoods and access The three components are: (1) Strengthening public sector capacity for
transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources; (2) Investments in community capacity for adaption and
resilience to climate change; and (3) Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market-based approaches.
Component 1:  Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources
52.
Tajikistan has achieved important progress in developing a strategic vision for some of its development priorities such as water
and disaster management. However, the integration of a climate change perspective in the agriculture sector and in the
management of natural resources particularly pastures, forests and livestock is not very strong. There is limited technical capacity
and lack of tools for evidence-based planning, management and evaluation of natural resources and the impact of climate
change. This leads to fragmented governance of natural resources and limits the opportunities and potential for sustainable
development for rural livelihoods. This component is designed to address some of these issues and includes two specific outputs
focused on capacity development and improving the policy environment. The two outputs and their associated activities are
elaborated below:
Output 1.1: By the end of year 7, capacities of relevant national institutions for climate-resilient natural resources
management are strengthened
53.
National capacities to plan, manage and monitor the natural resource base at central and at lower administrative tiers will be
strengthened with a focus on forests and pastures. The capacity of the State Forestry Agency (SFA) will be strengthened. A
forestry curriculum recently developed for Tajikistan with the assistance of GIZ will be rolled out to the 14 project Leskhoz.
Operational capacities of national institutions responsible for pasture management (Pasture Meliorative Trust, PMT), livestock
(National Veterinary Authority, NVA; and State Enterprise for Animal Breeding and Artificial Insemination, SEABAI); as well as
research and academic institutions (Tajik Agrarian University, Tajik Academy of Agricultural Science and the Public
Administration Academy) will be strengthened, with the project assisting them in the review of existing curricula for training of
climate change specialists in key decision making positions in the government. The output will also focus on capacities to map
and monitor natural resources, to allow proper decision making on ecosystem services management. A system that combines
remote and participatory natural resources monitoring and management will be introduced. In addition, the project will pilot test an
innovative approach to undertake pasture monitoring using hives on a pilot area of 3,500 ha. To encourage the generation of
knowledge and the practical application of innovations in the project area, the project will encourage research institutions to
produce evidence on effective approaches to NRM through a call for proposals. The private sector will also be invited to present
proposals for the production of technical innovations that can help in climate adaptation which can then be disseminated through
the private sector and facilitate the adoption of climate adaptation technologies and practices. This output will comprise the
following activities:
10/40
Activity 1.1.1:    Capacity Development of public institutions on climate resilient ecosystem management. Develop
capacities of public institutions to streamline climate sensitive, participatory and gender inclusive ecosystem management
approaches such as landscape approach, integrated watershed management, joint forest management and community-based
pasture management. This activity is coordinated by CEP and SEPMU.
Activity 1.1.2:    Introduce combined remote and participatory Natural Resources monitoring and management.
Establish remote and participatory management of natural resources as the basis for climate adaptive development and
enable exchange of information between the different competent state agencies and communities. This activity is
implemented by CEP.
Activity 1.1.3:    Enhance technical capacities of national livestock institutions. Strengthen capacities of public agencies
under the MoA and FSC in charge of animal health and breeding services to improve the outreach of their activities
(investments in veterinary management, veterinary surveillance and one health approach) and improve adaptation capacities
to the predicted increase in diseases as a result of climate change through provision of logistical support and technical
assistance (all under PMU implementation).
Activity 1.1.4:    Build capacities of research and academia institutions on climate resilient ecosystem management.
Streamline Climate Change and Ecosystem management approaches in the training curricula and research programmes of
National and Research Institutions and academia (all under CEP implementation)
Output 1.2: By the end of year 7, the enabling environment for climate adaptive, inclusive and integrated management of
pasture, forestry and livestock resources is enhanced
54.
CASP+ has chosen strategic areas for policy engagement from the climate perspective and will focus animal husbandry and
health, pasture management, implications of promoting the Green Economy on the existing system of incentives and regulation
and lessons learned from the experience of joint forestry management and monitoring of pastures. The lead agency CEP, has the
mandate to enhance the enabling environment for addressing climate risks and is already engaged with the preparatory work for
National Adaptation Plan (NAP) readiness. To facilitate coordination among the main stakeholders, the project will organize
regular workshops to facilitate interaction and enhance the mainstreaming of climate adaptive natural resource management
practices, in close coordination with existing thematic platforms such as the Pasture Working Group and the National River Basin
Organization to better understand the changing trends and prepare to deal with growing climate risks. The dialogue will also
include the integration in the Pasture Law of critical aspects related to control of livestock inventories (currently not included).
One of the possible entry points to address this issue from a policy and regulatory point of view would be to include in the law,
provisions to enable PUUs to establish systems (grazing permits, quotas) that ensure that carrying capacities are observed and
that stock accumulation is discouraged. If these types of measures were framed in the Pasture Law and applied by all PUUs, the
impact on animal inventories would be expected to be substantial. Given the centrality of an integrated ecosystem approach for a
transformative and climate adaptive livestock sector for rural livelihoods, and the concerns regarding its contribution to
ecosystem services, the project will also provide assistance in the use of decision tools such as the EX-Ante Carbon Balance
Tool (EX-ACT),[63] the Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model-interactive (GLEAM-i), and the Biodiversity Integrated
Assessment and Computational Tool (B-Intact).[64]
55.
Social inclusion dimension. The component will support women and youth’s participation in key dialogues. Through the social
inclusion and climate assessment, the project will inform the policy dialogue and improve the capacity of institutions to be gender
and youth responsive. Social mobilization and inclusion process promoted by this component will focus specifically on youth, as
an empowerment measure and to ensure that the policy and regulatory framework changes embed youth perspectives. To this
end, CASP+ will partner with existing youth unions and youth committees (districts and village levels) already formed and
receiving public and self-sustained support.
56.
The output will comprise the following activities:
Activity 1.2.1:    Promote an inclusive and integrated policy dialogue. Enhance the mainstreaming of climate adaptive
management practices of natural resources in all national institutions (including gender and climate change) and verification of
the effectiveness of policies on the ground. The activity is implemented by CEP.[65]
Activity 1.2.2:    Technical assistance for review of livestock and pasture related regulatory frameworks. Review and
update of the Pasture Law and animal health and breeding regulatory and strategic framework to ensure compliance with
international guidelines and ensure streamlining of measures supporting climate resilience and environmental protection. The
activity is implemented by SEPMU.[66]
Activity 1.2.3:    Support government’s capacity to coordinate and monitor Green investments. Review of the legislation
and regulatory framework related the Green Economy for MoDT and provide related training to government officials, and
strengthen Min of Finance capacity to monitor relevant projects and resource mobilization (management info system – MIS),
and government exposure to similar countries’ experiences (study tours). The activity is coordinated by CEP.
Component 2:  Investments in community capacity for adaption and resilience to climate change
57.
This component will develop and implement 400 Climate Sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAPs.) in the selected districts.
The project will encourage a collaborative and a participatory diagnostic and implementation process. The community planning
will be preceded by a District level Climate Resilience Diagnostic (DCRD), defining the main challenges related to climate
change and the main avenues for investment. CsCAPs will include ecosystem improvement and agricultural resilience
investments, including improved pasture management, afforestation and forest rehabilitation, climate resilient infrastructures, and
community agricultural equipment for improved productivity.
58.
Social inclusion dimension. Women will represent 50 percent of the overall beneficiaries and youth will represent 30 percent of
the overall beneficiaries. It is expected that community consultations will include at least 30 percent of women and youth as
participants. This will ensure that their needs and priorities are identified during the community prioritization process for the
CsCAPs and selection of CIGs. As part of direct targeted interventions, trainings for 2,400 women will be conducted. The
objective is preparing women members of community organizations to be leaders and change agents in their organizations. They
will be provided with sensitization on topics including gender relations, self-awareness, leadership and accountability, negotiation
and conflict management, advocacy, lobbying and effective communication (among others). To provide youth with long-term
employment opportunities, 15 percent of the joint forest management contracts will be provided to youth, swaying them to remain
in rural areas and develop livelihood opportunities there.
11/40
59.
This component is structured in two outputs:
Output 2.1: By the end of year 3, 400 Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAP) based on 21 district level climate
diagnostics are developed
60.
A diagnostic analysis of community needs will be mapped using an advanced desktop geospatial analysis of climate risk and
vulnerability. A map-based profile of each district will be created to indicate the geographic areas where the effects of climate
change pose the greatest threat to the safety and livelihood of inhabitants, built assets, agriculture, livestock and natural
resources. Given the importance of water control, conservation and topography in disaster risk reduction and climate change
resilience, each district will be divided into planning units based on sub-catchments. This will stimulate a landscape management
approach. The District level Climate Resilience Diagnostic (DCRD) will be regarded as a discrete ‘information product’ output of
the project and an information campaign will explain the basis of the diagnostic to jamoats in the selected 21 districts, benefitting
the entire population of each district, in the frame of CASP+ and is expected to also inform future investment decisions. At
operational level, the DCRD will outline the climate-related changes that can be expected and the best strategies to cope with
them including adaptation investments and forestry Investments (Output 2.2).[67] The presence and capacity of local institutions
will be assessed, thus defining actions to strengthen local capacities to plan and monitor climate sensitive community action
plans (CsCAPs). Based on the evidence and on the needs emerging from consultations in the 400 selected villages, the output
will support the communities and their groups in designing CsCAPs screened against social and environmental safeguards,[68]
and in establishing Common Interest Groups within the selected villages. These will be self-selecting groups of up to 10
households per village organised into two themes (i) climate resilient food or fodder production and (ii) processing and storage
which will be financed through a matching grant (see component 3). This output will be composed of the following activities:
Activity 2.1.1:    District Climate Resilience Diagnostic. Elaborate district diagnostic (by CP) and disseminate the results to
institutional stakeholders (by SEPMU – also responsible for community mobilization in subsequent activities).
Activity 2.1.2:    Establishing relevant local institutions. Identify institutional and community capacity gaps, establish them
where needed and strengthen their capacities with support from a community facilitator (recruited NGO). With exception for
forest-related matters facilitated by CEP, the activity is implemented by SEPMU.
Activity 2.1.3:    CsCAP planning and design. Design of 400 CsCAPs in the targeted communities, including all relevant
prioritized subprojects (under SEPMU implementation)
Activity 2.1.4:    Strengthening local institutions capacity to monitor and evaluate CsCAPs. Strengthen local capacity to
generate data to monitor NR affected by the CsCAPs (under SEPMU implementation)
Output 2.2: by the end of year 7, 400 Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAP) implemented in 21 districts with
benefits for 100,000 rural households. 
61.
This output will make sure that CsCAPs include a balanced mix of investment activities, and that they properly capture the need
for specific interventions on climate change adaptation, mitigation and disaster risk reduction. The list of options is indicative as
they will be identified by the beneficiary households based on climate diagnostic analysis and village level priorities. The
CsCAPs will include ecosystem resilience and adaptation investments , including sub-projects in the following categories:
Pasture Management investments identified through the forum of PUU (where VOs don’t exist) or PUG (where VOs exist). The
pasture plans will include pasture rotation and protection, pasture restoration, or plantation of forage shrubs and trees, and
summer pasture infrastructure such as shepherd cabins, night fences and shelters for animals, cattle crushes for treatments,
etc. In some cases a sub-class of pasture management investments could simultaneously benefit multiple villages such as in
cases where plans are made for transhumance routes, etc. Overall, pasture investments will represent minimum 20 percent of
the total CsCAP Adaptation investment.
Forestry investment, operated in collaboration with leskhoz (Forest enterprises depending on the State Forest Agency), and
with the participation of forest users groups, will aim to complement the restoration of ecosystems and the protection of areas
vulnerable to climate hazards (disaster risk reduction), at the same time providing additional sources of income to rural
communities. As part of the CsCAPs, Forest investment will be part of a broad ecosystem plan, which will be monitored by the
communities and Leskhoz. Specifically, investments will include: (i) Joint Forest Management (JFM):[69] where a contract is
created between JFM household and Leskhoz for the management (initially for 20 years) of a plot of land where the yield from
the plot is split between each party to the contract; (ii) Direct Leskhoz Forestry:[70] where forest is re-established on Leskhoz
land using community labour. All materials and labour are paid for by the project. These sites are usually more remote from
villages and include more typical forest species; and (c) Forestry investments in buffer zones of protected areas: JFM will be
applied through Leskhoz in the buffer zone of Protected Area (in the project area this is limited to Sh. Shohin district). All
forestry investment include concessional project support for site works, irrigation, fencing, seedlings, Leskhoz vehicles,
equipment and required climate adaptive forest nursery establishment. Training will be provided to participants in tree planting
and aftercare, while forest user groups and Leskhoz will provide labour.[71] As part of the CsCAPs, the forestry investments
will include a management plan, monitored by the project as well as by Leskhoz and the communities themselves.
Climate Resilient infrastructure investments, related to addressing water stresses and the need to adapt to increasing risks of
climate-related hazards. The communities will ensure operation and maintenance, including a plan to finance it. Water
investments aim to support diversification activities (backyard garden, fruticulture, small animal husbandry), alleviate the
12/40
burden on women and increase water availability, and ensure meeting basic livelihood requirements in isolated areas. Soil
and water conservation structures to prevent soil erosion, mudslides and floods will be considered where appropriate.[72] This
could include the plantation of bushes and trees, small hydrological works that slow down torrential water flows, where there is
potential for aquifer recharge and enhance infiltration, reduce impacts of storms and reduce soil erosion, such as roads,
protective works and erosion reduction, water points and irrigation schemes, etc. The project will ensure that infrastructure is
adapted to the increased risks caused by more frequent torrential precipitation events.
Community agriculture equipment for productivity improvement. CsCAPs will include the procurement of agricultural
equipment such as tractors, bailers, etc., that will contribute to support transformation of production systems. As in LPDP I and
II and CASP, the equipment will be owned and managed (including maintenance) by the community institutions, and will be
rented to individual community members, generating financial income for the communities to be earmarked for operation and
maintenance of the investments. The focus of equipment investment will be on fodder harvesting and conservation material, in
order to help farmers to cope with feed shortages in summer and winter exacerbated by climate change.[73] In addition, other
category of mechanization equipment that could be considered are those that can be used both for hay/fodder and other crops
such as: Tractors, tillage equipment (plough, harrows, cultivator, etc.), trailers, planters, fertilizer spreaders (used with good
agricultural practices). Equipment that are only for non-fodder crops (e.g., combine harvester) will need to be justified in the
CsCAPs according to specific climate vulnerability upfront and shall ensure they benefit smallholders.
62.
CsCAP Monitoring. The monitoring and evaluation of the CsCAPs will be an intrinsic part of the approach under this component.
The SEPMU will recruit a national monitoring consultant and will use ‘Open Source’ smartphone tools for project planning,
monitoring and control to minimize supervision costs and improve the speed and frequency of supervision reports. During
implementation of physical infrastructure investments, the Engineer recruited by the PMU and technical works Supervisor will be
responsible for supervision and will support the local communities with monitoring their plans. A bridge will be established
between the diagnostic maps and citizen reporting to provide a means of tracking the achievement of objectives of the plans and
the outcomes achieved from CSCAPs implementation. All investments will be georeferenced. This will allow communities to
better monitor all CsCAP investments using digital tools. Innovative methods will be employed to engage and incentivize
stakeholders, including youth, to use smartphones for field reporting and ground truthing of remote sensing.
63.
Output 2.2. will comprise the following activities:
Activity 2.2.1:    Implement Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans. Implementation of the ecosystem resilience and
adaptation investments of the CsCAP in the selected villages, comprising the multiple dimensions of improved pasture
management (including cross-village when required), Forestry investments of the CsCAP in the selected villages (in the
proximity of Leskhoz), climate resilient infrastructures, agricultural productivity improvement. With exception for forest
investments (under CEP responsibility) the activity is implemented by SEPMU.
Component 3:  Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market based approaches
64.
65.
This component aims to strengthen the capacities of smallholders to identify and invest in climate resilient and diversified
production systems that link to local and national value chains. The current production systems are not adapted to climate
change impacts, rely on rainfed agriculture and are not integrated with market opportunities. The project will invest in developing
linkages between smallholders and private sector actors, building smallholders capacities in climate resilient production practices
and conducting farming as a business.
Social inclusion dimension. The whole component is supporting women and youth participation in the project’s activities.
Women and youth will represent respectively 50 percent and 30 percent of the beneficiaries of the component’s activities,
including as part of the promotion of climate smart innovations, Farmers Field Schools, Common Interest Groups (CIG) for
livelihoods diversification (window 1). Women and youth will represent 30 percent of the beneficiaries for CIG window 2 (for
commercialization and agribusiness development). Criteria for selection and prioritization of youth, women, women head of
households (WHHs) and the most poor and vulnerable (including PWD) are presented in the SECAP Appendix I. Finally, youth
will be trained on artificial insemination and trained and equipped to operate private enterprises as private veterinarians to
diversify their existing skill set and become involved in additional income generating activities.
66.
The component is structured in three outputs, as follows:
Output 3.1: By the end of year 7, 105,600[74] smallholder livestock farmers receive AI, animal health or training services to
increase productivity of their livestock
67.
Livestock productivity is currently low and limited by the poor genetic potential of animals, the poor animal health status, and
inadequate animal husbandry practices, including in particular the feeding and reproduction management. This output will focus
on increasing the productivity of livestock production systems, which combined with the comprehensive project investments to
transform livestock production systems (feeding practices, fodder production, improved breeds, access to animal health services
and supporting policies and strategies), will encourage farmers to engage a path of reduction of herd and flock sizes while
increasing production and productivity. The combination of provision of breeding services through Artificial Insemination (AI) and
provision of improved bulls, increased access to animal health services and capacity building of farmers on animal husbandry will
result in significant improvement in livestock productivity.[75] In parallel, this output will also support the dissemination of
technical innovations and their adoption by smallholder farmers through a combination of demonstrations and hands-on training
activities, including Farmers Field Schools. The output will comprise the following activities:
Activity 3.1.1:    Improving the genetic potential of smallholder farmers’ livestock. Provision of breeding services (AI and
improved bulls) to farmers in the 400 targeted communities to improve productivity of cattle and support transition towards
more intensive production systems involving a reduced number of animals. The activity is implemented by SEPMU.
Activity 3.1.2:     Support to delivery of private animal health services. Ensuring population’s access to quality veterinary
services through training and provision of veterinary instruments, motorcycles to private veterinarians and support of
institutions responsible for the development of a private veterinary service. This activity is under full FAO implementation.
Activity 3.1.3:     Support adoption of climate resilient innovative technologies. Support the dissemination of technical
innovations and their adoption by smallholder farmers through a combination of demonstrations (under SEPMU responsibility)
and hands-on training activities including Farmers Field Schools (under FAO implementation.
13/40
Output 3.2: By the end of year 4, 9 productive alliances between livestock producers’ groups and private aggregators
established and operational
68.
This output will facilitate business partnerships between groups of smallholder farmers and private sector actors (e.g.
aggregators, processors) on dairy and beef value chains.[76] These partnerships or Productive Alliances will be formalized
through agreements with selected private sector partners on an implementation plan, commitments on prices, delivery and quality
requirements. This will enable farmers and the private sector farmers to plan their production, processing, procurement, supplies,
as well as marketing. Benefits for the producers will include secure and predictable market and prices, and could also include
access to services (e.g. production inputs, TA, access to finance) provided by the private sector companies to improve the
productivity and reduce the seasonality of production. As a general principle, the entry point for all business partnerships
supported by CASP+ will be climate vulnerability. Supported Value Chain and business arrangements will contribute to the
economic inclusion of climate vulnerable households. Moreover, via support to improved agricultural practices, they will
contribute to reduce environmental degradation. The output will comprise the following activities:
Activity 3.2.1:    Identification of market and business opportunities. Facilitate identification and contracting of business
partnerships between groups of small holder farmers and aggregators, to facilitate access to market and services (all under
SEPMU responsibility).
Activity 3.2.2:    Provision of financing and technical support to the business partnerships for selected livestock
commodities. Provide financial and technical support to the business partnerships for selected livestock commodities (all
under SEPMU responsibility).
Output 3.3: By the end of year 7, 12,400[77] smallholders have strengthened climate resilient production practices and
private sector market linkages
69.
This output will facilitate two types of Common Interest Groups (CIGs) to access support services to identify, analyze and adopt
climate resilient production practices.[78] The first CIG type (Window 1) will comprise of 1,020 CIGs, strengthening capacity to
adapt production systems to changing climate conditions and identifying opportunities to link to local markets. This support will
increase access for CIGs to productive assets and services to increase agricultural productivity and diversification. Farmers
accessing Window 1 will match the grant with a 10 percent cash contribution. The second type of market-linked groups (Window
2) will comprise 110 CIGs, trained in entrepreneurial skills and business plan development, to link to profitable agrifood value
chains (e.g. small-scale poultry, horticulture, processing, etc.). Window 2 beneficiaries will match the grant with a 20 percent cash
contribution. A Matching Grant Facility (MGF) will be established and support will be provided to ensure CIG members’ readiness
to effectively utilize the funds for climate-resilient value chains. Where needed, follow-up trainings on climate resilient
technologies, equipment, productive assets and technical assistance will be provided by the service provider hired for the
purpose. 
70.
The output will comprise the following activities:
Activity 3.3.1:    Strengthening of CIGs capacity. Facilitate establishment of two types of common interest groups (CIGs) to
access support services to identify, analyze and adopt climate resilient production practices (all under SEPMU responsibility).
Activity 3.3.2:    Management of the CIG matching grant program. Establish and manage a Matching Grant Facility for the
implementation of climate-resilient matching grant program for Window 1 and Window 2 (all under SEPMU responsibility).
Component 4. Project Management Component
71.
CASP+ will be co-executed by the State Enterprise for Programme Management Unit under the Ministry of Agriculture, the
Committee on Environmental Protection and NDA, and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN (FAO). The project
management component will ensure (a) effective and timely coordination of project’s interventions; (b) provision of technical
assistance and specialist input in impl
E. Theory of Change
72.
Current scenario. Tajikistan is highly vulnerable to climate change, with increasing temperatures threatening agricultural
productivity and changing rainfall patterns modifying the cropping seasons and entail changes in the grazing patterns for
livestock Climate change related hazards are affecting the already vulnerable ecosystems and population living in rural areas,
further exacerbating poverty levels, unequal gender relations, high levels of youth unemployment and lack of climate perspective
in community planning, livelihoods, and market integration. The country needs to reinforce its capacities to bring about a
sustainable transformation to climate-resilient patterns of behaviour and livelihood generation, and above all need to invest in
communities directly affected by these challenges, with agriculture and rural livelihoods as the entry point to reduce poverty,
increase resilience and contribute to making investments that will increase the carbon sequestration potential. Previous projects
in the livestock sector have successfully introduced the innovative “participatory and partnership-based” approaches building on
customary use-patterns and fostering cooperation between pastoralists and farmers. Overall, however, these projects operated
within the old equilibrium model, representing the rangelands as self-regulated systems disturbed by uncontrolled grazing.[79]
73.
Barriers. Key barriers to enhance climate resilience of rural population and in parallel maximize the potential of rural contexts to
sequester carbon include elements of: (a) policy and governance of ecosystems; (b) knowledge and capacities; (c) private
entrepreneurship, linkages to markets and social inclusion.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
14/40
(a) Key difficulty under the policy and regulatory framework on natural resources management  is the fragmentation of
governance at local, as well as at national, level. Pastures and forests, key elements of the ecosystems used by the rural
communities, are managed by different institutions, regulating the access in different ways and with a lack of opportunities for
joint planning. The limited integration of policies and regulatory frameworks on key natural resources has important implications
consequences at local level – where local planning and resource allocation does not incorporate climate change implications into
the decision-matrix. In addition, the limited use of remote sensing or georeferenced monitoring is a missed opportunity for the
depleted ecosystems, affecting the capacity of evidence-based planning, management, and evaluation of natural resources at
national and local levels. The limited fiscal space as consequence of the recent recession and COVID-19 crisis is reducing public
investment capacity to invest in climate adaptive technologies and infrastructure. In this context, business as usual risks to limit
benefits for rural vulnerable communities due to an inadequately integrated policy, institutional and investment frameworks.
(b) The poor access to knowledge on climate change is limiting the planning capacity at community and household level. Rural
contexts (communities and institutions) fail to adequately consider the effects of climate change on livelihoods and potential
economic transformation. A low asset base of mechanized equipment, limited investment capacity and limited availability of
suitable adaptation options limit individual farmers’ capacities to adopt modern and efficient agricultural practices. Moreover,
farmer awareness about climate risks is limited, skills to adapt are constrained and production choices lead to sub-optimal and
unsustainable resource use. Similarly, the prevailing livestock husbandry practices are extensive and with no productivity gains,
at the expense of the already fragile ecosystem equilibrium (pasture, cropland, forests). Without appropriate investment at farm
and community level, the ecosystems risk to be increasingly degraded by the prevailing unsustainable agriculture and
livestock husbandry practices.
(c) Mountainous areas are the most vulnerable and remote as served by inadequate road network. The limited presence of
financial services and scarce productivity of agriculture is hampering the interest of the private sector in remote rural areas. The
COVID-19 pandemic has further exacerbated the situation reducing the potential for private investments (at MSMEs as well as
smallholders household level), reinforcing a critical barrier to diversification and strengthening of the climate resilience of rural
livelihoods. Strengthening productive alliances between producers and private sectors (building on IFAD experience of public
private producer partnerships - 4Ps) will be critical to integrate rural producers to markets. Innovative strategies are required, to
encourage private sector and smallholder partnerships in mutually beneficial arrangements. Linkages of common interest groups
with agri-food processors and the development of communities’ and farmers’ skills around milk collection centers are proven
innovative approaches that still have to be replicated in rural contexts. Critical risk of no action is a perpetuation of limited
productivity, lack of employment and self-employment opportunities especially for youth, of whom many returned from
abroad due to the pandemic, and women.
Opportunities. The NDC (2021)[80] identifies agriculture and forestry among the vehicles to ensure a progressive reduction of
climate change vulnerability as well as to enhance the carbon sequestration potential of the country, and soil protection, grazing
management, and tree plantation as needed investments for adaptation and disaster risk reduction. Important steps towards
integration of natural resource management have begun (e.g., in the Water Sector Reform Programme 2016-25), yet are
insufficiently implemented and key sectoral policies are still missing the opportunity for a consistent and coordinated approach
under the aegis of climate change.
Transformation of livestock production system. There is strong demand from smallholders for improved breeding, fodder
production and improved animal health. Coupled with stimuli to diversify livelihoods, these elements could lead to a gradual
reduction of the livestock population and related emissions.[81] Specifically, the interlinked measures to transform livestock
production system include improved feeding practices (expanding fodder production and conservation, and utilize fodder species
and varieties adapted to water and temperature stresses); improved breeds (large outreach of AI campaigns, with heat
synchronization techniques part of the protocol), enhanced access to animal health services (via support to private vets);
reinforcing skills and capacities to enhance climate sensitivity at community level and adoption of adaptation techniques including
on livestock (Farmer Field Schools, dissemination of innovative techniques and technologies, farmers field days); and
improvements in the policy and regulatory system (improvements in the pasture law, reform of the breeding strategy).
Forest and pasture ecosystems . Forest cover is low and sparse and degradation is continuing, leading to increased
vulnerability to soil erosion, slope instability, flooding and impaired soil water regulation and whole catchments are affected. Rural
communities are highly reliant on their natural resources and lack of food security is a real threat. This risk is heightened by
increases in returned migrants, falling remittances and reduced capacity for control caused by COVID-19. Usage of natural
resources is unsustainable and pastures management needs improvement inside the State Forest Fund as well as outside. To
date, coordination has been poor across all land users. While many donor projects usefully operate at a catchment-by-catchment
basis no one coordinated approach has yet been adopted by the authorities. Anticipation of the effects of climate change and
training in Ecosystem based Adaptations; a focus on food security and enlisting the power of local knowledge in a participatory
manner are aspects that have been largely absent in investment planning.
Social inclusion. Rural women are crucial to agricultural production especially given that the out-migration of men has placed a
higher burden on them for agriculture production. Research shows however that women play a key role in the effective
implementation of climate action. By making women and women heads of households among the effective drivers of the CsCAP
design will improve their efficacy and also assure that women are better represented in rural areas in line with the objectives of
Tajikistan’s empowerment policies. Young people represent approximately 70 percent of the population with a majority living in
rural areas. Many returned to Tajikistan after losing their income generating opportunities abroad due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Despite being a substantial demographic group, young people often lack opportunities for productive employment as the
economy has not grown fast enough to absorb the growing youth. The project will find ways to engage the youth by providing
them mentorship, skills, assets, access to technology, financing, develop their business ideas to enable them to create value for
themselves and their communities for greater resilience. This ambition is in line with the Tajikistan’s youth policy aimed at
amongst other increasing youth representation and economic opportunities for them.
81.
15/40
Vision. The underlying theory of change of the project is that if investments are made in supportive policy and technical capacity
at the national level, community institutions at the village level accompanied by investments in natural resource management
plans, with grants and access to markets at the household level in close engagement with the private sector, then vulnerable
communities and households will be able to transform their production practices and enhance their resilience to climate risks,
increase carbon sequestration potential in rural ecosystems, and  thereby enhance living standards. The most promising
pathways for change would be investments at the: (i) national level in the public sector for enhanced policy and regulation and
institutional strengthening; (ii) community level in climate-sensitive community action plans; and (iii) household level with greater
access to markets through productive alliances between the smallholder and the private sector. The project components are
designed in keeping with this three-pronged strategy (chart in Annex 2: Theory of Change).
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
Alignment with Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). CASP+ will directly contribute to achieving SDGs 1, 2, 5, 12, 13 and
15.[82] Specifically, the project will address SDG 1-no poverty, and SDG 2-zero hunger via targeted investment in highly
vulnerable communities to ensure improving the livelihoods in a climate-resilient manner (increased livestock and agriculture
productivity, linking smallholder producers to markets). Enhanced livelihoods will feature among the major results of the project.
CASP+ will ensure the integration of women, youth and vulnerable groups participation in local institutions as well as in
economic dynamics such as entrepreneurship and Common Interest Groups, thus contributing to SDG 5-gender equality and
SDG 8-decent work. By establishing conditions for improved sustainability of agrifood production systems, facilitating the
identification and dissemination of climate adaptive practices through academia and national institutions, the project will also
contribute to SDG 12-responsible consumption and production. Similarly, the main project focus in on contributing to SDG
13-climate action, including efforts to improve the policy and regulatory framework to factor in climate change adaptation and
mitigation, as well as making climate resilient investments at community level. Finally, the project is also contributing to SDG
15-life on land, especially with its investment on forestry (improving ecosystem functions and resilience through afforestation/
reforestation / forest enrichment / pasture management, especially in vulnerable mountain areas).
Alignment with national priorities. Tajikistan’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (2017), building on the previous
2003 National Action Plan for Climate Change Mitigation, offers clear guidance on climate change adaptation and mitigation
investment, specifically promoting full-scale integration of climate resilience and adaptation measures into the planning and
development of green infrastructure in agriculture and disaster risk reduction systems (among others). The project is included in
the Country Work Programme of the GCF NDA and responds to national priorities given by the Intended Nationally Determined
Contribution, and will align to the directives of the upcoming revised NDC (expected to be submitted to UNFCCC during the
summer of 2021). CASP+ is also aligned to the Disaster Risk Reduction Strategy 2019-2030, Water Sector Reform Programme
2016-2025, the draft Strategy for the Development of the Forestry Sector (2016–2030), the updated Pasture Law, the
Comprehensive Program for the Development of the Livestock Sector in the Republic of Tajikistan for 2018-2022, and the
National Agricultural Investment Plan (NIP) 2021-2030 (under finalization).
Alignment with IFAD policies and corporate priorities . CASP+ is aligned to the COSOP’s overall goal to reduce rural poverty
and enhance food security levels, and its two strategic objectives, and will directly contribute to the Fund’s three closely
interlinked and mutually reinforcing Strategic Objectives as stated in its Strategic Framework: (i) increase poor rural people’s
productive capacities; (ii) increase poor rural people’s benefits from market participation; and (iii) strengthen the environmental
sustainability and climate resilience of poor rural people’s economic activities. The project is aligned to the IFAD’s strategy and
action plan on environment and climate change 2019-2025.[83]
Country ownership. CASP+ responds to the needs of the country in terms of climate change adaptation and mitigation priorities.
It contributes to the commitments of the INDC and the National Strategy on Adaptation to Climate Change of the Republic of
Tajikistan for the Period Until 2030, and their targets in terms of mitigation and adaptation. Moreover, the project is fully aligned to
the upcoming National Agricultural Investment Plan 2021-2030 (NIP), currently being developed by the ministry of Agriculture
with the assistance of FAO, detailing priority investment for agriculture, including all investments and policy options planned
under CASP+, and is aligned to the youth policy (2013) around the economic empowerment and increased civil participation of
youth.
During CASP+ design, all relevant government agencies – first and foremost the MoA and the CEP as the NDA, have been
consulted at various stages, and have contributed to the definition of key founding elements of it, such as the vulnerability
analysis, complementing existing information in country with additional remote sensing data, the subsequent selection of target
districts, the definition of project investments and the strategy of execution (Appendix xx of the SECAP summarizes the key
findings and steps of the stakeholders engagement during design). Similar bilateral discussions were held with all major
government stakeholders in the country, including MoA, Committee on Civil Defence and Disaster Risk Reduction, State Forest
Agency, Committee on Land Management and Geodesy, Pasture Meliorative Trust, Food Security Committee, the Agency for
Land Reclamation and Irrigation, and numerous development partners (World Food Programme, UNDP, World Bank, ADB, and
FAO – implementing GCF readiness and investment proposals, as well as International Finance Corporation, European Union
Delegation, GIZ, ACTED, Helvetas, Caritas Switzerland…).
87.
Harmonization and partnerships. Besides consolidating partnership with the MoA for the execution of the project, CASP+ will
extend the collaboration and co-responsibility in execution with the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP), serving as
National Designated Authority to the Green Climate Fund (GCF) and FAO, strengthening at field level the Rome Based Agency
(RBA) collaborations. CEP is a key partner in the execution of the project. It is well positioned to guide the national and
decentralized dialogues to enhance the climate-sensitivity of the policy, regulatory and investment framework. Similarly, FAO has
a long-standing experience on climate change globally, and in country is engaged with CEP on climate finance Readiness
Programme, including the ongoing update of the NDC and other projects.
88.
16/40
In order to achieve the envisioned shift in the enabling environment towards a harmonized climate-sensitive policy and regulatory
framework, the project will establish close partnerships with the development partners engaged in climate actions in the country.
These include Asian Development Bank (ADB), World Bank (WB), European Union (including their partner NGOs such as
ACTED), Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC), Global Water Partnership (GWP), German Agency for
International Cooperation (GIZ), Caritas, the Regional Environmental Centre for Central Asia (CAREC). Such institutions are
involved not only in on field activities, but are also bringing to the policy level the findings and lessons learned from their
operations. Building on these experiences, and coupling them with the successful community investments in rural areas
implemented by MoA (LPDP I[84] and II, KLSP), in line with the INDCs and the major relevant strategic frameworks on natural
resources, and with a highly inclusive approach to policy dialogue, CASP+ will address critical policy and investment bottlenecks
(section E, Theory of Change) by: (a) ensuring an evidence based and climate sensitive assessment of natural resources (also
in support to river basin planning); (b) ensuring an integrated ecosystem approach in promoting rural community investment
planning and institutional strengthening; (c) complementing the above with community climate-adaptive investments and capital
formation in rural areas to improve pasture management, forestry; as well as (d) providing technical assistance and other stimuli
(including matching grants) to improve productivity, diversify livelihoods and improve agricultural practices as measures to
enhance climate resilience.
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
89.
The main assumptions underlying the derivation of Project costs are:
Project Period. The proposed Project will be financed over a seven-year period.
The latest available Economist Intelligence Unit’s (EIU) Country Reports (3rd and 4th quarters of 2020) forecasts the
Tajikistan’s inflation rate at around 8-9% for 2021 for the following year. The depreciatory trend of the Somoni will also
contribute to rising prices. Lower global energy prices will be an offsetting factor. As a conservative option, a constant inflation
rate of 9% was considered for CASP+ cost analysis as a base for the project period 2022-2029. The international inflation rate
is set at 2% per year, in line with medium to long term projections of EIU and the World Bank group (Commodity Market
Outlook, 2020) for the USD.
Exchange rate. The exchange rate used in the financial and economic analysis is fixed at USD 1= TJS 11.3, with a strong
assumption that future inflation of inputs will be outweighed by increase in output prices. However, in project costing, in order
to avoid underestimation of inflation in the country, the average exchange rate for the whole project lifetime is taken as USD 1
= TJS 17.5. More details of this estimation can be found in Working Paper on Economic and Financial Analysis.
Unit costs. The Project costs are based on June-July 2021 prices. The Project costs are presented in both TJS and USD.
Conversions from current USD values into TJS use constant purchasing power exchange rates.
Taxes and Duties. Overall, the items to be imported for the Project do not attract any import and excise duties. However,
there is VAT of 18% levied on all imported and locally procured goods and services, which is a contribution of the Government
of Tajikistan to the project.
90.
The total investment and incremental recurrent Project costs, including physical and price contingencies, are estimated at about
USD 98.19 million. Physical and price contingencies are lower than 1% of the total Project costs. This is mostly due to the fact
that investments associated with CsCAPs implementation and provision of grants under Window 1 and 2 as well as financing of
Productive Alliances represent around 75% of the total Project costs (expressed as a lump sum, no contingencies). The summary
and detailed cost tables are presented in Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables, while the key summary
tables are presented below (see Table 2, Table 3 and Table 4).
91.
An estimated 96 percent of the project costs (throughout all Project components) count towards IFAD climate-focused
financing.[85]
Table 2. Project costs by component (and sub-components) and financier (Thousands of United States dollars)
Table 3: Project costs by expenditure category and financier (Thousands of United States dollars)
17/40
Table 4: Project costs by component and year (Thousands of United States dollars)
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
92.
93.
94.
95.
96.
97.
IFAD financing. IFAD financing is expected to be composed of IFAD 11 allocation (USD 13.5 million), comprising a USD 6.75
million loan and USD 6.75 million grant, and an additional financing from IFAD 12 allocation (grant). The IFAD 11 allocation will be
composed of a loan of USD 6.75 million (6.9 percent of the total project costs), would finance: 0.8 percent of Component 2.
Investments in community capacity for adaption and resilience to climate change (USD 0.52 million), 25.7 percent of Component
3. Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market based approaches (USD 6.225 million). An IFAD grant of
USD 6.75 million (6.9 percent of the total project costs) would finance: 18.5 percent of Component 1. Strengthening public sector
capacity for transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources (USD 0.48 million), 6.2 percent of Component 2
(USD 4.19 million), and 52.3 percent of the Project Management Component (USD 2.08 million).
In addition it is expected that IFAD 12 allocation, tentatively estimated to be a grant of USD 23.3 million, will be determined and
confirmed by the IFAD Executive Board in December 2021. The IFAD 12 grant allocation (23.7 percent of the total project costs)
would finance: 2.7 percent of Component 1. (USD 0.69 million), 20.0 percent of Component 2 (USD 13.00 million), 39.4 percent
of Component 3 (USD 9.53 million) and 4.8 percent of the Project Management Component (USD 0.19 million).
Expected co-financing. It is expected that additional USD 39.0 million are mobilized from the Green Climate Fund (GCF). Such
amount will be composed of a USD 9.0 million loan (9.0 percent of the total project costs), financing: 13.4 percent of Component
2 (USD 9.0 million); and of a USD 30.0 million grant (30.6 percent of the total project costs), financing: 70.3 percent of
Component 1 (USD 1.8 million), 36.8 percent of Component 2 (USD 24.80 million), 9.6 percent of Component 3
(USD 2.34 million) and 26.2 percent of the Project Management Component (USD 1.04 million).
FAO. An estimated amount of USD 0.16 million is expected from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN, representing
0.2 percent of the project costs, financing 3.1 percent of Component 1 (USD 0.08 million), 0.3 percent of Component 3 (USD 0.08
million).
Government. The Government will be covering all taxes and duties estimated at around USD 15.0 million, which is 15.2 percent
of total project cost, financing 3.5 percent of Component 1 (USD 0.09 million), 16.0 percent of Component 2 (USD 10.8 million),
16.4 percent of Component 3 (USD 3.98 million), and 2.2 percent of PMC (USD 0.09 million).
Additional in-kind government contribution from MoA (USD 0.90 million), CEP (USD 0.89 million) and SFA (USD 0.89 million)
will also finance project activities. Specifically: MoA will finance 0.5 percent of Component 2 (USD 0.37 million), 0.9 percent of
Component 3 (USD 0.23 million) and 7.5 percent of PMC (USD 0.3 million); CEP will finance 0.9 percent of Component 2
(USD 0.61 million), and 7.0 percent of PMC (USD 0.28 million); SFA will finance 2.0 percent of Component 1 (USD 0.05 million),
and 1.2 percent of Component 2 (USD 0.84 million).
98.
Beneficiaries and private sector. The project beneficiaries’ contribution is estimated at USD 4.5 million, which would finance:
about 4.1 percent of Component 2 (USD 2.74 million), 7.4 percent of Component 3 (USD 1.79 million). Beneficiaries will be
contributing in-kind with various ratios depending on the type of activity (see details in PIM).[86] Moreover, it is expected that
private sector would co-finance the productive alliances supported by the project in the total amount of USD 0.06 million, or 0.1
percent of the project.
18/40
99.
IFAD 12 allocation for Tajikistan is expected to be in full grant. The mobilization of IFAD 12 allocation will allow to reduce the loan
component of the project, meeting the government request for it to be limited to 30 percent. The IFAD 12 allocation will be
discussed during IFAD’s Executive Board in September 2021. Lack of confirmation of the amount will reduce the project size, but
will not compromise the project integrity.
100.
The falling out of the GCF investment can be offset by redistributing the financing across the board using existing IFAD funds.
This would reduce the size of the project, but not change it in a critical way.
c. Disbursement
101.
CASP+ duration will be 7 years with a total project cost for an amount of around US$ 98.2 million comprising of approximately
US$ 94.29 million (96%) investment costs and US$ 3.9 million (4%) recurrent costs. The main categories of expenditures under
investment costs are civil works, goods, equipment and services; grants; training and workshops; and technical assistance &
studies while under recurrent costs, the main categories are salaries & allowances; and operating costs.
102.
The project cost includes an IFAD Loan for an amount of US$ 6.75 million; IFAD grant for an amount of US$ 30.05 million (for
which US$6.75 million is confirmed from IFAD 11 and around US$ 23.3 million is estimated from IFAD 12); GCF financing for an
amount of US$ 39 million comprising of US$ 30 million grant and US$ 9 million loan (both at proposal stage); FAO financing for
an amount of US$ 0.160 million; Private Sector financing for an amount of US$ 0.056 million; government contribution in the form
of taxes for an amount of US$ 15.3 million; beneficiary contribution for an amount of US$ 4.61 million; and in-kind contributions
from (1) MOA for an amount US$ 0.902 million; (2) CEP for an amount of US$ 0.89 million and (3) SFA for an amount of US$
0.89 million.
103.
For ongoing projects in Tajikistan, disbursement rating ranges between moderately satisfactory and unsatisfactory.
Unsatisfactory rating is applied for CASP for which the project disbursement was affected by a 6-month suspension period for
the portfolio which coincided with the beginning of the implementation period of CASP.
104.
Funds for CASP+ will be disbursed based on the revolving fund modality for which first advance will be withdrawn for an amount
equivalent to the first six months of the approved AWPB and further advances will be withdrawn based on the cash forecast for
the next reporting period provided that at least 70% of the immediately preceding advance and 100% of all prior advances have
been fully justified.
105.
CASP+ will have segregated, but integrated, systems of funds flow, budgeting and accounting to ensure a clear, verifiable audit
trail for all project transactions. Total project cost is estimated at US$ 98.2 million which includes IFAD, GCF, FAO, private sector
funds and government, MOA, CEP, SFA and beneficiaries contributions.
106.
Both PMUs shall open Designated Accounts (DAs) in US$ for each finance source in a commercial bank acceptable to IFAD.
These DAs will be managed by SEPMU & CEP according to IFAD disbursement guidelines. For IFAD funds, four Designated
Account in US$ shall be opened to receive funds from IFAD loan and IFAD grant (two at SEPMU and two at CEP).
107.
For GCF loan and grant, each PMU will open four ring-fenced bank accounts in US$ for the purposes of receiving GCF proceeds
through IFAD (one for GCF loan and one for GCF grant at SEPMU and one for GCF loan and one for GCF grant at CEP).
108.
FAO will be receiving part of GCF funds to implement specific activities under component 3. These funds will be received through
IFAD Direct payment method for which withdrawal applications shall be submitted by SEPMU for the required amount as
projected in the approved AWPB. FAO shall receive the projects funds in a ring-fenced bank account as per GCF requirements.
In addition to that, FAO shall open separate ledger in their accounting software for the project funds. On the other hand, FAO will
be co-financing the project for an amount of US$ 0.160 million by providing specific technical support in the form of in-kind
contribution.
109.
Both PMUs will open and manage six separate operating bank accounts, in TJS, in a commercial bank acceptable to IFAD. The
first two of these accounts will receive funds from loan Designated Account, to pay eligible expenditure of the project on loan
proceeds at each PMU, the second two will receive funds from grant Designated Account, to pay eligible expenditure of the
project on grant proceeds at each PMU, and the third set of two to receive Government contributions at each unit.
110.
Report-based disbursement will be the mechanism used for withdrawing funds from IFAD financings. Interim Financial Reports
(IFRs) package will be used as a basis of submission of withdrawal applications to IFAD. The IFRs package will be included in
the Letter to Borrower and the PIM. Project will be using the Revolving Fund modality under the report-based disbursements
during the implementation period. The first advance should be equal to or less than the forecast amount of IFAD financed
expenditures approved in the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) for the period of six months. Further advances to the
Designated Account will be made for the next reporting period based on the AWPB or expenditures forecast provided that at least
70% of the immediately preceding advance and 100% of all prior advances have been fully justified.
111.
The flowchart depicts the flow of funds:  
19/40
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
112.
Financial analysis. CASP+ financial analysis builds upon the precautionary principle, accounting for project benefits in a
realistic and conservative manner. A financial analysis is carried out to present the scenarios with and without project
interventions using the indicative models that would be most likely supported by the project. The key-indicators used to carry out
the analysis are the net present values (NPVs) discounted at 12.0%, financial and economic internal rate of return (FIRR – EIRR),
benefit-cost ratio (B/C) and return to family labour. The indicative financial models can be divided into five main groups: i)
adaptation investments, including investments into pasture management, climate-resilient infrastructure and agricultural
machinery by implementing CsCAPs; ii) implementation of CsCAPs on forestry investments; iii) provision of grants through
Window 1 which are aimed at livelihood diversification for vulnerable households; iv) provision of grants through Window 2 which
are aimed at commercialization and agribusiness development; v) investments in productive alliances greater access to markets
through productive alliances between the smallholder and the private sector. Table 5 below summarizes the carried out financial
analysis.
113.
Economic analysis. The illustrative models described above have been used for the calculation of the overall benefit stream, on
the basis of economic prices. The overall benefit stream has been generating based on the phasing of CsCAPs implementation
in 400 villages over the 5-year period and provision of grants aimed at strengthening livelihoods and enhanced resilience through
market based approaches (1020 grants through Window 1, and 110 grants through Window 2); and promotion of Productive
Alliances (support of 9 models).
114.
Given the benefit and cost streams, the base-case ERR of the Project is estimated at 22.4 percent. The base-case (not
including social price of carbon) ENPV of the project’s net benefit stream, discounted at 6%, is USD 143.4 million. This proves
that the project is economically viable and justified and recommended for financing from the economic point of view.
115.
Sensitivity Analysis. Economic returns were tested against changes in benefits and costs and for various lags in the realization
of benefits. In relative terms, the ERR is equally sensitive to changes in costs and in benefits. In absolute terms, these changes
do not have a significant impact on the ERR, and the economic viability is not threatened by both a 20 percent decline in benefits
nor by a 20 percent increase in costs, since the ERR in both cases remains well above the discount rate. However, a mixed
scenario with 20% increase in costs and 30% decrease in benefits makes the project economically unviable. The climate shocks
were also considered in sensitivity analysis. The results are presented in Table 6.
Table 5: Summary of financial analysis
20/40
Table 6: Economic Analysis. Sensitivity
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
116.
There are several elements embedded in CASP+ investments that support its exit strategy and sustainability. Amongst them, the
key element is that CASP+ represents the extension and natural evolution of past IFAD-funded projects and technical
interventions, which opened up and improved pasture usage and related institutions (at national level and local level) capacities,
responding to the stimuli from the Pasture law. CASP+ embeds into pasture investments other interlinked dimensions of
agricultural development and adaptation to climate change.
117.
Specific elements of CASP+ sustainability include (i) undertaking all investments with a counterpart at the national and local
level; (ii) tailored and strategic capacity development of institutions and individuals; (iii) strengthening of policy and regulatory
frameworks in a manner that adds to sustainability of natural resource through improved management and governance; (iv)
introduction of modern tools and technologies to strengthen institutional capacity; (v) use of participatory approaches to ensure
beneficiary ownership and (v) a clear plan for operation and maintenance of all infrastructure, assets and equipment provided
under the project, etc. The approach at the national and local level for the improvements to the enabling environment
(component 1), climate sensitive community investments (component 2), and the focus on strengthening and diversifying
livelihoods, focusing on key constraints within selected value chains and strong participation of the private sector (component 3)
build project sustainability. The consolidated experience of the MoA’s SEPMU and CEP in consultative processes at the national
and local level will ensure relevance to the needs of the institutions, communities and households targeted.
118.
At the national level, all the investments are expected to continue beyond the project period because of the nature of the
investments. The project will invest in very specific areas of institutional strengthening for a range of public sector institutions
dealing with natural resources such as the Ministry of Economic Development and Trade, the State Forestry Agency, the State
Enterprise for Animal Breeding and Artificial Insemination, the Land and Geodesy Department, the Pasture Meliorative Trust
(PMT), several national livestock institutions dealing with public animal health and production services. The project is also
introducing modern and efficient techniques and technologies such as remote sensing and carbon accounting tools such as the
use of Ex-ACT and GLEAM-i that will enhance the capacity of the institutions for managing and monitoring the resources. These
institutions are all supported by the public budget and care will be taken to invest in only those activities which either have no
implications for increase in their budgets, and where incremental budget is required, a commitment has been secured to increase
the annual budget allocations for sustaining the investments beyond the project period.  The specific staff members trained in the
project are long-term public servants and even though they are not expected to be retained in their current positions for long,
they can be expected to contribute within the institution during their service period. 
21/40
119.
The expertise for understanding climate risks will be strengthened through supporting research and training of administrators and
public sector decision-makers and building the capacity of academic institutions to train professionals on the subject. The
institutions involved like the Tajik Agrarian University, Tajik Academy of Agricultural Science and Forest Research Institute will all
be expected to offer these courses to their students as part of their regular curricula and thus these courses will be continued
beyond the project period. The project is also planning a series of measures for the sustainable development of the country's
veterinary system and ensuring access of animal owners to veterinary services. By supporting private veterinarians as well as
their associations and the gradual shift towards private service provision, the project will contribute to the creation of a
sustainable cadre of veterinary services paid for by the private users.
120.
The project will assist with the review of policy in a participatory and inclusive manner and suggest refinements with regards to
pasture use and rehabilitation, joint forest management and livestock related regulatory frameworks. These refinements and
regulations will be enacted into the legal framework of the country and implemented through the established agencies responsible
for their implementation and enforcement. The policy measures proposed will be selected based on their potential for enhancing
the sustainability of the natural resource base. Tajikistan’s national development policy framework and its commitments as part of
its NDC will further mainstream climate change adaptation into national and sectoral development plans. The on-going GCF
Readiness project for the NAP is expected to lay the foundation on which the current project will further consolidate ensuring
synergy between the two projects that will add to the overall sustainability of investments. At the district level, the capacity of
district and Jamoat governments to better appreciate and prepare for climate risk analysis and adaptation in district level
planning will be strengthened.
121.
At the community level, the strengthening of community institutions particularly the use of the broad base Village Organizations
and within that, the formation of Pasture User Unions (PUU) consisting of interested households, and PUA and Joint Forest
Management arrangements where required, will enhance the chance of sustaining the investments. The establishment of the
PUUs in past IFAD operations in Tajikistan has demonstrated high institutional and financial sustainability for the rural
communities beneficiaries (including their apex Pasture Users Associations). Many agencies have been investing in these
institutions as well as the Mohallah Committees. There are also plans to identify policy refinements that can make these local
institutions more sustainable by providing them with the power to generate revenue by collecting user fees through changes in
the existing regulation and trying to emulate those in other countries of the region, like Kyrgyzstan. Furthermore, all investments
that are included in the climate sensitive action plans (CsCAPs) will be identified through participation of the local governments,
local stakeholders, and community members to ensure ownership with a clear plan for operation and maintenance after
completion. No investment in terms of either the physical infrastructure or assets will be provided which are beyond the capacity
of the local government or community to operate and maintain after completion. The experience with previous IFAD projects has
shown that communities are generally able to operate and maintain infrastructure investments well beyond project completion.
The physical investment on the ground at community level in pasture, forestry, and agriculture productivity gains will generate
capacity for the communities to adapt to climate risks and challenges that they currently face and add to the sustainability of their
livelihoods.
122.
For investments at the household level, the project places strong emphasis on making livelihoods more sustainable through
providing matching grants for investments that will be sustained by the The environmental sustainability of the investments will be
ensured based on the fact that only green investments that enhance climate resilience will be financed. In addition, the project will
have a strong private sector orientation and will work backwards from the markets in trying to identify opportunities in which the
private sector is interested. The brokering of productive alliances between the private sector (dairy processors, feed lots
operators, poultry processors) and groups of farmers for increased access to markets will strengthen their linkages. The
underlying mutual interest of small-holder producers and the private sector will ensure the sustainability of the arrangements
beyond the project period.
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
123.
Technical and operational risks. The full deployment of CASP+ paradigm shift potential is subject to technical and operational
risks (to be fine tuned during design), including:
124.
Lack of institutional cohesion and coordination capacity (inherent risk: moderate): There is limited capacity and
coordination at the inter-ministerial level between institutions dedicated to natural resources, including Ministry of Agriculture
(MoA), Committee on Environment Protection (CEP), State Forest Agency (SFA), Ministry of economic Development and trade
(MEDT), Ministry of Energy and Water Resources (MoEWR), the Committee of Emergency Situations and Civil Defense (CES)
and other relevant institutions in the country. There is also limited coordination between institutions at the central level and those
at lower tiers. Furthermore, there is limited expertise in understanding and awareness of climate change and climate risks as well
as how to best plan and allocate resources for investment in the green economy at the national level. Moreover, currently there
are no procedures for ensuring that climate change adaptation, planning and implementation are inclusive processes. Inability to
integrate climate change adaptation considerations into the national development planning processes or in local level planning
hinder the process of adaptation. There is also lack of coordination and synergy between disaster risk reduction and climate
change adaptation. Ineffective coordination and knowledge sharing decreases effectiveness and impact of NAP processes.[87]
22/40
Mitigation measure: There are several projects for strengthening institutional capacity and the leading role of CEP on climate
change (including prominently GCF financed Readiness projects). Recently a decree to establish a Coordinating Council on
the Green Climate Fund has been submitted to the government for approval, and the current National Adaptation Plans
Readiness proposal will support the process with major capacity development to respond to specific gaps and weaknesses
related to climate change adaptation to improve vertical and horizontal coordination, facilitate the integration of climate change
adaptation into national development planning activities, and strengthen data and information capabilities. The current CASP+
project will further strengthen the coordination and institutional capacity of some of the key agencies dealing with mitigation
and adaptation measures. Further, CASP+ is designed to integrate climate adaptation and green economy initiatives into
planning at the local level by initiating a participatory process which will involve all key agencies at the district level. This
approach is expected to enhance coordination among the key agencies dealing with various key sectors most impacted by
climate change such as water and agriculture and adopt a more inclusive approach involving women, youth, women headed
households and integrate disaster risk reduction into the planning process. Residual risk: low.
125.
Herd size growth jeopardizing ecosystems investments (inherent risk: high). Low levels of productivity and poor
reproductive performance paradoxically leads smallholders to compensate by increasing herd size. The livestock population has
increased by 74 percent over the 1991-2019 period, and by 11 percent over the last 6 years (1.6 percent per year on average). 
This has a major direct impact on carrying capacity and overutilization of pasture, water use and GHG emissions. Continued
growth of the livestock population in rural areas is recognized as a significant driver of natural resources degradation. Rural
households have limited options to diversify their livelihoods and rely on livestock as a principal store of value, food security and
income. More than 93 percent of the livestock is owned by smallholders who do not have access to sufficient feed resources and
count on pastures for feed. Productivity of livestock is extremely low due to a combination of factors including poor feeding, low
genetic potential, inadequate herd/flock management, and unfavorable animal health status.
Mitigation measure: The current project envisages several investments to address the low levels of livestock productivity and
the overstocking of smallholders by improving productivity and promoting livelihood diversification. The project will encourage
adoption of better breeds and encourage reduction of herd size through improved productivity and support to marketing of
young bulls, leading to reduced grazing pressure on pastures. Investments in key constraints in the dairy value chain will help
to reduce losses, increase productivity, increase income and encourage modern management practices in livestock
production. Project investments will introduce additional mechanisms for better pasture management through regulatory
measures, including the Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans to observe pasture management principles.[88]
Diversification and shifting of livelihoods to more climate resilient options will decrease reliance on livestock. Residual risk:
Moderate.
126.
Limited engagement of the private sector (inherent risk: moderate). The private sector is small with limited capacity and
relatively small and working in a market which is dependent on agriculture and government spending. The lack of private sector
involvement also limits the potential for innovation, critical when it comes to implementing new adaptation initiatives or
technologies.[89] The large number of smallholders who cannot always guarantee the quality or quantity of their produce, and
lack of market infrastructure discourages productive partnerships between smallholders and the private sector. 
Mitigation measure: The project relies on the private sector to play a key role in strengthening and diversifying rural
livelihoods. CASP+ includes several activities designed to engage the private sector in policy dialogue and advocacy at the
national level and in direct partnerships with small producers in the dairy, poultry and crop sector to help in removing
constraints along the value chain. A strategy to build productive alliances will encourage the private sector to play a more
active role and reduce losses, enhance efficiency and productivity and add value. The private sector will be encouraged
through improved equipment and arrangements for storage, transport, processing and trade and providing grants to
smallholders which will enable them to increase the quality and quantity of their produce for the market. Residual risk: low
127.
Climate hazards affecting the project area (inherent risk: high). Climate change related hazards have a substantial impact in
the project area and may hamper the project results. Losses have proven to be substantial and to affect the capacity of rural
population to develop sustainable livelihood patterns.
Mitigation measure: via forestry and pasture investment, CASP+ will generate opportunities to mitigate the impact of
potential climate hazards (including interventions in specific hot-spots identified in collaboration with the Committee on
Emergency and Civil Defense). Residual risk: moderate.
128.
COVID-19 pandemics affects the operations. With COVID-19, market linkages became weaker and the capacity of SMEs to
procure agricultural products from project areas is reduced.
Mitigation measure: CASP+ will mitigate this risk by including protocols to proactively ensure high standards of minimization
of health risks related to the ongoing pandemic, ensuring social distancing measures in place in community mobilization,
trainings and dialogues (including on remote basis), monitoring. Residual risk: low.
129.
Fiduciary risk assessment. The country’s risk rating continues to be “High” with a CPI score of 25. Tajikistan’s Corruption
Perception Index (CPI) ranking is 149 out of 180 countries in 2020—advancing four spots compared to last year. This flags that
corruption is a major issue in the country. The country is experiencing high inflation rates recently along with fluctuations in the
local currency against the US dollar.
130.
As per the latest PEFA, execution of revenue collection and expenditure is reasonably in line with the original budget each year,
and there has been a significant reduction in contingency expenditures. The government performs well on several indicators
under the fiscal transparency pillar, including budget classification, budget documentation, information on revenue and
expenditure of extra-budgetary funds, and transfers to subnational governments. However, limited public access to fiscal
information contributes to a lower overall score in this area.
23/40
131.
Public investment management is a major challenge, mainly due to weaknesses in project selection and poor costing systems
which undermine the effectiveness and efficiency of public investment management decisions. For cash management, even
though all cash balances are held at the treasury single account and are consolidated, it is in infancy stage and should be further
evolved. Moreover, while there is noticeable progress in accounts reconciliation and the integrity of financial  data, the
government should take further efforts to improve coverage and timing of the reports. The operations of the Chamber of Accounts
have improved, but the organization is not a truly independent external auditor.
132.
In recent years, there has been significant improvement in the timing of Parliament’s scrutiny of the audit report and follow-up on
this. Parliament now holds in-depth hearings with representatives of a few ministries, departments and agencies and makes
recommendations. However, the public are not yet able to access any of this information. 
133.
Despite the high inherent risk for the county, the current financial management (FM) risk for on-going projects in Tajikistan is
rated between moderate and low, based on the current financial management arrangements executed by SEPMU. The FM
residual risk is low for both projects after applying all mitigation actions. Moderate FM inherent risk rating is affected by (1) timely
recruitment and trainings for new staff before project implementation starts; (2) timely contracting for the Accounting software
(1C); (3) finalizing the first draft of the PIM, including the finance manual section, before implementation starts; and (4) including
counterparts contribution (cash and in-kind) at design stage to ensure ownership and future sustainability of project’ outcomes. 
134.
For CASP+, FM assessment has been carried out for both SEPMU and CEP as project co-implementing agencies. The project
overall FM inherent risk is rated Moderate, and FM residual risk is rated low if all mitigation actions where applied and if
conditions precedent to withdrawal were met on time. A summary of actions needed to mitigate FM risks is shown under project
risks section. SEPMU, as the current PMU of IFAD ongoing projects, has well established FM arrangements and procedures and
sufficient experience. For CEP, not having previous experience with IFAD projects, specific recommendations on organization
and staffing are provided in Section N, Implementation plans section to ensure it meets the project’s needs. Specifically, before
disbursement starts, it is recommended that CEP hires all key finance staff and send IFAD their on boarding plan.
135.
The following table shows a summary of the Financial Management issues, risks and proposed mitigation actions:
Control Risks
Issues
FM
Inherent
Risk
Mitigation Actions
FM Residual
Risk
1.    Organization and
Staffing
The current capacity at both
units does not allow for an
additional project.
First IFAD project to be
implemented by CEP, no
experience in IFAD projects.
No annual staff performance
evaluations are performed.
Recruiting all staff in the finance
department for both units before
implementation starts and ensure proper
induction plan is in place for new staff.
Moderate
Substantial
Perform performance evaluations for staff
on annual basis.
2.    Budgeting
Delays in submitting AWPB
due to delays in consolidating
CEP and SEPMU budgets
and plans from all financiers.
Moderate
Bottom up approach to be followed for
budget preparation. CEP and SEPMU to
start drafting the budget in the 3rd quarter
of each year. SEPMU to manage the
process and to submit final consolidated
AWPB within 60 days before the
beginning of each year.
Low
3.  Funds flow and
Disbursement
Arrangements
Inadequate cash
management, under all
finance instruments, that
could affect project liquidity
and delay implementation.
Moderate
SEPMU to monitor financial performance
for the project (including CEP
performance) on monthly basis. IFRs to
be submitted to IFAD on quarterly basis.
Low
4.Internal Controls
No project specific internal
audit on both PMUs
Moderate
An internal Auditor to be recruited so audit
is performed periodically on project
activities. Internal Auditor to report to PSC
directly.
Low
5.Accounting and Financial
Reporting
24/40
Risk that IFAD, GCF and FAO
reporting requirements are
not met.
Moderate
Quarterly IFRs to include all financiers
reporting requirements especially IFAD
and GCF. SEPMU have the responsibility
to consolidate all reports and to submit to
IFAD.
Low
6.External Audit
Delay in contracting the
private auditors.
Moderate
Tendering process to take place once the
first disbursement is withdrawn from
IFAD.
Low
Overall Rating
Moderate
Low
I. Environment and Social category
136.
The programme is considered to be Category B. Overall, the programme is not expected to have any significant adverse
environmental or social implications. Environmental risks associated with activities such as construction of agricultural
infrastructure or rehabilitation of rural roads will follow the environmental laws of Tajikistan or IFAD environmental and social
policy, whichever is more stringent. Tajikistan has a well-developed environmental legal and regulatory framework. Current
environmental legislation in Tajikistan includes statutory acts and laws on the following topics: (i) protection of the environment;
(ii) ecological audit and monitoring; (iii) protection of flora and fauna; (iv) environmental information and education; (v) soil, water
and air quality; (vi) biological safety; (vii) human health and safety; and (viii) waste and chemicals management. These laws,
along with the regulations approved by the Government of Tajikistan (GoT), create a favorable legal framework for environmental
protection and for the use and protection of the country’s natural resources. The programme will have to comply with the
procedures for environmental impact, under the Law on Environmental Impact Assessment (2017) detailed in Appendix 2 of the
Annex 5 (SECAP) and on IFAD’s environmental and social policy – whichever is most stringent.
137.
Furthermore, the programme aims at increasing natural resource management and reduce overexploitation of land, pasture and
resources. The proposed programme will enhance social cohesion due to the strengthening of the value chains and will contribute
to environmental conservation and sustainability because of its emphasis on the rehabilitation of degraded land, reforestation, the
introduction of new management and maintenance practices and technologies, and the reduction of anthropic pressure on
grazing lands and pastures. The proposed programme will strictly follow the existing environmental laws and regulations
applicable in the country and represents a NRM oriented approach to using natural capital available in Tajikistan. The
programme is designed to enhance sustainable and resilient business opportunities of vulnerable rural households through
climate-smart natural resource management, sustainable agriculture and agroecology, promoting the territory and its
environmental integrity as main driver of local economy.
J. Climate Risk classification
138.
Climate change and variable historical trends (from both local weather stations and aggregated remote sensing data) and future
scenarios for Tajikistan have been analysed in detail during the design presented in Appendices 4 and 5 of the Annex 5
(SECAP). The programme's climate risk classification is High. Based on assessments undertaken during preparation of the
Concept Note, the programme is expected to be highly sensitive to climate risks, mainly due to the exposure of Tajikistan’s
agricultural sector to projected rising temperatures and changes in rainfall and glacial melt patterns that are likely to compound
existing food security, energy security and poverty challenges. The main climate change impacts have been detected on natural
resources (forest, pasture, water bodies, others) as well as on rural infrastructures such as roads and water points. The
programme will seek to mitigate this by improving the governance at both government and community level, and improving land
management practices in the communities. The programme will aim at reducing the vulnerability of the rural poor to those risks
and programme funds are allocated to ensure climate adaptation and resilience of both infrastructures and people’s livelihood.
Furthermore, a Green Climate Fund proposal is developed in parallel and may reinforce programme adaptation, as well as
mitigation, activities.
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
139.
A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be constituted at the national level. The PSC will have the overall responsibility for
providing strategy and policy guidance to ensure that the Project objectives are achieved. The PSC will be co-chaired by the
Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), and the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP). Members will include: the Ministry of
Energy and Water Resources (MoEWR), the Pasture Meliorative Trust (PMT), the Food Security Committee, the State Forest
Agency (SFA), the Committee on Land Management and Geodesy (CLMG), the Tajik Academy of Agricultural Sciences (TAAS),
the Agency for Land Reclamation and Irrigation (ALRI), State Agency for Hydrometeorology, State Enterprise for Animal
Breeding and Artificial Insemination, Committee on Civil Defence and Disaster Risk Reduction and representatives from Civil
Society Organizations. Development partners committed to climate-adaptive strategies and mitigation will participate as
observers. The PSC will also coordinate with the Coordinating Council on the Green Climate Fund to assess how to strengthen
and build on the on-going GCF investments in the country.
25/40
140.
Supervision functions. The International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD) is the Accredited Entity for the CASP+
project. It is also co-financing the project together with GCF and FAO. IFAD will supervise the execution of CASP+ with regular
supervision and implementation support missions. The Fund will ensure the quality of the project deliverables, undertake
procurement reviews, ensure fiduciary risk management, assess project performance, and undertake value for money analysis.
IFAD will apply its georeferenced protocol to monitor investment progress and impact.
141.
Implementation functions. The project will operate under the leadership of the Ministry of Agriculture (lead project agency),
which will ensure coordination with IFAD, government and between implementing agencies. Operational functions will be carried
out by:
The State Enterprise “Project Management Unit” Livestock and Pasture Development (SEPMU LPD), with have overall
responsibility for Project implementation, coordination, oversight and reporting to IFAD and the government including liaising
closely with the other implementing agencies.
The Committee on Environment Protection (CEP), the National Designated Authority of the GCF, operating through its
Project Implementation Group (CEP-IGP) will play leading role on climate change policies and strategies.[90]
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN (FAO) will providing specific technical support on defined activities with
GCF financing.
142.
District Governments and Jamoats at the village level are expected to play an important role in coordination and helping to raise
awareness about the project among key stakeholders and helping to incorporate climate vulnerability assessments in local
development planning based on district diagnostics.
143.
The project will procure the services of local NGOs, service providers and partner agencies in the implementation of the project
on the ground. The inclusion and engagement of the private sector will be encouraged to ensure that the project puts in place
market-based solutions and productive alliances that can ensure the sustainability of the project investments.
Figure 3. CASP+ Implementation arrangements and funds flow
144.
Institutional synergies. There are several agencies at the national level which are also expected to play a supportive role in
coordinating project activities and enhancing project impact. These include:
The Hydrometeorological Agency of Tajikistan (Hydromet), reporting to CEP and instrumental in producing and
disseminating climate related data. Specifically, its Climate Change Center (CCC), is expected to support the district level
climate vulnerability analysis and support district governments in incorporating climate vulnerabilities and risks in local level
development planning and resource allocation for enhanced adaptation and mitigation.
The Ministry of Economic Development and Trade (MEDT) plays an important role in climate-related governance and is
responsible for state investment plans and coordination of the National Development Strategy. MEDT will be involved in the
project in policy dialogues and identifying entry points for national and subnational planning processes for climate change
adaptation and introducing elements for the development of green economy investments.
The Committee on Emergency Situations and Civil Defence (COES) is also relevant to climate change adaptation
planning and is engaged in early warning, disaster prevention, and recovery. Its role in the project will be to help identify
investments at the district level which can lead to disaster risk reduction caused by climate risks.
The State Committee on Land Use, Geodesy and Cartography (COLUGC) is expected to play a key role at subnational
levels in incorporating climate change adaptation considerations into land management and spatial planning at the district and
village level.
26/40
145.
Civil Society Organizations and community-based organizations will play a key role in the mobilization of the communities
through the well tested Village organization approach and through them identify climate sensitive community action plans. The
Community Facilitator (NGO recruited by the project) will mobilise communities into Village Organizations, Pasture User
Unions/groups, Pasture User Associations, Joint Forest Management Groups or Common Interest Groups as required for
implementing local plans.
146.
Private sector players who are engaged in the value chains identified for investments will be invited in policy dialogues and
specific platforms for their feedback.
Monitoring and evaluation
147.
M&E Structure. A monitoring and evaluation system will be established for the CASP+ project in keeping with the guidelines of
GCF to report on the Performance Measurement Frameworks (PMF) designed to measure the key indicators. Within the country
this system will be established and coordinated by the SEPMU as it will be the lead implementing agency responsible for the
major share of the work. Two M&E Units will be established, one in the SEPMU-LPD and one in CEP. Monitoring and Evaluation
Specialists will be recruited to head the two units and oversee the monitoring of all key components. The M&E Officer in SEPMU
will consolidate all reports for submission to IFAD and GCF. CEP and FAO and all other implementing partners will report to
SEPMU to enable them to consolidate and submit regular progress reports to IFAD and GCF with inputs from each Executing
Entity. As the AE of the GCF for the current project, IFAD will oversee the process and submit the reports to the GCF.
148.
M&E Responsibilities. All executing agencies will be responsible for ensuring that the agencies working under their supervision
provide them quarterly progress reports. These reports will be consolidated into annual progress reports and sent by CEP and
FAO to SEPMU who will submit an Annual Performance Report to IFAD and GCF. The responsibility for reporting on the progress
under each component will be assumed by the agency responsible for ensuring its implementation in the field directly or through
supervision by another implementing partner. All contracts or MOUs with implementing partners will specify their responsibility
with respect to sex-disaggregated data collection and reporting. The implementing partners will submit reports to SEPMU, CEP or
FAO depending upon which agency is overall responsible for overseeing the specific aspect on the ground. Specific M&E
arrangements include:
Component 1
CEP will coordinate all activities related to the introduction of climate courses in the Academy for public Administration,
selected universities, policy advocacy activities, and introduction of carbon accounting tools for land use and livestock (in
coordination with FAO).
SEPMU will record the progress on the national level strengthening of the PMT and FSC, the animal breeding strategy (in
coordination with FAO), veterinary legislation and the capacity for strengthening of AI technicians and development of
technological packages for climate resilience.
FAO will provide support on capacity development to government on strategic carbon accounting and livestock related
planning and strategic tools.
Component 2
CEP will report on the enhanced capacity for climate resilience in development planning at the district level through Hydromet
and the CCC at the district level. CEP will identify suitable indicators in collaboration with district governments for the purpose.
SFA will implement all forestry related activities under component 2 and report all activities related to forestry plantation in
coordination with the selected Lezkhoz to CEP. The downstream benefits of adopting a catchment level approach and the
households that this protects will be recorded by SFA and reported to CEP.
The SEPMU will coordinate all activities related to the agriculture sector such as community mobilization aspects, PMPs,
infrastructure, mechanization, etc. Infrastructure financed for disaster risk reduction by the COES will be reported to the
SEPMU.
Component 3
SEPMU is overall responsible to implement and monitor all activities (except FFS, implemented by FAO). Data for all grants
provided and disaggregated by sex and age.
FAO will report on strengthening private veterinaries’ services and on FFS execution.
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
149.
Robust Financial Management arrangements should be in place to ensure that project funds are managed efficiently and for the
intended purpose by both PMUs and all implementing partners. SEPMU has the responsibility to consolidate and submit to IFAD
the IFRs, AWPB, progress reports, other financial requirements and the audit financial statements.
150.
Organizing and Staffing. Both PMUs shall have adequate structure in the finance unit that includes qualified and experienced
staff. At SEPMU, a full time Finance Management Specialist should be recruited to manage CASP+ finances supported by full
time Disbursement Officer and Project Accountant. An Administrator Assistant to support the finance staff in the administrative
tasks. This is crucial since the final financial management responsibility lies with SEPMU and considering the several financiers
included in the project.
151.
The current staffing of CEP does not meet the project needs. Before the start of the project, the following positions should be filled
in the finance unit: full time Finance Management Specialist and Disbursement Officer. Finance staffing structure at CEP should
be monitored during implementation to ensure that they are able to manage all FM aspects at their level. It is advised to add a
Project Accountant position to the structure in case this was deemed necessary during implementation.
27/40
152.
CASP+ includes more than one financier, executing agency and reporting line, based on that, it is important that finance staff are
recruited at both units before disbursement starts. In addition to that, staff shall receive proper training and induction, which
covers IFAD, GCF and FAO requirements and the fraud and the anticorruption policies, within the first month of their
employment. The start-up workshop will include at least one day that shall cover project’s specific financial management
arrangements as per IFAD/other financiers’ requirements and policies. The chart shows proposed structure of FM Sections at
both PMUs for the project:
153.
The positions of Finance Management Specialist, Disbursement Officers and Accountant at both units shall be recruited subject
to No Objection from IFAD.  All positions should be filled through a competitive process on terms and conditions acceptable to
IFAD.  The TORs for all the finance staff positions shall be included in the PIM. An internal audit firm/Internal Audit Manager shall
also be engaged to strengthen FM arrangements at both units.
154.
Work Plans and Budgets. Both PMUs shall prepare Annual Work Plan & Budgets (AWPBs) following a bottom up approach by
engaging line departments, regional offices, implementing agencies (including FAO) and target beneficiaries as applicable.
AWPB should be in line with the PDR and the Financing Agreement. The AWPB format and guidelines shall be defined and
included in the finance manual within the PIM. SEPMU has the responsibility to prepare a consolidated AWPB which
incorporates the individual budgets prepared by each PMU. SEPMU shall obtain IFAD’s No Objection to the AWPBs 60 days
before the beginning of each financial year. The AWPB shall reflect separate allocations for each financier; IFAD loan, grant,
GCF loan, grant, FAO in-kind contribution financing, government and beneficiaries contribution. Both FM teams at SEPMU and
CEP shall prepare budget vs actual expenditure statements and meet to discuss the financial performance and the variances on
monthly basis.
155.
For GCF funds, a multi-dimensional budget should be implemented and monitored by the project. The budget should be
categorized by components, output, activity, financing source and budget account description. The GCF budget account
description includes 1) staff cost, 2) local consultants, 3) international consultants, 4) equipment, 5) construction cost, 6) training,
workshop and conference 7) travel and 8) professional/contractual services. Each budget line item shall include a
note/description of assumptions. Since GCF budget account description does not match IFAD standard disbursement
categories, separate budget for GCF funds should be prepared to include all GCF requirements then it should be integrated in
the project overall budget.
156.
Flow of Funds. Project will be withdrawing advances from IFAD based on AWPB and cash forecasts for the next reporting
period. Disbursement will be based on the revolving fund modality for which 70% should be justified from the immediately
preceding advance and 100% from all prior advances. Withdrawal applications will include the Quarterly IFRs and other reports
as will be in the Letter to Borrower. The report based disbursement mechanism will serve as an analytical tool for project periodic
and overall performance. Furthermore, it would require adequate cash forecasts on quarterly basis that reflects the cash needed
for the next reporting period which should be in harmonization with the AWPB.
157.
Financial accounting & reporting. Project accounting shall be done based on acceptable international accounting standards
such as IPSAS Cash Basis. The accounting system shall permit allocation of expenditures in accordance with the respective
components, disbursement categories, and sources of funds. Both PMUs shall (a) maintain full set of accounts subject to IFAD’s
requirements; (b) conduct monthly reconciliation of accounts so project accounts are consolidated; (c) maintain updated Fixed
Asset Register on prescribed format and conduct periodic physical inspection of assets; and (d) take appropriate mitigation
against fraud risk in its work subject to IFAD’s Anti-corruption policy. Contractual agreements with implementing partners shall
establish responsibility for proper accounting, documentation, financial reporting, and anti-corruption actions in line with IFAD
policies.
158.
Both SEPMU and CEP shall ensure that they are using the latest version of 1C accounting software (8.3 version). The
accounting system should reflect all sources and uses of funds separately, project categories expenditures, components and
sub-components.
159.
The project shall submit Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) on quarterly basis within 45 days of the period end, unaudited financial
statements within 4 months of the financial year-end and audited financial statements within 6 months of the financial year-end.
The financial statements shall be prepared based on the followed accounting standards as per the prevalent accounting system
and as per IFAD financial reporting and auditing requirements.
28/40
160.
Based on that, the finance unit at both PMUs should prepare monthly management reports in order to monitor the physical and
the financial performance of the project. SEPMU will be responsible for the consolidation of the financial reports and for the
submission of the relevant reports on quarterly and annual basis to IFAD. The format and content of the reports will be outlined in
the LTB/R and the Financial Manual and comply with IFAD requirements.
161.
FAO shall maintain separate financial records for the grant proceeds by opening separate ledger to record receipts and
expenditures. FAO shall report on quarterly basis to SEPMU the expenditures utilized from GCF funds and the value of the in-
kind contribution provided to the project for the reporting period. Financial reports shall include SOEs that disclose the sources
and uses of funds spent to finance the project activities, specifying whether the expenditures were funded in cash by GCF or by
in-kind contribution from FAO. Financial Reports must be submitted to SEPMU within 30 days of the period end to facilitate the
process of reports consolidation and submission to IFAD.
162.
Internal Controls. In order to ensure proper internal control measures in place, both PMUs shall be required to implement
following actions during project implementation:
1.  Segregation of duties over payment and payment authorization process and over accounting systems accesses.
2.  Monthly bank reconciliation must be performed and record thereof maintained;
3.  Budgetary controls must be ensured for each transaction at the PMUs. Further on monthly basis, budget v/s actual report
must be prepared by the FMs and shared with the PD and Project Steering Committee for continuous project oversight;
4.  Fixed Asset Register shall be maintained. These assets shall be tagged and physically verified periodically by the admin
section of the PMUs. Accuracy and completeness of the fixed assets register shall be verified independently periodically;
5.  FM team shall maintain complete documentation for each category of expenditure and it shall also conduct periodic/random
inspection of partner organizations’ project record to ensure that project activities/expenditure are properly documented and
factually reported. Specific documentation requirements/guidance for different partner organizations are provided in the PIM.
6.  Internal Auditor shall review project transactions, processes, procedures, and performance at least semi-annually to provide
assurance regarding the fiduciary controls, risk management and monitoring mechanisms in place.
163.
For GCF funds, in order to comply with GCF reporting requirements, SEPMU shall arrange to submit within the IFRs templates
the following details for GCF loan and grant; (i) the dates and amounts disbursed for Funded Activities, for the period reported
and cumulative amounts up to the period, broken down by each Funded Activity, and compliance with financial covenants; (ii) the
actual expenses for the Funded Activities for the period reported and cumulative amounts up to the period, broken down by each
Funded Activity; (iii) (A) the date on which any Funded Activity is financially closed, (B) the final amount disbursed for such
Funded Activity, (C) the amount of any unused funds from such Funded Activity, and (D) the amount of such unused funds paid
to the Fund, for the period reported, broken down by each such Funded Activity; the dates and amounts of any Reflowed Funds
received by the Accredited Entity from Funded Activities, as well as the amount of such Reflowed Funds paid to the Fund, for the
period reported and cumulative amounts up to the period, broken down by each Funded Activity; and (v) a statement of
Investment Income earned on GCF Proceeds, as well as the amount of such Investment Income paid to the Fund. In addition to
that, a transaction list is required for expenditures and commitments for the period. As per GCF requirements, certified semi-
annual reports required, within 30 days of period end. GCF reporting templates and document archiving requirements shall be
included in the LTB/R and the PIM.
164.
Internal Audit. Tajikistan projects are subject to ex-post review by the Accounts chamber and by the Agency for State Financial
Control and Fight with Corruption of the Republic of Tajikistan. Both CEP and SEPMU will be subject to an annual review
performed by the Chamber of Accounts. This review is focussed on compliance with financial management processes and
procedures. It is required that PMUs implement recommendations in a timely manner. Since the project will be implemented by
two implementing units and as it is include several financiers, NGOs who will assist in community facilitation, SEPMU shall
consider either recruiting an independent internal auditor or external firm to perform internal audit functions for which reporting
should be directly to the Project Steering Committee and IFAD.
165.
External Audit. IFAD projects are not subject to external audit by the Audit Chamber, which is the supreme body of financial
control in the Republic of Tajikistan. Based on that, the project accounts will be audited annually by a private audit firm
acceptable to IFAD. Audit work should be in line with International Auditing Standards, IFAD financial reporting and auditing
requirements as outlined in IFAD Handbook and a cleared audit TOR by IFAD Finance Officer. As per country legislation and
regulations, the tendering process for private auditors shall take place every three years whereas as per IFAD the tendering
process shall take place every 4 years. The project to follow the country legislation in the required tendering period for private
auditors.
166.
PMUs shall prepare—and submit to the auditors the Annual Financial Statements (AFS) within two (2) months of the close of a
financial year for this purpose. Report of each Audit—along with the Management Letter shall be submitted to IFAD within six
months of the close of financial year (by 30th of June) to which the audit relates. SEPMU has the responsibility of following up and
coordinating with the auditors during the process and on submitting the final audit report by deadline.
167.
For GCF funds, the auditor scope of work should provide a specific opinion on the GCF specific information. The additional scope
requirements shall be outlined in the PIM / Audit TOR as appropriate.
168.
FAO shall send to SEPMU its annual institutional audited financial statements which shall include a reference to the project
proceeds and expenditures. In addition to that, FAO shall make all supporting documents for project expenditures available in
soft copies whenever the project annual audit work takes place and if requested by project contracted auditors.
29/40
169.
Before project start-up
170.
Both SEPMU & CEP to ensure that the latest version of 1C (8.3 version) is procured to be used for the project; recruit all finance
staff as foreseen during design; CEP to share with IFAD the on-boarding (training) plan for new staff; finalize first AWPB; and to
open the Designated Accounts for the each finance source. IFAD shall organize a start-up training for the project staff of both
PMUs which shall also provide detailed guidance on how the project staff shall comply with IFAD’s Anti-Corruption Policy.
171.
Use of country system
System Domains
On/Off
Comments
Organization
50% On
One of the Project Management Units is the STATE ENTERPRISE “PROJECT
MANAGEMENT UNIT “LIVESTOCK AND PASTURE DEVELOPMENT”, the other
one is The Committee for Environmental protection for which both operates within
the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan. The core staff of both PMUs will be
partially transferred from the previous projects (IFAD financed projects) and
recruited from the labor market of the Republic of Tajikistan. No objection to the
government officials to participate in the recruitment process.
The PMU staffing includes key staff who works on consultancy contracts hence the
project staff are not all from government staff. 
Budget
On
The Project shall follow the instructions/timelines contained in the PIM in preparing
AWPBs. The budget—irrespective of the sources of finances (IFAD Loan or
Government Counterpart Fund) shall be reflected in the Annual Development
Budget prepared and approved by the Ministry of finance in Tajikistan.
Treasury
Off
The legislation of the Republic of Tajikistan on treasury is based on the
Constitution of the Republic of Tajikistan, and consists of this Law, other regulatory
legal acts of the Republic of Tajikistan and the international legal acts recognized
by Tajikistan.
All the FM in country is performed from the side of the National Bank of Tajikistan
or Ministry of Finance in Tajikistan, which is prescribing procedures for foreign
donor aided projects on local or governmental levels. IFAD funds shall flow to the
project designed account with the permission note form the Ministry of Finance,
however bank accounts to be open in commercial banks that are acceptable to the
fund.
The Funds are transferred to the PMUs designated account in trusted commercial
bank only after the approval note from the Ministry of Finance side.
30/40
Ministry of Finance of the Tajikistan has prescribed a Chart of Accounts for the
donor-funded projects that is used in the accounting software used by the PMUs
(1C) (CoA).
The Chart of accounts was prepared in a consistent form and allows aggregating
sources of financing and expenditures by major groups and subgroups, taking into
account requirements of the “A unified chart of accounts in budget institutions,
organizations and the treasury, approved by the decree of the Minister of Finance
of the Republic of Tajikistan at January 26, 2015, No. 173” and IFAD. The chart of
accounts is the main tool to ensure availability and accessibility of necessary
information, in order to achieve consistency in classification of accounts.
The chart of accounts will be used to: (a) enter financial data in the relevant
sections; and (b) classification of financial data for various financial statements.
The structure of the accounting plan will cover data that will fall under: (i) the
project components; and (ii) expenditure categories.
Donor-funded projects are required to follow this CoA for local accounting and
financial reporting to local authorities. Chart of Accounts is in the compliance with
the International Standards such as IPSAS/IFRS.
Both units use 1C accounting software which is not the government accounting
software.
Both PMUs shall use the latest version of the accounting software 1C to record all
transactions and operational activities of the project. Financial Reports must be
prepared using own accounting system taking into consideration IFAD
requirements and be submitted in the set deadlines. All deviations and
misstatements have to be addressed in the financial statements. 
It is suggested to the project to have Internal Audit arrangements to improve the
internal control for the Project. In general, PMUs are undergoing state
assessments and inspections on constant basis, such as Ministry of Labor
inspection, Tax inspections, Statistical inspection, reports are published on
monthly basis. Inspection is performed based on the legislation and regulatory
matters of the Republic of Tajikistan.
IFAD projects in Tajikistan are not audited by the Account Chamber of the
Republic of Tajikistan which is the Supreme audit body in the country, instead
private audit firms are contracted after completion of the tendering process.
National Bank of Tajikistan – main financial regulator in the Republic of Tajikistan,
requires annual audit of the financial institutions, entities and projects. PMUs must
undergo independent audit annually as prescribed by the IFAD procedures and in
accordance with the timelines of the audit plan as per IFAD requirements.
Accounting
Off
Reporting
Off
Internal Audit
On
External Audit
Off
172.
Procurement Legislation. The Public Procurement Law (PPL) of 2006, as amended on April 16, 2012, is the major legal
instrument that regulates public procurement in Tajikistan. The PPL does not contain a clear provision exempting public
procurement financed by International Financial Institutions (IFIs) from the PPL. The reason for this a number of shortcomings
with the PPL.
173.
Reference is made to the pre-existing World Bank’s/Asian Development Bank’s Country Procurement Status Review (CPSR) of
2013, an in-depth review of the capacities of the public procurement systems, the EBRD’s procurement assessment of 2012, as
well as the 2017 Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Assessment (PEFA), which includes an updated assessment of
the public procurement system. The assessment found the weaknesses in the public procurement system, which have critical
gaps in compatibility with IFAD’s applicable Procurement Guidelines and procedures.
174.
The draft new PPL was developed in 2021 by financing of EBRD and WB, which as expected will provide a more satisfactory
legal framework following good international practices. Nevertheless, the draft law is subject to further discussion with the WB,
EBRD etc. because it does not fully meet the requirements of the international standards. In view of the above, CASP+ will adopt
IFAD procurement Guidelines.
175.
Transparency International’s Corruption Perception Index ranked Tajikistan 149 out of 183 countries in 2020 (153 of 180 in 2019),
with the awarded score of 25. There are Laws "On Anti-Corruption Enforcement" and the “Strategy for Counteracting Corruption
in the Republic of Tajikistan for 2013-2020” and a new anti-corruption strategy presently is under development. However,
implementation of the mentioned program documents is subject to improvement, with an emphasis on quality and analytical
components. The full range of fraudulent and corrupt practices is presently not covered under the legislative framework and
accountability, transparency and oversight arrangements are inadequate to safeguard the integrity of project procurement and
contract execution.
31/40
176.
The mission has also conducted Procurement Risk Matrix (PRM) evaluation of the country's risk system. Following the result of
assessment, the total Net Risk Rating is – 2.20 (Medium). The next main actions should be planned to mitigate risks, in
particular: (1) Develop a Project Implementation Manual to mitigate the inconsistency of a national procurement manual is
necessary; (2) Use and follow IFAD Procurement Guidelines and Procurement Handbook; (3) The terms, procedures, and
responsibilities as clearly specified in the revised "IFAD Policy on preventing fraud and corruption in its activities and operations"
should be strictly followed; (4) IFAD’s Anti-corruption hotline to be disseminated in all bidding documents; (5) When considering
the requirements of the National legislation, the procurement shall be conducted in a way that does not negatively impact on
IFAD's prescribed procurement procedures.
177.
Agency capacity assessment. The State Enterprise Project Management Unit (SEPMU) was created as a state entity in the
Ministry of Agriculture, and currently implements the on-going IFAD investments in the country. SEPMU’s Procurement Unit is
adequately staffed and consists of three Procurement Consultants. They have sufficient proficiency in procurement and have the
skills and knowledge of the IFAD procurement procedures. Application of procurement procedures is transparent and
competitive. The last supervision missions of LPDP II and CASP in 2020 rated the procurement performance as satisfactory.
Overall, the SEPMU’s capacity and arrangements were found to be in compliance with IFAD procurement regulations and
procedures.
178.
The Project Implementation Group (IGP) is an entity under the Committee on Environmental Protection, and currently is
implementing procurement processes for projects co-financed by the World Bank and GCF. The Procurement Unit is adequately
staffed and consists of one Procurement Consultant, provided with skills and knowledge of the WB/ADB procurement
procedures, and some IFAD procedures. Application of procurement procedures is transparent and competitive. In general, the
IGP’s capacity and arrangements are considered as acceptable.
179.
The mission has also conducted a Procurement Risk Matrix (PRM) evaluation of the project institutional risk. The total Net Risk
Rating is – 3.00 (Low). The next main actions should be planned to mitigate risks, in particular: (1) Build the capacity of the IGP
Procurement consultant to fill any competency, skills and knowledge gaps on IFAD procurement procedures; (2) Recruit
additional procurement consultants/assistance for both SEPMU and CEP-IGP; (3) The IGP should apply the IFAD Guidelines in
their activities and adapt procurement documentation in line with the standard forms agreed with IFAD.
180.
Procurement arrangements under the Project. Procurement of goods, works and services for the proposed project will be
carried out in accordance with the IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreement/Letter to
the Borrower. If there is conflict between the Government’s decrees, rules and regulations and the IFAD Procurement Guidelines,
then IFAD Guidelines shall prevail.
181.
The procurement sections within the SEPMU/CEP-IGP will be responsible for undertaking the following tasks: (i) consolidation of
annual procurement plans; (ii) implementation and monitoring of procurement activities; (iii) interface with IFAD and GCF for
procurement reporting; and (iv) ensuring that the procurement under the project is undertaken in line with the IFAD Procurement
Guidelines.
182.
FAO will undertake the procurement for the activities that it is expected to undertake. The procurement of goods, works and
services to be financed from the proceeds of IFAD’s financing would be in accordance with the FAO Procurement procedures
and guidelines. During implementation, FAO shall observe the following specific principles: (a) procurement would be carried out
in accordance with the Financing Agreement and any duly agreed amendments thereto; (b) it would be conducted within the
project implementation period, except as provided in the financing agreement; (c) the cost of the procurement is not to exceed
the availability of duly allocated funds as per financing agreement, and (d) the Revised IFAD Policy on Preventing Frauds and
Corruption in its Activities and Operations are to be respected.
183.
Goods and Non-consulting services shall be procured adhering to the following thresholds for procurement methods:
International Competitive Bidding (ICB): Any contract estimated to cost more than US$ 200 000 or equivalent;
National Competitive Bidding (NCB): any contract estimated to cost more than US$ 70 000 or less than US$ 200 000;
National Shopping (NS): any contract estimated to cost less than US$ 70 000 or equivalent;
Direct Contracting (DC): as an exception to the above regardless of value and if warranted by circumstances with due
justification in line with IFAD procurement guidelines or contracts estimated to cost less than US$ 2 000 or equivalent.
184.
Civil Works and Non-consulting services shall be procured adhering to the following thresholds for procurement methods:
International competitive Bidding (ICB): Any contract estimated to cost more than US$ 800 000 or equivalent;
National Competitive Bidding (NCB): any contract estimated to cost more than US$ 190 000 or less than US$ 800 000;
National Shopping (NS): any contract estimated to cost less than US$ 190 000 or equivalent;
Direct Contracting (DC): as an exception to the above regardless of value and if warranted by circumstances with due
justification in line with IFAD procurement guidelines or contracts estimated to cost less than US$ 3 000 or equivalent.
185.
Consulting and Non-consulting services shall be procured adhering to the following thresholds for procurement methods:
Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS): Any contract estimated to cost US$ 100 000 equivalent or more shall be awarded
on the basis of QCBS, unless the use of another procurement method is expressly allowed. Advertising of REOI shall be
international for any contract estimated to cost US$ 100 000 equivalent or more and where there is expected to be interest
internationally. Otherwise the advertising shall national.
Quality Based Selection (QBS), Fixed Budget Selection (FBS) and Least Cost Selection (LCS): Any contract for consulting
32/40
services estimated to cost US$ 100 000 or less may be awarded on the basis of QBS, FBS LCS from a shortlist comprising
three to six firms. Advertising of REOI shall be international for any contract where there is expected to be interest
internationally. Otherwise the advertising shall national.
Selection based on Consultants’ Qualification (CQS): Any contract for consulting services estimated to cost US$ 70 000
equivalent or less may be awarded on the basis of CQS from a shortlist comprising three to six firms. Advertising of REOI shall
be international for any contract where there is expected to be interest internationally. Otherwise the advertising shall national.
Individual Consultant Selection (ICS): Any contracts for consulting services regardless of value may be awarded on the basis
of ICS with due consideration of the principles set out in the IFAD Procurement Guidelines.
Single Source Selection (SSS): as an exception to the above regardless of value and if warranted by circumstances with due
justification in line with IFAD procurement guidelines and/or contracts with firms estimated to cost US$ 2 000 equivalent or
less and contracts with individual consultants estimated to cost US$ 1 000 equivalent or less or with a contract duration of
three months or less may be awarded on the basis of SSS.
186.
The following shall be subject to prior review by IFAD: Goods/Non-consulting services - The first three (3) contracts regardless of
value and thereafter all contracts for goods estimated to cost more than US$ 70 000 or equivalent;
Civil works/Non-consulting services - The first three (3) contracts regardless of value and thereafter all contracts for civil works
estimated to cost more than US$ 150 000 or equivalent;
Consulting services/Non-consulting services - The first three (3) contracts regardless of value and thereafter all contracts for
consulting services estimated to cost more than US$ 60 000 or equivalent;
Awarding of any contract based on DC or SSS regardless of their costs.
187.
All other contracts will be subject to post-review and procurement audit by IFAD. The CASP+ procurement consultant will
maintain accurate records and separate files for each procurement activity. Details with regards to the content of a procurement
file or dossier can be found in the Module C of the Procurement Handbook.
188.
All contracts, with or without IFAD prior approval, will be listed in the register of contract maintained by the procurement units
including any amendments and cancelled contracts, the information will also be recorded, providing the relevant background.
Additionally, the contract data will be registered in NOTUS.
189.
The procurement of the E&G/CW for grants will be competitive basis and handled by SEPMU, CEP-IGP, FAO as 'in-kind' grants
(no monetary applies) and further 'in-kind' grants will be transferred to the beneficiaries according to the targeting purposes.
190.
Project start-up activities will include the following: (1) Develop of a PIM; (2) Prepare and publish the General Procurement Notice
on the UN Development Business website (contact the SPO in NEN via e-mail gebrayel@ifad.org); (3) Build the capacity of the
CEP IGP Procurement consultant to fill any competency, skills and knowledge gaps; (4) Recruit additionally procurement
consultant/assistance for both PMU and CEP IGP; (5) Finalization of the Procurement Plan for the first 18 months.
191.
Governance. CASP+ design has introduced a clear mechanism to ensure good governance of the activities between the three
implementing agencies. The SEPMU in the MoA will be the leading agency, and will implement the project jointly with CEP and
FAO. Each agency is assigned specific responsibility and a specific financial allocation. Good governance will be assured by the
overall operational accountability and transparency; financial management; procurement of goods and services; environmental
governance; gender equality and mechanisms for complaints and remedies. Key measures include (i) the terms and conditions of
MOU with all service providers (specified in annex 8, PIM); (ii) consistent stakeholder representation in the project’s planning,
M&E/ KM and impact assessment cycle, affording mechanisms for complaints and remedies; (iii) fair participation of women and
youth beneficiaries in all activities and levels of the project; (iv) social, environmental and climate change safeguards and
guidelines detailed in SECAP and PIM; (v) application of guidelines and procedures for procurement consistent with the current
IFAD Procurement Guidelines; (vi) close supervision and implementation support by IFAD, including risk-based financial
management supervision and operational reviews; and (vii) provision for regular external audit. 
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
192.
Planning. The main planning tools comprise the Logical Framework, including indicators at output, outcome, and impact level
selected among the core indicators of IFAD as well as of the GCF (based on the relevant Performance Measurement
Framework).[91] The SEPMU will review and update the Logical Framework during programme start-up and fine-tune first AWPB,
amending data and the information with the results of the baseline and subsequent household surveys (see infra).[92] During
implementation, the main planning tool will be the Results Based Annual Work plan and Budget (AWPB). The SEPMU will
prepare a consolidated AWPB and submit it in advance of the government annual budgeting process to ensure that sufficient
counterpart funds are made available. Following this step, SEPMU will submit the AWPB to IFAD for “no-objection”, at least 60
days before the commencement of the proceeding program year. SEPMU will make sure the AWPB captures lessons learned
from previous years’ experiences (if any), to be used to benefit the proposed plan. It will also include a plan for staff capacity
development and training, whenever relevant. The Logical Framework will complement the AWPB as part of the essential
planning tools. The preparation of the AWPB will be grounded on the principles of results-based management (planning,
monitoring, evaluation and learning).
193.
M&E. The M&E system for CASP+ will build on the existing georeferenced system set up for the ongoing LPDP-II and CASP,
managed by the PMU. Such system provides comprehensive information for effective and efficient management of the projects
and to contribute learning from implementation experience for all stakeholders. Such system will be complemented with remote
sensing information to enhance monitoring of the status of natural resources. The SEPMU is provided with a Management
Information System (MIS) designed in a manner which allows gender disaggregation of data, poverty profiling of households,
education status, livestock ownership pattern, information on livestock yields, pasture use and management practices, and asset
33/40
base and employment. The logframe will be informed by the baseline, mid-term, and completion surveys.
194.
The M&E system will collect and analyse information about programme outreach, effectiveness of the targeting strategy and
specific benefits for women and youth. This requires strong coordination and collaboration between the M&E responsible person
and the Gender and Social Development experts/Focal Points at all levels. Impact will be assessed on the basis of
methodologically gender sensitive baseline, mid-term and completion surveys which will use key indicators to measure women’s
empowerment and youth inclusion. The M&E system will be informed by all implementing partners that will be required to provide
data concerning the activities and sub-activities under their responsibility. All implementing agencies will provide data
disaggregated by women and youth participation, including further disaggregation by People with Disability (where possible).
195.
The M&E system will report on IFAD Core Indicators and comply with IFAD guidelines in terms of result-based management as
described in the Project’s Logical Framework. In line with the overall result-based management approach, the M&E system will
collect appropriate and timely information to track progress towards outputs, outcomes, impact and sustainability. Such
information will serve as basis to produce progress reports and will enable the SEPMU, the other implementing agencies and
project stakeholders to keep track of progress against the AWBP and to determine if: (i) the Program is on-track for attaining its
objectives, on time and serving the right targets; (ii) funds are used as intended; (iii) the Program is implemented as planned.
Baseline surveys, with relevant data disaggregation, will include a household survey to assess socio-economic level of
beneficiaries and a gender analysis and will be conducted during year 1, and used to inform accurately the result based logical
framework.
196.
A Mid-Term Review (MTR) will be undertaken halfway through the project implementation to evaluate whether the Program is on
track to achieving its development objectives, and if the performance is satisfactory. Any prevailing constraints will be identified
and recommendations for correction (if required) will be The recommendations will take into consideration the likelihood of
achieving the development objectives during the remaining time. At completion, an Impact Assessment (IA) will be undertaken.
Findings and conclusions of such IA will be used to prepare a Program Completion Report (PCR) that will provide an overview of
the accomplishments of CASP Plus.
197.
The regular monitoring and reporting on inputs and outputs against AWBP will be the responsibilities of PMU and program staff,
as well as of the other implementing agencies. The coordinators of each implementing agency will be responsible for analyzing
and evaluating achievements, progress, identifying implementation bottlenecks, making informed decisions and taking timely
corrective actions. The overall responsibility for the Program’s M&E system will rest with the M&E Specialist at PMU level,
compiling the reports from the other implementing agencies. To ensure an effective flow of information, the M&E Specialist will
develop simple and user-friendly tools for data collection, data entry, data processing and analysis. Standard forms and formats
will be developed and made available to ensure consistency in the way data is recorded across all intervention areas and from all
implementing agencies. CASP+ will provide robust capacity building activities to M&E staff deployed by all implementing
agencies. These capacity-building activities will provide concerned staff with necessary skills in planning, monitoring of activities,
data collection and analysis, audit of data, gender disaggregation, RIMS, and other specific technical skills and tools required to
facilitate the rollout of M&E plan and activities.
198.
Household surveys. Between Concept Note and final design, a Baseline survey will be conducted with FAO support. This
exercise will provide basic data on livelihoods and will complement the climate change and socio-economic vulnerability for the
full design. After specific selection of the villages, and at project inception, the PMU will carry out a full-fledged baseline survey,
including as control area some districts and villages with similar characteristics to the target area. Those will be selected based
on the potential project expansion area defined during project design (the inclusion of treatment and control areas will also allow
to establish a basis for a potential impact assessment). Outcome surveys will be performed on yearly basis starting from the
second year of implementation, while a comprehensive mid-term survey and end-project survey will be performed in Year 3 and
early-Year 7, to allow utilizing findings in the mid-term review and end-project results assessments.
199.
Quality control and quality assurance measures. Each agency will establish a system for a periodic review of the quality of its
reports by fact checking 5 percent to 10 percent of the reports submitted by its staff. In addition, the M&E Units of all
implementing agencies will also depute its staff in the field to fact check and verify 5 percent to 10 percent of the reports
submitted by the implementing agencies or its own staff. Regular field visits will be undertaken for the verification with a well
specified approach to engaging the beneficiary group representatives in the process and recording how the process and
consultations were conducted.
200.
Beneficiary Feedback. Each partner will also establish a mechanism for beneficiary feedback and demonstrate how they have
incorporated the feedback in improving their implementation approach. A beneficiary feedback will also be prepared by each
implementing partner on an annual basis and will form part of the Annual Performance Report (APR). The implementing agency
will ensure that the beneficiary feedback is organized so that the reports provide sex-disaggregated perspectives. All
implementing agencies will also establish a grievance redress system which will be communicated by each implementing agency
to the participants to enable them to directly access the system in a manner which guarantees their confidentiality. IFAD and
GCF’s procedures for complaints related to the Environmental and Social Standards will be adopted. Corresponding Core
Indicators for reporting on stakeholder feedback with regard to their appreciation of services received, and how the project has
contributed in empowering them to address and mitigate grievances, will be described in the project’s logical framework.
201.
Learning and knowledge management. Learning and knowledge management are essential elements of CASP+, supporting
the intended paradigm shift of policy and investment sensitive to climate change, increasing resilience and poverty reduction
patterns. The georeferenced monitoring system of the project and its dissemination in the relevant institutions will ensure higher
accountability on investment implementation. The utilization of - and training of key institutions on - the carbon accounting tools
will also enhance the use and knowledge of the potential of carbon sequestration. All project interventions will generate
knowledge that will be utilized to inform the policy dialogue accompanying the regulatory framework reform in a more evidence-
based manner. The highly inclusive policy dialogue will reach out to all relevant stakeholders, in government, civil society,
development partners, private sector including smallholder farmers and disadvantaged people, thus contributing to increase their
knowledge on the project interventions as well as their participation in decision making processes. Lesson learning from CASP
and CASP+ will be aligned and complementary, especially to complement the ongoing knowledge generation of CASP with a
climate change mitigation and adaptation angle, and building on lessons from CASP on the need to increase capital generation in
rural / vulnerable villages.
34/40
202.
The Project will also synthesize the lessons that emerge from the Project in a separate section in the annual reports, including
lessons on innovations and mainstreaming gender. These lessons will be shared with the NDA and the NCCC to enable them to
incorporate them in the strategies and plans being developed by the country in its NAP and other key strategy documents. IFAD
and FAO will also capitalize on their in-house experience to undertake the development of knowledge products for wider
dissemination. Workshops, dissemination via social media and digital technologies and tool developed during the project
implementation will help disseminate progress, lessons learned, challenges and solutions to implementation constraints based on
evidence from the implementation.
203.
Communication. All the interventions, data and results generated by the project will be effectively communicated and
disseminated to the different stakeholders and beneficiaries at the national and district level. Specialized services will be
contracted to implement gender-sensitive communications campaigns which will include the use of knowledge-sharing platforms
and social-media networks to promote participation, awareness raising and to strengthen project´s partnerships. Communication
services will also make sure that all the documents requiring multi-lingual support will be available in Russian and English.
b. Innovation and scaling up
204.
CASP+ is the first IFAD project in Tajikistan that has climate change as the entry point for investment support and the only one in
the country that promotes climate change adaptation combined with potential carbon sequestration in a large scale. It presents a
number of innovative approaches and investments, spanning the use of evidence on climate to support planning and decision
making at local level, the georeferencing of all investments to ensure appropriate monitoring, promotion of climate adaptive
techniques and technologies for agriculture and livestock production, and promotion of market-based approaches to spark private
sector’s engagement in rural areas. Specific innovations include:
205.
Mapping and monitoring of natural resources. Currently it is only partially undertaken and needs to be strengthened to allow
proper decision making on ecosystem services management. CASP+ will introduce a combined remote and participatory natural
resources monitoring. By introducing participatory monitoring techniques in combination with low-cost remote sensing, the project
will put in place the basis of a system by which annual reporting will be replicated by relevant institutions (Pasture Meliorative
Trust). In addition, the project will pilot test an innovative approach to pasture monitoring, entailing the use of hives on a pilot area
of 3.500 ha and undertaking a scientific analysis of the pollen collected by the bees, which can be utilized as bioindicators. This
analysis enables the recording of precise qualitative and quantitative data on the type and quantity of plant species present in the
area. The analysis enables the project to clearly identify the impacts and effects of the measures applied. Geobotany experts and
innovative monitoring methods applying apiculture will contribute to ground-truthing of the data elaborated. In addition to the pilot
area, the Geobotany experts will assist with ground truthing of Earth Observation data.
206.
Georeferenced investments. The monitoring and evaluation of the CsCAPs will be an intrinsic part of the approach of the
ecosystem monitoring. All project investments will be georeferenced. This will allow communities to better monitor all CsCAP
investments including by using digital tools. Innovative methods will be employed to engage and incentivise stakeholders,
including youth, to use smartphones for field reporting and ground-truthing of remote sensing.
207.
Climate change adaptation technologies. To encourage the generation of knowledge and the practical application of
innovations, the project will encourage research institutions to produce evidence on effective approaches to NRM through a call
for proposals. The private sector will also be invited to present proposals for the production of technical innovations that can help
in climate adaptation which can then be disseminated through the market and facilitate the adoption of climate adaptation
technologies and practices. Climate resilient technologies and innovations that have been tested, adapted and validated by
research institutions under Component 1 will be demonstrated in the field to enable farmers to see and evaluate their benefits
and adoption. Twenty one demo plots (1/District) will be established via a MoU with the State Enterprise for Capacity
Development, which has extensive demonstration experience. In order to allow farmers access to these demonstrations, field
days and exchange visits will be organized.
208.
Farmers field schools adapted to improved pasture management. CASP+ will support the dissemination of technical
innovations and their adoption by smallholder farmers through a combination of demonstrations, hands-on training and FFS.[93]
FFS will support improved knowledge of technical innovations that could improve productivity, resilience to climate change, and
reduce environmental impacts.National Master Trainers are available in the country and could support rolling out. The FFS will
allow to overcome bottlenecks in productivity and resilience to climate change of traditional livestock production systems,
depending on the poor capacities of farmers on animal husbandry, in particular fodder cultivation, fodder conservation and stall
feeding.
209.
Community and pasture organizations. Moreover, the establishment of PUUs has proved itself as a major innovation that with
low cost effectively converts the village-controlled natural resources and pastures in the country under sustainable management,
and presents a platform for subsequent successive work on natural resource and pasture management. There has been positive
uptake of the Pasture Users’ Union model by the Government of Tajikistan,[94] and legislative changes have further enabled the
viability and replication of this model. This approach will be scaled up and has the potential to be adopted also by other large
financiers in the country (e.g., World Bank-funded Tajikistan Resilient Landscapes Restoration Project). Moreover, the
involvement of women in the PUUs has been successful not only in the involvement in public life, but also on the repercussion of
women’s participation, which has been inducing increase of ownership and sustainability of project activities.
35/40
210.
 Scaling-up of the project’s approach and technologies promoted will pass through the strategic partnership with the
relevant national institutions responsible for the identification and dissemination of climate adaptive technologies, exchange visits
between farmers and smallholders, successful productive alliances between producers and entrepreneurs stimulating the
engagement of private sector in rural areas.
M. Project Target Group Engagement and Feedback, and Grievance Redress
a. Project Target Group Engagement and Feedback.
211.
The project approach is based on community consultation and demand-driven development, placing attention to capture and
integrate the view of all stakeholders into the sub-project design and implementation process. Mobilization activities include key
steps such as: information, consultation, engagement with all social actors and specific measures for social inclusion of the most
vulnerable as outlined in the targeting and social inclusion section above.
212.
In the initial stages of implementation, the project will work with community members and community-based organizations (VOs,
PUUs, others at local level), including village elders and local leaders, to inform them about the project activities. Consultations
will take place in all communities to seek concurrence about the relevance of the planned activities and ascertain the
community’s interest in participating. Community meetings will include a minimum of 50 percent of women, 30 percent of youth,
as well as vulnerable social category such as women head of households (15 percent) and the people with disabilities present in
the community. Separate discussion with women and youth as well as their representation in decision making will be a key
enabling instrument to ensure their pro-active participation, consultation and feedback. Throughout the facilitation of community
consultations and planning, the project Gender and Youth Specialists and the NGOs Community Facilitators will ensure inclusion
of the vulnerable groups, their mobilization within the process, including gathering their feedback. Eventually, separate
consultations with those groups could be organized to ensure full participation and ownership.
213.
During implementation, regular community meetings will continue to take place to inform community members on the status of
implementation with the participation of community facilitators and representatives of the project and local administration.
b. Grievance redress.
214.
A grievance redress[95]mechanism has been developed in line with the requirements of both IFAD as well as the GCF. The
GRM reflects a three-tiered approach for communities to submit their grievance, starting at the community level and ending at
IFAD as an actor of last resort. CASP+ will ensure dissemination of the GRM to local communities prior to starting programme
activities and maintain solid documentation for the received complaints during the operation of the programme and track the level
of responsiveness (provision of feedback). As part of the community mobilization, the project will ensure communicating the GRM
functioning and eventually adjust to community-specific pre-existing mechanisms for beneficiaries and stakeholders to
communicate their concerns and ideas. Complaints can be raised directly to the SEPMU/CEP representative at the district level
at the concerned project area and the field team should help the complainant fill the complaint and ensure it includes mandatory
information. The outline of the GRM, which is also part of the GCF funding proposal documentation, is included in Appendix 6 of
the SECAP as well as Annex 7 of the GCF funding proposal (complaints will be reported by IFAD in the annual reports to
GCF). The appendix also includes an overview of non-community stakeholders (such as research institutions and international
organizations) that will be regularly consulted to assure that the project remains relevant throughout implementation.
N. Implementation plans
a. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
215.
Timeline and milestones for financing approval. In-country revision of the IFAD PDR and GCF-funding proposals and related
annexes is ongoing and is expected to be completed within July 2021, including obtaining letters of intent from co-financiers. The
parallel process to ensure NDA no-objection on the project for GCF financing is ongoing and is expected to be completed within
August 2021. Quality Assurance review from IFAD and FAO will be arranged between August and September 2021.
216.
Immediate steps for the effectiveness and full financing are expected according to the following calendar:
IFAD EB decision on the use of IFAD12 allocation for CASP+ (September 2021)
CASP+ submission to IFAD EB / GCF Secretariat (October 2021)
In country negotiations on IFAD financing (October-November 2021)
Expected IFAD EB approval (December 2021)
GCF Secretariat review of Funding Proposal (from October 2021 – to be determined)
GCF Independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) review: (to be determined)
Expected GCF appraisal of CASP+ (2022)
217.
Implementation readiness and start-up. CASP+ will be implemented by the existing SEPMU and CEP-IGP. One additional office
will be opened by SEPMU in Bokhtar, to facilitate the implementation in the most remote districts. SEPMU and CEP-IGP are
already staffed with key positions, and Terms of Reference for the complementary staff and specialists are included in the PIM,
facilitating an early selection and readiness at entry into force of the project. The recruitment process of the coordinators, and
other specialists required for early implementation as foreseen in the procurement plan should commence immediately upon
ratification of the Financing Agreement.
36/40
218.
Before project start-up, both SEPMU and CEP-IGP will ensure that the latest version of 1C (8.3 version) is procured to be used for
the project; recruit all finance staff as foreseen during design; finalize first AWPB; and to open the Designated Accounts for each
finance In addition, CEP-IGP will share with IFAD the on-boarding (training) plan for new staff. IFAD shall organize a start-up
training for the project staff of all implementing agencies which shall also provide detailed guidance on how the project staff shall
comply with IFAD’s Anti-Corruption Policy.
219.
Organizing and Staffing. Both PMUs shall have adequate structure in the finance unit that includes qualified and experienced
staff. At SEPMU, the Finance Manager should allocate at least 50 percent of his/her time on the financial management of CASP+
supported by full time Finance Specialist, Disbursement Officer, Accountant and Finance This is crucial since the final financial
management responsibility lies with SEPMU and considering the several financiers included in the project.
220.
The current staffing of CEP does not meet the project needs. Before the start of the project, CEP-IGP will need to fill the following
positions should in the finance unit: (a) one full-time Finance Manager, (b) one Disbursement Officer.[96]
221.
CASP+ includes more than one financier, executing agency and reporting line, based on that, it is important that finance staff are
recruited at both units before disbursement starts. In addition to that, staff shall receive proper training and induction, which
covers IFAD, GCF and FAO requirements and the fraud and the anticorruption policies, within the first month of their
employment. The start-up workshop will include at least one day that shall cover project’s specific financial management
arrangements as per IFAD/other financiers’ requirements and policies. Figure 2 below shows the proposed structure of FM
Sections at both PMUs for the project:
Figure 2. CASP+ structure of FM sections for SEPMU and CEP-IGP
222.
The positions of Finance Manager, Specialist and Officers at both units shall be recruited subject to No Objection from IFAD. All
positions should be filled through a competitive process on terms and conditions acceptable to IFAD. The TORs for all the
finance staff positions shall be included in the PIM. An internal audit firm/Internal Audit Manager shall also be engaged to
strengthen FM arrangements at both units.
Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans
223.
Project supervision. IFAD's supervisory function will be ongoing, and support will be provided to resolve issues that may arise
during implementation. As Accredited Entity to the GCF, IFAD will perform a supervisory role overall CASP+ project. Supervision
missions will take place at least once per year and will be organized by IFAD’s subregional hub based in Istanbul in coordination
with the SEPMU as Lead Implementing Agency.
224.
Mid-term review. A Mid-Term Review (MTR) will be carried out during the fourth year after project start-up. It will assess
implementation progress and likelihood of the achievement of the project development objectives trough the evaluation of results
reported up to that moment against the Logframe indicators. If required, the MTR will also advice on corrective actions to be put in
place in the remaining implementation period before completion.
225.
Project completion process and report. The project completion review will be undertaken by the Government of Tajikistan, in
close coordination with IFAD at the end of the implementation cycle, in order to report on the results achieved through project
interventions. The main purposes of the review process are to promote accountability, reflect on project performance, produce
lessons learnt to inform new programme/project designs, define an exit strategy for sustainability. The learning dimension of the
completion process should be emphasized since it provides useful information for improvements in future programme/project
designs and programming. 
Footnotes
[1] The Third National Communication of the Republic of Tajikistan under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change,
Dushanbe, 2014.
[2] SECAP’s Appendix 4: Climate change impacts, climate vulnerability analysis – Historical and current climate, Precipitation.
[3] An assessment tool that enables easy access to modelling results for crop yields under various climate change scenarios.
Developed by the West and Central Africa Division of the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) with funding from
Phase II of the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP2).
37/40
[4]https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/41085512/Card_usermanual_W.pdf/e867a16c-e581-8038-aa6f-1767a10629a3
[5] See details in SECAP.
[6] Detailed results of the B-intact are presented in the SECAP, Appendix 4.
[7] Agency on Statistics under the President of Tajikistan. "Tajikistan in Figures" 2020, page 25
[8] https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/906519-world-bank-country-and-lending-groups
[9] Mid-Term Development Plan Review. 2020. Agriculture Sector. Chapter 3. Development of sectors of national economy.
[10] COVID-19 Crisis Through a Migration Lens, World Bank, Apr 2020.
http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/989721587512418006/pdf/COVID-19-Crisis-Through-a-Migration-Lens.pdf
[11]Tajikistan Systematic Country Diagnostic. The World Bank. May 2018
[12] UNDP Human Development Report Tajikistan 2019, available at http://hdr.undp.org/sites/all/themes/hdr_theme/country-
notes/TJK.pdf
[13] 2019 poverty rate according to national Agency of statistics: Food Security and Poverty, Statistical Agency under President of the
Republic of Tajikistan, 2020 (matrix pp144). https://stat.ww.tj/posts/February2021/2-2020_angl..pdf
[14] Poverty measurement in Tajikistan: methodological note, Tajstat 2015. Available at:
https://stat.ww.tj/files/metodologia_bednosti_anglisi.pdf
[15] TajStat 2015
[16] UNDP, mapping registered extreme poverty in rural Tajikistan (2015) available at: http://untj.org/jambi-project/images/Extreme-
Poverty_ENG.pdf
[17] Tajikistan Nutrition Profile, Global Nutrition Report, 2019, available at:
https://globalnutritionreport.org/media/profiles/3.0.3/pdfs/tajikistan.pdf
[19] UNDP, socio-economic impact of COVID-19 on lives, livelihoods and micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) in
Tajikistan. https://www.tj.undp.org/content/tajikistan/en/home/library/impact-of-covid-19-on-lives--livelihoods-and-micro--small-and-
me.html
[19] Agency on Statistics under the President of Tajikistan. “Tajikistan in Figures” 2020, page 39
[20] Agency on Statistics under the President of Tajikistan. “Tajikistan in Figures” 2020, page 86
[21] OIE Performance of Veterinary Services Reports, 2011, 2017.
[22] 500 to 700 litres of milk per cow/year. A detailed description can be found in CASP+ Working Paper on “Pasture and Animal
Husbandry” – para I.2.1, p. 4.
[23] SECAP’s Appendix 4: Climate change impacts, climate vulnerability analysis - Recommendations to enhance resilience to
climate change in Tajikistan
[24] The Feed-Livestock Nexus in Tajikistan: Livestock Development Policy in Transition (revised version) David Sedik. October
2010.
[25] SECAP’s Appendix 4: Climate change impacts, climate vulnerability analysis - The state of grasslands and the impacts of climate
change.
[27] UNDP, Human Development Report, Tajikistan,  2020 Document available at:
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/all/themes/hdr_theme/country-notes/TJK.pdf
[28] Tajikistan: Addressing Challenges to Create More and Better Jobs, WB 2017 available at
https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/tajikistan/publication/tajikistan-addressing-challenges-to-create-more-and-better-jobs
[29] Rural dwellers were estimated to be 85.7 percent of the total number of migrant workers (Source: International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (2017). Consideration of reports submitted by States
parties under article 73 of the Convention – Tajikistan.
[30] World Bank, 2020 : Economic and social impacts of COVID-19 Updates from listening to Tajikistan Survey.
[31] Muhammadjon Kobuliev, Tie Liu, Zainalobudin Kobuliev, Xi Chen, Aminjon Gulakhmadov, Anming Bao, Effect of future climate
change on the water footprint of major crops in southern Tajikistan, Regional Sustainability, Volume 2, Issue 1, 2021, Pages 60-72,
ISSN 2666-660X, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.regsus.2021.01.004.
[32] SECAP’s Appendix 4: Climate change impacts, climate vulnerability analysis - The state of grasslands and the impacts of climate
change
38/40
[33] Climate risks and food security in Tajikistan. A Review of Evidence and Priorities for Adaptation Strategies. April 2017. WFP.
[34] Tajikistan: Country situation assessment Working paper, 2015. CARECECO, PRISE.
[35] Tajikistan - Autonomous Adaptation to Climate Change: Economic Opportunities and Institutional Constraints for Farming
Households. World Bank. 2014. Washington, DC.
[36] SECAP’s Appendix 4: Climate change impacts, climate vulnerability analysis - Climate Vulnerability analysis in Tajikistan for
geographic targeting
[37] This is a climate change vulnerability index: including risks from increased climate variability (higher variance in values of climate
variables) and also from changes in the mean values of climate variables.
[38] Climate risks and food security in Tajikistan. A Review of Evidence and Priorities for Adaptation Strategies. April 2017. WFP.
[39] United Nations Development Program (UNDP). 2012. Capacity for climate resiliency in Tajikistan: Stocktaking and Institutional
Assessment.
[40] Greˆt-Regamey A, Brunner SH, Kienast F. 2012. Mountain ecosystem services: Who cares? Mountain Research and
Development 32(1):23–34.
[41] Ariza C, Maselli D, Kohler T. 2013. Mountains: Our Life, Our Future. Progress and Perspectives on Sustainable Mountain
Development from Rio 1992 to Rio 2012 and Beyond. Bern, Switzerland: SDC [Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation],
CDE [Centre for Development and Environment]
[42] Share of Agriculture Emission (AR5) – 2017 data, Source: FAOstat, consulted in Dec 2020.
[43] The first biennial report of the republic of Tajikistan on inventory of greenhouse gases under the UNFCC, 2018 - 2.3.4 Sector 4
(LULUCF).
[44] These checklists have been simplified for data entry purposes. Please refer to the Mainstreaming Annex in the Project Design
Guidelines for detailed guidance and the full criteria.
[45] Project level Women's Empowerment in Agriculture Index
[46] Accounting to be provided by ECG.
[47] Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment
[48] To be provided by ECG.
[49] In the frame of the project, the concepts of vulnerability, adaptation, adaptive capacity and resilience are fully aligned to the
definitions utilized by IPCC. (https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02/AR5_SYR_FINAL_Annexes.pdf). Specific aspects of
resilience in the rural context targeted by the project include a combination of well-being such as access to services and resources,
reduced risk of losses (economic, health, lives, etc.) and enhanced production/productivity in agriculture, livestock, and other
economic activities.
[50] LPDP Project Completion Report Validation, IFAD (2021).
[51] IFAD, 2021 - https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714182/42864434/tajikistan_1100001408_ppe.pdf/ec8d562b-9646-a384-00c7-
bb3d2429c649?t=1623402705705, reported in Annex 18.
[52] ECTAP (Enhanced Competitiveness of Tajik Agribusiness Project, 2014-2019) was an EU-funded project implemented in close
cooperation with the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD).
[53]CAFT project – KfW financed project “Climate adaptation through sustainable forestry in important river catchment areas in
Tajikistan”.
[54] Resulting from the carbon accounting tools developed by FAO: Ex-ACT, EX-Ante Carbon Balance Tool (overview:
http://www.fao.org/in-action/epic/ex-act-tool/suite-of-tools/ex-act/en/ ; and tool: http://www.fao.org/in-action/epic/ex-act-tool/suite-of-
tools/registration/en/), and GLEAM-i, Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model-interactive (overview:
http://www.fao.org/gleam/resources/en/; tool: https://gleami.apps.fao.org/).
[55] Climate vulnerability index of Tajikistan, IFAD 2021.
[56] Tajstat 2020
[57] CASP+ SECAP, Appendix 4.
[58] Based on the analysis of IFAD (2020) using dataset from Bastin et al. 2019 on potential reforestation in the world.
[59] Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration Index (SPEI) on 18 months. Climate vulnerability index of Tajikistan, IFAD 2021.
[60] Additional details can be found in the CASP+ SECAP, Appendix 1
[61] Consultation with AKF representative during the CN design mission on the validity of the proposed methodology and lesson
learned.
39/40
[62] For instance, the case of the Joint Programme on Accelerating Progress Towards the Economic Empowerment of Rural Women
(JP RWEE) in Kyrgyzstan in phase Implementing project activities; (c) timely financial management and procurement for project
activities; (d) preparation of AWPB and procurement plan for approval of all financing institutions; (e) support in monitoring,
submission of reports to GCF, IFAD and Government, supervision and impact assessment (full details are outlined in Annex 8 - PIM).
[63] for the Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU) sector
[64] which uses geo-referenced maps and tools to increase accuracy and account for the ecological value and biodiversity sensitivity
of project sites
[65] With possible technical support from FAO.
[66] With possible technical support from FAO.
[67] The village ranking criteria will include village population, climate vulnerability, district poverty ranking and Earth Observation
indicators (erosion potential, vegetation indices, etc).
[68] CsCAPs will be thoroughly screened against social and environmental safeguards and an environmental and social impact
assessment will be carried out.
[69] In JFM, all materials and labour are paid for by the project although labour may be cheaper if provided as part of in-kind
contribution by beneficiaries. Typically a large plot is created and fenced with the sub-divisions inside being assigned to different
contracts and a lot of emphasis is put on fruit and nut species that will quickly yield benefits for the participants.
[70] Direct forestry works are usually about 10-20% of the scale of the JFM works in a given Leskhoz. The project will only support
direct leskhoz forestry in areas suitable for JFM.
[71] Incremental net benefits of the JFM business model is shown in the economic and financial analysis.
[72] Several mechanisms have been set up to avoid any type of maladaptation: Each CsCAP will be developed based on the district
level diagnostic. The activities will be pre-selected in line with the climate change impacts in the area as measures to adapt to it and
increase the resilience of the ecosystem and the population. Furthermore, as a second mechanism to avoid maladaptation, ESMPs
(and ESIAs when required) will be developed at the level of the CsCAP to ensure the adequacy of the activities and to include risk
mitigation measures where needed. Finally, CASP+ district officers will be trained in the development of ESMPs and ESIAs and in
their implementation and monitoring throughout the project.
[73] The list of community equipment eligible under this window would include:  Mowers, Hay rakes, Balers, Forager / Silage
machine, Silage/haylage wrappers, Manure spreader (not only for fodder but contributes to improve soil fertility), Hay trailers (flatbed).
[74] 105,600 unique AH beneficiaries (264 vets x 400 HHs ), same beneficiaries receive (i) AI services (20,000 once per year for 5
years, (ii) bull mating services (20,000 once per year for 5 years) and training via FFS (4000)
[75] One important lesson from LPDP II mid-term review is that genetic improvement through crossbreeding or distribution of
improved stock has proven to trigger a transformation from a traditional subsistence production systems into semi intensive, market
oriented, sometimes zero grazing or partially, and more integrated with crops.
[76] Limited to large ruminants as CASP+ aims to valorize the effects of AI as well (ie, not only for dairy, but also as farmers will
produce better quality carcasses, and need a good market to sell them).
[77] 1020 production and diversification CIGs of 10 members and 110 market-led CIGs of 20 people
[78] These practices span agriculture, horticulture, and other agrifood subsectors that have proven to be adapted to the climate
conditions and challenges in the areas, as well as suitable for markets. During project design, a rapid analysis of the growth potential
and climate risks was undertaken, and assumptions on potential horticulture and agriculture sub-sectors was discussed with private
sector actors. Based on the issues raised during the stakeholder meetings in relation with prevailing agriculture practices and climate
related concerns, a selection of models and investment options was proposed for the CIGs (Window 1 and window 2). A summary is
described in the PIM and in the Feasibility Study. CIG members will receive capacity development on farming as a business,
entrepreneurial skills and business plan development, so they can link to profitable value chains (e.g., small-scale poultry,
horticulture, beekeeping, processing, etc.).
[79] FAO's and IFAD's Engagement in Pastoral Development Joint Evaluation Synthesis. February 2016 Report No. 3909
[80] Updated Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) towards the achievement of the global goal of the UN Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) by the Republic of Tajikistan, 2021.
[81] Gerber, P.J., Steinfeld, H., Henderson, B., Mottet, A., Opio, C., Dijkman, J., Falcucci, A. & Tempio, G. 2013. Tackling climate
change through livestock – A global assessment of emissions and mitigation opportunities, FAO, Rome.
[82] SDG 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere; SDG 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition, and promote
sustainable agriculture; SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls; SDG 12: Ensure sustainable consumption
and production patterns; SDG 13:Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts; SDG 15: Protect, restore and promote
sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, halt and reverse land degradation and
halt biodiversity loss.
40/40
[83] https://webapps.ifad.org/members/eb/125/docs/EB-2018-125-R-12.pdf
[84] Impact assessment Report on the Livestock and Pasture Development Programme LDPP, 2018. IFAD
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/41114919/TJ_LPDP_IA+report.pdf/46a3c493-b024-e1b2-3f3a-786255cdc035
[85] ECG to update. As per the MDB Methodologies for Tracking Climate Adaptation and Mitigation Finance. Detailed calculation of
Adaptation and Mitigation finance is under calculation by ECG.
[86] Beneficiaries contribution will be as follows: (a) the targeted villages will contribute with 5% of all CsCAPs investments (output
2.2), expecting investments in agricultural equipment and machineries for which the contribution will be of 10% of the value; (b) the
Common Interest Groups (output 3.3) will contribute with 10% of all matching grants financing under Window 1, and 20% for window
2; (c) Productive alliances financed under output 3.2 will be complemented with 10% of the financing by beneficiaries and 10% by
private sector partners.
[87] Readiness Proposal. GCF. United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) for Republic of Tajikistan 18 May 2020 | Adaptation
Planning.
[88] The National Investment Plan 2021-2030 (draft under preparation by MoA and FAO) is considering the proposal of a mix of policy
measures, possibly including progressive taxation on pasture use (depending on herd size) or quotas (to be revised upon validation of
the NIP). 
[89] Independent Evaluation of the GCF’s Adaptation Portfolio. Virtual Country Mission to Tajikistan. In association with Steward
Redqueen. October 2020.
[90] CEP has large experience in implementing IFI-funded projects (World Bank) and has an experienced Project Implementing
Group (equivalent to the PMU for the MoA). In addition, CEP has experience in implementing GCF funded projects, which will prove
to be an asset in implementation, including the early stages.
[91] Mitigation and adaptation performance measurement frameworks, adopted by GCF Board B.08/07. Available at
https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/mitigation-adaptation-performance-measurement.pdf
[92] Mid- and end-targets should be revised based on the results of the Baseline survey that is planned to be conducted during year 1.
[93] Potential climate resilient technologies to be disseminated are: (i) new crops and varieties of drought and heat resistant fodder
(e.g. saxaul, kochia prostrata, agropyron for dry land areas of Khatlon region), (ii) affordable and simple fodder conservation
techniques, in order to reduce seasonality of production and dependence on pasture in winter (e.g. hay and silage making,
hydroponic feed production), (iii) composting and manure management, (iv) husbandry of alternative livestock species that are less
dependent of pasture resources, and more resilient to climate change, (v) prevention and management of animal diseases and (vi)
reproduction management (e.g. detection of animals in heat, calving and calf care, drying off management). Communities supported
in marketing and processing of milk, milk hygiene and milk quality/safety management in sub-component 3.2 will also receive this
support.
[94] LPDP Project Completion Report Validation, IFAD (2021).
[95] See Framework for Operational Feedback from Stakeholders https://webapps.ifad.org/members/eb/128/docs/EB-2019-128-R-
13.pdf?attach=1 and Annex ABC for further details.
[96] One Accountant and an accounting assistant are also ideally desired (pending available finance).
Tajikistan
Community-based Agricultural Support Project Plus (CASP+)
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Mission Dates:
01 April - 09 June 2021
Document Date:
16/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002204
5854-TJ
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Community-based Agricultural Support Project Plus (CASP+)
Logical Framework
1/7
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Outreach 
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households members
Household members
0
260000
650000
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
Women-headed households
Non-women-headed households
Households
0
0
0
4000
10000
36000
90000
40000
100000
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the project
Males
Females
Young
Not Young
Total number of persons receiving
services
0
0
0
0
0
126100
315250
133900
334750
78000
195000
130032
433440
260000
650000
Outcome
Survey
Annual
Project M&E
system
Annual
Project M&E
system
Annual
PMU
PMU
PMU
Project Goal 
Contribute to the country’s shift towards low emission
sustainable development pathways and climate-adaptive
agricultural production practices
Number of poor smallholder households whose climate resilience has
been increased
Surveys
Baseline/MTR/Completion PMU
Households
32000
80000
Macro-economic
and political
conditions are
stable and the
interest of
Government for
Green Economy is
maintained and
sustained.
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
2/7
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Development Objective 
Contribute to establishing a transformative policy and
investment framework leading to climate change resilient
livelihood patterns for vulnerable households and to carbon
sequestration potential
Income increase in TJS
Income increase in TJS
6
15
Surveys
Baseline/MTR/Completion PMU
Number of targeted HH reporting increased income from rural
livelihoods
Surveys
Baseline/MTR/Completion PMU
Households
32000
80000
4.1 GCF: Tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO2eq) reduced or
avoided (including increased removals) as a result of Fund-funded
projects/programmes
Tons of CO2s emissions
0 2000000 7062655
Ex-ACT and
GLEAM-i
Carbon
accounting
tools
A2.2 (GCF) Number of food secure households (in areas/periods at risk
of climate change impacts
Males
Females
Total number of HH members
100880
252200
107120
267800
208000
520000
Baseline/MTR/Completion IFAD
GCF Core/a. Total Number of direct and indirect beneficiaries
Surveys
Baseline/MTR/Completion PMU
Direct Beneficiaries (women)
Direct Beneficiaries (men)
133900
334750
126100
315250
Direct Beneficiaries (men/women)
260000
650000
Indirect Beneficiaries (men)
Indirect Beneficiaries (women)
440075 1100187
467296 1168239
Indirect Beneficiaires (men/women)
907370 2268426
1.2.2 Households reporting adoption of new/improved inputs,
technologies or practices
Surveys
Baseline/MTR/Completion PMU
Total number of household members
208000
520000
Males
Females
65666
218887
64366
214553
Macro economic
conditions are
stable and impact of
potential climate
hazards does not
damage local /
national economy.
The COVID-19
pandemic has
eased and allows
field activities.
Availability and
interest of local
communities and
commitment to the
investments in
improved NR
Availability of
service providers
able to support
outreach and
mobilization of
communities.
Macro-economic
and political stability
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
3/7
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
GCF Core/b. Number of beneficiaries relative to total population of the
country (direct)
Surveys
Baseline/MTR/Completion PMU
% beneficiaries (direct)
% beneficiaries (indirect)
2.8
7
12.5
31.3
Outcome 
Outcome 1 (5.0 for GCF) Strengthened institutional and
regulatory systems for climate-responsive planning and
development
Policy 3 Existing/new laws, regulations, policies or strategies proposed
to policy makers for approval, ratification or amendment
Surveys
Baseline/MTR/Completion PMU
Number
3
4
Output 
Output 1.1 By year 7, capacities of relevant national
institutions for climate-resilient natural resources
management are strengthened
Number of individuals from relevant institutions trained in evidence-
based joint climate-adaptive natural resources planning, management
and monitoring
Individuals (National Level)
Individuals (Local Level)
50
120
100
200
Surveys
Baseline/MTR/Completion PMU
Output 
Output 1.2 By year 7, enabling environment for climate
adaptive, inclusive and integrated management of pasture,
forestry and livestock resources is enhanced
Number of institutions utilizing the evidence-based georeferenced tool
(including remote sensing) for integrated NRM
Surveys
Baseline/MTR/Completion PMU
Number of institutions (National Level)
Number of institutions (Local Level)
0
0
10
7
10
7
Commitment of
project partners
(government
agencies,
development
partners, civil
society) to inclusive
and constructive
dialogue
Commitment of
targeted institutions;
Limited staff
turnover;
constructive
partnership created
will continues after
closure
Willingness to adopt
accountable
georeferenced M&E
and planning
system for NR with
remote sensing data
use Government
and relevant
institutions'
commitment to a
shift to green
economy and
integrated
ecosystem
management
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
4/7
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Outcome 
Outcome 2: 9.0 GCF: Improved management of land or
forest areas contributing to emissions reductions
9.1 GCF: Hectares of land or forests under improved and effective
management that contributes to CO2 emission reductions: - Pasture /
rangeland (ha and condition) - Forests (ha and condition)
Surveys
Baseline/MTR/Completion PMU
Forests
Pastures
Agricultural land
0
0
0
1200
8641
50000
180000
500
1416
3.2.2 Households reporting adoption of environmentally sustainable
and climate-resilient technologies and practices
Surveys
Baseline/MTR/Completion PMU
Total number of household members
104000
520000
Households
Males
Females
Young
Not Young
Women-headed households
Non-women-headed households
Households
40
80
37524
218887
36780
214553
22291
130032
52013
303408
1600
8000
11059
64512
16000
80000
SF.2.1 Households satisfied with project-supported services
Surveys
Baseline/MTR/Completion PMU
Household members
104000
520000
Non-women-headed households
11059
64512
Women-headed households
Households (%)
Households (number)
1600
8000
40
80
16000
80000
Output 
Output 2.1 By year 3,400 Climate-sensitive Community
Action Plans (CsCAP) based on 21 district level climate
diagnostics are developed
Number of District level Climate Resilience Diagnostics (DCRD)
prepared
Surveys
Baseline/MTR/Completion PMU
Availability and
interest of local
communities and
commitment to the
investments in
improved NR;
climate sensitive
planning and local
level partnerships
created will
continues after
project closure
Willingness of rural
communities,
availability of
suitable service
providers and
commitment of local
institutions to
support rural
communities
investment and
planning even
beyond project end.
Available service
providers for
agriculture
improvement and
animal health
(including private
vets) willing to
engage in project
areas; agribusiness
enterprises willing to
engage with
smallholders in the
project area
Willingness of rural
communities,
availability of
suitable service
providers and
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
5/7
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Output 
Output 2.2 By year 7,400 Climate-sensitive Community
Action Plans (CsCAP) implemented in 21 districts
benefitting at least 100,000 rural households
Number of DCRDs
21
21
Number of Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAP)
approved Number
Surveys
Baseline/MTR/Completion PMU
Number of CsCAPs
400
400
Number of households benefitting from the CsCAPs
Surveys
Baseline/MTR/Completion PMU
Households
Male-headed HHs
Female-headed HHs
40000
100000
36000
90000
4000
10000
3.1.4 Land brought under climate-resilient practices
Hectares of land
51700
190057
Number of hectares of land brought under climate-resilient
management
Pastures
Forests
Agriculture
50000
180000
1200
8641
500
1416
Annual
Project M&E
Annual
Annual
Remote
Sensing with
ground
thruting
PMU
PMU
1.2.4 Households reporting an increase in production
Surveys
Baseline/MTR/Completion PMU
Households
40
80
Total Number of HH members
208000
520000
Women-headed HHs
3200
80000
1.2.2 Households reporting adoption of new/improved inputs,
technologies or practices
Surveys
Baseline/MTR/Completion PMU
Households
40
80
providers and
Assumptions
commitment of local
institutions to
support rural
communities
investment and
planning even
beyond project end.
Willingness of rural
communities,
availability of
suitable service
providers and
commitment of local
institutions to
support rural
communities
investment and
planning even
beyond project end.
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
6/7
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Outcome 
Outcome 3. A7.0 Strengthened adaptive capacity and
reduced exposure to climate risks
Total number of HH members
Households
208000
520000
16000
80000
1.1.3 Rural producers accessing production inputs and/or technological
packages
Males
Females
Young
12880
322000
12880
322000
7728
19320
2.1.2 Persons trained in income-generating activities or business
management
Males
Females
Young
2880
7200
2880
7200
1728
4320
Output 
Output 3.1 By end of year 7, 105,600 smallholder livestock
farmers receive AI, animal health or training services to
increase productivity of their livestock
Number of Artificial Inseminations conducted in the project area
Number of Artificial Inseminations
conducted in the project area
40000
100000
Number of supported private veterinarians
Veterinarian
200
284
Number of farmers enrolled in FFS
Males
Females
Young
Male and Female
360
240
180
600
1200
800
600
2000
Annual
Project M&E
Annual
Annual
Project M&E;
TVA report
Annual
Project M&E
Annual
Annual
Number of farmers accessing demonstration plots on climate resilient
technologies
Annual
Project M&E
Annual
Males
1440
4800
Available service
providers for
agriculture
improvement and
animal health willing
to engage in project
areas Agribusiness
enterprises willing to
engage with
smallholders in the
project area The
technologies are
affordable and
disseminated for
wider use and
replication
Available service
providers for
agriculture
improvement and
animal health
(including private
vets) willing to
engage in project
areas
PMU
FAO
PMU
PMU
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
7/7
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
End
Target
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Females
Young
Male and Female
960
720
3200
2400
2400
8000
Output 
Output 3.2 By end of year 4, 9 productive alliances
between livestock producers’ groups and private
aggregators established and operational
Number of active and operational productive alliances for marketing of
livestock commodities
Annual project
M&E
Annual
Number of Productive Alliances
supported
0
8
9
Output 
Output 3.3 By end of year 7, 12,400 smallholders have
strengthened climate resilient production practices and
private sector market linkages
Number of farmers accessing market and services through productive
alliances facilitated by the project
Annual project
M&E
Annual
Males
Females
Young
Male and Female
4860
16200
3240
10800
2430
8100
8100
27000
Number of Common Interest groups' (Window 1) proposals approved
(% women led groups proposal approved and youth - led approved)
Annual project
M&E
Annual
Number of CIGs approved
612
1020
Number of Common Interest groups' (Window 2) proposals approved
(% women led groups proposal approved and youth - led approved)
Annual project
M&E
Annual
Number of CIGs approved
66
110
PMU
PMU
PMU
PMU
Private sector
actors are willing to
enter and invest in
productive alliances
arrangements.
Market demand for
livestock
commodities keeps
increasing at the
same pace
Market linkages
established, primary
production
increased using
climate resilient
technologies quality
improved, value
addition, climate
resilient
technologies
scaled-up
Women/youth
increase their
incomes from
diversified
agriculture activities
Tajikistan
Community-based Agricultural Support Project Plus (CASP+)
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Mission Dates:
01 April - 09 June 2021
Document Date:
16/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002204
5854-TJ
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 2:  Theory of Change  
Tajikistan
Community-based Agricultural Support Project Plus (CASP+)
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Mission Dates:
01 April - 09 June 2021
Document Date:
16/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002204
5854-TJ
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 3: Project Cost and Financing: Summary and 
Detailed Tables 
Annex 3 Project Cost and Financing
Tajikistan
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ (CASP+)
Disbursement Accounts by Financiers
(USD '000)
IFAD 11 GRANT
Amount
%
IFAD 12 GRANT
Amount
%
FAO
Amount
IFAD 11 Loan
Amount
%
%
GCF Loan
Amount
GCF GRANT
Amount
Beneficiaries
Amount
Private Sector
Amount
%
%
%
%
CEP
Amount
SFA
Amount
%
MoA
Amount
GOVT: Taxes
Amount
%
%
Total
Amount
%
1. Civil Works, Goods, Equipment and Services
2. In_kind
3. Training and Workshops
4. Technical Assistance and Studies
5. Travel
6. Other Grants
7. Operating Expenses
Total PROJECT COSTS
4 740
-
147
164
3
-
1 697
6 750
5.7
-
10.3
2.6
0.6
-
51.0
6.9
20 554
-
32
2 601
57
-
50
23 294
24.7
-
2.2
41.7
14.3
-
1.5
23.7
-
-
94
56
10
-
-
160
-
-
6.6
0.9
2.5
-
-
0.2
6 750
-
-
-
-
-
-
6 750
8.1
-
-
-
-
-
-
6.9
9 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
9 000
10.8
-
-
-
-
-
-
9.2
22 559
-
1 156
3 419
329
960
1 577
30 000
27.1
-
80.9
54.8
82.6
100.0
47.4
30.6
4 533
-
-
-
-
-
-
4 533
5.5
-
-
-
-
-
-
4.6
56
-
-
-
-
-
-
56
0.1
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.1
-
890
-
-
-
-
-
890
-
33.2
-
-
-
-
-
0.9
-
890
-
-
-
-
-
890
-
33.2
-
-
-
-
-
0.9
-
902
-
-
-
-
-
902
-
33.6
-
-
-
-
-
0.9
14 969
-
-
-
-
-
-
14 969
18.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
15.2
83 162
2 682
1 429
6 240
398
960
3 324
98 194
For.
Exch.
Local
(Excl.
Taxes)
Duties &
Taxes
58 213
-
-
637
-
-
356
59 206
9 979
2 682
1 429
5 603
398
960
2 968
24 019
14 969
-
-
-
-
-
-
14 969
%
84.7
2.7
1.5
6.4
0.4
1.0
3.4
100.0
1
Tajikistan
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ (CASP+)
Components by Financiers
(USD '000)
A. Component 1: Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources
1. Output 1.1: By year 7, capacities of relevant national institutions for climate-resilient natural resources management are strengthened
2. Output 1.2: By year 7, enabling environment for climate adaptive, inclusive and integrated management of pasture, forestry and livestock resources is enhanced
Subtotal Component 1: Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources
B. Component 2: Investments in community capacity for adaption and resilience to climate change
1. Output 2.1: By year 3, 400 Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAP) based on 21 District level Climate Resilience Diagnostics are developed
2. Output 2.2: By year 7, 400 Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAP) implemented in 21 districts benefitting at least 100,000 rural households
Subtotal Component 2: Investments in community capacity for adaption and resilience to climate change
C. Component 3: Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market-based approaches
1. Output 3.1: By end of year 7, 105,600 smallholder livestock farmers receive AI, animal health or training services to increase productivity of their livestock
2. Output 3.2: By end of year 4, 9 productive alliances between livestock producers’ groups and private aggregators established and operational
3. Output 3.3: By end of year 7, 12,400 smallholders have strengthened climate resilient production practices and private sector market linkages
Subtotal Component 3: Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market-based approaches
D. Project Management Component
1. Project Management
Project Management
Total PROJECT COSTS
Annex 3 Project Cost and Financing
IFAD 11 
GRANT
Amount %
IFAD 12 
GRANT
Amount
FAO
IFAD 11 
Loan
GCF Loan
%
Amount %
Amount %
Amount %
GCF 
GRANT
Amount %
Beneficiari
es
Amount %
417 20.2
60 11.5
477 18.5
5
0.2
64 12.1
2.7
69
51
4 140
4 191
0.6
7.0
6.2
1 851 22.6
11 649 19.7
13 500 20.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3 234 53.8
495 55.2
5 806 33.5
9 535 39.4
-
-
81 15.5
3.1
81
-
-
-
79
-
-
79
-
-
-
1.3
-
-
0.3
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 551 75.3
265 50.6
1 816 70.3
-
525
525
-
0.9
0.8
-
-
9 000 15.2
9 000 13.4
4 611 56.4
20 193 34.1
24 804 36.8
-
-
-
-
6 225 35.9
6 225 25.7
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 765 29.3
167 18.6
2.3
406
9.6
2 338
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 744
2 744
-
4.6
4.1
-
56
-
6.3
1 733 10.0
7.4
1 790
Private 
Sector
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
GOVT: 
Taxes
MoA
CEP
SFA
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
56 6.3
-
56 0.2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
610 7.5
-
-
610 0.9
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
50 9.6
50 2.0
394 4.8
445 0.8
840 1.2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
372 4.5
-
-
372 0.6
-
-
-
-
229 1.3
229 0.9
88
4
91
4.2
0.7
3.5
289
3.5
10 524 17.8
10 813 16.0
936 15.6
123 13.8
2 919 16.9
3 979 16.4
Total
Amount
2 061
523
2 584
8 178
59 220
67 398
6 014
897
17 320
24 231
%
2.1
0.5
2.6
8.3
60.3
68.6
6.1
0.9
17.6
24.7
Local
For.
Exch.
(Excl.
Taxes)
Duties &
Taxes
515
147
662
1 539
40 928
42 467
3 714
494
11 353
15 562
1 459
372
1 831
6 351
7 768
14 119
1 364
280
3 047
4 691
88
4
91
289
10 524
10 813
936
123
2 919
3 979
2 082 52.3
6.9
6 750
190
4.8
23 294 23.7
-
160
-
0.2
-
6 750
-
6.9
-
9 000
-
9.2
1 042 26.2
30 000 30.6
-
4 533
-
4.6
-
-
56 0.1
280 7.0
890 0.9
-
-
890 0.9
301 7.5
902 0.9
86
2.2
14 969 15.2
3 981
4.1
98 194 100.0
516
59 206
3 379
24 019
86
14 969
2
Tajikistan
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ (CASP+)
Expenditure Accounts by Financiers
(USD '000)
I. Investment Costs
A. In-kind
B. Civil Works, Goods, Equipment and Services
C. Technical Assistance and Studies
International TA
National TA
Studies
Travel
Subtotal Technical Assistance and Studies
D. Other Grants
E. Training and Workshops
Training and workshops
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. In_kind
B. Salaries and Allowances
C. Operating Expenses
Vehicles
Office
Other
Subtotal Operating Expenses
Total Recurrent Costs
Total PROJECT COSTS
Annex 3 Project Cost and Financing
GCF 
IFAD 11 
GRANT
GRANT
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
IFAD 11 
Loan
IFAD 12 
GRANT
GCF 
Loan
FAO
Beneficia
ries
Private 
Sector
CEP
SFA
MoA
GOVT: 
Taxes
Total
%
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
%
For.
Exch.
(Excl.
Taxes)
Duties &
Taxes
Local
-
-
20 554 24.7
-
-
-
-
-
-
6 750 8.1
-
-
9 000 10.8
-
22 559
-
27.1
-
-
4 533 5.5
-
-
56 0.1
610 29.0
-
-
890 42.4
-
-
601 28.6
-
-
-
-
14 969 18.0
2 101
83 162
2.1
84.7
-
58 213
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
56 0.1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
56 0.1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
610
-
0.6
280 48.2
-
-
-
-
-
-
280
890
-
-
-
-
7.2
0.9
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
417
5 382
441
398
6 638
960
0.4
5.5
0.4
0.4
6.8
1.0
417
-
221
-
637
-
2 101
9 979
-
5 382
221
398
6 001
960
-
14 969
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
890
-
0.9
-
601
-
0.6
-
-
14 969 15.9
1 429
94 290
1.5
96.0
-
58 850
1 429
20 470
-
14 969
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
890
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.9
301 51.8
-
-
-
-
-
-
301
902
-
-
-
-
7.7
0.9
-
-
-
-
581
2 139
0.6
2.2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
14 969 15.2
595
403
187
1 185
3 905
0.6
0.4
0.2
1.2
4.0
98 194 100.0
-
-
179
121
56
356
356
59 206
581
2 139
417
282
131
830
3 549
24 019
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
14 969
-
4 740
18
116
30
3
166
-
-
5.7
4.3
2.2
6.8
0.6
2.5
-
44 10.4
2 355 43.7
203 46.0
57 14.3
2 658 40.0
-
-
-
36 8.6
20 0.4
-
10 2.5
66 1.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
319
2 892
208
329
3 748
76.6
53.7
47.2
82.6
56.5
960 100.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
147 10.3
5.4
5 053
32
2.2
23 244 24.7
94 6.6
160 0.2
-
-
6 750 7.2
-
9 000
-
9.5
1 156
28 423
80.9
30.1
-
-
4 533 4.8
-
-
1 386 64.8
-
50
-
2.4
-
-
-
311 77.1
-
311 26.2
1 697 43.5
6.9
6 750
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
50
1.3
23 294 23.7
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
160 0.2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
6 750 6.9
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
9 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
9.2
-
702
-
32.8
-
-
-
-
92
595 100.0
22.9
187 100.0
73.8
875
40.4
1 577
30.6
30 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
4 533 4.6
3
Annex 3 Project Cost and Financing
Tajikistan
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ (CASP+)
Components Project Cost Summary
A. Component 1: Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources
1. Output 1.1: By year 7, capacities of relevant national institutions for climate-resilient natural resources management are strengthened
2. Output 1.2: By year 7, enabling environment for climate adaptive, inclusive and integrated management of pasture, forestry and livestock resources is enhanced 
Subtotal Component 1: Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources
B. Component 2: Investments in community capacity for adaption and resilience to climate change
1. Output 2.1: By year 3, 400 Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAP) based on 21 District level Climate Resilience Diagnostics are developed
2. Output 2.2: By year 7, 400 Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAP) implemented in 21 districts benefitting at least 100,000 rural households
Subtotal Component 2: Investments in community capacity for adaption and resilience to climate change
C. Component 3: Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market-based approaches
1. Output 3.1: By end of year 7, 105,600 smallholder livestock farmers receive AI, animal health or training services to increase productivity of their livestock
2. Output 3.2: By end of year 4, 9 productive alliances between livestock producers’ groups and private aggregators established and operational
3. Output 3.3: By end of year 7, 12,400 smallholders have strengthened climate resilient production practices and private sector market linkages
Subtotal Component 3: Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market-based approaches
D. Project Management Component
1. Project Management
Project Management
Subtotal Project Management Component
Total BASELINE COSTS
Physical Contingencies
Price Contingencies
Total PROJECT COSTS
(Somoni Million)
Foreign
Local
Total
Local
(USD '000)
Foreign
Total
%
Foreign
% Total
Base
Exchange Costs
26.9
6.6
33.5
115.8
319.5
435.3
38.9
7.1
104.4
150.4
60.5
60.5
679.7
2.6
-
682.3
8.7
2.6
11.3
26.0
714.8
740.8
62.0
8.6
198.6
269.2
8.7
8.7
1 030.1
6.0
-
1 036.1
35.7
9.1
44.8
141.8
1 034.4
1 176.1
100.9
15.7
303.0
419.6
69.3
69.3
1 709.8
8.6
-
1 718.4
1 539.5
375.3
1 914.9
6 616.4
18 258.1
24 874.6
2 225.3
403.3
5 965.0
8 593.5
3 458.5
3 458.5
38 841.5
147.0
-
38 988.4
498.6
146.7
645.3
1 485.1
40 848.3
42 333.4
3 540.9
494.2
11 349.5
15 384.6
499.8
499.8
58 863.1
342.9
-
59 206.0
2 038.2
522.0
2 560.2
8 101.5
59 106.5
67 208.0
5 766.1
897.5
17 314.5
23 978.1
3 958.2
3 958.2
97 704.5
489.9
-
98 194.4
24
28
25
18
69
63
61
55
66
64
13
13
60
70
-
60
2
1
3
8
60
69
6
1
18
25
4
4
100
1
-
101
4
Annex 3 Project Cost and Financing
Tajikistan
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ (CASP+)
Expenditure Accounts Project Cost Summary
(Somoni Million)
Foreign
Local
Total
Local
(USD '000)
Foreign
Total
%
Foreign
% Total
Base
Exchange Costs
 I. Investment Costs
A. In-kind
B. Civil Works, Goods, Equipment and Services
C. Technical Assistance and Studies
International TA
National TA
Studies
Travel
Subtotal Technical Assistance and Studies
D. Other Grants
E. Training and Workshops
Training and workshops
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. In_kind
B. Salaries and Allowances
C. Operating Expenses
Vehicles
Office
Other
Subtotal Operating Expenses
Total Recurrent Costs
Total BASELINE COSTS
Physical Contingencies
Price Contingencies
Total PROJECT COSTS
36.8
434.0
-
94.2
3.9
7.0
105.0
16.8
25.0
617.6
10.2
37.4
7.3
4.9
2.3
14.5
62.1
679.7
2.6
-
682.3
-
1 012.7
36.8
1 446.8
2 101.2
24 801.5
-
57 870.2
2 101.2
82 671.7
7.3
-
3.9
-
11.2
-
7.3
94.2
7.7
7.0
116.2
16.8
-
5 382.0
220.5
398.1
6 000.6
960.0
416.8
-
220.5
-
637.3
-
416.8
5 382.0
441.0
398.1
6 637.8
960.0
-
1 023.9
25.0
1 641.5
1 429.2
35 292.4
-
58 507.4
1 429.2
93 799.9
-
-
10.2
37.4
580.5
2 138.7
-
-
580.5
2 138.7
3.1
2.1
1.0
6.2
6.2
1 030.1
6.0
-
1 036.1
10.4
7.1
3.3
20.7
68.3
1 709.8
8.6
-
1 718.4
416.6
282.2
131.0
829.8
3 549.0
38 841.5
147.0
-
38 988.4
178.5
121.0
56.2
355.6
355.6
58 863.1
342.9
-
59 206.0
595.1
403.2
187.2
1 185.5
3 904.7
97 704.5
489.9
-
98 194.4
-
70
100
-
50
-
10
-
-
62
-
-
30
30
30
30
9
60
70
-
60
2
85
-
6
-
-
7
1
1
96
1
2
1
-
-
1
4
100
1
-
101
5
Annex 3 Project Cost and Financing
Tajikistan
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ (CASP+)
Expenditure Accounts by Components - Base Costs
(USD '000)
 Component 1: Strengthening
 public sector capacity for
transformative
climate-resilient management
of natural resources
Output 1.2:
By year 7,
enablingComponent 2: Investments in
community capacity for adaption and
environment
for climateresilience to climate change
adaptive,
inclusive
and
integrated
management
of pasture,
forestry
and
livestock
resources
is enhanced
Output 2.1: By
year 3, 400
Climate-sensitive
Community Action
Plans (CsCAP)
based on 21
District level
Climate
Resilience
Diagnostics are
developed
Output 2.2: By
year 7, 400
Climate-sensitive
Community Action
Plans (CsCAP)
implemented in 21
districts
benefitting at
least 100,000
rural households
Output 1.1: By
year 7,
capacities of
relevant national
institutions for
climate-resilient
natural resources
management are
strengthened
Component 3: Strengthening livelihoods
for enhanced resilience through
market-based approaches
Output 3.1: By
end of year 7,
105,600
smallholder
livestock
farmers
receive AI,
animal health
or training
services to
increase
productivity
of their
livestock
Output 3.2:
By end of
year 4, 9
productive
alliances
between
livestock
producers’
groups and
private
aggregators
established
and
operational
Output 3.3: By
end of year 7,
12,400
smallholders
have
strengthened
climate
resilient
production
practices and
private sector Management
Project
Management
Component
Project
market
linkages
Project
Management
 I. Investment Costs
A. In-kind
B. Civil Works, Goods, Equipment and Services
C. Technical Assistance and Studies
International TA
National TA
Studies
Travel
Subtotal Technical Assistance and Studies
D. Other Grants
E. Training and Workshops
Training and workshops
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. In_kind
B. Salaries and Allowances
C. Operating Expenses
Vehicles
Office
Other
Subtotal Operating Expenses
Total Recurrent Costs
Total BASELINE COSTS
Physical Contingencies
Price Contingencies
Total PROJECT COSTS
Taxes
Foreign Exchange
445.2
58 354.8
-
4 951.2
-
10.5
-
196.0
206.5
-
75.0
261.2
-
27.5
363.7
-
100.0
59 106.5
451.2
5 766.1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
59 106.5
113.8
-
59 220.3
10 524.3
40 928.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
5 766.1
247.6
-
6 013.7
935.8
3 714.1
-
686.0
-
120.0
28.0
9.0
157.0
-
54.5
897.5
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
897.5
-
-
897.5
123.5
494.2
229.2
16 213.6
-
652.8
-
37.4
690.2
-
181.5
17 314.5
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
17 314.5
5.2
-
17 319.7
2 919.4
11 353.2
-
463.4
112.3
283.0
124.0
36.5
555.8
960.0
59.0
2 038.2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 038.2
23.2
-
2 061.3
87.6
514.9
50.4
18.8
133.5
194.8
-
27.5
355.8
-
97.0
522.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
522.0
0.9
-
523.0
3.6
147.3
1 376.4
1 527.3
96.0
3 719.7
289.0
64.2
4 168.9
-
444.0
7 516.5
-
-
522.0
-
63.0
585.0
585.0
8 101.5
76.4
-
8 177.9
288.7
1 538.6
6
Physical
Contingencies
%
Amount
Total
2 101.2
82 671.7
-
0.6
-
489.9
-
456.6
-
140.0
-
-
140.0
-
42.0
638.6
580.5
2 138.7
73.1
403.2
124.2
600.5
3 319.7
3 958.2
22.8
-
3 981.1
416.8
5 382.0
441.0
398.1
6 637.8
960.0
1 429.2
93 799.9
580.5
2 138.7
595.1
403.2
187.2
1 185.5
3 904.7
97 704.5
489.9
-
98 194.4
86.3
515.7
14 969.1
59 206.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.5
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.5
-
-
0.5
0.6
0.6
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
489.9
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
489.9
-
-
489.9
88.2
342.9
Annex 3 Project Cost and Financing
Tajikistan
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ (CASP+)
Expenditure Accounts by Components - Totals Including Contingencies
(USD '000)
 Component 1: Strengthening
 public sector capacity for
transformative
climate-resilient management
of natural resources
Output 1.2:
By year 7,
enablingComponent 2: Investments in
community capacity for adaption and
environment
for climateresilience to climate change
adaptive,
inclusive
and
integrated
management
of pasture,
forestry
and
livestock
resources
is enhanced
Output 2.1: By
year 3, 400
Climate-sensitive
Community Action
Plans (CsCAP)
based on 21
District level
Climate
Resilience
Diagnostics are
developed
Output 2.2: By
year 7, 400
Climate-sensitive
Community Action
Plans (CsCAP)
implemented in 21
districts
benefitting at
least 100,000
rural households
Output 1.1: By
year 7,
capacities of
relevant national
institutions for
climate-resilient
natural resources
management are
strengthened
Component 3: Strengthening livelihoods
for enhanced resilience through
market-based approaches
Output 3.1: By
end of year 7,
105,600
smallholder
livestock
farmers
receive AI,
animal health
or training
services to
increase
productivity
of their
livestock
Output 3.2:
By end of
year 4, 9
productive
alliances
between
livestock
producers’
groups and
private
aggregators
established
and
operational
Output 3.3: By
end of year 7,
12,400
smallholders
have
strengthened
climate
resilient
production
practices and
private sector Management
Project
Management
Component
Project
market
linkages
Project
Management
 I. Investment Costs
A. In-kind
B. Civil Works, Goods, Equipment and Services
C. Technical Assistance and Studies
International TA
National TA
Studies
Travel
Subtotal Technical Assistance and Studies
D. Other Grants
E. Training and Workshops
Training and workshops
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. In_kind
B. Salaries and Allowances
C. Operating Expenses
Vehicles
Office
Other
Subtotal Operating Expenses
Total Recurrent Costs
Total PROJECT COSTS
Taxes
Foreign Exchange
445.2
58 468.6
-
10.5
-
196.0
206.5
-
-
5 198.8
75.0
261.2
-
27.5
363.7
-
100.0
59 220.3
451.2
6 013.7
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
59 220.3
10 524.3
40 928.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
6 013.7
935.8
3 714.1
-
686.0
-
120.0
28.0
9.0
157.0
-
54.5
897.5
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
897.5
123.5
494.2
229.2
16 218.8
-
652.8
-
37.4
690.2
-
181.5
17 319.7
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
17 319.7
2 919.4
11 353.2
-
479.4
-
140.0
-
-
140.0
-
42.0
661.4
580.5
2 138.7
73.1
403.2
124.2
600.5
3 319.7
3 981.1
86.3
515.7
-
486.6
112.3
283.0
124.0
36.5
555.8
960.0
59.0
2 061.3
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 061.3
87.6
514.9
50.4
19.8
133.5
194.8
-
27.5
355.8
-
97.0
523.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
523.0
3.6
147.3
1 376.4
1 603.7
96.0
3 719.7
289.0
64.2
4 168.9
-
444.0
7 592.9
-
-
522.0
-
63.0
585.0
585.0
8 177.9
288.7
1 538.6
7
Total
2 101.2
83 161.6
416.8
5 382.0
441.0
398.1
6 637.8
960.0
1 429.2
94 289.8
580.5
2 138.7
595.1
403.2
187.2
1 185.5
3 904.7
98 194.4
14 969.1
59 206.0
Annex 3 Project Cost and Financing
Tajikistan
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ (CASP+)
Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies
(USD '000)
A. Component 1: Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources
1. Output 1.1: By year 7, capacities of relevant national institutions for climate-resilient natural resources management are strengthened
2. Output 1.2: By year 7, enabling environment for climate adaptive, inclusive and integrated management of pasture, forestry and livestock resources is enhanced
Subtotal Component 1: Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources
B. Component 2: Investments in community capacity for adaption and resilience to climate change
1. Output 2.1: By year 3, 400 Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAP) based on 21 District level Climate Resilience Diagnostics are developed
2. Output 2.2: By year 7, 400 Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAP) implemented in 21 districts benefitting at least 100,000 rural households
Subtotal Component 2: Investments in community capacity for adaption and resilience to climate change
C. Component 3: Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market-based approaches
1. Output 3.1: By end of year 7, 105,600 smallholder livestock farmers receive AI, animal health or training services to increase productivity of their livestock
2. Output 3.2: By end of year 4, 9 productive alliances between livestock producers’ groups and private aggregators established and operational
3. Output 3.3: By end of year 7, 12,400 smallholders have strengthened climate resilient production practices and private sector market linkages
Subtotal Component 3: Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market-based approaches
D. Project Management Component
1. Project Management
Project Management
Subtotal Project Management Component
Total PROJECT COSTS
2022
2023
Totals Including Contingencies
2026
2025
2024
2027
2028
Total
250.2
131.8
382.0
3 615.8
3 183.6
6 799.4
493.9
50.4
19.1
563.3
423.0
204.5
627.5
891.8
11 203.8
12 095.6
1 675.5
35.8
995.0
2 706.4
319.3
62.9
382.2
855.4
11 203.8
12 059.2
1 261.0
269.5
5 076.3
6 606.8
263.0
48.6
311.6
760.4
11 203.8
11 964.2
1 162.1
267.5
6 079.9
7 509.5
345.8
24.1
369.9
725.4
11 182.1
11 907.5
705.5
259.5
4 964.1
5 929.0
262.0
24.1
286.1
654.4
11 162.1
11 816.5
603.3
14.9
166.3
784.4
198.1
26.8
224.9
674.6
81.2
755.8
112.4
-
19.1
131.5
2 061.3
523.0
2 584.3
8 177.9
59 220.3
67 398.2
6 013.7
897.5
17 319.7
24 230.9
857.0
857.0
8 601.7
498.7
498.7
15 928.2
540.4
540.4
19 588.6
522.1
522.1
20 307.4
530.6
530.6
18 737.0
507.1
507.1
13 394.2
525.1
525.1
1 637.3
3 981.1
3 981.1
98 194.4
8
Tajikistan
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ (CASP+)
Project Components by Year -- Investment/Recurrent Costs
(USD '000)
2022
2023
Totals Including Contingencies
2026
2025
2024
2027
2028
Total
Annex 3 Project Cost and Financing
A. Component 1: Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources
1. Output 1.1: By year 7, capacities of relevant national institutions for climate-resilient natural resources management are strengthened
Investment Costs
2. Output 1.2: By year 7, enabling environment for climate adaptive, inclusive and integrated management of pasture, forestry and livestock resources is enhanced 
Investment Costs
Subtotal Component 1: Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources
B. Component 2: Investments in community capacity for adaption and resilience to climate change
1. Output 2.1: By year 3, 400 Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAP) based on 21 District level Climate Resilience Diagnostics are developed
Investment Costs
Recurrent Costs
Subtotal Output 2.1: By year 3, 400 Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAP) based on 21 District level Climate Resilience Diagnostics are developed
2. Output 2.2: By year 7, 400 Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAP) implemented in 21 districts benefitting at least 100,000 rural households
Investment Costs
Subtotal Component 2: Investments in community capacity for adaption and resilience to climate change
C. Component 3: Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market-based approaches
250.2
131.8
382.0
3 483.2
132.6
3 615.8
3 183.6
6 799.4
262.0
198.1
2 061.3
423.0
204.5
627.5
822.2
69.6
891.8
319.3
62.9
382.2
778.9
76.6
855.4
263.0
48.6
311.6
683.9
76.6
760.4
345.8
24.1
369.9
648.9
76.6
725.4
24.1
286.1
577.9
76.6
654.4
11 203.8
12 095.6
11 203.8
12 059.2
11 203.8
11 964.2
11 182.1
11 907.5
11 162.1
11 816.5
26.8
224.9
523.0
2 584.3
598.0
76.6
674.6
81.2
755.8
7 592.9
585.0
8 177.9
59 220.3
67 398.2
1. Output 3.1: By end of year 7, 105,600 smallholder livestock farmers receive AI, animal health or training services to increase productivity of their livestock
Investment Costs
493.9
1 675.5
1 261.0
1 162.1
2. Output 3.2: By end of year 4, 9 productive alliances between livestock producers’ groups and private aggregators established and operational
35.8
269.5
267.5
995.0
2 706.4
5 076.3
6 606.8
6 079.9
7 509.5
4 964.1
5 929.0
705.5
259.5
603.3
112.4
6 013.7
14.9
166.3
784.4
-
897.5
19.1
131.5
17 319.7
24 230.9
38.2
460.5
498.7
15 928.2
15 398.1
530.1
56.5
483.9
540.4
19 588.6
19 028.1
560.5
38.2
483.9
522.1
20 307.4
19 746.9
560.5
56.5
474.1
530.6
18 737.0
18 186.3
550.7
38.2
468.9
507.1
13 394.2
12 848.7
545.5
56.5
468.6
525.1
1 637.3
1 092.1
545.2
661.4
3 319.7
3 981.1
98 194.4
94 289.8
3 904.7
Investment Costs
3. Output 3.3: By end of year 7, 12,400 smallholders have strengthened climate resilient production practices and private sector market linkages
Investment Costs
Subtotal Component 3: Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market-based approaches
D. Project Management Component
1. Project Management
Project Management
Investment Costs
Recurrent Costs
Subtotal Project Management Component
Total PROJECT COSTS
Total Investment Costs
Total Recurrent Costs
50.4
19.1
563.3
377.4
479.6
857.0
8 601.7
7 989.5
612.2
9
Annex 3 Project Cost and Financing
Tajikistan
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ (CASP+)
Expenditure Accounts by Years -- Base Costs
(USD '000)
 I. Investment Costs
A. In-kind
B. Civil Works, Goods, Equipment and Services
C. Technical Assistance and Studies
International TA
National TA
Studies
Travel
Subtotal Technical Assistance and Studies
D. Other Grants
E. Training and Workshops
Training and workshops
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. In_kind
B. Salaries and Allowances
C. Operating Expenses
Vehicles
Office
Other
Subtotal Operating Expenses
Total Recurrent Costs
Total BASELINE COSTS
Physical Contingencies
Price Contingencies
Total PROJECT COSTS
Taxes
Foreign Exchange
2022
2023
2024
Base Cost
2025
2026
2027
2028
Foreign Exchange
%
Amount
Total
305.2
5 380.9
36.5
1 217.3
189.0
41.3
1 484.1
-
583.9
7 754.1
82.9
284.1
80.0
57.6
107.6
245.2
612.2
8 366.4
235.3
-
8 601.7
1 010.9
4 136.0
315.0
13 482.6
371.3
17 241.5
299.3
18 165.0
281.1
16 659.6
281.1
11 633.7
220.0
851.7
50.0
104.4
1 226.1
-
126.8
782.9
33.0
67.6
1 010.3
140.0
22.5
761.4
48.0
57.6
889.5
200.0
11.0
754.6
23.0
50.6
839.2
260.0
-
607.2
5.0
39.2
651.4
210.0
248.3
108.2
-
406.9
93.0
37.4
537.3
150.0
2 101.2
82 671.7
416.8
5 382.0
441.0
398.1
6 637.8
960.0
286.8
15 310.5
208.9
18 971.9
143.9
19 697.7
117.9
18 157.8
44.9
12 821.1
42.9
1 086.7
1 429.2
93 799.9
82.9
284.1
82.9
314.1
82.9
314.1
82.9
314.1
82.9
314.1
82.9
314.1
580.5
2 138.7
80.0
57.6
25.5
163.1
530.1
15 840.6
87.6
-
15 928.2
87.0
57.6
18.9
163.5
560.5
19 532.4
56.2
-
19 588.6
87.0
57.6
18.9
163.5
560.5
20 258.2
49.2
-
20 307.4
87.0
57.6
9.1
153.7
550.7
18 708.5
28.5
-
18 737.0
87.0
57.6
3.8
148.4
545.5
13 366.5
27.6
-
13 394.2
87.0
57.6
3.5
148.1
545.2
1 631.9
5.4
-
1 637.3
595.1
403.2
187.2
1 185.5
3 904.7
97 704.5
489.9
-
98 194.4
2 442.6
9 793.1
3 113.6
12 300.7
3 278.6
12 845.5
3 003.9
11 750.3
2 099.0
8 210.0
20.5
170.5
14 969.1
59 206.0
-
70.0
100.0
-
50.0
-
9.6
-
-
62.4
-
-
30.0
30.0
30.0
30.0
9.1
60.2
70.0
-
60.3
-
-
-
57 870.2
416.8
-
220.5
-
637.3
-
-
58 507.4
-
-
178.5
121.0
56.2
355.6
355.6
58 863.1
342.9
-
59 206.0
-
-
10
Annex 3 Project Cost and Financing
Tajikistan
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ (CASP+)
Expenditure Accounts by Years -- Totals Including Contingencies  
(USD '000)
 I. Investment Costs
A. In-kind
B. Civil Works, Goods, Equipment and Services
C. Technical Assistance and Studies
International TA
National TA
Studies
Travel
Subtotal Technical Assistance and Studies
D. Other Grants
E. Training and Workshops
Training and workshops
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. In_kind
B. Salaries and Allowances
C. Operating Expenses
Vehicles
Office
Other
Subtotal Operating Expenses
Total Recurrent Costs
Total PROJECT COSTS
2022
2023
Totals Including Contingencies
2026
2025
2024
2027
2028
Total
305.2
5 616.3
36.5
1 217.3
189.0
41.3
1 484.1
-
583.9
7 989.5
82.9
284.1
80.0
57.6
107.6
245.2
612.2
8 601.7
315.0
13 570.2
371.3
17 297.7
299.3
18 214.3
281.1
16 688.1
281.1
11 661.4
220.0
851.7
50.0
104.4
1 226.1
-
126.8
782.9
33.0
67.6
1 010.3
140.0
22.5
761.4
48.0
57.6
889.5
200.0
11.0
754.6
23.0
50.6
839.2
260.0
-
607.2
5.0
39.2
651.4
210.0
248.3
113.7
-
406.9
93.0
37.4
537.3
150.0
2 101.2
83 161.6
416.8
5 382.0
441.0
398.1
6 637.8
960.0
286.8
15 398.1
208.9
19 028.1
143.9
19 746.9
117.9
18 186.3
44.9
12 848.7
42.9
1 092.1
1 429.2
94 289.8
82.9
284.1
82.9
314.1
82.9
314.1
82.9
314.1
82.9
314.1
80.0
57.6
25.5
163.1
530.1
15 928.2
87.0
57.6
18.9
163.5
560.5
19 588.6
87.0
57.6
18.9
163.5
560.5
20 307.4
87.0
57.6
9.1
153.7
550.7
18 737.0
87.0
57.6
3.8
148.4
545.5
13 394.2
82.9
314.1
87.0
57.6
3.5
148.1
545.2
1 637.3
580.5
2 138.7
595.1
403.2
187.2
1 185.5
3 904.7
98 194.4
11
Annex 3 Project Cost and Financing
Tajikistan
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ (CASP+)
Expenditure Accounts Breakdown
(USD '000)
Base Cost
Local
(Excl.
Taxes)
For. Exch.
Duties &
Taxes
Total
Physical Contingencies
Local
(Excl.
Taxes)
For.
Exch.
Duties &
Taxes
Total
Price Contingencies
Local
(Excl.
Taxes)
For.
Exch.
Duties &
Taxes
Total Incl. Cont.
Local
(Excl.
Taxes)
Duties &
Taxes
Total
Base Costs
+ Price
Cont. on
Base Costs
Total
For. Exch.
Physical
Cont.
Plus
Price
Cont. on
Physical
Cont.
 I. Investment Costs
A. In-kind
B. Civil Works, Goods, Equipment and Services
C. Technical Assistance and Studies
International TA
National TA
Studies
Travel
Subtotal Technical Assistance and Studies
D. Other Grants
E. Training and Workshops
Training and workshops
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. In_kind
B. Salaries and Allowances
C. Operating Expenses
Vehicles
Office
Other
Subtotal Operating Expenses
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
-
57 870.2
416.8
-
220.5
-
637.3
-
2 101.2
9 920.6
-
5 382.0
220.5
398.1
6 000.6
960.0
-
14 880.9
2 101.2
82 671.7
-
342.9
-
58.8
-
88.2
-
489.9
-
-
-
-
-
-
416.8
5 382.0
441.0
398.1
6 637.8
960.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
58 507.4
1 429.2
20 411.5
-
14 880.9
1 429.2
93 799.9
-
342.9
-
58.8
-
88.2
-
489.9
-
-
580.5
2 138.7
-
-
580.5
2 138.7
178.5
121.0
56.2
355.6
355.6
58 863.1
416.6
282.2
131.0
829.8
3 549.0
23 960.6
-
-
-
-
-
14 880.9
595.1
403.2
187.2
1 185.5
3 904.7
97 704.5
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
342.9
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
58.8
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
88.2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
489.9
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
58 213.1
416.8
-
220.5
-
637.3
-
2 101.2
9 979.4
-
5 382.0
220.5
398.1
6 000.6
960.0
-
14 969.1
2 101.2
83 161.6
2 101.2
82 671.7
-
489.9
-
-
-
-
-
-
416.8
5 382.0
441.0
398.1
6 637.8
960.0
416.8
5 382.0
441.0
398.1
6 637.8
960.0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
58 850.4
1 429.2
20 470.3
-
14 969.1
1 429.2
94 289.8
1 429.2
93 799.9
-
489.9
-
-
580.5
2 138.7
-
-
580.5
2 138.7
580.5
2 138.7
178.5
121.0
56.2
355.6
355.6
59 206.0
416.6
282.2
131.0
829.8
3 549.0
24 019.4
-
-
-
-
-
14 969.1
595.1
403.2
187.2
1 185.5
3 904.7
98 194.4
595.1
403.2
187.2
1 185.5
3 904.7
97 704.5
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
489.9
12
Tajikistan
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ (CASP+)
Table 1. Output 1.1: By year 7, capacities of relevant national institutions for climate-resilient natural resources management are strengthened
Detailed Costs
(USD)
Unit
2022
2023
2024
Quantities
2025
2026
2027
2028
Total
Unit Cost
2022
2023
Annex 3 Project Cost and Financing
Base Cost ('000)
2025
2026
2024
2027
2028
Total
2022
Totals Including Contingencies ('000)
2025
2024
2026
2023
2027
Breakdown of Totals Incl. Cont.
2028
Total
12
12
12
12
12
-
-
20
1
-
-
15
12
-
12
1
1
-
-
-
-
12
-
-
-
-
-
30
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
12
-
12
1
1
-
-
-
-
12
-
-
-
-
-
35
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
6
-
12
1
1
-
-
-
-
6
-
-
-
-
-
25
-
60
900
4
4
6.000
3.750
90
4
45
2
68
75
1
81
7
7
15
1
25
2
74
1
1
20
50
1
550
2.500
550
2.500
150
900
12.195
1.000
2.000
5.000
450
2.500
450
2.500
950
81.301
46.458
1.000
174
139.373
120
6.000
3
80.000
-
-
-
12
8
20
20
14
3
14
3
33
3
8
-
12
-
12
9
2
5
51
84
-
-
-
-
8
81
46
4
139
-
-
-
-
139
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
243
11
58
69
12
8
20
88
14
3
-
-
16
3
11
-
-
-
-
12
2
5
33
49
7
3
7
3
11
-
-
6
36
35
9
139
183
219
30
5
10
10
55
-
-
55
411
11
58
69
-
-
-
69
11
3
11
3
27
3
11
18
-
12
-
12
2
5
63
90
-
-
-
-
11
-
-
6
17
-
-
-
-
17
-
-
-
-
-
11
-
11
-
-
-
11
-
-
-
-
-
-
11
-
-
-
-
12
2
5
30
30
-
-
5
3
11
-
-
4
22
-
-
-
-
22
-
-
-
-
-
11
-
11
-
-
-
11
11
3
-
-
14
2
11
18
-
-
-
12
2
5
50
64
-
-
-
-
11
-
-
-
11
-
-
-
-
11
-
-
-
-
-
11
-
11
-
-
-
11
-
-
-
-
-
-
11
-
-
-
-
12
2
5
30
30
-
-
-
-
11
-
-
-
11
-
-
-
-
11
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
5
18
-
-
-
12
2
5
42
42
-
-
-
-
6
-
-
-
6
-
-
-
-
6
-
-
-
-
-
54
116
170
24
15
39
209
50
10
25
5
89
10
68
54
12
12
12
81
14
35
298
388
7
3
11
5
70
81
46
20
244
35
9
139
183
426
30
5
10
10
55
60
80
140
316
120
80
200
263
180
80
260
346
210
-
210
262
150
-
150
198
720
240
1 015
2 038
-
-
-
12
8
20
20
14
3
14
3
33
3
8
-
13
-
13
9
2
5
52
85
-
-
-
-
8
85
49
4
146
-
-
-
-
146
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
250
11
61
72
12
8
20
91
14
3
-
-
16
3
11
-
-
-
-
12
2
5
33
49
7
3
7
3
11
-
-
6
36
37
9
146
192
228
30
5
10
10
55
-
-
55
423
11
61
72
-
-
-
72
11
3
11
3
27
3
11
18
-
13
-
12
2
5
63
90
-
-
-
-
11
-
-
6
17
-
-
-
-
17
-
-
-
-
-
11
-
11
-
-
-
11
-
-
-
-
-
-
11
-
-
-
-
12
2
5
30
30
-
-
5
3
11
-
-
4
22
-
-
-
-
22
-
-
-
-
-
11
-
11
-
-
-
11
11
3
-
-
14
2
11
18
-
-
-
12
2
5
50
64
-
-
-
-
11
-
-
-
11
-
-
-
-
11
-
-
-
-
-
11
-
11
-
-
-
11
-
-
-
-
-
-
11
-
-
-
-
12
2
5
30
30
-
-
-
-
11
-
-
-
11
-
-
-
-
11
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
5
18
-
-
-
12
2
5
42
42
-
-
-
-
6
-
-
-
6
-
-
-
-
6
-
-
-
-
-
54
122
176
24
15
39
215
50
10
25
5
89
10
68
54
13
13
13
81
14
35
300
389
7
3
11
5
70
85
49
20
250
37
9
146
192
442
30
5
10
10
55
60
80
140
319
120
80
200
263
180
80
260
346
210
-
210
262
150
-
150
198
720
240
1 015
2 061
 I. Investment Costs
A. Activity 1.1.1: Capacity Development of public institutions on climate resilient ecosystem management
1. Sub-activity 1.1.1.1. Strengthen capacities of Pasture Meliorative Trust to roll out Pasture Law at community level and provide technical assistance to PUUs, PUAs and PCs
pers-month
lumpsum
Recruitment of 1 nat.pastures specialist
Logistical support to the regional PMToffice in Kulob /a
Subtotal Sub-activity 1.1.1.1. Strengthen capacities of Pasture Meliorative Trust to roll out Pasture Law at community level and provide technical assistance to PUUs, PUAs and PCs
2. Sub-activity 1.1.1.2. Upgrade the technical skills of the Forestry Department
Service provider for training
Forester curriculum rolled out in the 11 leskhoz
Subtotal Sub-activity 1.1.1.2. Upgrade the technical skills of the Forestry Department
Subtotal Activity 1.1.1: Capacity Development of public institutions on climate resilient ecosystem management
B. Activity 1.1.2: Introduce combined remote and participatory Natural Resources monitoring and management
1. Sub-activity 1.1.2.1. Training on remote and participatory NRM
International GIS expert
Travel of International GIS expert
International Expert for Participatory NRM  planning
Travel of International Expert for Participatory NRM planning
Subtotal Sub-activity 1.1.2.1. Training on remote and participatory NRM
2. Sub-activity 1.1.2.2. Field testing of NRM approaches
National Botany expert
National GIS specialist - full-time (including Social Fund 25%)
NRM monitoring with bees
Purchase of computer plotter plus ink, paper etc.
Purchase of satellite images
Purchase of a server (to store data)
Monitoring and Evaluation Consultant for CEP (including social fund)
Travel for CEP M&E Specialist
Annual outcome survey
Subtotal Sub-activity 1.1.2.2. Field testing of NRM approaches
Trainings
training
pers-day
mission
pers-day
mission
pers-day
pers-month
lumpsum
lumpsum
lumpsum
unit
pers-month
per year
study
-
2
2
25
1
25
1
18
9
1
9
1
1
2
2
25
1
-
-
18
12
-
12
1
1
-
-
20
1
20
1
17
12
-
12
1
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
12
-
12
1
1
Subtotal Activity 1.1.2: Introduce combined remote and participatory Natural Resources monitoring and management
C. Activity 1.1.3: Enhance technical capacities of national livestock institutions to ensure efficient provision of public animal health and production services to smallholder farmers through efficient partnership between public and 
1. Sub-activity 1.1.3.1. Step up veterinary public health services of the National Veterinary Authority through provision of technical assistance and equipment  
International Veterinary Management Expert
Travel of International Vet Management Expert
International Expert on veterinary surveillance and public veterinary health service
Travel of International Expert on veterinary surveillance and public veterinary health service
National Expert on Epidemiology and One Health approach (including social fund)
Purchase of a mini truck-refrigerator for FSC
Purchase of a disinfection machine for FSC
Training, workshop, round tables for State Veterinary staff
pers-day
mission
pers-day
mission
pers-month
unit
unit
event
-
-
-
-
8
1
1
4
Subtotal Sub-activity 1.1.3.1. Step up veterinary public health services of the National Veterinary Authority through provision of technical assistance and equipment
2. Sub-activity 1.1.3.2. Improve the outreach of breeding services provided by State Enterprise for Animal Breeding and Artificial Insemination to areas and communities targeted by the Project
Purchase of laboratory equipment for SEABAI
Purchase of AI kits for SEABAI
Purchase of liquid nitrogen machine
lumpsum
kit
unit
-
-
15
1
15
1
12
-
-
6
50
1
Subtotal Sub-activity 1.1.3.2. Improve the outreach of breeding services provided by State Enterprise for Animal Breeding and Artificial Insemination to areas and communities targeted by the Project
Subtotal Activity 1.1.3: Enhance technical capacities of national livestock institutions to ensure efficient provision of public animal health and production services to smallholder farmers through efficient p
D. Activity 1.1.4: Build capacities of research and academia institutions on climate resilient ecosystem management
1. Sub-activity 1.1.4.1.  Integrate climate change issues in university and training institutions curricula
Development of 1 new curriculum for CC specialists
Develop gender modules to be integrated into the CC curricula developed by the project for schools and specialized universities
Inclusion of a CC module in the curricula of agronomists, agricultural engineers, foresters, zootechnicians and veterinarians, and public administrators
Traiing of diploma level trainers
Subtotal Sub-activity 1.1.4.1.  Integrate climate change issues in university and training institutions curricula
2. Sub-activity 1.1.4.2. Promote enrollment of male and female youth in training curricula on climate-resilient natural resources management
Provision of scholarships
lumpsum
lumpsum
lumpsum
lumpsum
scholarship
3. Sub-activity 1.1.4.3.Enable research institutes and the private sector to produce evidence on NRM and Climate Change for policy dialogue and climate sensitive technical innovations
Provision of batches of grants for research projects /b
Subtotal Activity 1.1.4: Build capacities of research and academia institutions on climate resilient ecosystem management
batch
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
12
-
-
6
-
-
10
1
-
-
10
1
12
-
-
4
-
-
20
1
Total
_________________________________
\a Refurbishment - $30,000; equipment - $20,000, two vehicles for field missions - $50,000 (w/o VAT)
\b 1 batch - 2 projects/year
1
Tajikistan
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ (CASP+)
Table 2. Output 1.2: By year 7, enabling environment for climate adaptive, inclusive and integrated management of pasture, forestry and livestock resources is enhanced
Detailed Costs
(USD)
 I. Investment Costs
A. Activity 1.2.1: Promote an inclusive and integrated policy dialogue
1. Sub-activity 1.2.1.1. Stock taking of policy development and mainstreaming of gender sensitive climate adaptive agricultural practices
Unit
2022
2023
2024
Quantities
2025
2026
2027
2028
Total
Unit Cost
2022
2023
Annex 3 Project Cost and Financing
Base Cost ('000)
2025
2026
2024
2027
2028
Total
2022
Totals Including Contingencies ('000)
2025
2024
2026
2023
2027
Breakdown of Totals Incl. Cont.
2028
Total
Recruitment of International Policy Expert
Travel of international policy expert
Recruitment of International Gender Expert
Travel of international gender specialist
Subtotal Sub-activity 1.2.1.1. Stock taking of policy development and mainstreaming of gender sensitive climate adaptive agricultural practices
2. Sub-activity 1.2.1.2. Training on the utilization of policy support tools e.g.  SIPT, GLEAM, EXACT, B-INTACT
Recruitment of International Specialists on Carbon accounting Tools
Travel of Carbon accounting specialist
Recruitment of International Specialists on Livestock Planning Related Tools (LSIPT)
Travel of Livestock Planning Tool Specialist (LSIPT)
Subtotal Sub-activity 1.2.1.2. Training on the utilization of policy support tools e.g.  SIPT, GLEAM, EXACT, B-INTACT
3. Sub-activity 1.2.1.3. Implementation of workshops for institutional networking
Policy dialogue workshops
SFA staff time to be involved in policy dialogues
Purchase and printing of communication materials (including Publication: Gender and Climate Change in Tajikistan (based on CASP experience)
Conduct of thematic workshops on gender and climate change at national level for policy makers /a
Subtotal Sub-activity 1.2.1.3. Implementation of workshops for institutional networking
Subtotal Activity 1.2.1: Promote an inclusive and integrated policy dialogue
B. Activity 1.2.2: Technical assistance for review of livestock related regulatory frameworks
1. Sub-activity 1.2.2.1. Improvement of the Pasture Law
Recruitment of pasture policy expert
Missions of the pasture policy expert
Consultation workshops on Pasture Law
Interpreter/Translators (including 25% social fund)
Subtotal Sub-activity 1.2.2.1. Improvement of the Pasture Law
2. Sub-activity 1.2.2.2. Technical assistance of the OIE
Organization of the OIE mission on veterinary legislation
3. Sub-activity 1.2.2.3. Improvement of veterinary legislation
Workshops, round tables, conferences
International Vet Legislation Expert
Travel of International Vet Legislation Expert
Subtotal Sub-activity 1.2.2.3. Improvement of veterinary legislation
4. Sub-activity 1.2.2.4. Review of the national breeding strategy
Provision of technical assistance on the formulation of breeding strategies
Organization of workshops (2 consultations and 1 validation)
Subtotal Sub-activity 1.2.2.4. Review of the national breeding strategy
Subtotal Activity 1.2.2: Technical assistance for review of livestock related regulatory frameworks
C. Activity 1.2.3. Launching the basis for a green economy
1. Sub-activity 1.2.3.1. Develop the draft of the Green Economy strategy
Recruitment of International Green Economy Expert
Travel of International Green Economy Expert
Recruitment of National Green Economy Expert
1 Consultation and 1 Validation Workshop
Subtotal Sub-activity 1.2.3.1. Develop the draft of the Green Economy strategy
2. Sub-activity 1.2.3.2. Capacity Development of MEDT staff
Training on Green economy carried out by the National GE Expert to MEDT
ToT for subnational MEDT staff that can be autonomously repeated on district level by MEDT staff
Study tour to learn from best practice experience in the sector from a partner country
Subtotal Sub-activity 1.2.3.2. Capacity Development of MEDT staff
3. Sub-activity 1.2.3.3. Capacity Development of Ministry of Finance staff
10 participants of Government agencies (Min Fin and others) participate in study tours on key project topics
Software for Monitoring and Analysis of Public Investment Projects (including advisory and installment)
Subtotal Sub-activity 1.2.3.3. Capacity Development of Ministry of Finance staff
Subtotal Activity 1.2.3. Launching the basis for a green economy
Total
pers-day
mission
pers-day
mission
pers-day
mission
pers-day
mission
workshop
pers-month
lumpsum
workshop
pers-day
mission
workshop
pers-month
lumpsum
event
pers-day
mission
lumpsum
workshop
pers-day
mission
pers-day
workshop
training
training
per participant
participant
software
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
21
1
20
1
1
24
3
-
-
2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
20
1
20
1
20
1
20
1
1
21
1
20
1
1
24
3
15
1
1
40
1
60
2
1
1
10
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
1
-
-
-
24
3
15
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
-
-
-
-
-
20
1
20
1
1
-
1
-
-
-
24
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
_________________________________
\a Through dissemination of findings from gender study, diagnostic , assessment to  ensure CC and NRM policies/ legal frameworks consider gender-specific recommendations
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
1
-
-
-
24
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
1
-
-
-
24
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
20
1
20
1
40
2
40
2
7
42
7
40
2
2
168
10
30
2
450
2.500
450
2.500
450
2.500
450
2.500
1.000
1.200
1.500
450
2.500
1.500
800
1.500
450
2.500
3
5.000
40
1
60
2
1
1
10
10
1
450
2.500
90
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.750
2.500
35.000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
25
2
2
30
30
9
3
2
19
32
-
5
-
-
5
20
10
30
67
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
9
3
9
3
23
9
3
9
3
23
1
25
2
2
30
76
9
3
2
19
32
30
5
7
3
14
-
5
5
81
18
3
5
2
28
1
1
18
20
-
35
35
35
132
-
-
-
47
204
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
2
2
5
5
-
-
-
19
19
-
5
7
3
14
-
-
-
33
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
25
-
25
25
63
-
-
-
-
-
9
3
9
3
23
1
-
2
2
5
28
-
-
-
19
19
-
2
-
-
2
-
-
-
21
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
49
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
2
2
5
5
-
-
-
19
19
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
19
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
24
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
2
2
5
5
-
-
-
19
19
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
19
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
24
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
5
2
7
7
-
-
-
19
19
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
19
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
27
9
3
9
3
23
18
5
18
5
46
7
50
19
11
87
156
18
5
3
134
160
30
15
14
5
34
20
15
35
259
18
3
5
2
28
1
1
18
20
25
35
60
107
522
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
25
2
2
30
30
9
3
2
19
32
-
5
-
-
5
20
10
30
67
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
9
3
9
3
23
9
3
9
3
23
1
25
2
2
30
76
9
3
2
19
32
30
5
7
3
14
-
5
5
81
18
3
5
2
28
1
1
18
20
-
35
35
35
132
-
-
-
47
204
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
2
2
5
5
-
-
-
19
19
-
5
7
3
14
-
-
-
33
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
25
-
25
25
63
-
-
-
-
-
9
3
9
3
23
1
-
2
2
5
28
-
-
-
19
19
-
2
-
-
2
-
-
-
21
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
49
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
2
2
5
5
-
-
-
19
19
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
19
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
24
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
2
2
5
5
-
-
-
19
19
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
19
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
24
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
5
2
8
8
-
-
-
19
19
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
19
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
27
9
3
9
3
23
18
5
18
5
46
7
50
20
11
88
157
18
5
3
134
160
30
15
14
5
34
20
15
35
259
18
3
5
2
28
1
1
18
20
25
35
60
107
523
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
1
-
-
-
24
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
Development of CsCAPs, including forestry (conerning design and allocation of JFM plots and layout of direct afforestation areas), pastures, infrastructure and mechanisation aspects in 400 villages /h
Environmental and social impact assessments (ESIA) - Recruitment of 2 Environment/Climate Change specialists
Environmental and social impact assessments (ESIA) - Recruitment of 2 Social Inclusion specialists
Environmental and social impact assessments (ESIA) - Experts travel
lumpsum
lumpsum
lumpsum
mission
-
4
4
-
-
Tajikistan
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ (CASP+)
Table 3. Output 2.1: By year 3, 400 Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAP) based on 21 District level Climate Resilience Diagnostics are developed
Detailed Costs
(USD)
 I. Investment Costs
A. Activity 2.1.1: Diagnostic of Community needs
1. Sub-activity 2.1.1.1. Diagnostic - create a District Climate Resilience Diagnostic (DCRD) for each District
Compile District dignostic /a
Community district-level meetings /b
National communication expert to create videos,animations, communications material to explain diagnostic /c
CEP in-kind contribution: Conducting different campaign at local and national levels on Project activities
Communication Specialist (including 25% social fund)
Subtotal Sub-activity 2.1.1.1. Diagnostic - create a District Climate Resilience Diagnostic (DCRD) for each District
2. Sub-activity 2.1.1.2. Dissemination of diagnostic
District community meetings /d
3. Sub-activity 2.1.1.3. Village selection
Village selection process (qualitative elements)
Subtotal Activity 2.1.1: Diagnostic of Community needs
B. Activity 2.1.2: Establishing relevant local institutions
1. Sub-activity 2.1.2.1. Establishment  and strengthening VO's
National Pasture Specialist (SEPMU)
Per diem for travels of National Pasture Specialist (SEPMU)
Recruit a local NGO to set baseline socio-economic status of households with particular focus on capacity to deal with climate change and risks
Community facilitator to establish VO
Training of VO executives by community facilitator
Equipment of VO or PUU or PUG: office equipment, mobile phone for pasture monitoring
Subtotal Sub-activity 2.1.2.1. Establishment  and strengthening VO's
2. Sub-activity 2.1.2.2. Establishment and strengthening PUU or PUG
Community facilitator to establish PUU (or PUG under VO)
Training of PUU executives on formulation of PMP, pasture monitoring
Subtotal Sub-activity 2.1.2.2. Establishment and strengthening PUU or PUG
3. Sub-activity 2.1.2.3. Establishment and strengthening of PUA's
Community facilitator to establish PUA at District level
4. Sub-activity 2.1.2.4. Establishment and strengthening of Pasture Commissions
Community facilitator to establish PC at district level
5. Sub-activity 2.1.2.5. Promotion of JFM and establishment of Forest User Groups
Community facilitator to establish - Forest User Groups
JFM mobilization from first field visit through, plot id, user selection, signing JFM Contracts, 5 year plan and ongoing support. /e
Subtotal Sub-activity 2.1.2.5. Promotion of JFM and establishment of Forest User Groups
6. Sub-activity 2.1.2.6. Establishment of Common Interest Groups (CIGs)
Community facilitator to establish - Common Interest Groups /f
Training of CIGs by community facilitator
Subtotal Sub-activity 2.1.2.6. Establishment of Common Interest Groups (CIGs)
7. Sub-activity 2.1.2.7. Organize leadership training for women representatives in PUUs/VOs
Women representatives  trained in leadership skills by a specialized NGO /g
Subtotal Activity 2.1.2: Establishing relevant local institutions
C. Activity 2.1.3: CsCAP planning and design
1. Sub-activity 2.1.3.1. CsCAP planning and design
Subtotal Sub-activity 2.1.3.1. CsCAP planning and design
D. Activity 2.1.4: Strengthening local institutions capacity to monitor and evaluate CsCAPs
1. Sub-activity 2.1.4.1. Strengthening local institutions capacity to monitor and evaluate CsCAPs
Training in monitoring & evaluation, use of Smartphone reporting tools
16 PMU District officers /i
In-kind PMU (MoA) co-financing - Involvement of specialists from agricultural departments of target districts in Project implementation
Vehicles for 16 District Officers in Component 2 and 4 key project management staff
Provision of PMU vehicles for the Project implementation (excluding the fuel and maintenance expenses)
Organization of training of 16 PMU and 5 CEP Project forestry specialists on compliance with GCF requirements (e.g.ESIA)
Trainer fee for training (including material preparation) of 16 PMU and 5 CEP Project forestry specialists on compliance with GCF requirements (e.g.ESIA)
Engineers (including social fund) /j
Agronomist (including social fund)
Community development specialist (including social fund)
Gender and Youth policy specialist (including social fund)
MIS system operational support
Baseline survey (initial)
Conduct of Project Mid-term survey by a local NGO
Conduct of Project Final survey by a local NGO
Conduct of Gender–sensitive impact assessment by an NGO
Monitoring and Evaluation Consultant for SEPMU (including social fund)
Travel for SEPMU M&E Specialist
Monitoring and Evaluation Assistant for SEPMU (including social fund)
Subtotal Sub-activity 2.1.4.1. Strengthening local institutions capacity to monitor and evaluate CsCAPs
2. Sub-activity 2.1.4.2. Implement Community Forest Investments
5 Project forestry specialists (covering each 2 or 3 leskhozes) -  including social fund /k
Project forestry specialists travel
Purchase of field vehicles for CEP PIU (3 units)
CEP in-kind contribution: Involving of CEP staffs (including CEP specialists from 21 districts, drivers and other technical staff)
Office equipment - SFA in-kind co-financing (computre, printer, camera, etc.)
SFA staff Travel (per diems) - 3 persons - 2 times per month each
SFA office space
SFA vehicles O&M
SFA running costs
Subtotal Sub-activity 2.1.4.2. Implement Community Forest Investments
Subtotal Activity 2.1.4: Strengthening local institutions capacity to monitor and evaluate CsCAPs
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. Activity 2.1.2: Establishing relevant local institutions
1. Sub-activity 2.1.2.3. Establishment and strengthening of PUA's
Operations of PUAs: meeting cost and travel
2. Sub-activity 2.1.2.4. Establishment and strengthening of Pasture Commissions
Operations of PCs: meetings and travel
Subtotal Activity 2.1.2: Establishing relevant local institutions
B. Activity 2.1.4: Strengthening local institutions capacity to monitor and evaluate CsCAPs
1. Sub-activity 2.1.4.1. Strengthening local institutions capacity to monitor and evaluate CsCAPs
Operating costs for PMU vehicles /l
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
_________________________________
\a National experts in GIS/climate change/geobotany with assistance of International consultant
\b To a) explain diagnostic report and how it should be used in development planning and b) to collect qualitative elements to be used in village selection process.
\c One animation/video. One communications pack per district to complement the written diagnostic report, including gender sensitive comminication material.
\d To a) explain diagnostic report and how it should be used in development planning and b) to collect qualitative elements to be used in village selection process.
\e Numbers are to give effort phasing (will operate in all 200 villages immediately)
\f 2.5 per village, 10 HH each
\g Y1 - training and Y2 - refresher training
\h @$950/village
\i 12 months per year; including social fund
\j 4 persons
\k Y1 - 0, Y2 - 6 months, Y3-Y7 - 12 months
\l +2 cars from on-going IFAD CASP project in Y3
Annex 3 Project Cost and Financing
Unit
2022
2023
2024
Quantities
2025
2026
2027
2028
Total
Unit Cost
2022
2023
Base Cost ('000)
2025
2026
2024
diagnostic report
workshop
communication pack
lumpsum
pers-month
workshop
report
pers-month
pers-month
contract
VO
VO
VO or PUU or PUG
PUU  or PUG
PUU or PUG
PUA
PUA
FUG
JFM contract
CIG
CIG
contract
21
21
1
6
21
-
12
6
1
200
200
400
200
400
21
21
-
-
1 020
-
-
-
-
12
-
-
12
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
50
100
-
255
-
-
-
12
-
-
12
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
50
25
-
255
-
-
-
12
-
-
12
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
50
25
-
255
-
-
-
12
-
-
12
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
50
25
-
255
-
-
-
12
-
-
12
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
25
-
-
-
-
-
-
12
-
-
12
6
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
21
21
1
78
21
-
84
72
1
200
200
400
200
400
21
21
200
200
1 020
1 020
4.000
1.000
10.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
75
70.000
800
800
1.858
400
400
1.000
1.500
400
1.975
100
200
8
2.500
workshop
pers-month
lumpsum
vehicle
vehicle
workshop
workshop
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
contract
contract
contract
contract
contract
pers-month
per year
pers-month
pers-month
per month
vehicle
lumpsum
units
lump sum/year
per year
lump sum/year
lump sum/year
PUA
PUA
400
192
-
192
-
192
-
192
-
192
-
192
-
192
400
1 344
20
-
2
2
-
-
12
12
1
1
-
-
-
12
1
12
-
-
3
14
14
1
14
14
21
21
-
-
-
-
-
-
12
12
1
-
-
-
-
12
1
12
30
30
-
14
14
1
14
14
-
-
-
2
-
-
48
12
12
12
1
-
-
-
-
12
1
12
60
60
-
-
14
1
14
14
-
-
-
-
-
-
48
12
12
12
1
-
1
-
-
12
1
12
60
60
-
-
14
1
14
14
-
-
-
-
-
-
48
12
12
12
1
-
-
-
-
12
1
12
60
60
-
-
14
1
14
14
-
-
-
-
-
-
48
12
12
12
1
-
-
-
-
12
1
12
60
60
-
-
14
1
14
14
-
-
-
-
-
-
48
12
12
12
1
-
-
1
1
12
1
12
60
60
-
-
14
1
14
14
-
-
200
800
34.843
36.000
1.000
2.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
5.000
30.000
35.000
35.000
35.000
1.000
2.000
1.000
800
75
29.036
965
1.400
1.500
1.500
742
20
2
2
2
240
60
84
84
7
1
1
1
1
84
7
84
330
330
3
28
98
7
98
98
21
21
1.500
1.500
2027
2028
Total
2022
-
-
-
37
12
49
-
-
49
12
1
-
-
-
-
13
-
-
-
-
-
-
49
49
-
-
-
-
62
-
-
-
-
-
-
154
43
-
-
-
-
48
12
12
12
5
-
-
-
-
12
2
12
311
48
5
-
50
-
20
2
21
10
155
466
578
-
-
-
-
-
-
37
12
49
-
-
49
12
0
-
-
-
-
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
84
21
10
260
78
453
21
-
474
84
5
70
160
160
743
1 223
80
160
240
21
32
80
395
475
102
204
306
84
21
10
37
6
158
21
-
179
12
0
70
160
160
780
1 183
80
160
240
21
32
-
-
-
102
-
102
-
12
80
2 376
40
1 617
-
-
-
-
-
-
154
43
-
-
-
-
48
12
12
12
5
-
-
35
35
12
2
12
381
48
5
-
50
-
20
2
21
10
155
536
598
-
-
-
380
48
48
20
496
80
1 075
300
697
72
2
4
240
60
84
84
35
30
35
35
35
84
14
84
3 050
264
25
87
350
27
137
11
147
73
1 120
4 170
7 517
380
-
-
-
380
80
154
43
732
-
2
4
-
-
12
12
5
30
-
-
-
12
2
12
1 099
-
-
91
50
14
20
2
21
10
207
1 307
3 483
32
32
63
32
32
63
Totals Including Contingencies ('000)
2025
2024
2026
2027
2023
Breakdown of Totals Incl. Cont.
2028
Total
-
-
-
37
12
49
-
-
49
12
1
-
-
-
-
13
-
-
-
-
-
20
198
218
-
51
51
40
321
-
24
24
10
58
-
154
43
-
-
-
-
-
-
12
12
5
-
-
-
-
12
2
12
251
24
2
-
50
14
20
2
21
10
142
394
822
-
-
-
-
-
-
37
12
49
-
-
49
12
1
-
-
-
-
13
-
-
-
-
-
20
49
69
-
51
51
-
-
-
37
12
49
-
-
49
12
1
-
-
-
-
13
-
-
-
-
-
20
49
69
-
51
51
-
-
-
37
12
49
-
-
49
12
1
-
-
-
-
13
-
-
-
-
-
20
49
69
-
51
51
-
133
-
133
-
133
-
24
24
10
58
-
154
43
-
72
-
-
48
12
12
12
5
-
-
-
-
12
2
12
383
48
5
-
50
-
20
2
21
10
155
538
779
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
154
43
-
-
-
-
48
12
12
12
5
-
35
-
-
12
2
12
346
48
5
-
50
-
20
2
21
10
155
501
684
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
154
43
-
-
-
-
48
12
12
12
5
-
-
-
-
12
2
12
311
48
5
-
50
-
20
2
21
10
155
466
649
-
-
-
-
-
-
37
12
49
-
-
49
12
1
-
-
-
-
13
-
-
-
-
-
-
49
49
-
-
-
-
62
-
-
-
-
-
-
154
43
-
-
-
-
48
12
12
12
5
-
-
-
-
12
2
12
311
48
5
-
50
-
20
2
21
10
155
466
578
-
-
-
-
-
-
37
12
49
-
-
49
12
0
-
-
-
-
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
84
21
10
260
78
453
21
-
474
84
5
70
160
160
780
1 260
80
160
240
21
32
80
395
475
102
204
306
-
12
80
2 413
-
-
-
-
-
-
154
43
-
-
-
-
48
12
12
12
5
-
-
35
35
12
2
12
381
48
5
-
50
-
20
2
21
10
155
536
598
-
-
-
380
48
48
20
496
80
1 075
300
732
72
2
4
240
60
84
84
35
30
35
35
35
84
14
84
3 085
264
25
91
350
27
137
11
147
73
1 125
4 210
7 593
32
32
63
84
21
10
37
6
158
21
-
179
12
0
70
160
160
743
1 146
80
160
240
21
32
-
-
-
102
-
102
40
1 580
380
-
-
-
380
80
154
43
697
-
2
4
-
-
12
12
5
30
-
-
-
12
2
12
1 064
-
-
87
50
14
20
2
21
10
203
1 267
3 407
32
32
63
-
-
-
37
12
49
-
-
49
12
1
-
-
-
-
13
-
-
-
-
-
20
198
218
-
51
51
40
321
-
24
24
10
58
-
154
43
-
-
-
-
-
-
12
12
5
-
-
-
-
12
2
12
251
24
2
-
50
14
20
2
21
10
142
394
822
-
-
-
-
-
-
37
12
49
-
-
49
12
1
-
-
-
-
13
-
-
-
-
-
20
49
69
-
51
51
-
-
-
37
12
49
-
-
49
12
1
-
-
-
-
13
-
-
-
-
-
20
49
69
-
51
51
-
-
-
37
12
49
-
-
49
12
1
-
-
-
-
13
-
-
-
-
-
20
49
69
-
51
51
-
133
-
133
-
133
-
24
24
10
58
-
154
43
-
72
-
-
48
12
12
12
5
-
-
-
-
12
2
12
383
48
5
-
50
-
20
2
21
10
155
538
779
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
154
43
-
-
-
-
48
12
12
12
5
-
35
-
-
12
2
12
346
48
5
-
50
-
20
2
21
10
155
501
684
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
154
43
-
-
-
-
48
12
12
12
5
-
-
-
-
12
2
12
311
48
5
-
50
-
20
2
21
10
155
466
649
-
-
-
vehicle/month
240
240
264
264
264
264
264
1 800
290
70
133
3 539
70
70
892
77
77
855
77
77
760
77
77
725
77
77
654
77
77
675
522
585
8 102
70
133
3 616
70
70
892
77
77
855
77
77
760
77
77
725
77
77
654
77
77
675
522
585
8 178
3
Tajikistan
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ (CASP+)
Table 4. Output 2.2: By year 7, 400 Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAP) implemented in 21 districts benefitting at least 100,000 rural households 
Detailed Costs
(USD)
Unit
2022
2023
2024
Quantities
2025
2026
2027
2028
Total
Unit Cost
2022
2023
2024
Base Cost ('000)
2025
2026
2027
2028
Total
2022
2023
Annex 3 Project Cost and Financing
Totals Including Contingencies ('000)
2025
2024
2026
Breakdown of Totals Incl. Cont.
2027
2028
Total
 I. Investment Costs
A. Activity 2.2.1: Implement Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans
1. Sub-Activity 2.2.1.1. Implement Pasture Restoration Investment
Implement Pasture Management Plan
PMP monitoring (by PMT). Two visits per year per PUU by PMT officers /a
Subtotal Sub-Activity 2.2.1.1. Implement Pasture Restoration Investment
2. Sub-Activity 2.2.1.2. Implement cross-village Pasture Management Investments
PMP
per village
-
800
Implement cross-village Pasture Management Plan: these are activities that benefit more than one PUU and are best planned at the multi-PUU or district level.
Cross-village PMP monitoring (by PIU or appointed consultants)
PC-level PMP
CsCAP
Subtotal Sub-Activity 2.2.1.2. Implement cross-village Pasture Management Investments
3. Sub-Activity 2.2.1.3: Implement Joint Forest Management Investments
JFM Investment: Forest & Pasture Management Plans
Field training for JFM beneficiaries on planting and aftercare of trees
Equipment package for forest establishment, site preparation  to be used across multiple FMPs /b
SFA in-kind co-financing - Leshoze staff time
Subtotal Sub-Activity 2.2.1.3: Implement Joint Forest Management Investments
4. Sub-Activity 2.2.1.4: Implement Direct Leskhoz Forestry Investments
Leskhoz Investment: Forest & Pasture Management Plans
Equipment package for forest establishment, site preparation to be used across multiple FMPs /c
SFA in-kind co-financing - Seedlings
SFA in-kind co-financing - Leshoze staff time
Subtotal Sub-Activity 2.2.1.4: Implement Direct Leskhoz Forestry Investments
5. Sub-Activity 2.2.1.5: Implementation JFM in Protected Area buffer zones
JFM Investment: Protected Area Buffer Zones
6. Sub-Activity 2.2.1.6: Implement Climate Resilient infrastructure investments
Implement Climate Resilient infrastructure investments
7. Sub-Activity 2.2.1.7: Community Agricultural equipment for productivity improvement
Implement Agriculture Mechanisation investments from CsCAP: the purchase of community-shared equipment
Total
_________________________________
\a Each village twice a year
\b 2 x tractors, 2 x 4x4 car, 1 x larger trucks for water/seedling transport
\c 2 x tractors, 2 x 4x4 car, 1 x larger trucks for water/seedling transport
Ha
workshop
  Equipment package
lump sum/year
Ha
  Equipment package
lump sum/year
lump sum/year
Ha
CsCAP
CsCAP
21
-
-
40
10
14
-
4
14
14
-
-
-
80
800
-
7
1 160
40
-
14
270
-
14
14
36
80
80
80
800
-
7
1 160
40
-
14
270
-
14
14
36
80
80
80
800
-
7
1 160
40
-
14
270
-
14
14
36
80
80
80
800
-
-
1 160
40
-
14
270
-
-
14
36
80
80
80
800
-
-
1 160
-
-
14
270
-
-
14
36
80
80
-
800
400
5 600
32.534
35
-
-
-
-
-
14
-
-
-
14
-
-
-
21
21
32.092
500
5 800
200
10
98
1 350
4
56
98
180
400
400
3.043
500
162.602
2.500
2.497
162.602
1.300
1.300
3.043
24.962
27.100
-
28
28
674
-
674
-
20
1 626
35
1 681
-
650
18
18
687
-
-
2 603
28
2 631
2 603
28
2 631
2 603
28
2 631
2 603
28
2 631
2 603
28
2 631
-
4
4
3 530
20
-
35
3 585
674
-
18
18
711
110
-
4
4
3 530
20
-
35
3 585
674
-
18
18
711
110
-
4
4
3 530
20
-
35
3 585
674
-
18
18
711
110
-
-
-
3 530
20
-
35
3 585
674
-
-
18
692
110
-
-
-
3 530
-
-
35
3 565
674
-
-
18
692
110
1 997
1 997
1 997
1 997
1 997
-
3 070
2 168
11 204
2 168
11 204
2 168
11 204
2 168
11 182
2 168
11 162
-
28
28
-
-
-
-
-
-
35
35
-
-
-
18
18
-
-
-
81
13 013
196
13 209
674
11
684
17 648
100
1 626
245
19 619
3 371
650
73
127
4 221
548
9 985
-
28
28
674
-
674
-
20
1 707
35
1 762
-
683
18
18
719
-
-
2 603
28
2 631
2 603
28
2 631
2 603
28
2 631
2 603
28
2 631
2 603
28
2 631
-
4
4
3 530
20
-
35
3 585
674
-
18
18
711
110
-
4
4
3 530
20
-
35
3 585
674
-
18
18
711
110
-
4
4
3 530
20
-
35
3 585
674
-
18
18
711
110
-
-
-
3 530
20
-
35
3 585
674
-
-
18
692
110
-
-
-
3 530
-
-
35
3 565
674
-
-
18
692
110
1 997
1 997
1 997
1 997
1 997
10 840
59 106
-
3 184
2 168
11 204
2 168
11 204
2 168
11 204
2 168
11 182
2 168
11 162
-
28
28
-
-
-
-
-
-
35
35
-
-
-
18
18
-
-
-
81
13 013
196
13 209
674
11
684
17 648
100
1 707
245
19 700
3 371
683
73
127
4 254
548
9 985
10 840
59 220
4
Tajikistan
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ (CASP+)
Table 5. Output 3.1: By end of year 7, 105,600 smallholder livestock farmers receive AI, animal health or training services to increase productivity of their livestock
Detailed Costs
(USD)
Unit
2022
2023
2024
Quantities
2025
2026
2027
2028
Total
Unit Cost
2022
2023
Annex 3 Project Cost and Financing
Base Cost ('000)
2025
2024
2026
2027
2028
Total
2022
Totals Including Contingencies ('000)
2025
2024
2026
2023
2027
Breakdown of Totals Incl. Cont.
2028
Total
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
17
7
1
27
12
6
70
28
330
-
429
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
32
13
44
44
473
28
2
9
15
53
465
348
866
-
-
1
-
12
6
19
28
-
330
377
64
73
25
162
25
10
8
43
-
-
-
84
-
19
8
32
13
155
360
1 604
-
-
-
-
-
465
348
813
-
-
1
-
12
6
19
28
-
-
48
58
73
75
206
25
-
8
33
25
25
24
-
12
19
8
-
-
112
352
1 212
-
-
-
-
-
465
348
813
-
-
1
-
9
6
16
28
-
-
45
-
73
50
123
-
-
-
-
25
-
24
84
-
-
-
-
-
133
256
1 114
-
-
-
-
-
465
-
465
-
-
1
-
6
6
13
28
-
-
42
-
73
50
123
-
-
-
-
25
-
24
-
-
-
-
-
-
49
172
679
-
-
-
-
-
465
-
465
-
-
1
-
3
6
10
28
-
-
39
-
73
-
73
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
73
576
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
6
7
28
-
-
36
-
73
-
73
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
73
109
28
2
9
15
53
2 323
1 045
3 421
17
7
8
27
54
42
155
199
330
330
1 014
122
439
200
761
50
10
16
76
76
25
72
167
12
37
16
64
25
493
1 331
5 766
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
18
8
1
28
12
6
73
28
346
-
448
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
33
13
46
46
494
28
2
9
15
54
488
366
908
-
-
1
-
12
6
19
28
-
346
394
67
77
25
169
25
10
8
43
-
-
-
88
-
20
8
33
13
161
374
1 676
-
-
-
-
-
488
366
854
-
-
1
-
12
6
19
28
-
-
48
61
77
75
213
25
-
8
33
25
25
24
-
12
20
8
-
-
114
360
1 261
-
-
-
-
-
488
366
854
-
-
1
-
9
6
16
28
-
-
45
-
77
50
127
-
-
-
-
25
-
24
88
-
-
-
-
-
137
264
1 162
-
-
-
-
-
488
-
488
-
-
1
-
6
6
13
28
-
-
42
-
77
50
127
-
-
-
-
25
-
24
-
-
-
-
-
-
49
176
705
-
-
-
-
-
488
-
488
-
-
1
-
3
6
10
28
-
-
39
-
77
-
77
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
77
603
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
6
7
28
-
-
36
-
77
-
77
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
77
112
28
2
9
15
54
2 439
1 098
3 591
18
8
9
28
54
42
158
199
346
346
1 050
128
461
200
789
50
10
16
76
76
25
72
176
12
39
16
67
25
507
1 373
6 014
 I. Investment Costs
A. Activity 3.1.1: Improving the genetic potential of smallholder farmers’ livestock
1. Sub-activity 3.1.1.1. Training of youth in Artificial Insemination
Participants' travel and per diems (10 days stay in Dushanbe) - 50 young specialists
Trainers' fee (2 trainers)
AI kits
Consumables including cows (5 out of 10 days are practical sessions)
Subtotal Sub-activity 3.1.1.1. Training of youth in Artificial Insemination
2. Sub-activity 3.1.1.2. Organization of Artificial Insemination Campaigns
Purchase of doses and synchronization for AI
3. Sub-activity 3.1.1.3. Establish Off-Farm Mating stations
Purchase of bulls
Subtotal Activity 3.1.1: Improving the genetic potential of smallholder farmers’ livestock
B. Activity 3.1.2: Support to delivery of private animal health services
1. Sub-activity 3.1.2.1. Institutional support to Tajik Veterinary Association (TVA)
Renovation of TVA office and Training Center
Purchase of office equipment and furniture for the training room (TVA office)
Office maintenance (TVA)
Purchase of a vehicle for TVA
Recruitment of Nat Specialist on ontinuous Veterinary Education
Participation in the international events/workshops
Subtotal Sub-activity 3.1.2.1. Institutional support to Tajik Veterinary Association (TVA)
2. Sub-activity 3.1.2.2. Training of private veterinarians
Training and workshops, including kick off meetings
3. Sub-activity 3.1.2.3. Equiping private veterinarians
Purchase of Veterinary package for 284 vets
4. Sub-activity 3.1.2.4. Mobility of private veterinarians
Purchase of motobike for 284 vets
Subtotal Activity 3.1.2: Support to delivery of private animal health services
C. Activity 3.1.3: Support adoption of climate resilient innovative technologies
1. Sub-activity 3.1.3.1. Promotion of technical climate smart innovations through demonstrations and exchange visits
Establishment of demo plots (1 demo plot by district)
O&M of demo plots - 5 years each
Exchange visits (1 visit per district per year)
Subtotal Sub-activity 3.1.3.1. Promotion of technical climate smart innovations through demonstrations and exchange visits
2. Sub-activity 3.1.3.2. Development of FFS curricula and training of facilitators
Recruitment of International Master Trainer on FFS ( 2 missions incl fees and travel)
Training of facilitators - 40 people (including per diems and transport)
Honorarium of National Master Trainers for training of facilitators
Subtotal Sub-activity 3.1.3.2. Development of FFS curricula and training of facilitators
3. Sub-activity 3.1.3.3. Roll out of FFS
Honorarium of National Master Trainers for supervision of facilitators
Technical and methodological backstopping by the International Master Trainer /a
Contribution to facilitators
FFS starting capital (each school will receive 2 chorts of participants in the project cycle)
Bicycles for facilitators
Establishment of trial side
Monitoring and evaluation  (including DSA and honorarium)
Awarenes raising work and selection of FFS member and to promote FFS (hard investments)
Awarenes raising work and selection of FFS member and to promote FFS (TA)
Subtotal Sub-activity 3.1.3.3. Roll out of FFS
Subtotal Activity 3.1.3: Support adoption of climate resilient innovative technologies
Total
_________________________________
\a 3SWs including 2 weeks per diem and travel
participant
training day
kit
session
AI
bull
square meter (m2)
lumpsum
year
vehicle
pers-month
participant
veterinarian
veterinarian
veterinarian
demo plot
demo plot/year
visit
mission
per training
pers-month
pers-month
lumpsum
pers-month
unit
unit
unit
unit
unit
unit
-
-
-
-
-
-
300
1
1
12
3
284
284
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
40
40
-
1
-
12
3
284
-
284
11
21
50
1
2
8
-
-
80
-
20
8
40
40
500
20
50
5
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
20 000
20 000
20 000
20 000
20 000
100
100
100
-
1
-
12
3
-
1
-
9
3
-
-
1
-
6
3
-
-
1
-
3
3
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
3
500
20
50
5
55
120
174
2.904
100 000
23
300
3.484
300
58
7
1
54
21
1.161
26.713
1.000
2.000
284
284
284
284
284
1 988
100
-
-
10
21
150
1
-
8
36
480
-
40
20
8
-
-
-
-
-
21
100
-
-
-
36
480
80
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
21
100
-
-
-
36
480
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
21
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
21
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
284
284
21
126
400
2
2
16
1.161
1.161
5.807
3.484
500
25.000
5.200
1.000
108
700
1 440
160
40
40
16
80
80
50
1.045
290
929
1.000
796
315
5
Tajikistan
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ (CASP+)
Table 6. Output 3.2: By end of year 4, 9 productive alliances between livestock producers’ groups and private aggregators established and operational
Detailed Costs
(USD)
Unit
2022
2023
2024
Quantities
2025
2026
2027
2028
Total
Unit Cost
2022
2023
Annex 3 Project Cost and Financing
Base Cost ('000)
2025
2026
2024
2027
2028
Total
2022
Totals Including Contingencies ('000)
2025
2024
2026
2027
2023
Breakdown of Totals Incl. Cont.
2028
Total
 I. Investment Costs
A. Activity 3.2.1: Identification of market and business opportunities
1. Sub-activity 3.2.1.1. Identification of market and business opportunities
Livestock specialist (zootechnician or veterinarian), covering animal production and animal health
Livestock specialist per diem for travels
Market/value chain specialist (with experience in Dairy)
Market/value chain specialist per diem for travels
Organization of VC consultation meetings gathering potential PA partners /a
Contracting of the Regional Chamber of Commerce for facilitation
Subtotal Sub-activity 3.2.1.1. Identification of market and business opportunities
2. Sub-activity 3.2.1.2. Feasibility studies of proposed business arrangements including Productive Alliances
Conduct of feasibility study (addressing technical, economic and market aspects)
Subtotal Activity 3.2.1: Identification of market and business opportunities
B. Activity 3.2.2: Provision of financing and technical support to the business partnerships for selected livestock commodities
1. Sub-activity 3.2.2.1. Financing of business arrangements including Productive Alliances
9 matching grants for productive allliances average 50,000
2. Sub-activity 3.2.2.2. Technical and business assistance to business arrangements including Productive Alliances
Training and coaching on technical issues and business managemenet
Subtotal Activity 3.2.2: Provision of financing and technical support to the business partnerships for selected livestock commodities 
Total
_________________________________
\a Producers groups and business operators - 15 meetings for 1 VC
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
workshop
workshop
study
sub-project
sub-project
6
6
6
6
30
30
-
-
-
12
12
12
12
-
-
5
-
-
12
12
12
12
-
-
5
3
5
12
12
12
12
-
-
4
3
5
12
12
12
12
-
-
-
3
5
6
6
6
6
-
-
-
-
2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
60
60
60
60
30
30
14
9
17
1.000
75
1.000
75
1.000
250
2.000
76.220
1.000
6
0
6
0
30
8
50
-
50
-
-
-
50
12
1
12
1
-
-
26
10
36
-
-
-
36
12
1
12
1
-
-
26
10
36
229
5
234
269
12
1
12
1
-
-
26
8
34
229
5
234
267
12
1
12
1
-
-
26
-
26
229
5
234
259
6
0
6
0
-
-
13
-
13
-
2
2
15
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
60
5
60
5
30
8
167
28
195
686
17
703
897
6
0
6
0
30
8
50
-
50
-
-
-
50
12
1
12
1
-
-
26
10
36
-
-
-
36
12
1
12
1
-
-
26
10
36
229
5
234
269
12
1
12
1
-
-
26
8
34
229
5
234
267
12
1
12
1
-
-
26
-
26
229
5
234
259
6
0
6
0
-
-
13
-
13
-
2
2
15
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
60
5
60
5
30
8
167
28
195
686
17
703
897
6
2028
Total
-
-
-
-
-
13
-
13
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
13
6
0
-
-
6
-
-
-
-
6
19
20
3
20
10
20
88
49
210
12
33
2
22
28
12
108
4
20
10
41
49
40
32
196
514
72
5
468
141
686
10
11 079
5 030
16 119
16 805
17 320
Tajikistan
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ (CASP+)
Table 7. Output 3.3: By end of year 7, 12,400 smallholders have strengthened climate resilient production practices and private sector market linkages
Detailed Costs
(USD)
Unit
2022
2023
2024
Quantities
2025
2026
2027
2028
Total
Unit Cost
2022
2023
Annex 3 Project Cost and Financing
Base Cost ('000)
2025
2026
2024
2027
2028
Total
2022
Totals Including Contingencies ('000)
2025
2024
2026
2023
2027
 I. Investment Costs
A. Activity 3.3.1: Strengthening of CIGs capacity
1. Sub-activity 3.3.1.1. Support to production/diversification CIGs
ToT for district officers and agro departments experts on business and climate-resilient technologies (10 days of training) for W1 and W2 activities 
Recruitment of Service Provider for training material preparation on Window 1
Training delivery specialist (Service Provider for the first 100 villages), including per diem and travel
Rent of training facility (venue) for first 100 villages to be trained by SP
Rent of training facility (venue) for the rest 410 villages to be trained by district officers and agro department experts
Provision of rooms and halls for meetings, trainings and activities of the Project in the target districts
Printing of handover materials, etc
training day
contract
training
per day
per day
lump sum/year
lumpsum
Subtotal Sub-activity 3.3.1.1. Support to production/diversification CIGs
2. Sub activity 3.3.1.2. Support to market-linked CIGs
Recruitment of 10 facilitators for 3 months each
Organization of 1  meeting in each village with local communities (in 110 villages)
Recruitment of Service Provider for training material preparation on Window 2 business planning, proposal writing and looking at farm as a business 
Training delivery specialist (Service Provider to 110 villages), including per diem and travel
Rent of training facility (venue) for  110 vilagges to be trained by SP
Printing of handover materials, etc
pers-month
workshop
contract
training
per day
lumpsum
Subtotal Sub activity 3.3.1.2. Support to market-linked CIGs
3. Sub-activity 3.3.1.3. Capacity building on climate smart resilient technologies for Window 1 and 2 beneficiaries
Recruitment of Service Provider for training material preparation on climate-reseilient technologies in 6 different VCs
Training delivery specialist (Service Provider for the first 100 villages), including per diem and travel
Rent of training facility (venue) for first 100 vilagges to be trained by SP
Rent of training facility (venue) for the rest 410 villages to be trained by district officers and agro department experts
Printing of handover materials, etc
Sub-projects implementation expert (2 part-time experts, supporting local community to run the facilities and use the equipment)
Travel costs of sub-project implementation expert
Subtotal Sub-activity 3.3.1.3. Capacity building on climate smart resilient technologies for Window 1 and 2 beneficiaries
Subtotal Activity 3.3.1: Strengthening of CIGs capacity
B. Activity 3.3.2: Management of the CIG matching grant program
1. Sub-activity 3.3.2.1.  Matching grant manual developed
Grant management specialist (including Social Fund)
Per diem for travels
PMU District Officers to provide Capacity development for CIGs / matching grant schemes recipients (Win1 and Win 2)
Subtotal Sub-activity 3.3.2.1.  Matching grant manual developed
2. Sub-activity 3.3.2.2. Launch of the MGF
Communication campaign (printing of materials, advertising on TV and magazines, etc)
Provision of goods/equipment/inputs to grant beneficiaries under Window 1
Provision of goods/equipment/inputs to grant beneficiaries under Window 2
Subtotal Sub-activity 3.3.2.2. Launch of the MGF
Subtotal Activity 3.3.2: Management of the CIG matching grant program
Total
contract
training
per day
per day
lumpsum
sub-project
visit
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
lump sum
lumpsum
grant
grant
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
6
6
-
-
-
10
1
100
100
100
1
30
110
1
110
110
1
100
100
-
100
100
12
12
48
60
-
-
-
-
-
100
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
205
250
250
12
12
144
317
30
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
205
250
250
12
12
144
415
30
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
200
200
12
12
144
230
50
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
12
12
144
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
6
6
-
-
-
10
1
100
100
200
7
30
110
1
110
110
1
100
100
410
800
800
72
72
624
2.000
3.000
200
100
100
12.600
400
300
1.800
200
250
4.000
200
100
100
50
40
1.000
75
750
1 022
110
10.840
45.732
-
-
-
-
-
13
-
13
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
13
6
0
-
-
6
-
-
-
-
6
19
20
3
20
10
10
13
-
76
12
33
2
22
28
12
108
4
20
10
-
46
5
4
89
273
12
1
36
10
59
10
650
-
660
719
992
-
-
-
-
10
13
46
69
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
21
-
13
10
43
112
12
1
108
33
154
-
3 436
1 372
4 808
4 962
5 074
-
-
-
-
-
13
-
13
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
21
-
13
10
43
56
-
-
-
-
-
13
-
13
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
8
18
31
12
1
108
33
154
-
4 499
1 372
5 871
6 024
6 080
12
1
108
33
154
-
2 493
2 287
4 780
4 934
4 964
-
-
-
-
-
13
-
13
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
13
12
1
108
33
154
-
-
-
-
154
166
-
-
-
-
-
13
-
13
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
13
6
0
-
-
6
-
-
-
-
6
19
20
3
20
10
20
88
46
208
12
33
2
22
28
12
108
4
20
10
41
46
40
32
193
509
72
5
468
141
686
10
11 079
5 030
16 119
16 805
17 315
-
-
-
-
-
13
-
13
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
13
6
0
-
-
6
-
-
-
-
6
19
20
3
20
10
10
13
-
76
12
33
2
22
28
12
108
4
20
10
-
49
5
4
92
276
12
1
36
10
59
10
650
-
660
719
995
-
-
-
-
10
13
49
71
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
21
-
13
10
43
114
12
1
108
33
154
-
3 436
1 372
4 808
4 962
5 076
-
-
-
-
-
13
-
13
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
21
-
13
10
43
56
-
-
-
-
-
13
-
13
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
8
18
31
12
1
108
33
154
-
4 499
1 372
5 871
6 024
6 080
12
1
108
33
154
-
2 493
2 287
4 780
4 934
4 964
-
-
-
-
-
13
-
13
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
13
12
1
108
33
154
-
-
-
-
154
166
7
Annex 3 Project Cost and Financing
Unit
2022
2023
2024
Quantities
2025
2026
2027
2028
Total
Unit Cost
2022
2023
Base Cost ('000)
2025
2024
2026
2027
2028
Total
2022
Totals Including Contingencies ('000)
2025
2024
2026
2023
2027
Breakdown of Totals Incl. Cont.
2028
Total
Tajikistan
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ (CASP+)
Table 8. Project Management
Detailed Costs
(USD)
 I. Investment Costs
A. SEPMU investment costs
1. Contracting an audit firm to audit PMU each year
2. Training of PMU on FM, Procurement and other issues
3. FM Software installation and support for PMU
4. Office Renovation
5. PMU Office Equipment and Furniture
Computer Desktop
Computer - laptop /a
Printer 3 in 1
Printer high speed
Set of office furniture (Table, armchair, bookcase, side table attachment and othres)
Tablet /b
Camera
Equipment for online conferences (Kulob and Bokhtar reg. office)
Subtotal PMU Office Equipment and Furniture
Subtotal SEPMU investment costs
B. CEP PIU investment costs
Contracting an audit firm to audit CEP each year
Training of PMU on FM, Procurement and other issues
FM Software installation and support for PMU
Office Renovation
Purchase of office furniture and equipment for CEP PIU
Subtotal CEP PIU investment costs
Total Investment Costs
II. Recurrent Costs
A. SEPMU
1. Salaries and Allowances
PMU Director
PMU Project Coordinator
Financial management specialist
Project Accountant
Disbursement specialist
Procurement specialist
Procurement Assistant
Administrator
Administrator Assistants (2 persons)
Project Assistant
Office Cleaner (4 persons)
Drivers (10 persons)
Security Guards (6 persons)
Social Fund (25%)
Travel (per diems)
Subtotal Salaries and Allowances
2. Operating Expenses
per year
lumpsum
per year
lumpsum
set
pcs.
pcs.
pcs.
set
pcs.
pcs.
set
per year
lumpsum
per year
lumpsum
lumpsum
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
lumpsum
lumpsum
Utility payments, office supplies, communication, bank fees etc. (PMU office in Dushanbe in 2 in regions) 
Provision of office for PMU in Dushanbe
Provision of office for Project Regional Antenna in Kulob city
Provision of office for Project Regional Antenna in Bokhtar city
per month
lump sum/year
lump sum/year
lump sum/year
Subtotal Operating Expenses
Subtotal SEPMU
B. CEP PIU
1. Salaries and Allowances
CEP Project Coordinator
Financial management specialist
Disbursement specialist
Procurement specialist
Project Assistant
Office Cleaner
Drivers (3 persons)
Interpreter/Translator
Social Fund (25%)
Travel (per diems)
Subtotal Salaries and Allowances
2. Operating Expenses
Utility payments, office supplies, communication, bank fees etc.
CEP in-kind contribution: Rent of premises: Implenting Group office, conference hall, warehouses
CEP in-kind contribution: Rent of machineries and equipment (not include fuel, maintanence cost)
Vehicle Maintainance & Operations (3 vehicles)
Subtotal Operating Expenses
Subtotal CEP PIU
C. FAO
1. Operating expenses
Total Recurrent Costs
Total
_________________________________
\a 6-DPO+12 DPO CIG + 4 Engeneer+ 2M&E+2 Other consult=36
\b 16-DPO+12 DPO CIG + 4 Engeneer+ 2M&E = 34
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
lumpsum
lumpsum
per month
lumpsum
lumpsum
per month
per year
1
0.2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
0.2
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
24
12
48
120
72
12
1
1
1
12
12
12
12
12
12
36
12
12
36
7
10.000
2.2
29.036
6
36
28
3
36
34
2
2
1.138
871
348
465
987
534
2.904
2.555
7
10.000
2.2
29.036
60
84
84
84
84
84
84
84
168
60
336
840
504
84
7
7
7
84
84
84
84
84
84
252
84
1.200
1.200
1.100
800
1.000
1.000
800
640
640
800
100
200
100
3.700
19.717
13.484
9.731
1.200
1.100
1.000
1.000
800
150
200
640
84
1.100
252
290
10
3
29
70
7
31
10
1
36
18
6
5
114
226
10
3
29
35
58
135
361
-
14
13
10
12
12
10
8
15
-
5
24
7
32
12
175
44
20
13
10
87
262
14
13
12
12
10
2
7
8
19
12
109
13
30
10
10
64
173
45
480
840
10
3
6
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
19
10
3
6
-
-
19
38
-
14
13
10
12
12
10
8
15
-
5
24
7
32
12
175
44
20
13
10
87
262
14
13
12
12
10
2
7
8
19
12
109
13
30
10
10
64
173
25
461
498
10
3
6
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
30
10
3
6
6
-
25
55
14
14
13
10
12
12
10
8
15
10
5
24
7
38
12
205
44
20
13
10
87
292
14
13
12
12
10
2
7
8
19
12
109
13
30
10
10
64
173
19
484
539
10
3
6
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
19
10
3
6
-
-
19
38
14
14
13
10
12
12
10
8
15
10
5
24
7
38
12
205
44
20
13
10
87
292
14
13
12
12
10
2
7
8
19
12
109
13
30
10
10
64
173
19
484
522
10
3
6
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
30
10
3
6
6
-
25
55
14
14
13
10
12
12
10
8
15
10
5
24
7
38
12
205
44
20
13
10
87
292
14
13
12
12
10
2
7
8
19
12
109
13
30
10
10
64
173
9
474
529
10
3
6
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
19
10
3
6
-
-
19
38
14
14
13
10
12
12
10
8
15
10
5
24
7
38
12
205
44
20
13
10
87
292
14
13
12
12
10
2
7
8
19
12
109
13
30
10
10
64
173
4
469
507
10
3
6
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
30
10
3
6
6
-
25
55
14
14
13
10
12
12
10
8
15
10
5
24
7
38
12
205
44
20
13
10
87
292
14
13
12
12
10
2
7
8
19
12
109
13
30
10
10
64
173
4
469
524
70
21
64
105
7
31
10
1
36
18
6
5
114
373
70
21
64
52
58
265
639
72
101
92
67
84
84
67
54
108
48
34
168
50
257
87
1 373
311
138
94
68
611
1 985
101
92
84
84
67
13
50
54
136
84
765
92
210
70
73
445
1 211
124
3 320
3 958
10
3
30
73
7
33
10
1
37
19
6
5
120
236
10
3
30
37
61
141
377
-
14
13
10
12
12
10
8
15
-
5
24
7
32
12
175
44
20
13
10
87
262
14
13
12
12
10
2
7
8
19
12
109
13
30
10
10
64
173
45
480
857
10
3
6
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
19
10
3
6
-
-
19
38
-
14
13
10
12
12
10
8
15
-
5
24
7
32
12
175
44
20
13
10
87
262
14
13
12
12
10
2
7
8
19
12
109
13
30
10
10
64
173
25
461
499
10
3
6
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
31
10
3
6
6
-
25
56
14
14
13
10
12
12
10
8
15
10
5
24
7
38
12
205
44
20
13
10
87
292
14
13
12
12
10
2
7
8
19
12
109
13
30
10
10
64
173
19
484
540
10
3
6
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
19
10
3
6
-
-
19
38
14
14
13
10
12
12
10
8
15
10
5
24
7
38
12
205
44
20
13
10
87
292
14
13
12
12
10
2
7
8
19
12
109
13
30
10
10
64
173
19
484
522
10
3
6
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
31
10
3
6
6
-
25
56
14
14
13
10
12
12
10
8
15
10
5
24
7
38
12
205
44
20
13
10
87
292
14
13
12
12
10
2
7
8
19
12
109
13
30
10
10
64
173
9
474
531
10
3
6
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
19
10
3
6
-
-
19
38
14
14
13
10
12
12
10
8
15
10
5
24
7
38
12
205
44
20
13
10
87
292
14
13
12
12
10
2
7
8
19
12
109
13
30
10
10
64
173
4
469
507
10
3
6
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
31
10
3
6
6
-
25
56
14
14
13
10
12
12
10
8
15
10
5
24
7
38
12
205
44
20
13
10
87
292
14
13
12
12
10
2
7
8
19
12
109
13
30
10
10
64
173
4
469
525
70
21
67
110
7
33
10
1
37
19
6
5
120
387
70
21
67
55
61
274
661
72
101
92
67
84
84
67
54
108
48
34
168
50
257
87
1 373
311
138
94
68
611
1 985
101
92
84
84
67
13
50
54
136
84
765
92
210
70
73
445
1 211
124
3 320
3 981
1
1
6
36
28
3
36
34
2
2
1
1
-
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
24
-
48
120
72
12
1
1
1
12
12
12
12
12
12
36
12
12
36
1
0.2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
0.2
-
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
24
-
48
120
72
12
1
1
1
12
12
12
12
12
12
36
12
12
36
1
0.2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
0.2
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
24
12
48
120
72
12
1
1
1
12
12
12
12
12
12
36
12
12
36
1
0.2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
0.2
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
24
12
48
120
72
12
1
1
1
12
12
12
12
12
12
36
12
12
36
1
0.2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
0.2
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
24
12
48
120
72
12
1
1
1
12
12
12
12
12
12
36
12
12
36
1
0.2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
0.2
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
24
12
48
120
72
12
1
1
1
12
12
12
12
12
12
36
12
12
36
8
Tajikistan
Community-based Agricultural Support Project Plus (CASP+)
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Mission Dates:
01 April - 09 June 2021
Document Date:
16/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002204
5854-TJ
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis 
Contents 
I. 
Introduction ................................................................................................................................. 2 
II.  Project Benefits .......................................................................................................................... 3 
III.  Key Assumptions ....................................................................................................................... 4 
IV.  Financial Analysis ...................................................................................................................... 5 
V.  Economic analysis ..................................................................................................................... 7 
I.  Introduction 
The  development  objective  of  Community-based  Agriculture  Support  Programme  ‘plus’  – 
(CASP+) is to increase resilience of ecosystems and adaptation of livelihoods in rural areas affected 
by climate change in Tajikistan. It is expected that this will be done by establishing a transformative 
policy  and  investment  framework  leading  to  climate  change  resilient  livelihood  patterns  for 
vulnerable households and to carbon sequestration potential in the country. The core intervention 
area of the project will comprise the 21 districts: 16 in Khatlon region, 3 in RRS region and 2 in the 
Sughd  region,  which  are  selected  as  the  most  vulnerable  to  the  combined  effects  of  direct  and 
indirect impacts of climate change. The selection of districts has also considered: (i) overlaying with 
watershed/river basin boundaries; (ii) adjacency of selected districts to facilitate implementation; 
(iii) equal representation of the three agro-ecologic zones for inclusion of upstream and downstream 
communities highly affected by climate change. 
To  define  the  potential  of  livelihoods  diversification  and  enhanced  agrifood  value  chain 
activities,  a  sub-criteria  in  the  form  of  presence  and  proximity  to  peri-urban  and  urban  areas, 
relevant to ensure market access for smallholder producers is also applied. 
The  project  will  intervene  in  key  hot  spots  of  target  areas  with  investments  aimed  to  (i) 
(iii)  agriculture 
improved  pasture  management; 
equipment/machinery; (iv) improved forestry management; (v) livelihoods diversification activities 
and (vi) support of Productive Alliances. These investments will not only fill immediate needs of the 
populations in terms of climate change, but will also build sustainable patterns to influence public 
interventions  as  well  as  private  sector’s  decisions  under  the  climate  resilience  angle  using 
ecosystem-based  sustainable  NRM  approaches  through  implementation  of  such  planning  tools as 
Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAPs) and detailed business plans.  
climate-resilient 
infrastructure; 
(ii) 
  While the project will focus on the selected target areas, the interventions and the knowledge 
generated through the evidence-based approach will allow the country to scale-up the approach to 
additional priority districts  and will have a parallel country-wide and  demand-driven  outreach, in 
order  to  stimulate  the  economic  incentives  and  ensure  long  term  impact  beyond  the  project’s 
investment.  
The  total  outreach  will  include  will  include  650,000  direct  beneficiaries  (51.5  percent 
women)  –  about  87,5001  households,  in  communities  affected  by  climate  change  and  2,268,424 
indirect beneficiaries (about 305,300 households)2. Specific focus will be on vulnerable categories 
such as: women, women heads of households (WHHs), youth (including young returning migrants) 
and persons with disability (PWD). 
The direct beneficiaries of the project will benefit from the promotion of climate-sensitive 
investments  at  community  level,  coupled  with  improvement  in  the  enabling  environment  and 
georeferenced  knowledge  for  an  effective  ecosystem  approach;  provision  of  grants  aimed  at 
strengthening  livelihoods  and  enhanced  resilience  through  market  based  approaches;  and 
promotion  of  Productive  Alliances.  Besides  individuals,  the  capacities  of  institutions  at  local  and 
national level will be also strengthened.  
Institutions  at  the  local  level,  namely  the  stakeholders  involved  in  the  Climate-
sensitive  Community  Action  Plans  (CsCAP)  design,  implementation,  monitoring  and 
evaluation, including Village organizations (VOs), Pasture Users Unions (PUUs), Pasture 
Users Associations (PUAs), Water Users Associations (WUAs), Common Interest Groups 
(CIGs) as well as the decentralized institutions mandated to plan, monitor and invest in 
natural  resources  (Forest  Enterprises,  River  Basins  Councils,  Local  Administration, 
Environmental Protection offices, Emergency Committees), other natural resources users 
groups and all relevant stakeholders and Common Interest Groups.  
Institutions  at  the  national  level,  including  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  (MoA),  the 
Committee  for  Environmental  Protection  (CEP),  the  Ministry  of  Energy  and  Water 
Resources (MoEWR), the State Forest Agency (SFA), the Food Security Committee (FSC), 
the  Committee  of  Emergency  situations  and  Civil  defence  (CES),  Committee  on  Land 
Management  and  Geodesy,  ,  the  Agency  for  Land  Reclamation  and  Irrigation  (ALRI), 
Pasture Meliorative Trust (PMT), Tajik Veterinary Association (TVA), and other relevant 
1 According to Working Paper on Financial and Economic Analysis with reference to TAJSTAT 2019, the average household 
size in target areas is 7.43.  
2 In accordance with Beneficiary Estimates calculation, GCF Funding Proposal for Community-based Agriculture Support 
Programme ‘plus’ – (CASP+)  
ministries,  research  and  educational  institutions,  non-governmental  organizations 
(NGOs) and other civil society organizations (CSOs).   
The  proposed  project  promotes  an  innovative  approach  to  leveraging  investment  in 
ecosystem-based NRM through a set of instruments by promoting georeferenced climate-sensitive 
investments  at  community  level,  coupled  with  coordinated  efforts  to  improve  the  enabling 
environment for an effective ecosystem approach.   
The  project  investments  and  activities  will  be  executed  through  the  following  three 
components: 
Component 1. Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient 
management of natural resources; 
Component 2. Investments in community capacity for adaption and resilience to climate 
change; 
Component 3. Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market based 
approaches; 
Project Management Component. 
Low-carbon  Investment  Delivery  approach.  The  project  will  support  carbon  emission 
reduction and enhance carbon sequestration potential through different ways: the implementation 
of the Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAPs), including investment in afforestation, 
reforestation and forest restoration using Joint Forest Management (JFM); preservation of pastures 
and  prevention  of  further  degradation;  the  potential  progressive  reduction  of  the  number  of 
livestock, representing a reduction in the carbon emissions and reducing an excessive pressure on 
pastures.  The  implementation  of  CsCAPs  and  the  positive  results  obtained  from  the  support  of 
agrifood value chains that integrate rural producers to markets will be amongst the main drivers for 
replication beyond the project. The country will thus shift from a carbon insensitive agrifood sector 
to a low-carbon emission economy.  
II.  Project Benefits 
  CASP+  will  contribute  to  enhancing  resilience  of  at  least  87,500  rural  households  through 
climate-sensitive investments at community level, and to rehabilitate and sustainably manage about 
180,000  ha  of  rangeland;  and  severely  damaged  forests  via  afforestation/reforestation  (namely 
5,801 ha through JFM, 1350 ha through direct afforestation and 179 ha in buffer zones). It is also 
expected that a total of 10,200 households will access 1020 Window 1 grants and 2,200 households 
will access 110 Window 2 grants. Moreover, a total of 80 FFS will be established in villages where 
opportunities for establishing value chain projects (Productive Alliances) have been identified. Each 
FFS will be active during 4 to 5 years and will train 25 participants each (2000 beneficiaries in total). 
CASP+  investment  per  beneficiary  is  set  at  about  USD  30.3  per  individual.  Sustainability  and 
replicability of project activities will be ensured by strengthening NRM governance at the community 
level and by the establishment of an improved legal and regulatory environment. 
  Economic development. The  project will generate direct economic benefits from many of 
the  activities  that  it  will  be  financed  in  order  to  enhance  the  resilience  of  communities  and 
households to climate risks, it is also expected to generate economic co-benefits as a result of many 
of its activities in the implementation of Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAPs) and 
the  support  that  will  be  provided  to  farming  households  in  making  the  farming  practices  more 
resilient through FFS, provision of modern technology, assets and the links with the private sector. 
It is expected that quantifiable benefits would accrue from: (i) increased livestock and farm-level 
production  and  productivity;  (ii)  reduction  of  production  costs  due  to  the  adoption  of  modern 
technologies  and  mechanized  operations;  (iii)  higher  yields  and  products;  (iv)  a  subsequent 
increased proportion of marketed farm produce; (v) increased employment opportunities for both 
on-farm and off-farm activities; and (vi) financial inclusion. 
  Enabling environment. The policy and regulatory frameworks revised will ensure adequate 
capacity to respond to climate hazards, increased inclusiveness of smallholders in agri-food value 
chains, and improved integrated NRM planning and monitoring capacity.  
  Environmental  co-benefits.  Carbon  sequestration,  directly  generated  by  the  project 
investments  on  rangelands  and  forestry  (and  avoided  via  improved  herd  management),  reduced 
land degradation and biodiversity increase are the main ecosystem services produced by the project. 
An  ex-ante  assessment  of  the  impact  of  the  project  on  the  GHG  emission  has  been  undertaken 
using  the  FAO  Ex-ACT  and  GLEAM-i  tools.  The  net  carbon  balance  is  the  difference  between  the 
gross results of With and Without Project scenarios achieved during 20 years, including 5 years of 
project  implementation  and  15  years  of  capitalization  periods.  This  amount  is  estimated  at  7.06 
million tons of CO2 equivalent of mitigated emissions during the whole Project lifetime.  
  Gender Strategy and empowering measures: In addition to developing technical skills in 
(i)  small  livestock  and  poultry  production  or  post-harvesting  as  well  as  (ii)  climate  resilient 
technologies and practices, the project will support women beneficiaries to develop (iii) household 
nutrition (as part of training modules delivered through FFS) and leadership for the Women Groups 
(WGs),  Women  in  VOs  and  PUUs.  Gender  awareness  trainings  will  contribute  fostering  more 
equitable  gender  roles  and  relations  at  household  and  group  levels.  Furthermore,  through  the 
leadership  training,  the  project  expects  at  least  30  percent  women  members  and  30  percent  in 
leadership position in the institutions/committees formed under the programme. 
III.  Key Assumptions for Financial and Economic analyses 
  The parameters for the models are based on information gathered during the design mission: 
interviews  with  farmers  and  entrepreneurs,  information  from  the  donor  agencies  operating  in 
Tajikistan and the ongoing IFAD CASP, LPDP II projects. In particular, information on labour and 
input  requirements  for  various  operations,  capital  costs,  prevailing  wages,  yields,  farm  gate  and 
market  prices  of  commodities,  input  and  farm-to-market  transport  costs  were  collected. 
Conservative  assumptions  were  made  both  for  inputs  and  outputs,  and  take  account  of  possible 
risks. 
  Prices. Prices for commodities/inputs reflect annual average and those actually paid/received 
by the farmer/entrepreneur, and imply potential risks.  
  Exchange  rate.  The  exchange  rate  used  in  the  financial  and  economic  analysis  is  fixed  at 
US$ 1= TJS 11.33, with a strong assumption that future inflation of inputs will be outweighed by 
increase in output prices. However, in project costing, in order to avoid underestimation of inflation 
in the country, the average exchange rate for the whole project lifetime is taken as US$ 1 = TJS 
17.54.  
  Internal rate of return. An internal rate of return (IRR) of 12.0%5, which is the refinancing 
rate according National Bank of Tajikistan, has been used as financial discount rate (FDR) for the 
financial  analysis  to  assess  the  viability  and  robustness  of  the  investments  at  farm  level.  The 
selection criterion for the IRR is to accept all projects for which the IRR is above the opportunity 
cost of capital. Using the IRR as the measure, the models’ sensitivity to the changes in parameters 
can be assessed by varying the costs and revenues. For the social opportunity costs of capital or 
social discount rate (SDR), the analysis has adopted a rate of 6.0%6,7,8, which is a suggested social 
discount rate for developing countries by the World Bank. 
  Labour. Family labour has been valued both in financial and economic analysis. It has been 
assumed that both family labour and hired unskilled labour market price is TJS 40.0 per day, which 
has been adjusted by local unemployment rates to calculate its economic value. 
  The  shadow  exchange  rate  (SER)  has  been  calculated  at  US$  1  =  TJS  12.8.  Overall 
conversion factors for inputs and outputs vary between 0.85 and 1.05. The conversion factors have 
been estimated for the main outputs – wheat (CF is 0.97), meat (CF is 0.98), urea (CF is 1.05) and 
TSP (CF is 0.81).  
  More  details  on  production  and  financial  parameters  for  the  models  can  be  found  in  the 
analysis excel tables in EFA Working Paper. 
3 As of July 2021. National Bank of Tajikistan, https://www.nbt.tj/en/  
4 Expert estimations based on historical data from the National Bank of Tajikistan and forecasts done by Economist 
Intelligence Unit Country report on Tajikistan (3rd and 4th quarters).  
5 Re-financing rate in Tajikistan from 28 April 2021. National Bank of Tajikistan, https://www.nbt.tj/en/ 
6 The social discount rate used for the economic analysis is based on World Bank’s estimations, proposed by a standardized 
methodology. See Discounting Costs and Benefits in Economic Analysis of World Bank Projects, OPSPQ. May 9, 2016. 
“Where no country-specific growth projections are available, we suggest using 3% as a rough estimate for expected long-
term growth rate in developing countries. Given reasonable parameters for the other parameters for the other variables in 
the standard Ramsey formula linking discount rates to growth rates, this yields a discount rate of 6%.” 
7 The discount rate is also in line with the discount rate in recently endorsed Strengthening Resilience of the Agriculture 
Sector Project In Tajikistan (P175952), ANNEX 4: Economic and Financial Analysis and Greenhouse Gas Accounting 
8 The joint World Bank/ IMF Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA, May 2020) projects an average growth rate of 3.8 percent 
in the coming decade.  
IV.  Financial Analysis 
  The  analysis  builds  upon  the  precautionary  principle,  accounting  for  project  benefits  in  a 
realistic and conservative manner. A financial analysis is carried out to present the scenarios with 
and  without  project  interventions.  The  key-indicators  used  to  carry  out  the  analysis  are  the  net 
present values (NPVs), financial and economic internal rate of return (FIRR – EIRR), benefit-cost 
ratio (B/C) and return to family labour. 
  The  primary  objective  of  the  financial  analysis  is  to  determine  the  financial  viability  and 
incentives  for  the  project  target  group  as  a  result  of  their  engagement  in  project  activities,  and 
hence to examine project’s impacts on family labour, financial flow and household incomes.  
  A number of indicative economic activities, which may be supported by CASP+, were identified 
during the design process. The analysis presents several sets of models. 
  The  models  show  only  incremental  revenues  and  costs  generated  by  the  new  investment. 
Incremental benefits are estimated by comparison of the without project (WOP) and the with-project 
(WP) benefits.     In  each case, the  result of the investment translates into additional demand for 
produce from primary producers and new permanent jobs. 
  The  indicative  financial  models  can  be  divided  into  five  main  groups:  i)  adaptation 
investments, including investments into pasture management, climate-resilient infrastructure and 
agricultural  machinery  by  implementing  CsCAPs;  ii)  implementation  of  CsCAPs  on  forestry 
investments; iii) provision of grants through Window 1 which are aimed at livelihood diversification 
for  vulnerable  households;  iv)    provision  of  grants  through  Window  2  which  are  aimed  at 
commercialisation  and  agribusiness  development;  v)  investments  in  productive  alliances  greater 
access to markets through productive alliances between the smallholder and the private sector. 
  All  investments  that  are  included  in  the  climate  sensitive  action  plans  (CsCAPs)  will  be 
identified  through  participation  of  the  local  governments,  local  stakeholders  and  community 
members to ensure ownership with a clear plan for operation and maintenance after completion. 
Typical  village  model  on  Adaptation  investments  (CsCAPs  implementation). 
These 
in  a)  Pasture  management;  b)  Climate-resilient 
infrastructure;  and  c)  Agricultural  machinery.  The  financial  model  is  constructed  on  a 
so-called typical village level, which includes all three listed types of investments.  
investments 
include 
The potential benefits in this indicative model are represented by increased productivity 
of  milk  and  meat  and  increased  savings  in  household  budget  due  to  improved 
productivity  of  pastures  near  the  villages  and  access  to  remote  pastures.  The  main 
assumption is that the livestock inventories will be controlled and by 2030 the number 
of heads will be the same as it is now, whereas in WoP scenario the livestock inventories 
will  increase  by  12%  with  a  lower  productivity  and  higher  pressure  on  pastures.  The 
financial  analysis  of  the  model  demonstrates  a  good  IRR  of  57.50%  with  NPV  of 
US$356,079. The B/C ratio for this model is 2.61, which also proves its financial viability. 
a)  Pasture investments are aimed at improving the overall productivity of pasture and 
limit their degradation, but also at reducing the fodder deficit in summer, amplified 
by Climate Change. The pasture investment plans could include pasture restoration, 
rotation and access tracks and bridges for remote areas, pasture protection through 
fencing,  reseeding,    fertilization,  plantation  of  forage  shrubs  and  trees,  access  to 
water for livestock, summer pasture infrastructures, shepherd cabins, night fences 
and shelters for animals, cattle crushes for treatments, etc.  This might include also 
cross-village pasture management investments that benefit multiple villages such as 
cooperation on transhumance routes, etc. 
b)  Climate-resilient  infrastructure  includes  infrastructure,  addressing  water  stresses 
and the need to adapt to increasing risks of climate-related hazards. It is expected 
that the provided water infrastructure will help to alleviate the burden on women and 
increase water availability throughout the year that can also support diversification 
activities (backyard garden, fruticulture, small animal husbandry) and to meet basic 
livelihood requirements in isolated areas.   
c)  Agricultural machinery may include the following list of community equipment eligible 
under  this  window:    Mowers,  Hay  rakes,  Balers,  Forager  /  Silage  machine, 
Silage/haylage  wrappers,  Manure  spreader  (not  only  for  fodder  but  contributes  to 
improve  soil  fertility),  Hay  trailers  (flatbed).  In  addition,  other  category  of 
mechanization equipment that could be considered are those that can be used both 
for hay/fodder and other crops such as: Tractors, tillage equipment (plough, harrows, 
cultivator , etc…), trailers, Planters, Fertilizer spreaders (used with good agricultural 
practices). 
investments  (CsCAPs 
implementation).  These  are  operated 
Forestry 
in 
collaboration with leskhoz (Forest enterprises depending on the State Forest Agency), 
and with the participation of forest users groups, will aim to complement the restoration 
of ecosystems and the protection of areas vulnerable to climate hazards (disaster risk 
reduction),  at  the  same  time  providing  additional  sources  of  income  to  rural 
communities. Forest investment will include: (i) Joint Forest Management (JFM):  where 
a contract is created between JFM household and Leskhoz for the management (initially 
for 20 years) of a plot of land where the yield from the plot is split between each party 
to the contract; (ii) Direct Leskhoz Forestry:  where forest is re-established on Leskhoz 
land using community labour. Moreover some forestry investments will be implemented 
in  buffer  zones  of  protected  areas:  JFM  will  be  applied  through  Leskhoz  in  the  buffer 
zone of Protected Area (in the project area this is limited to Sh. Shohin district). 
Besides  specifying  the  modality  of  implementation  (JFM  or  direct  by  Leskhoze),  1ha 
forestry models were built by different specie type, such as riparian forest, fruit and nut 
plantation, pistachio plantation, juniper forest plantation, juniper forest plantation with 
natural regeneration, saxaul plantation and agroforestry model. The direct quantifiable 
financial  benefits  would  accrue  from  sales  of  timber,  fuelwood,  nuts,  fruit  and  berries 
collected  on  plantation  depending  on  model  type.  The  financial  analysis  reflects  the 
leaseholders’  perspective  and  estimated  NPVs  for  the  mentioned  models  vary  from 
US$ 134 to US$ 3,133, while IRRs are in the range of 14.98% to 35.85%Provision of 
Window 1 grants. The Window 1 will be for grants of up to 8,000 USD. These grants 
could  be  for,  e.g.    small-scale  processing  equipment,  local  storage  infrastructure, 
community-based  seed  production,  inputs  and  service  provision,  drip  irrigation, 
greenhouses,  nurseries,  shelterbelt  establishment,  riverbank  stability,  access  to 
renewable energy. Farmers accessing Window 1 will match the grant with a 10 percent 
cash contribution. For the financial analysis, the following three indicative models were 
selected: a) bee-keeping; b) greenhouse; and c) drip irrigation.  
a)  Bee-keeping  model.  The  project  will  cover  the  cost  of  an  investment  of  10  bee 
families for a group of vulnerable people. The investment will include also a manual 
honey  extractor and specific clothes to manage beehives.  The grant will cover the 
US$ 6,993 to cover the cost of capital. This activity proven to be profitable, with a 
B/C ratio of 1.84, IRR of 31.66% and NPV of US$ 5,847. 
b)  Greenhouse  model.  The  project  will  cover  the  cost  of  establishment  of  0.09  ha 
greenhouse, which will be targeted at growing of vegetables (mostly tomatoes and 
cucumbers). The comparative advantage of such model is in seasonal prices, which 
are much higher than the usual ones. Such greenhouse would require an investment 
of US$ 8,280. The IRR is estimated at 42.04%, while NPV would be US$ 8,684. The 
B/C ratio for such model is 2.05.  
c)  Drip irrigation model. The project will cover the cost of investments into drip irrigation 
equipment to be used on open ground for production of horticultural production. Such 
approach guarantees a higher productivity and shifting from old methods of irrigation 
into  drip  irrigation  would  increase  the  yields  by  20-25%.  Such  technology  would 
require  an  investment  of  US$  8,761.  The  IRR  is  estimated  at  49.87%,  while  NPV 
would be US$ 6,507. The B/C ratio for such model is 1.32.  
Provision  of  Window  2  grants.  The  Window  2  will  be  for  grants  for  CIG  of  up  to 
30,000.  In  comparison  with  Window  1  grants,  these  grants  will  be  for  larger  scale 
investments,  e.g.,  processing  equipment,  storage  infrastructure,  greenhouses,  solar 
drying facility, etc. Window 2 beneficiaries will match the grant with a 20 percent cash 
contribution.  For  the  financial  analysis,  the  following  three  indicative  models  were 
selected: a) cold storage model; b) vacuum dryer model; and c) milk processing facility.  
a)  Cold storage model. The model represents a cold storage facility with total capacity 
of 80 tonnes per year. The benefits will come from purchase of fruits and berries and 
selling them in between of seasons for a higher price. %. Such facility would require 
an investment of US$ 34,956. The IRR is estimated at 65.90%, while NPV would be 
US$ 87,096. The B/C ratio for such model is 1.87. 
b)  Vacuum dryer model. The project will support the cost of establishment of a vacuum 
dryer facility with total capacity of 180 tonnes/year. Such facility would require an 
investment of US$ 32,743. The IRR is estimated at 101.09%, while NPV would be 
US$ 93,713. The B/C ratio for such model is 2.17. 
c)  Milk processing facility. It is expected that the project will support the establishment 
of  a  milk  processing  unit  with  total  capacity  of  600  litres  of  milk  per  day.  The 
investments  costs  include  renovation  of  an  existing  building  and  purchase  of  all 
needed equipment for milk processing. Such facility would require an investment of 
US$ 29,292. The IRR is estimated at 24.76%, while NPV would be US$ 18,203. The 
B/C ratio for such model is 1.28. 
d)  Productive  Alliances.  It  is  expected  this  this  will  facilitate  business  partnerships 
between groups of smallholder farmers and private sector actors (e.g. aggregators, 
processors) on dairy and beef value chains. As an example, the analysis considers 
the  milk  collecting  center  model,  which  requires  the  participation  of  250  milk 
producers, bringing an average of 4,5 liters per day in average at the beginning (3 
in year 1, 6 in year 6). These 250 producers will typically come from 5 to 10 villages. 
Such  facility  would  require  an  investment  of  US$  49,558.  The  IRR  is  estimated  at 
79.04%, while NPV would be US$ 146,315. The B/C ratio for such model is 1.97. 
  For more details on financial analysis, please refer to Table 1. 
Table 1. Summary of financial analysis. 
V. 
Economic analysis 
ENPV = US$ 143.4 million; ERR = 22.2% (base-case scenario). 
  The period of economic analysis is 20 years to account for the phasing and gestation period 
of  the  proposed  interventions.  The  conservative  scenario  is  presented  in  the  analysis  and  it  is 
indicative and demonstrates the scope of profitability originated from the conditions prevailing at 
the time of the preparation (2nd quarter of 2021).  
  Financial  prices  of  locally  traded  outputs  and  inputs  are  converted  into  economic  prices  by 
deducting direct subsidies, taxes and duties and using the conversion factors. Economic prices for 
imported  inputs  and  outputs  and/or  traded  goods  are  calculated  at  their  border  parity  prices. 
Financial  cost  of  unskilled  labour  is  converted  into  economic  one  using  a  shadow  wage  rate 
conversion  factor  of  0.89.  The  economic  cost  of  the  project  is  estimated  by  removing  price 
CASP+Beneficiary Contrib.TotalWithout ProjectW. Project -Full DvtIncremental1. CsCAP adaptation investments (typical village) *68,6047,62376,22711,24096,19984,9591.157.50%356,0792.611.02. Riparian forest plantation (1ha JFM model)1,037551,09103113110.333.37%2,9663.673.13. Riparian forest plantation (1ha LH model)1,070561,12603143140.323.26%2,5312.770.04. Fruit and nut plantation (1ha JFM model)1,339701,41008178170.635.86%2,9502.9120.55. Fruit and nut plantation (1ha LH model)1,357711,42805285280.428.14%1,5962.020.06. Pistachio plantation (1ha JFM model)7974283902652650.325.28%8211.8424.47. Pistachio plantation (1ha LH model)8144385702292290.322.40%6181.620.08. Juniper forest plantation (1ha JFM model)62633659063630.114.98%1341.1726.29. Juniper forest plantation (1ha LH model)56730597066660.115.47%1551.210.010. Juniper natural regeneration plantation (1ha JFM model)53428562023230.015.52%1511.2210.511. Juniper natural regeneration plantation (1ha LH model)53428562026260.015.90%1671.240.012. Saxaul plantation (1ha JFM model)1,554821,63602082080.121.73%2011.1242.113. Saxaul plantation (1ha LH model)1,554821,63602102100.122.60%2171.130.014. Agroforestry model (1ha JFM model)1,053821,13503733730.331.76%3,1173.4920.815. Agroforestry model (1ha LH model)1,070561,12603763760.331.99%3,1333.490.016. Bee-keeping model6,2946996,99301,6261,6260.231.66%5,8471.8435.917. Greenhouse model7,4528288,28002,2742,2740.342.04%8,6842.0512.118. Drip irrigation model7,8858768,76127,88631,0673,1810.449.87%6,5071.32155.819. Cold storage model27,9656,99134,956018,46918,4690.565.90%87,0961.870.020. Vacuum dryer model26,1956,54932,743016,46016,4600.5101.09%93,7132.170.021. Milk processing model23,4345,85829,29206,2776,2770.224.76%18,2031.280.022. Milk collection center model **39,6469,91249,558037,34237,3420.879.04%146,3151.970.0Benefit-to-cost ratioCsCAP adaptation investments (typical village)* Includes a joint typical village level model with Pasture management, Agricultural machinery and Climate Resilient Infrastructure investments** Beneficiary contribution includes: 10% -beneficiary contribution; 10% - private partner's investmentRepublic of Tajikistan: Community-based Agriculture Support Programme – Phase II (CASP+) FINANCIAL ANALYSISCATEGORYEstimated Investment Costs (US$)Annual Net Benefits (US$)Annual Inc. net benefits per 1US$ of Inv.IRR (%)NPV (US$)Return to family labour, US$/dayCsCAP forestry investments (1ha models)Window 1 indicative grant models (average investment @$8,000)Window 2 indicative grant models (average investment @$30,000)Productive Alliances (average investment @$50,000) 
contingencies and all taxes and duties from the financial cost using, which is generated automatically 
from COSTAB application. 
  The analysis identifies the quantifiable benefits that relate directly to the activities undertaken 
following  implementation  of  the  project  components,  or  that  can  be  justifiable  attributed  to  the 
project’s implementation.  
  The  illustrative  models  described  above  have  been  used  for  the  calculation  of  the  overall 
benefit stream,  on the  basis of economic prices.  The overall benefit stream has been generating 
based on the phasing of CsCAPs implementation in 400 villages over the 5-year period and provision 
of  grants  aimed  at  strengthening  livelihoods  and  enhanced  resilience  through  market  based 
approaches (1020 grants through Window 1 and 110 grants through Window 2); and promotion of 
Productive  Alliances  (support  of  9  models).  The  conservative  average  adoption  rate  of  80%  is 
applied  to  the  analysis  based  on  findings  and  experience  of  previous  and  on-going  similar  IFAD 
projects LMDP I and II and consultations with other donor partners working in the country. 
  Given the benefit and cost streams, the base-case ERR of the Project is estimated at 22.2%. 
The base-case ENPV of the project’s net benefit stream, discounted  at 6%, is US$ 143.4 million. 
This  proves  that  the  project  is  economically  viable  and  justified  and  recommended  for  financing 
from the economic point of view. 
  GHG analysis. The GHG analysis was carried out using EX-ACT and GLEAM-i tools. EX-ACT is 
a  land-based  appraisal system  for  assessing  a  project’s  net  carbon  balance  –  the  net  balance  of 
tons of CO2 equivalent (tCO2eq) of GHGs that were emitted or carbon sequestered as a result of 
project interventions – compared to a “without project” scenario, while GLEAM-I has a very similar 
functions  but  focuses  on  assessment  of  intervention  scenarios  in  animal  husbandry,  feed  and 
manure management.  The net carbon balance over a period  of 20  years is estimated to be  7.46 
million tCO2-eq (approximately -372,796 tCO2-eq per year).  
  Since the emission trading scheme is not well developed in Tajikistan, peer countries from the 
region were analysed in order to value the carbon price. The only country in the region of Central 
Asia with an emissions trading scheme set on place is Kazakhstan, where the price is US$1.1/tCO2-
eq9. This price is set as a benchmark and used in the base case. The worldwide standard social cost 
of carbon is US$21/tCO2-eq10, which is considered as a high carbon price scenario in this analysis. 
The medium scenario is set at conservative rate as a half of worldwide standard (US$10.5/tCO2-
eq). 
  The World Bank Shadow Price of Carbon Guidance Note was also considered as an option for 
the analysis, which has low carbon price (starting from US$41 and evolving over years) and high 
carbon  price  (starting  from  US$82  and  evolving  over  year).  However  the  analysis  excluded  such 
scenarios due unrealistically high prices for the context of the country.  
Table 2: Project Economic Indicators with Carbon Externalities 
Base case (regional 
benchmark) 
Conservative scenario (half 
of worldwide standard) 
High carbon price scenario 
(worldwide standard) 
ENPV (US$ mln) 
ERR 
143.4 
22.2% 
183.6 
29.6% 
228.5 
43.3% 
  Sensitivity  Analysis.  Economic  returns  were  tested  against  changes  in  benefits  and  costs 
and for various lags in the realization of benefits. In relative terms, the ERR is equally sensitive to 
changes in costs and in benefits. In absolute terms, these changes do not have a significant impact 
on the ERR, and the economic viability is not threatened by both a 20 % decline in benefits nor by 
a 20 % increase in costs, since the ERR in both cases remains well above the discount rate. The 
decrease  in  benefits  by  10%  and  20%  due  to  the  combined  risks  of  decrease  of  sale  prices  and 
yields accompanied by climate risks (droughts, floods, etc.) would not reduce the economic viability 
of  the  project  dramatically.    A  mixed  scenario  with  decrease  in  benefits  by  30%  and  increase  in 
costs by 20%, would drag the ERR down to 15.24% with ENPV of US$ 73.8 million. A 70% reduction 
in benefits, which can happen mostly due to severe climate disaster (severe drought, flood, etc.), 
would make the project economically unviable, decreasing the ERR down to 5.36% and ENPV to - 
US$ 3.5 million.  The results are presented in Table 3 below.  
9 Kazakhstan emissions trading scheme, 2020 average prices https://icapcarbonaction.com/en/ets-map?etsid=46        
10 Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon, 2010 
Table 3: Economic Analysis. Sensitivity. 
Sensitivity AnalysisEIRRNPV (million US$)22.25%143.4             20.54%122.4             18.68%101.4             5.36%3.5-                 20.70%136.7             19.32%130.1             19.17%123.0             16.71%103.7             29.61%183.6             43.28%228.5             Climate Shock every 3 yr21.98%134.5             Climate Shock every 5 yr22.18%136.6             10%-10%19.03%115.8             10%-20%17.23%94.8               20%-20%15.93%88.2               20%-30%15.24%73.8               20%-10%17.69%109.1             Mixed ScenariosCostsBenefitsCosts10%Increase in expenses, input prices and unit costs20%DelaysDelay 2yr in BenefitsDelay 1yr in BenefitsCarbon price (@US$10.5/tCO2-eq)Carbon price (@US$21/tCO2-eq)Social cost of carbon is set at @US$1.1/tCO2-eq in base case, while in other two scenarios it is US$10.5 and US$21, respectively20% BenefitsRepeating climate shocks20% Benefits∆%RiskBase scenario-10%-20%Benefits -70%Combined risks on sale prices, yields, climate effect (droughts, floods, etc.)Severe climate risks 
Tajikistan
Community-based Agricultural Support Project Plus (CASP+)
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Mission Dates:
01 April - 09 June 2021
Document Date:
16/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002204
5854-TJ
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Project Design Report – SECAP Compliance Review at the DRM Stage 
Project title: 
Country:  
Justification of the final project category and classification 
Final environmental and social category proposed by PDT:  A  ☐ B  ☒  C☐  
Community-based agricultural support programme II (CASP+) 
Tajikistan 
Date of Review: 
21/09/2021 
Category validated by OPR: Yes ☒  No  ☐  
CASP+ is an expansion of the on-going CASP 1 and builds on the broader IFAD portfolio in Tajikistan. 
The goal of the project is to increase resilience of ecosystems and adaptation of livelihoods in rural 
areas  affected  by  climate  change  (PDR  #41-42). Activities  include  (i)  strengthening  public  sector 
capacity  for  transformative  climate-resilient  governance  of  natural  resources,  (ii)  investments  in 
community  capacity  for  adaptation  and  resilience  to  climate  change,  and  (iii)  strengthening 
livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market-based approaches (PDR #51).  
Overall, the programme is not expected to have any significant adverse environmental or social 
implications. Environmental risks associated with activities such as construction of agricultural 
infrastructure or rehabilitation of rural roads will follow the environmental laws of Tajikistan or IFAD 
environmental and social policy, whichever is more stringent (PDR#142). The PDT is commended 
for developing a comprehensive SECAP Review note, ESMP and PIM, including a grievance 
redress mechanism. For activities in buffer areas of reserves and national parks, the project will 
conduct an ESIA (appendix 4).  
The following issues deserve further attention: 
1.  Grievance redress: The procedure for the project-level grievance redress could benefit 
from information on the expected timeline for administering and redressing complaints. The 
information on IFAD’s complaint procedure refers to the draft operational procedure which 
is yet to finalized and approved.  
2.  Road safety: the SECAP screening exercise has identified there is a possibility that the 
proposed construction or operation of the project will result in an increase in traffic on rural 
roads (screening question 33). The recommendation during concept stage to introduce 
measures on road safety measures has not been addressed in the design. 
3.  Labour standards: the SECAP review notes that during infrastructure construction, 
safeguards should be established for worker safety and local communities (SECAP 
screening question 36). This aspect needs to be better reflected in the ESMP. 
Recommendations: 
1.  Grievance redress: further strengthen the project-level grievance procedure to: (i) include 
information on expected timelines, and (ii) ensue information on IFAD’s complaints 
procedure is based on the current procedures. The SECAP team in OPR is available for 
further support. 
2.  Road safety: ensure safety measures are included in the design of road rehabilitation 
activities and reflected in the ESMP and procurement documents. Where appropriate, 
introduce measures to ensure the Borrower undertakes a road safety assessment for each 
phase of the project, and will monitor incidents and accidents and implement measures to 
resolve them, and prepare regular reports of such monitoring. 
3.  Labour standards: ensure sound labour management procedures (safety, health, fair 
treatment, non-discrimination, etc.) are included in the ESMP and procurement documents. 
SECAP studies required during QAG Desk Review stage: 
-  Revised ESMP 
-  Revised grievance redress mechanism 
Final Climate Risk Classification proposed by PDT: High  ☒  Moderate  ☐   Low ☐  
Classification validated by OPR: Yes  ☒ No  ☐  
Climate change and variable historical trends and future scenarios for Tajikistan have been analysed 
in  detail  during  the  design  and  presented  in  SECAP  review  note.  The  in-depth  climate  risk 
assessment provides appropriate measures which have been effectively integrated in the ESMP. 
Climate risk analysis submitted In-depth ☒ Basic ☐ 
Cleared by OPR Director: Yes ☐  No ☐ 
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment 
CASP+  
Community-based agriculture Support  
Programme ‘plus’  
Annex 5 
Social Environment and Climate 
Assessment – SECAP 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Contents 
CASP+  Community-based agriculture Support  Programme ‘plus’ .......................................................... 1 
Annex 6 ................................................................................................................................................................. 1 
Social Environment and Climate Assessment – SECAP ............................................................................... 1 
1. Introduction ................................................................................................................................................. 3 
2. Situational analysis and potential programme impacts .......................................................................... 3 
2.1 Socio-economic and nutritional assessment ....................................................................................... 3 
2.2 Environment and climate context, trends and implications........................................................... 10 
3. Institutional analysis .................................................................................................................................... 20 
4. Environmental and social category ........................................................................................................... 20 
5.  Climate risk category .................................................................................................................................. 20 
6. Recommendations for programme design and implementation .......................................................... 21 
7. Further studies needed ................................................................................................................................ 23 
8. Monitoring and evaluation .......................................................................................................................... 23 
References .......................................................................................................................................................... 25 
10. Environment and Social Management Plan Matrix ............................................................................... 28 
Appendix 1: Gender, targeting and social inclusion startegies .................................................................. 1 
Gender Strategy .............................................................................................................................................. 6 
Youth strategy. .............................................................................................................................................. 15 
Targeting Mechanisms  and Social Inclusion Strategy .......................................................................... 17 
Appendix 2: Institutional analysis and Relevant Environmental, Health and Safety Laws in 
Tajikistan ............................................................................................................................................................. 27 
Appendix 3. Guiding questions for environment, social and climate risk screening ............................ 43 
Appendix 4. Grievance Redress Mechanism ................................................................................................. 52 
Appendix 5. Proposed Social Inclusion and Environment and Climate Related Indicators ................. 57 
Appendix 6: Integrating Agro-Ecological principles in CASP+.................................................................. 59 
2 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
1. Introduction  
1.  Main objective of the Social Environment and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) 
is to inform and strategically orient the CASP+ programme team and the government 
of  Tajikistan  on  social,  environmental  and  climate  change  issues.  It  includes:  (i)  a 
synthesis  of  the  key  climate,  environmental  and  social  challenges  identified  as 
mainstreaming priorities for IFAD and GCF; (ii) an institutional analysis; and (iii) key 
recommendations  to  address  the  challenges  to  targeting  vulnerable  groups  including 
women,  youth,  indigenous  peoples,  people  with  disabilities  and  undernourished 
individuals  in  the  face  of  climate  change,  land  degradation  and  other  environmental 
challenges. An appendix on climate change impacts, climate vulnerability analysis for 
geographic  targeting  and  related  recommendations  by  sector  is  attached  as  part  of 
Feasibility study. 
2.  Significant  constraints  were  present  during  the  SECAP  note  study.  The  Covid-19 
pandemic did not allow the original design team to undertake the mission in the country. 
The  mission  team  worked  together  remotely,  and  organized  virtual  meetings  to 
coordinate with the local government bodies and other stakeholders. 
3.  Consequently,  this  study  is  mostly  based  on  a  desk  review  and  is  enriched  by:  the 
outcomes  of  relevant  discussions  with  the  government  and  partners;  the  team  work 
with local consultants present on the field; an analysis of geographic information system 
datasets  downscaled  at  national  level  for  Tajikistan  through  remote  sensing;  and 
information  from  the  Working  Papers  on  Natural  Resources  Management,  and 
Governance, produced for the (on-going) preparation of the National Investment Plan 
for Sustainable Agriculture Development and Food Security 2021-2030 (NIP). 
2.  Situational  analysis  and  potential  programme 
impacts  
2.1 Socio-economic and nutritional assessment  
4.  Population:  According  to  the  National  Statistical  Agency,  the  total  population  of 
Tajikistan accounts for 9.3 Million. As of July 2020, the regional population distribution 
was the following, showing higher percentage in Khatlong Region (3,3 Million) followed 
by Sughd (2,7Million)1:  
Figure 1: Population by region. Source: Food Security and Poverty, Statistical Agency under the President of 
the Republic of Tajikistan, 2020. 
1 Food Security and Poverty, Statistical Agency under President of the Republic of Tajikistan, 2020 
Available at: https://stat.ww.tj/posts/February2021/2-2020_angl..pdf 
3 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
5.  Women account for 51.5% of the population. Households are larger on average in rural 
areas (6.5 persons) than urban areas (4.8 persons). Overall men head the majority of 
households  (79%),  with  only  21%  headed  by  women  (being  84%  male  headed  and 
16% female headed in rural areas). More than half (55%) of the population is under 
age 25, and 38% are younger than 15. Four percent of the population is age 65 and 
older (TajDHS, 2017)2.  
6.  Poverty: Extreme poverty, measured by the international poverty line of US$1.90 per 
day (WB data from 2003 to 2014)3, fell markedly from 27 percent in 2003 to 4 percent 
in 2014. According to the Government’s own calculations, using a national poverty line, 
poverty declined, over the same time horizon from 81 percent to 32 percent in 2014 
(Tajstat, 2015)4.  
7.  The most recent poverty data available at national level (2019) register a further decline 
to 26.3 with extreme poverty at 10.7 (Tajstat, 2020)5.The thresholds of the national 
poverty line (2009) on monthly consumption are calculated as follows: less than TJS162 
for poor, less than TJS230 for vulnerable, and less than TJS294 for middle class6. 
8.  Comparing the per-capita monthly consumption aggregate to the poverty lines yields a 
national  extreme  (food)  poverty  rate  of  16.8  percent  and  a  total  poverty  rate  of  32 
percent  (as  official  2014  data).  Poverty  in  Tajikistan  (  2014  data)  is  higher  in  RRS, 
Khatlon and GBAO and to a lesser degree in Sughd. Poverty is also higher in rural areas 
(36.1 percent) than in urban households (23.5 percent). Extreme Poverty in rural areas 
is 19.7 percent7. 
Figure 2: Overall poverty and extreme poverty in Tajikistan in 2014. Source: Agency on Statistics, Poverty 
measurement in Tajikistan, 2015  
9.  In 2014 Khatlon accounted for highest percentage of extreme poverty at 21% followed 
by  RRS  with  21,1%,  GBAO  with  18%  and  then  Sughd  with  10%.  The  poor  are 
concentrated in rural Tajikistan (81 %) and in three regions of Khatlon, GBAO and RRS. 
2 Tajikistan, Demographic and health Survey, 2 Statistical Agency under President of the Republic of Tajikistan, 2017 
Available at: https://dhsprogram.com/publications/publication-fr341-dhs-final-reports.cfm 
3 Data available at: https://data.worldbank.org/topic/11  
4 Official figures indicate that the poverty rate dropped from 81% in 2000 to 30.3% in 2016. Source: “Dynamics of poverty 
reduction in Tajikistan,” Statistical Agency under President of the Republic of Tajikistan. The extreme poverty rate (measured 
by food poverty line at 2,250 Kcal per person a day) dropped from 20%in 2012 to 16.8%in 2014,    
Available at: http://www.stat.tj/ru/news/307/  
https://stat.ww.tj/files/metodologia_bednosti_anglisi.pdf 
5 2019 poverty rate according to national Agency of statistics: Food Security and Poverty, Statistical Agency under President of 
the Republic of Tajikistan, 2020 (matrix pp144). 
https://stat.ww.tj/posts/February2021/2-2020_angl..pdf 
6 Poverty measurement in tajikistan: methodological note, Tajstat 2015. 
Available at: https://stat.ww.tj/files/metodologia_bednosti_anglisi.pdf 
7 Ibidem 
4 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Indeed, almost four out of five poor persons lives in rural households. Also, as of 2014 
statistics,  almost  2/3  of  the  poor  are  in  the  regions  of  Sughd  (30,2%)  and  Khatlon 
(36,7%).  
Figure  3:  Share  of  poor  in  Tajikistan  in  2014.  Source:  Agency  on  Statistics,  Poverty  measurement  in 
Tajikistan, 2015 
10. There  is  substantial  spatial  and  seasonal  variation  in  poverty.  Most  rural  areas  are 
poorer than urban ones, and poverty and income insecurity are higher during winter 
and spring8. 
11. Extreme  Poverty  and  gender:  In  2015  UNDP  conducted  a  survey  on:  “mapping 
registered  extreme  poverty  in  rural  Tajikistan  (2016)”9.  The  analysis  is  based  on 
poverty information for the 427 rural and township jamoats where around 79% of the 
country's population lives.  It emerged that the total number of extreme poor registered 
by jamoats was 163,617. Women accounted for 40% of this figure.   
Figure  4:  Extreme  poverty  in  Tajikistan  by  region  in  2015.  Sources:  JAMBI  dataset,  based  on  records  of 
jamoat social assistance commissions. 
12. The data collected by jamoats allows for an exploration of gender differences in terms 
of extreme poverty. As the numbers reported indicate, there were 64,974 women, or 
39.7%  of  all  extreme  poor  registered  in  rural  and  township  jamoats  in  2015.  Of  the 
30,404  extremely  poor  households  listed  in  the  same  table,  11,013  were  headed  by 
women,  which  translates  into  a  36.2  %  share  of  female-headed  households  (FHHs) 
among all extreme poor households. (UNDP, 2016). 
13. Human  Development  Index  (HDI):  Tajikistan’s  2019  HDI  of  0.668  is  above  the 
average of 0.631 for countries in the medium human development group and below the 
average  of 0.791 for countries in Europe and  Central Asia. From  Europe and Central 
8 Ibidem  
9 UNDP, mapping registered extreme poverty in rural Tajikistan, 2016 
Document available at: http://untj.org/jambi-project/images/Extreme-Poverty_ENG.pdf 
5 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Asia, Tajikistan is compared with Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan, which have HDIs ranked 
120 and 106, respectively (UNDP, 2020)10.  
Figure 5: Tajikistan Human Development Index (HDI). Source:  UNDP Human Development Report, 2020 
14. Gender  Development  Index  (GDI):  The  2019  female  HDI  value  for  Tajikistan  is 
0.586 in contrast with 0.712 for males, resulting in a GDI value of 0.823, placing it into 
Group  5.  2  In  comparison,  GDI  values  for  Kyrgyzstan  and  Uzbekistan  are  0.957  and 
0.939, respectively (UNDP,2020).  
Figure 6: Tajikistan Gender Development Index (HDI). Source:  UNDP Human Development Report, 2020 
15. In Tajikistan, 20.0 percent of parliamentary seats are held by women. Life expectancy 
at birth for the total population (both sex) is 70. It is higher for women at 70 compared 
to  men  at  67.9  The  median  number  of  years  of  schooling  among  women  is  10.2   
compared with 11,3 years for men (UNDP,2020)11. 
16. Gender inequalities. According to the UN Women Brief for Tajikistan12, women face 
discrimination and inequality in social, economic and political life. Their representation 
in  Tajik  politics  and  decision-making  remains  below  international  standards.   A  poor 
domestic economic has seen nearly one in five Tajik citizens – 1.5 million – work abroad, 
roughly 90 per cent of them in Russia. Most of the emigrants are male. Their left-behind 
or  “abandoned  wives”  become  de-facto  heads  of  households,  solely  responsible  for 
generating family income – despite limited access to education, resources, micro-credit, 
social  protection  and  employment,  particularly  in  rural  settings. Abandonment  is 
exacerbated by the negative social norms and traditional attitudes to women’s status 
and rights within the family and society (UN Women, 2020).   
17. Sections on Laws and Policies on Gender Equality, National mechanisms, Gender Based 
Domestic Violence, Women’s role in agriculture activities and Women-led Dekhan farms 
are presented in Appendix 1. 
18. Vulnerability  to  Climate  Change  from  a  gender  perspective:  Tajikistan  is  at 
significant  risk  from  disasters  triggered  by  natural  hazards.  Food  security  is  highly 
susceptible  to  drought  and  transportation  links  are  vulnerable  to  flooding.  Climate 
change  threatens  the  food  security  especially  for  those  who  depend  on  small-scale 
10 UNDP, Human Development Report, 2020 
Document available at: http://hdr.undp.org/sites/all/themes/hdr_theme/country-notes/TJK.pdf 
11 ibidem  
12 https://eca.unwomen.org/en/where-we-are/tajikistan 
6 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
subsistence farming. Women suffer disproportionately from this insecurity because they 
are often responsible for securing income from agriculture plots and providing for their 
families; however, they have limited access to information and support. Female farmers 
and  female-headed  households  are  frequently  among  the  most  vulnerable  in  rural 
areas,  and  often  have  very  limited  capacity  to  cope  with  or  recover  from  weather-
related  losses.  This  clearly  emerged  from  consultation  with  women’s  groups  through 
Focus Group Discussion (FGDs) held during CASP+ design Mission (April, 2021). Key 
notes  from  the  consultations  held  in  Hamadoni,  Sh.Sholin,  Sharitus  and  Maschoh 
districts are available in the stakeholder consultation report. 
19. According  to  the  Tajikistan  Country  Gender  Assessment  (ADB,  2016)  the  main 
indicators of climate change in Tajikistan are rising temperatures, uneven rainfall, and 
melting glaciers; these changes, in turn, can cause natural disasters such as flooding 
and  mudslides  or  droughts.  Rural  populations  are  especially  vulnerable  to  climate 
change given their dependence on small-scale farming and natural resources. According 
to  the  ADB  survey  conducted  to  prepare  the  gender  assessment,  women  who 
participated in Focus Group Discussions (FGDs), particularly women farmers, described 
unseasonably warm weather  followed by heavy rains that ruined crops (ADB, 2016). 
Similar  findings  were  confirmed  by  women  interviewed  through  Focus  Group 
Discussions (FGDs) by the project design mission13.  
20. Households  headed  by  females  are  among  the  poorest  and  “often  have  very  limited 
capacity to cope with or recover from weather-related losses”; further, they will also be 
disproportionately impacted by staple goods scarcity. In addition to increased physical 
burdens associated with collecting scarce resources, women and children are at risk for 
illness from substandard drinking water and unclean fuel (Oxfam, 2011)14. 
21. Women’s lower educational levels, lack of technical knowledge, and limited participation 
in decision making also impact their climate change adaptability. According to Oxfam, 
households headed by females that operate small farms exhibit fewer sustainable land 
management processes than households headed by males, which may be due to lack 
of technical knowledge or insufficient finances. Further more, in the same report, it is 
mentioned  that  water-related  changes  have  noticeable  and  immediate  effects  on 
women’s  options  for  collecting  water.  When  water  sources  become  scarce,  those 
farmers who are situated furthest from irrigation systems or who do not have the ability 
to negotiate their water rights, or who are unable to protect their water access, will lose 
out first (Oxfam, 2011).   
22. Youth: Tajikistan’s national Youth Policy (2004) defines youth as persons aged 14-30. 
Youth are largely unemployed, underemployed, and underpaid, and they rank among 
the working poor. The level of youth unemployment (working age 15-24) is 20.9% (WB, 
2020)15.  In  2017,  the  World  Bank  published  a  Job  Diagnostic  Study  in  Tajikistan. 
According to this study, only 43 percent of Tajikistan’s total working age population are 
in the labor force. The majority of those working are in low quality jobs in the informal 
sector.  Moreover,  too  many  jobs  in  Tajikistan  are  seasonal  or  temporary,  and  their 
share has increased over time. Women and youth are the least represented in the labor 
force. Inactive youth, i.e. those who are neither employed nor in school, represent 40 
percent of the total youth population, which is high by international standards. While 
youth are more likely than adults to work in private sector wage jobs, almost one third 
13 Details are reported in the stakeholder consultation report on separate FGDs with women (CASP+ Design Mission, April 
2021).  
14 Climate Change: Beyond Coping. Women smallholder farmers in Tajikistan, Oxfam, 2011   
15 World Bank, 2020:  https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.UEM.1524.ZS?locations=TJ 
7 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
of  employed  young  people  are  in  unpaid  (informal)  jobs,  compared  to  15  percent  of 
adults16.  employed nor in school (NEET),  represent 40 percent of the total, which is 
high  by  international  standards.  Between  2003  and  2013,  NEET  rates  among  youth 
increased  from  37  to  41  percent,  despite  relatively  favourable  economic  conditions. 
Moreover, the NEET rate for female youth is considerably higher than for male youth. 
While youth are more likely to work in private sector wage jobs than adults, almost a 
third of employed young people are in unpaid (informal) jobs compared to 15 percent 
of  adults.  Youth  are  also  significantly  less  likely  to  be  self-employed  (5  percent 
compared to 11 percent among adults)17. 
23. Due to the lack of work experience, youth may choose to exit the labor force after a 
few  failed attempts.  It is also possible that some  of the unfavourable outlook  on the 
labor market in Tajikistan results in young people leaving the domestic labor force in 
favor of international migration. There is an urgent need to address these high levels 
of youth labor market discouragement, partly because this is a wasted resource, but as 
the longer youth are in a state of inactivity, the harder it becomes to reactivate these 
workers (WB, 2017). Of the total number of migrant workers, 474,578 (85.7 percent) 
were  rural  dwellers,  while  only  79,290  (14.3  percent)  were  urban  dwellers  (ICRMW, 
2017)18. This makes a typical migrant worker is a relatively young married man who 
has  secondary  education  and  lives  in  rural  Tajikistan.  Before  migrating,  this  typical 
migrigant worker is either employed as an unskilled worker or unemployed. Besides the 
fact that the actual offer of jobs is not sufficient to meet demand, a World Bank study 
also  implies  that  workers  might  turn  down  jobs  with  a  view  to  the  fact  that  foreign 
payments  are  significantly  higher  than  local  jobs.  Migrant  works  support  households 
that are on average 7.5 persons in size, and in most cases, the migrants have children 
(WB, 2017).  
24. Although  there  is  no  strict  consensus  on  the  abosulute  number  of  abour  migrants, 
estimates suggest their number amounts up to 1 million. The vast majroty, up to some 
98 percent further to border statistics, migrate to the Russian federation whereas the 
remaining  2%  migrates  to  other  countries  in  the  subregion.  Very  few  migrate  to 
countries outside the subregion. A study executed as par of Tajikistan’s submission to 
the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and 
Members of Their Families indicates that 28% of migrants has been away for up to 6 
months, 27 percent has been away for up to 1 year a 47 percent was away for more 
than 1 year (ICRMW, 2017). The COVID-19 pandemic had a tremendeous impact on 
the migration and the Tajkik ministry of labour indicated that labor migration decreased 
by 76% (401,076 people) in comparison to 2019 figures. This was mainly attributed to 
COVID-19.  In  a  special  study  on  the  social  and  economic  effect  of  COVID-19  in 
Tajikistan,  the  World  Bank  indicates  that  more  than  61  percent  of  the  household 
reported a decline in remittances19 (WB, 2020).  
25. There are several micro-determinants that indicate the likelihood of Tajik youth being 
employed such as gender and educational attainment.  Females are about 23 percent 
less  likely  to  be  employed  than  otherwise  identical  males  and  people  who  have 
completed secondary school are more than eight percentage points more likely to be 
employed. Post-secondary school attainment are more than 25 percentage points more 
16 Tajikistan: Addressing Challenges to Create More and Better Jobs, WB 2017 
available at https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/tajikistan/publication/tajikistan-addressing-challenges-to-create-more-
and-better-jobs 
17 Tajikistan Jobs Diagnostic: Strategic Framework for Jobs (World Bank 2017) 
Available at: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/26029 
18 International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (2017). 
Consideration of reports submitted by States parties under article 73 of the Convention – Tajikistan.  
19 World Bank, 2020 : Economic and social impacts of COVID-19 Updates from listening to Tajikistan Survey.  
8 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
likely to be employed than otherwise identical people who have not completed primary 
school. Problematic is that the fact that access to and completion of education is not 
equitable. Workers in richer households have higher educational attainment, and, since 
higher  educational  attainment  leads  to  better  employment  outcomes,  there  is  some 
evidence that richer households have an intergenerational advantage (WB, 2017).  
26. Finally, in order to create jobs, escpecially for youth, the World Bank defined multiple 
entry  points  in  relation  to  the  agricultural  sector.  First,  the  World  Bank  recommends 
the government to better support value chain development. Primary producers could 
thereby receive better returns for their produce and more stable markets access when 
linked to processors downstream. Effectively this would improve the quality of jobs both 
for  to  wage  earners  and  the  self-employed.  Second,  rural  SMEs  should  be  better 
equipped to respond to emerging market needs through access to finance and access 
to business development services. Thirdly, the educational system should be refocused 
in order ot better respond to future market demands (WB, 2017).  
27. The Tajik State Committee of Youth Affairs, Sports and Tourism is the central executive 
agency of the country in the sectors of youth, sports and tourism. It is responsible for 
the  formulation  of  a  consistent  national  policy  and  a  legal  frame  in  the  areas  before 
mentioned.  The  Committee  coordinates  and  supports  the  activities  of  institutions, 
educational  establishments,  corporations  and  other  organization  operating in its  area 
of  responsibility. In order to do so, the Committee  collaborates with a wide range  of 
stakeholders  such  as  central  executive  agencies,  government  authorities  and  public 
organization20. The latest national youth policy dates from 2006 and runs until 2020. 
However,  ever  since  a  national  social  development  program  for  youth  has  been 
introduced in 2013.  
28. The before mentioned Tajik State Committee  of Youth Affairs, Sports and Tourism is 
the  coordinator  of  the  plan21.  The  overall  goals  of  the  programme  is:  “to  create 
favourable conditions and  opportunities for self-organization, self-realization and the 
upbringing  and  perfection  of  enlightenment  of  youth  in  the  spirit  national  self-
knowledge and patriotism, improvement  social and economic situation, legal support 
and  the  formation  of  a  healthy  lifestyle  for  young  people.”  (Dzhuraev  K.K,  2012)  In 
order to realize, these goals the following prority areas were formulated: (i) patriotic 
education  of  youth;  (ii)  development  of  social  opportunities  and  assistance;  (iii) 
economic independence of youth; (iv) development of youth health; (v) promoting the 
development of modern education and supporting the creativity of young people; (vi) 
development  of  scientific  -  methodological  and  information  aspects  of  state  youth 
policy; (vii) improving the labor  skills of specialists and development  of international 
relations.  In  order  to  implement  these  activities,  different  interventions  and 
stakeholders have been identified. The plan is funded through a combination of state 
funds  who  contribyute  roughly  1/3  to  the  plan  as  well  as  by  attracting  funds  from 
international  organizations  who  contribute  roughly  2/3  to  the  plan  (Dzhuraev  K.K, 
2012).  
29. Nutrition: Tajikistan is on course to meet the global targets for under-five overweight 
and under-five stunting, but is  off-course to meet the targets for all other indicators 
analysed  with  adequate  data.  Although  it  performs  well  against  other  developing 
countries,  Tajikistan  still  experiences  a  malnutrition  burden  among  its  under-five 
population.  According  to  the  Global  Nutrition  Report  (Tajikistan  Nutrition  profile, 
20  The Tajik State Committee of Youth Affairs, Sports and Tourism (2020).  
21 Dzhuraev K.K, 2012: Methodological and practical guide: national social programme youth development in Tajikistan.  
9 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
2019)22 based on latest 2017 data from the Demographic and Household Survey (DHS), 
the national prevalence of under-five  overweight is 3.3%, which has  decreased from 
6.7% in 2012. The national prevalence of under-five stunting is 17.5%, which is less 
than the developing country average of 25%. Tajikistan's under-five wasting prevalence 
of 5.6% is also less than the developing country average of 8.9%. In Tajikistan, 35.8% 
of infants under 6 months are exclusively breastfed. Tajikistan's 2015 low birth weight 
prevalence of 5.6% has decreased slightly from 6.2% in 2000.  
30. Tajikistan's  adult  population  also  face  a  malnutrition  burden.  30.5%  of  women  of 
reproductive age have anaemia, and 10.3% of adult men have diabetes, compared to 
9.9% of women. Meanwhile, 16.7% of women and 11.6% of men are obese.  
31. According to WFP’s Tajikistan profile (2020), vitamin and mineral deficiencies are high 
in the country; more than 40 percent of women and children are affected by anaemia 
and more than 50 percent of both women and children have iodine deficiency. According 
to 2018’s ‘Fill the Nutrient Gap’ analysis, an estimated 30 to 56 percent of households, 
depending on region, cannot afford a nutritious diet.23 
32. Persons with disabilities (PWD): Persons with disabilities in Tajikistan, like in any 
other developing country, face a multitude of barriers to securing a decent livelihood. 
Difficulty in identification of suitable jobs, accessibility, negative attitudes and lack of 
education and skills are among major factors that affect their livelihoods. With poverty 
levels still noteworthy, especially in rural areas, the exact number of PWD who live in 
poverty  cannot  be  reliably  determined  for  the  lack  of  sufficient  and  accurate  data. 
According  to  the  Situational  Analysis:  State  of  Rehabilitation  in  Tajikistan  (WHO, 
2015)24, empirical analysis suggests that most persons with disabilities in Tajikistan do 
not  have  opportunities  for  employment.  Although  it  is  assumed  that  unemployment 
rates among persons with disabilities are very high, no accurate data are available. 
33. Similarly,  there  is  no  information  about  self-employment  among  persons  with 
disabilities.  It  is  widely  recognized  that  employment  and  income  generation  are  key 
factors for empowering and promoting the inclusion of people with disabilities in society. 
Women with disabilities often face greater challenges in finding employment than men 
because of negative attitudes towards disabled women, according to data reported by 
the ADB Gender Assessments (2016)25.  
2.2 Environment and climate context, trends and implications  
Environmental assessment 
34. Water – Tajikistan is one of the world’s richest countries in terms of water. In Central 
Asia,  the  share  of  water  resources  of  Tajikistan  is  more  than  60%26.  In  addition  to 
abundant  river  flows,  water  flows  include  groundwater,  springs,  lakes,  glaciers  and 
other water bodies. The main source of water of the Tajikistan’s rivers are glaciers in 
the  Pamir,  Tien-Shan  and  Alay  mountains.  Glaciers  form  4.8  percent  of  Tajikistan’s 
22 Tajikistan Nutrition Profile, Global Nutrition Report, 2019, 
available at: https://globalnutritionreport.org/media/profiles/3.0.3/pdfs/tajikistan.pdf 
23 WFP, Country Brief Tajikistan 2020,  
available at: https://www.wfp.org/countries/tajikistan 
24 WHO, Situational Analysis: State of Rehabilitation in Tajikistan available at: 
https://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/276480/State-Rehabilitation-Tajikistan-Report-en.pdf 
25 ADB, Country Gender Assessment, 2017 (pp 30). 
26 Government of the Republic of Tajikistan Agency for Hydrometeorology under the Committee on Environmental Protection 
under the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan. 2018. The First Biennial Report of the Republic of Tajikistan on Inventory 
of Greenhouse Gases Under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change. 
10 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
territory and provide an important water storage capacity, containing 550 km3 of fresh 
water27. 
35. Even though it was concluded that there would not be a significant reduction of water 
resources  in  the  next  two  decades28,  glacial  melt  may  reduce  water  flow  into  the 
country’s rivers over the long term. Indeed, the decrease in snow occurrence in several 
areas of the country could have a direct impact on water flow in rivers in spring as less 
water is stored during winter. Furthermore, water is released faster when snow melts 
because  of  high  temperature,  which  can  increase  the  risk  of  floods,  erosion  and 
droughts. 
36. The total renewable annual flow forming in the territory of Tajikistan is about  63.46-
km329 and renewable ground water resources in Tajikistan are estimated to be about 
18.7 km3/year. On average, surface water resources available for Tajikistan are 12.98-
km3
per year. Irrigated agriculture is the main water consumer, accounting for around 
80  per  cent  of  total  water  use30  and  the  total  volume  of  water  abstracted  from  all 
sources for irrigation is on average 8.0–10.0 km3 per year. The irrigation system and 
network in the country is inadequate, and the value of output produced per cubic meter 
of irrigation water remains very low, causing stressed water resources for many rural 
communities31.   
37. Together,  the  unsustainable  use  of  land  and  water  lead  to  water  deficits  and  the 
deterioration  of  water  and  soils  quality32.  Thus,  the  main  issue  relating  to  water 
resources in Tajikistan is inadequate water management and its use. A very small area 
is irrigated through drip irrigation33.  While the available water resources from the main 
rivers  are  almost  fully  utilized,  in  the  agriculture  sector,  there  is  great  potential  for 
water  saving  and  effective  water  consumption.  Capitalizing  on  this  potential  is 
significant,  as  it  is  estimated  that  by  2030,  water  demand  will  increase  by  up  to  30 
percent. Thus, the deficit of water resources for irrigation is likely to increase in view of 
the predicted reduction in the volume of glaciers, precipitation in the form of snow, and 
of flow of the main rivers in the summer-autumn period34. 
38. In  order  to  respond  to  these  challenges,  CASP+  will  put  in  place  networks  of  water 
harvesting units and storage at watershed  level that could be accompanied with drip 
irrigation  systems.  Furthermore,  the  programme  will  promote  sustainable  agriculture 
and agro-ecology practices to reduce loss and deterioration of water and increase its 
efficient use. 
39. Forest and biodiversity – The area of protected land is 2,685 thousand ha. The main 
share  of  this  land  belongs  to  the  Tajik  National  Park35.  State  owned  forest  reserves 
make  up  1,342  thousand  ha,  including  412  thousand  ha  of  forest  cover.  The  forest 
cover in Tajikistan is the lowest of the Central Asian states and a large part of the forest 
27 State Administration for Hydrometeorology Committee on Environmental Protection under the Government of the Republic of 
Tajikistan. 2014. The Third National Communication of the Republic of Tajikistan under the UN Framework Convention on 
Climate Change. 
28 Ibid. 
29 2017 FAO AQUASTAT data 
30 Government of the Republic of Tajikistan. 2015. Water Sector Reforms Programme of the Republic of Tajikistan  
for 2016-2025. 
31 The World Bank. Feature Story. March 13, 2020. In Tajikistan, Better Water Resource Management is Critical to Food 
Security and Livelihoods. 
32 Groll, M., Opp, C., Kulmatov, R. et al. Environ Earth Sci (2015) 73: 743. doi:10.1007/s12665-013-2988-5 
33 Around 100ha in 2014 - Tajikistan’s Third National Communication on Climate Change to the UNFCCC, 2014. 
34 Ibid. 
35 The national parks and reserves in Tajikistan are presented in GCG Annex 2, Chapter 1. 
11 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
area  is  given  for  long-term  use  as  pasture36.  It  is  thought  that  in  the  19th  century, 
forests covered about 25 percent of Tajikistan’s total land area. Over the course of time, 
due to factors such as increased population, fuelwood demand, animal grazing, fires, 
increase  of  forest  pests  and  changes  in  land  use37,  the  total  forest  area  is  now  just 
under  3  percent.  Reforestation  is  50%  what it  was  compared  to  1990  and  the  stand 
density  has  continuously  decreased  since  this  period.  With  an  average  of  0.5-0.6  in 
1990, the average share of stocking rates was 50%; by 2007-2010, it had dropped to 
30%38. 
40. Over  a  quarter  of  forests  are  protected,  for  biodiversity  conservation.  Tajikistan’s 
forests contribute to ecosystem functions and are home to many rare and valuable fruit 
trees and shrubs, as well wild animals.  
41. Forests also play a key role in the lives of Tajikistan’s rural population; firewood, fodder, 
medicinal  plants,  fruit  and  nuts  are  sold  locally,  providing  an  important  source  of 
income.  The  main  tree  species  used  in  plantation  forests  include  pistachios,  almond, 
poplar, and fir tree (spruce). Considerable attention is paid to the creation of nut crop 
plantations (pistachio, nut, almond, and sea buckthorn). To meet the demand for wood, 
planting of quick growing species such as poplar and willow has increased.  
42. Non-wood forest products, especially fruit trees but also nuts, berries and game, are 
also  important  for  the  financial  survival  of  state-owned  forest  enterprises  (or 
“leskhoz”)39. Despite Tajikistan’s rich variety of plant life (around 5,000 species), the 
areas  covered  by  these  different  types  of  vegetation,  their  harvesting  seasons, 
productivity  and  potential  economic  benefits  to  the  country  have  not  been  fully 
studied40. 
43. CASP+  will  promote  reforestation  in  areas  with  high  potential  for  reforestation  as 
presented in the Feasibility study Chapter 1. The programme will work through leskhoz 
and  Joint  Forest  Management  (JFM)41  to  upscale  the  approach  set  out  by  GIZ  to 
demonstrate the applicability and impact of  JMF in different forest ecosystems42. The 
programme  will  also  support  the  use  and  protection  of  neglected  and  underutilized 
species (NUS) (e.g. non-timber forest products) and work with experienced partners in 
the field (e.g. Slow Food, already present in DRS and GBAO). There is great potential 
to  create  networks  of  communities  or  “convivium”  and  protect  the  biodiversity  while 
creating business opportunities. 
44. CASP+  is  piloting  the  new  biodiversity  assessment  tool  developed  by  FAO  called  B-
INTACT. A preliminary analysis based on a number of assumptions has been undertaken 
on four watersheds in Rudaki, Mastchoh, Sh. Sholin and Dangara to assess the impact 
the project interventions will have on biodiversity. As information on specific land use 
changes  resulting  from  project  interventions  become  available,  the  analysis  will  be 
updated  and  refined.  During  project  implementation,  B-INTACT  can  be  used  as  a 
participatory  decision-making  tool  to  identify  areas  where  the  positive  impact  on 
biodiversity  would  be  greatest.  Overall,  the  preliminary  analysis  has  shown  that  the 
36 The State Forest Fund accounts for 1.8 million ha, of which 0.4 million ha are forests and 1.4 million ha are non-forested 
areas, such as pastures 
37 UNECE and FAO. 2019. Overview of the State of Forests and Forest Management in Tajikistan. 
38 Tajikistan’s Third National Communication on Climate Change to the UNFCCC, 2014. 
39 Tajikistan’s Third National Communication on Climate Change to the UNFCCC, 2014. 
40 Akhmadov, K. 2008. Geneva Timber and Forest Discussion Paper 46. Forest and forest products country profile: Tajikistan. 
UNECE and FAO.  
41 JFM essentially involves leasing forest land to local people over the long term. The tenants rehabilitate and use their forest 
plots according to management plans. Local forest enterprises advise them on forest rehabilitation. 
42 GIZ. Adaptation to climate change through sustainable forest management in Tajikistan (2013-2018): 
https://www.giz.de/en/worldwide/29916.html  
12 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
impact  on  biodiversity  in  the  four  watersheds  identified  is  positive  with  the  level  of 
biodiversity  intactness  increasing  in  all  case  studies  (see  Chapter  1  of  Feasibility 
study). 
45. Land  degradation  and  soils–  In  Tajikistan,  land  degradation  is  a  serious  issue, 
caused by both natural and anthropogenic factors. Erosion is higher in grasslands than 
in other land cover types43 mainly because of the lack of vegetation. Indeed, the areas 
covered  by  forest  is  the  land  cover  type  with  less  erosion  in  Tajikistan.  Grassland 
accounts for a larger share of land cover than cropland in Tajikistan. Most of Tajikistan’s 
natural pastures are located in high-mountain areas, at altitudes ranging from 1,700-
2,000  to  3,500  m  above  sea  level.  Of  the  3.8  million  hectares  of  pastureland  in  the 
country, the largest pasturelands are found in the Khatlon Region (31 percent) and DRS 
(28 percent)44.  
46. Livestock production is a major source of livelihood for Tajik farmers. Since 2000, the 
number  of  livestock  units  has  been  steadily  increasing,  driven  by  the  country´s 
population  growth  and  remittance  flows.  High  livestock  units  have  resulted  in  the 
overgrazing  of  pasturelands,  which  further  degrades  the  quality  of  the  soil,  and 
contributes to erosion. According to estimates, land degradation from erosion caused 
by  overgrazing  impacts  around  85  percent  of  the  total  pasture  land45;  89  percent  of 
summer pastures and 97 percent of winter pastures are exposed to moderate and high 
erosion46.   
47. Agroforestry  areas  of  perennial  vegetation  are  usually  managed  with  little  soil 
disturbance; thus, soil aggregate stability and soil conservation increase in agroforestry 
areas. There is greater accumulation of organic matter, nutrients in biomass, and root 
density  reduce  runoff  from  cropland  when  agroforestry  is  integrated  into  fields,  as 
compared to soil with only cropland or grassland47. Studies show distinctly lower soil 
organic carbon content levels where annual crop cultivation was dominant in the 1990s 
and where cultivation has now been abandoned, compared to agroforestry areas. On 
the  other  hand,  there  are  strong  indications  that  afforestation  and  fruit  orchards 
established in the 1980s have been successful in conserving soil resources48.  
48. CASP+  will  promote  sustainable  pasture  management  through  the  already  existing 
Pasture Users Unions successfully established under previous IFAD programmes (e.g. 
LPDP  1&2),  and  will  create  new  ones.  The  programme  will  also  promote  pasture 
rehabilitation in degraded areas by establishing silvopastoral systems with local plants 
and  fodder  trees.  The  promotion  of  manure  management  will  similarly  support  soil 
rehabilitation and improvement in pasture and crop lands. 
49. b.     Climate trends and impacts  
43  GCG  Annex  2,  Chapter  1:  Climate  change  impacts,  climate  vulnerability  analysis,  for  geographic  targeting  and  related 
recommendations by sector. 
44 Government of the Republic of Tajikistan Agency for Hydrometeorology under the Committee on Environmental Protection 
under the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan. 2018. The First Biennial Report of the Republic of Tajikistan on Inventory 
of Greenhouse Gases Under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change. 
45 World Bank. Feature Story May 2018. “Sustainable Management of Natural Resources Helps Tajik Communities Adapt to 
Climate Change”. https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2018/05/04/sustainable-management-of-natural-resources-
helps-tajik-communities-adapt-to-climate-change 
46 Government of the Republic of Tajikistan Agency for Hydrometeorology under the Committee on Environmental Protection 
under the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan. 2018. The First Biennial Report of the Republic of Tajikistan on Inventory 
of Greenhouse Gases Under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change.  
47 M. Paudel; E.J. Nelson; C.W. Downer; R. Hotchkiss, 2011. Comparing the capability of distributed and lumped hydrologic 
models for analyzing the effects of land use change. ournal of Hydroinformatics (2011) 13 (3): 461–473. 
https://doi.org/10.2166/hydro.2010.100 
48 Wolfgramm, Bettina & Seiler, Bruno & Kneubuehler, Mathias & Liniger, Hanspeter. (2007). Spatial assessment of erosion and 
its impact on soil fertility in the Tajik foothills. EARSeL eProceedings. 6. 10.5167/uzh-77957. 
13 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
50. According  to  the  ND-GAIN  Index  which  captures  a  country's  vulnerability  to  climate 
change and other global challenges, and its readiness to improve resilience, Tajikistan 
is the most vulnerable country in the Central Asia49. Detailed analises are presented in 
the Chapter 1 of the Fasibility Study of the SECAP.  Temperatures are increasing all 
over the country and there is a clear shift in precipitation patterns. The country is prone 
to frequent natural disasters including floods, mudflows, landslides, droughts and water 
scarcity;  the  degradation  of  pastures  and  forests  from  climate  change  is  already 
visible50. Climate projections predict a worsening of the above-mentioned trends and 
events with significant impacts on these ecosystems and consequently on ecosystem 
services, people’s livelihood and the economy51,52,53
.  
51. With  more  than  70%  of  the  population  living  in  rural  areas54,  employment  in  the 
agricultural  sector  is  the  highest  in  Central  Asia  with  58  percent  of  the  total  labour 
population engaged in agriculture in 201555. Depending on land for their livelihood and 
food, climate has always been an important factor determining the incomes and lives 
of the rural population. Environmental shocks and stressors affect the rural poor who 
have limited resources and capacities to adapt. 
52. As  evident  from  the  climatic  and  environmental  analysis56,  the  country’s  climate 
presents aridity, high temperatures and significant inter-annual variability of almost all 
climatic elements as predominant characteristics. During the 1901-2017 period, mean 
and minimum temperature rise was recorded at an average rate of 0.12 and 0.2ºС per 
decade and, for the period 1970-2017, the positive trend  of mean temperatures has 
been  even  higher  with  an  increase  of  0.28  ºС  per  decade  compared  to  0.01ºС  per 
decade for the period 1901-196957,58. The positive trend is higher during winter months 
(e.g.  Trend  for  December  months  for  Fedchenko  glacier’s  weather  station)59  with 
detected impacts on glacier and snow cover60.  
49 ND-GAIN, 2018: https://gain.nd.edu/our-work/country-index/rankings/  
50 GCG Annex 2, Chapter 1: Climate change impacts, climate vulnerability analysis, for geographic targeting and related 
recommendations by sector; & Appendix 5: Climate Patterns & Trends atlas of Tajikistan pp. 12-15  
51 Climate risks and food security in Tajikistan. A Review of Evidence and Priorities for Adaptation Strategies. April 2017. WFP. 
52 Tajikistan: Country situation assessment Working paper, 2015. CARECECO, PRISE. 
53 Tajikistan - Autonomous Adaptation to Climate Change: Economic Opportunities and Institutional Constraints for Farming 
Households. World Bank. 2014. Washington, DC. 
54 Data World Bank. 2019: https://data.worldbank.org/  
55 FAO. 2018. Policy analysis of nationally determined contributions (NDC) in Europe and Central Asia. Budapest, 84 pp. 
56 GCG Annex 2, Chapter 1: Climate change impacts, climate vulnerability analysis, for geographic targeting and related 
recommendations by sector 
57 Tajikistan’s Third National Communication on Climate Change to the UNFCCC, 2014. 
58 GCG Annex 2, Chapter 1: Climate change impacts, climate vulnerability analysis, for geographic targeting and related 
recommendations by sector 
59 Ibid. 
60 Ibid. 
14 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Figure 1: Location of the local weather stations used for the analysis of CASP+ design in Tajikistan 
53. Significant  decrease  in  the  snow  extent  in  more  than  50%  of  the  whole  territory  is 
observed  for the period 2000-202061. The main source of water of Tajikistan’s rivers 
are glaciers62 and, even though the discharge of rivers has not experienced a significant 
reduction so far and might even increase by 2050 in spring, it is expected that glacial 
melt  over  the  long  term  will  reduce  water  flow  in  the  country’s  rivers  particularly  in 
summer  and  autumn  by  20-25%63.  The  increase  at  medium  term  in  spring  may 
contribute to more erosion, floods and mudflows. Over the last twenty years, natural 
disasters have resulted in more than 2,000 deaths and an economic damage exceeding 
US$ 160 million in Tajikistan. The mudflows and floods in 1998, 1999, 2005 and 2010 
were  the  most  devastating64  and  strengthening  soil  and  forest  protection  measures 
should be a high priority. 
54. At national level, annual precipitation (rain, sleet, and snow) rose significantly by 15-
20%  during  the  1901-2018  period.  The  analysis  of  the  local  weather  station 
corroborates these findings with a net decrease of precipitation during spring and most 
of  summer.65  The  increase  in  precipitation  is  concentrated  during  the  February-May 
season  mostly  in  the  Western  part  of  Tajikistan,  with  a  positive  trend  of  snow 
occurrence  in  high  mountains  where  temperature  permits,  while  the  June-October 
season is experiencing a significant decrease of 4 mm/decade66. These changes pose a 
61 Ibid. 
62 Tajikistan’s Third National Communication on Climate Change to the UNFCCC, 2014. 
63 Ibid. 
64 Climate risks and food security in Tajikistan. A Review of Evidence and Priorities for Adaptation Strategies. April 2017. WFP. 
65 GCG Annex 2, Chapter 1: Climate change impacts, climate vulnerability analysis – Historical and current climate, 
Precipitation, local weather stations analysis 
66 The Centre and North West of the country have an average of 700-900 mm per year compare to the North of the Sughd 
Region, the East of Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Region and the South of the Khatlon Region which receive around 100-300 
mm per year for the 1981-2018 period. 
15 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
threat to the agricultural cropping calendar, and to rangeland productivity by changing 
livestock grazing  habits and availability of productive pastures,  which prevail in rural 
areas. There is a clear shift in precipitation patterns, which has a major impact on water 
availability  between  the  end  of  the  wet  season  in  May  and  the  beginning  of  it  in 
November-December,  which,  in  turn,  increases  the  vulnerability  (i.e.  heavy  rainfall 
events,  extreme  temperatures,  droughts)  of  ecosystems    and,  therefore,  of  the 
population. The 2000/01 drought substantially impacted Tajikistan at an estimated 5 
percent  its  GDP.  More  than  3mln  people  (or  half  of  the  countries'  population  at  that 
time) were affected. 
55. Droughts over the period have affected the large parts of the country. The Standardised 
Precipitation-Evapotranspiration Index (SPEI)67 analysis at 18 months shows significant 
worsening in time for the period 1980-2019 at national level. Increase of droughts in 
time  is  observed  in  Northern  Sughd,  Eastern  Khatlon,  DRS  and  Western  GBAO.  The 
recurrence of such events since 1980 at national level is of 3 to 5 years and the SPEI 
presents negative values without interruption since 201368 attesting to a depletion of 
water reserves in deep soil layers. Heavy rainfall events (>10mm/day) are becoming 
more intense at the end of summer, beginning of falls in Ganjina, Aznob and Dushanbe 
, when soils are drier and with less vegetation cover (i.e. more prone to landslides and 
mudflows). 
56. Climate  change  projections  appear  to  follow  mostly  the  same  trends  than  historical 
data.  Projections  by  the  Coupled  Model  Intercomparison  Project,  Phase  5  (CMIP5) 
models  included  in  the  IPCC's  Fifth  Assessment  Report  (AR5)  foresee  that  the  mean 
annual temperatures will be warmer by approximately 2°C by 2050. Furthermore, cold 
days are projected to decrease by 35 days by 2050. The mean annual precipitation is 
projected  to  decrease  by  5%  at  national  level,  but  the  country  will  experience 
differences  geographically.  The  Western  part  of  the  country  should  experience  an 
annual decrease in precipitation, reversing the historical positive trend noticed in winter 
since 1981, while the Eastern and Central part should instead witness an increase by 
2050. Dry days are projected to increase by approximately 3 days leading to a shift of 
annual severe drought likelihood from once every 5 years in 2020 to once every 3 years 
in 205069. Winters are projected to be drier and summers wetter, which could result in 
both increased floods and droughts.  
57. As  a  result,  by  2050  the  yield  of  main  crops70  could  decrease  by  between  5  and  35 
percent  and  similarly,  pastures  on  which  livestock  depend  are  also  expected  to 
experience a reduction in quality and quantity due to pressures from high temperatures 
and  increased  evaporation  rates71.  Temperature  increases  are  also  likely  to  modify 
ecosystems and provide opportunities for pests and diseases to multiply, affecting food 
production  in  a  range  of  agricultural  sectors72,73
.  Indeed,  Tajikistan  is  exposed  to 
climate-sensitive diseases  such as, among others, the potato leafroll virus spread by 
67 SPEI is a multiscale drought index based on climatic data.(precipitation, evapotranspiration) allowing the index to account 
for the effect of temperature on drought development through a basic water balance calculation. SPEI has an intensity scale in 
which both positive and negative values (-5,5) are calculated, identifying wet and dry events. It can be calculated for time 
steps of as little as 1 month up to 48 months or more, with longer period deeper layer of soil can be analysed. Source: 
Copernicus Climate Change Service ERA5 reanalysis. 
68 GCG Annex 2, Chapter 1 
69 Climate Change Knowledge Portal, 2020: https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/ 
70 Groundnuts, Maize, Managed grass. Rapeseed, Rice, Sorghum, Sunflower, Wheat, Potato 
71 GCG Annex 2, Chapter 1: CARD analysis  
72 IPCC, AR5, 2014. 
73 L. Lipper, N. McCarthy, D. Zilberman, S. Asfaw, G. Branca. 2018. Climate Smart Agriculture, Natural Resource Management 
and Policy 52, FAO, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-61194-5_10 
16 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
aphids and the late blight in potato production74 and the Peste des Petits Ruminants, 
the Foot and Mouth Disease and the Helminthiasis in the livestock sector75.  
58. The climate vulnerability index analysis76 shows that higher vulnerability to climate is 
seen  in  the  Eastern  and  Centre  Khatlon  and  in  the  South  East  of  Sughd.  The  main 
reason  for  these  particular  locations  is  not  only  associated  with  adverse  impacts  of 
climate change but also with high sensitivity of the environment, low quality of life and 
insufficient income of the population. These findings complement the observations and 
assessments of previous studies77,78. In 2010, 11% of the total population was living 
on degraded land79. Mountainous regions are especially vulnerable to climate change, 
and thus require optimal land and water management80,81. Systematic reforestation and 
pasture  management  in  accordance  with  the  adopted  State  programmes  is  a 
considerable  contribution  of  the  country  to  the  reduction  of  negative  impacts  on  the 
climate system82. 
c.     Climate change mitigation 
59. Tajikistan’s  total  GHG  emissions  represent  0.02  percent  of  global  GHG  emissions. 
52.0%  of  Tajikistan’s  carbon  equivalent  emissions  originate  from  agriculture,  mostly 
from livestock related activities.83 Working on both GHG emissions and absorption by 
improving the current agricultural production system (with agroecology) and enhancing 
the potential of absorption (better pasture management,  reforestation) will lead to  a 
CO2 equivalent emissions reduction at national level while improving adaptation. Better 
management  of  on-farm  biomass  is  a  part  of  sustainable  land  management84  and 
sustainable agriculture85. In addition, with feasible improvements in feed quality, animal 
health and husbandry, emissions can potentially be reduced86 
60. The  ex-ante  analysis  shows  a  net  cumulative  incremental  carbon  balance  of  -2.95 
million tones CO2eq over the 20 years of the project compared to a situation without 
project.  Cattle  are  responsible  for  72%  of  this  balance  while  sheep  account  for  22% 
and goats 6%2.3 Target group profiles  
Livelihoods and climate change impact 
61. With  more  than  70%  of  the  population  living  in  rural  areas87,  employment  in  the 
agricultural sector is the highest in the non-EU ECA countries with 58 percent of the 
74 R. Hijmans. The effect of climate change on global potato production, July 2003. American Journal of Potato Research 80(4) 
Follow journal. DOI: 10.1007/BF02855363 
75 Abdela, N.; Jilo, K. Impact of climate change on livestock health: A review. Global Vet. 2016, 16, 419–424 
76 GCG Annex 2, Chapter 1 
77 United Nations Development Program (UNDP). 2012. Capacity for climate resiliency in Tajikistan: Stocktaking and 
Institutional Assessment. 
78 Climate risks and food security in Tajikistan. A Review of Evidence and Priorities for Adaptation Strategies. April 2017. WFP. 
79 UNDP. 2013. Human development report 2013. The rise of the South: human progress in a diverse world. 
80 Greˆt-Regamey A, Brunner SH, Kienast F. 2012. Mountain ecosystem services: Who cares? Mountain Research and 
Development 32(1):23–34.  
81 Ariza C, Maselli D, Kohler T. 2013. Mountains: Our Life, Our Future. Progress and Perspectives on Sustainable Mountain 
Development from Rio 1992 to Rio 2012 and Beyond. Bern, Switzerland: SDC [Swiss Agency for Development and 
Cooperation], CDE [Centre for Development and Environment] 
82 Updated Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) towards the achievement of the global goal of the UN Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) by the Republic of Tajikistan, 2021. 
83 UNFCCC GHG Inventories cited in FAO. 2018. Policy analysis of nationally determined contributions (NDC) in Europe and 
Central Asia. Budapest, 84 pp. Share of Agriculture Emission (AR5) – 2017 data, Source: FAOstat, consulted in Dec 2020.  
84 Liniger H, Mekdaschi Studer R, Hauert C, Gurtner M. 2011. Sustainable Land Management in Practice—Guidelines and Best 
Practices for Sub-Saharan Africa. Rome, Italy: TerrAfrica, WOCAT [World Overview of Conservation Approaches and 
Technologies] and Food and Agriculture Organization of United Nations [FAO]. 
85 Duncam AJ, Ge´rard B, Rufina MC, Teufel N, van Rooyen A, van Wijk MT. 2012. Conservation agriculture in mixed crop-
livestock systems: Scoping crop residue trade-offs in Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia. Field Crops Research 132:175–184. 
86 Gerber, P.J., Steinfeld, H., Henderson, B., Mottet, A., Opio, C., Dijkman, J., Falcucci, A. & Tempio, G. 2013. Tackling climate 
change through livestock – A global assessment of emissions and mitigation opportunities, FAO, Rome. 
87 Data World Bank. 2019: https://data.worldbank.org/  
17 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
total labour population engaged in agriculture in 201588. Depending on land for their 
livelihood  and  food,  climate  has  always  been  an  important  factor  determining  the 
incomes  and  lives  of  the  rural  population.  Environmental  shocks  and  stressors  affect 
the rural poor who have limited resources and capacities to adapt. 
62. In  2010,  11%  of  the  total  population  was  living  on  degraded  land89.  Mountainous 
regions are especially vulnerable to climate change, and thus require optimal land and 
water management90,91. Systematic reforestation in accordance with the adopted State 
programmes is a considerable contribution of the country to the reduction of negative 
impacts  on  the  climate  system92.  Adaptation  in  the  agriculture  and  food  security 
requires a food systems approach and should include livelihood diversification to reduce 
sensitivity of rural incomes.  
63. The  main  target  group  consists  of  poor  communities  and  those  households  whose 
livelihood is severely affected by climate change. These are represented by men and 
women  engaged in traditional livelihood systems based  on: (i) pastoralism  (livestock 
rearing:  cattle,  sheep  and  goats)  or  agro-pastoralism/mixed  farming;  and  (ii) 
combining  small  to  medium  scale  livestock  production  (including  sheep  and  goats, 
milking cows and poultry) with agriculture activities (crop/horticultural and fruits). The 
selection of the target groups and activities proposed is in line with Country Strategic 
Note ( 2016) and its strategic objective.93  
64. In  so  doing  the  programme  will  provide  programme  services  for    the  actually  or 
potentially economically active among the following target population: (i) subsistence 
and semi-subsistence men and women farmers with upside potential, in particular those 
willing to move to more commercial farming; (ii) extremely poor men and women (focus 
on  FHHs)  living  below  the  poverty  line,  who  are  either  landless  or  are  producing  a 
minimum subsistence level on household plots; (iii) the rural underemployed and self-
employed youth (including returning migrants).  
65. Within these groups, emphasis will be placed on reaching poor subsistence and semi-
subsistence farmers with upside potential:  Smallholder farmers in this category 
have access to land beyond household plots through leasing arrangements (about 1 ha) 
and  they  usually  own  on  average  5  heads  of  cattle  and  15-20  small  ruminants,  that 
graze  on  community  pasture  land.  They  have  (varying  degrees  of)  access  to  natural 
resources,  including  rangelands  areas  and  water  resources  but  lack  mechanisation, 
irrigation,  seeds  and  connectivity  to  networks  and  markets,  including  market 
information,  technical  capacity  and  scale.  Family  dekhan  farms  with  similar  size  of 
productive  resources  (land  and  livestock)  belong  to  this  category.  They  have  the 
potential to provide consistent increased quantity and quality of their output to meet 
compliance standards and market requirements (local/regional). In terms of poverty 94 
this  groups  consist  of  poor  and  transitory  poor  (above  the  poverty  line  but  highly 
88 FAO. 2018. Policy analysis of nationally determined contributions (NDC) in Europe and Central Asia. Budapest, 84 pp. 
89 UNDP. 2013. Human development report 2013. The rise of the South: human progress in a diverse world. 
90  Greˆt-Regamey  A,  Brunner  SH,  Kienast  F.  2012.  Mountain  ecosystem  services:  Who  cares?  Mountain  Research  and 
Development 32(1):23–34.  
91  Ariza  C,  Maselli  D,  Kohler  T.  2013.  Mountains:  Our  Life,  Our  Future.  Progress  and  Perspectives  on  Sustainable  Mountain 
Development from Rio 1992 to Rio 2012 and Beyond. Bern, Switzerland: SDC [Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation], 
CDE [Centre for Development and Environment] 
92  Updated  Nationally  Determined  Contribution  (NDC)  towards  the  achievement  of  the  global  goal  of  the  UN  Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) by the Republic of Tajikistan, 2021. 
93 Document available at: https://www.ifad.org/en/-/document/country-strategy-no-3 
94 As of 2018, the poverty rate is 27.4 (WB, 2020) percent, meaning that 27.4 percent of the population lives below the 
national poverty line. Additionally, 4.8 percent of people live on less than $1.90 a day, according to the World Bank. 
https://databank.worldbank.org/data/download/poverty/33EF03BB-9722-4AE2-ABC7-AA2972D68AFE/Global_POVEQ_TJK.pdf 
The extreme poverty rate (measured by food poverty line at 2,250 Kcal per person a day) dropped from 20%in 2012 to 
16.8%in 2014 (UNDP,2017). http://untj.org/jambi-project/images/Extreme-Poverty_ENG.pdf 
18 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
vulnerable and at risk to slide back due to the climatic shocks/other negative variables 
and seasonal trends)95.   
66. Extremely  poor  households  producing  on  a  subsistence  level:  These  poorer 
households’ make their income and living from very small scale livestock coupled with 
agriculture and other incomes derived from off-farm activities (poultry, dairy performed 
by women) and also combined with irregular remittances from occasional labour (men 
and younger). These include poor men and women farming small areas, usually “kitchen 
gardens” of about 0.2 ha and they have no access to land beyond household plots. They 
usually grow some vegetables for domestic consumption and keep some livestock, (1-
2 cattle, 5-10 small ruminants and 10-20 poultry).  
67. Target  groups  will  also  include  the  most  vulnerable  socio-economic  categories: 
poor rural women, especially those who are household heads, the elders,  poor rural 
youth (including returning migrants) elders and Persons with Disabilities (PWD). These 
categories live with none or very limited assets, they are unemployed and looking for 
alternative  livelihood  opportunities  to  make  a  living  based  on  on-farm  activities  (i.e. 
poultry,  milk  production,  dairy  processing)  or  off-farm  activities  (occasional  labour, 
enterprise development, service provision along selected value chains).  
68. Beneficiaries  Targeting  and  Social  Inclusion:  identification  and  selection  of 
beneficires will be conducted in a series of steps as follows: (i) mobilisation campaign 
to  present  the  programme;  (ii)  wealth  ranking  exercise  conducted  by  the  service 
provider  (SP)  and  specifically  by  Community  Facilitatirs  (CF)  including  support  from 
local CBOs, given their knowledge of poorest and disadvantaged households, especially 
recipients  of  social  aid  and  also  PWD;(iii)  involvements  of  the    local  community 
leaders/committee to validate the proposed beneficiaries and avoid risk of elite capture; 
(iv)  verification  by  programme  staff  through  physical  visits  to  the  households  and 
checking  the  community  validation  process  (minutes  of  meetings  and  other 
documentation provided to ensure process is transparent and records are duly kept as 
part of M&E requirements including the way potential complaints are addressed during 
the process). The Participatory Wealth Ranking exercise will be conducted at community 
level to identify the poorest and the better off, following the example of the LPDP where 
such  exercise  was  conducted  by  Aga  Khan  Foundation  (AKF)96  and  details  for 
implementation are reported in the Programme Implementation Manual (PIM) in Annex 
21 of the GCF proposal. 
69.  Targeting methods:  The programme will apply a combination of self-targeting and 
direct  targeting  methods.  CASP+  promote  services  in  line  with  needs  of  all  target 
groups. Some activities will be of interest for the community as a whole: i.e. Climate 
Sensitive  Community  Action  Plan 
social 
infrastructures/adaptation and mitigation activities and therefore all members  will be 
mobilised through Village Organisations (VOs), PUUs, WUAs and Women Groups (WG). 
Direct targeted activities will be designed for specific groups, especially the poorest and 
vulnerable ones. Poor and poorest households will be identified and selected through 
the wealth ranking exercise and key criteria related to poverty and vulnerability set for 
their participation in  Common Interests Groups (CIGs) and access to grant financing.  
for  productive  and 
(CsCAPs) 
95 According to WFP, the seasonality of poverty is clear in both rural and urban locations, yet more pronounced in the 
countryside where 75 percent of the population heavily depends on agriculture for an income. The proportion of people below 
the poverty line sharply increases during the first and second quarter of the calendar year – the lean season – when few 
agricultural activities are taking place, incomes tend to be lower and households become more market-reliant on food. Poverty 
rates drop during the third and fourth quarters when harvests are gathered and there is more income and food for those who 
produce and sell agricultural products (WFP vulnerability and resilience Atlas, 2019). 
https://unwfp.maps.arcgis.com/apps/Cascade/index.html?appid=1e262af203064241b087c64a7a399d35 
96 Consultation with AKF representative during the CN design mission on the validity of the proposed methodology and lesson 
learned.  
19 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Pro-poor  criteria  for  access  to  grants  (individuals  and  groups)  have  been  developed. 
Additional details can be found in Appendix 1.  
3. Institutional analysis 
70. The Insitutional analysis is presented in the table in Appendix 2: Institutional analysis 
and Relevant Environmental, Health and Safety Laws in Tajikistan. 
4. Environmental and social category 
71. The  programme  is  considered  to  be  Category  B.  Overall,  the  programme  is  not 
expected  to  have  any  significant  adverse  environmental  or  social  implications. 
Environmental  risks  associated  with  activities  such  as  construction  of  agricultural 
infrastructure  or  rehabilitation  of  rural  roads  will  follow  the  environmental  laws  of 
Tajikistan  or  IFAD  environmental  and  social  policy,  whichever  is  more  stringent. 
Tajikistan has a well-developed environmental legal and regulatory framework. Current 
environmental legislation in Tajikistan includes statutory acts and laws on the following 
topics:  (i)  protection  of  the  environment;  (ii)  ecological  audit  and  monitoring;  (iii) 
protection of flora and fauna; (iv) environmental information and education; (v) soil, 
water and air quality; (vi) biological safety; (vii) human health and safety; and (viii) 
waste and chemicals management. These laws, along with the regulations approved by 
the  Government  of  Tajikistan  (GoT),  create  a  favorable  legal  framework  for 
environmental  protection  and  for  the  use  and  protection  of  the  country’s  natural 
resources. The programme will have to comply with the procedures for environmental 
impact,  under  the  Law  on  Environmental  Impact  Assessment  (2017)  detailed  in 
Appendix 2 of the SECAP and on IFAD and GCF’s environmental and social policy – 
whichever is most stringent. 
72. Furthermore,  the  programme  aims  at  increasing  natural  resource  management  and 
reduce overexploitation of land, pasture and resources. The proposed programme will 
enhance social cohesion due to the strengthening of the value chains and will contribute 
to  environmental  conservation  and  sustainability  because  of  its  emphasis  on  the 
rehabilitation of degraded land, reforestation, the introduction of new management and 
maintenance  practices  and  technologies,  and  the  reduction  of  anthropic  pressure  on 
grazing lands  and  pastures.  The  proposed  programme  will  strictly  follow  the  existing 
environmental  laws  and  regulations  applicable  in  the  country  and  represents  a  NRM 
oriented  approach  to  using  natural  capital  available  in  Tajikistan.  The  programme  is 
designed to enhance sustainable and resilient business opportunities of vulnerable rural 
households  through  climate-smart  natural  resource  management,  sustainable 
agriculture and agroecology, promoting the territory and its environmental integrity as 
main driver of local economy. 
5.  Climate risk category 
73. Climate  change  and  variable  historical  trends  (from  both  local  weather  stations  and 
aggregated  remote  sensing  data)  and  future  scenarios  for  Tajikistan  have  been 
analysed in detail during the design presented in Appendices 4 and 5 of the SECAP. 
The programme's climate risk classification is High. Based on assessments undertaken 
during  preparation  of  the  Concept  Note,  the  programme  is  expected  to  be  highly 
sensitive to climate risks, mainly due to the exposure of Tajikistan’s agricultural sector 
to projected rising temperatures and changes in rainfall and glacial melt patterns that 
are likely to compound existing food security, energy security and poverty challenges. 
Main climate change impacts have been detected on natural resources (forest, pasture, 
20 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
water bodies, others) as well as on rural infrastructures such as roads and water points. 
The  programme  will  seek  to  mitigate  this  by  improving  the  governance  at  both 
government  and  community  level,  and  improving  land  management  practices  in  the 
communities. The programme will aim at reducing the vulnerability of the rural poor to 
those  risks  and  programme  funds  are  allocated  to  ensure  climate  adaptation  and 
resilience of both infrastructures and people’s livelihood. Furthermore, a Green Climate 
Fund  proposal  is  developed  in  parallel  and  may  reinforce  programme  adaptation,  as 
well as mitigation, activities. 
6.  Recommendations 
implementation  
for  programme  design  and 
74. The SECAP team supported actively the design team during the whole concept note and 
design  process.  Recommendations  at  CN  were  integrated  directly  within  CASP+ 
activities and are reflected in the targeting approaches adopted and presented in the 
Appendices and in the PIM. This section and the recommendations sections in Appendix 
1 (Social Inclusion) and chapter 1 of the Feasibility study  (Environment and Climate) 
give a clear idea of the integration of the Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment 
Procedures within CASP+. 
75. Recent  major  international  reports97  have  highlighted  the  alarming  impact  of  food 
production systems on climate change, land and biodiversity. The COVID-19 pandemic 
provides another illustration of the need for more sustainable food systems that work 
with, and not against nature, while ensuring food security and decent livelihoods for a 
rapidly growing population. 
76. CASP+ is a response to pasture and forest degradation caused by climate change and 
unsustainable anthropogenic activities (mainly livestock). The programme’s goal is to 
increase resilience and enhance livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities, 
and  regions.  The  programme  aims  at  reducing  emissions  from  land  use, 
deforestation, forest degradation, and through sustainable management of forests and 
conservation and enhancement of forest carbon stocks.  
77. Livestock  production  is  responsible  for  substantial  contributions  to  greenhouse  gas 
emissions.98 While Tajikistan does not contribute any significant amounts to GHGs, it 
can  further  reduce  emissions  and  embark  on  a  more  environmentally 
sustainable  pathway  by  reducing  the  number  of  livestock  and  investing  in 
more  productive  and  healthier  animals  that  generate  lower  emissions  per 
weight of product.99 
78. Through integrated planning and forest and pasture investments, CASP+ will intervene 
in vulnerable areas prone to climate-induced hazards such as river floods, heavy rainfall 
events,  flash  floods,  mudslides,  heat  stress  in  summer,  and  droughts  following  the 
geographic targeting approach developed under the SECAP and presented in Chapter 1  
of  the  Feasibility  study  in  Annex  2.    The  villages  will  be  selected in  the  most 
vulnerable water sub-catchments basins, based on their vulnerability to climate change 
and their limited adaptive capacity. The programme will attempt to tackle inappropriate 
forest-rangeland  management  practices  causing  land  degradation  that  is  further 
exacerbated by climate change.  
97 Larbodière, L., Davies, J., Schmidt, R., Magero, C., Vidal, Arroyo Schnell, A., Bucher, P., Maginnis, S., Cox, N., Hasinger, O., 
Abhilash, P.C., Conner, N., Westerberg, V., Costa, L. (2020). Common ground: restoring land health for sustainable 
agriculture. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN. 
98 http://www.fao.org/3/a-i3437e.pdf 
99 https://www.climatexchange.org.uk/media/2031/livestock_health_and_ghg.pdf 
21 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
79. Increasing  pressure  of  the  livestock  on  the  ecosystem,  over-grazing  of  pastures  and 
forests and pollution of waters are issues that should be tackled by the programme at 
landscape scale. Landscape management practices have a direct impact on agriculture 
and landscape productivity and on the level of provision of ecosystem services. CASP+ 
has two main components presented below: 
80. Comp  1.  Strengthening  public  sector  capacity  for  transformative  climate-
resilient management of natural resources  
81. CASP+ will engage in institutional support in strengthening institutional and local 
capacity to plan, monitor and evaluate natural resources management under increasing 
climate change related stresses. The programme will aim at strengthening institutional 
and  regulatory  systems  (remote  sensing,  surveillance)  on  climate-adaptive  planning 
and NR monitoring. . In addition, the project will pilot test an innovative approach to 
pasture monitoring using hives on a pilot area of 3,500 ha. CASP+ will strengthen 
the  capacities  of  relevant  government,  local  institutions  and  research 
agencies/universities  for  evidence-based  joint  climate-adaptive  natural  resources 
planning,  management  and  monitoring  (e.g.  of  pasture,  forest,  agricultural  land, 
livestock, water/river basins). Under the component 1, the programme will also propose 
relevant  evidence-based  policy  and  regional  framework  improvements  (e.g. 
integrated  NRM,  land  tenure,  conflict  resolution  and  registration,  etc.).  Furthermore, 
the programme will enable agribusiness environment by facilitating policy dialogues of 
multi-party  (public,  private,  civil  society)  for  improved  economic  opportunities 
(including PPP). 
82. Comp  2.  Community  climate-sensitive 
investments 
in  climate  change 
vulnerable rural areas 
83. The  programme  will  aim  at  strengthening  rural  communities’  investment  capacity 
(Technical  Assistance  (TA),  and  investments)  in  climate  adaptive  and  socio-
economically productive activities, with a gradual shift towards lower  GHG emissions 
livestock  management  practices,  etc.),  and 
(through  agroecology, 
downstream  linkages  in  the  value  chains/end  markets.  Through  these  activities,  the 
component  should  increase  the  adaptive  capacity  in  rural  areas  (including  reduced 
exposure to climate risks).  
improved 
84. The  programme  will  support  the  creation,  execution,  monitoring  and  evaluation  of 
Climate-sensitive  Community  Action  Plans  (CsCAP).  The  CsCAPs  will  include 
Adaptation  Investments  (improved  pasture  management,  climate  resilient 
infrastructures,  agricultural  machineries)  and  where  applicable  also  Forestry 
Investments, depending on the presence of leskhoz in the district and on opportunity 
for afforestation and reforestation. 
85. The  CsCAP  will  be  designed  and  validated  by  relevant  local  institutions  (Village 
Organizations, PUUs, WUAs) and public bodies (Forest Enterprises, Water management 
institutions, Local Administration, etc.) and then executed by these local institutions. 
86. It will provide local communities with the access to skills, technologies and financing to 
multi-purpose use and development of rangelands, forests and watersheds (see Annex 
2 Chapter 1 for proposed investments by sector at early design stage and reflected in 
the components description). 
87. Comp  3.  Strengthening  livelihoods  for  enhanced  resilience  through  market 
based approaches, 
22 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
88. The  programme  will  engage  the  individual  households  and  producer 
organizations  in  climate-adaptive  agrifood  economic  activities.It  will  promote 
knowledge 
for  agricultural  productivity 
enhancement  (e.g.  FFS).  It  will  also  improve  livestock  genetics  and  animal  health 
through veterinary services. Furthermore, the programme will increase the access to 
market for selected value chains (TBD) via climate-resilient investment. 
transfer  and  capacity  development 
89. The Main Gender Activities recommended by the SECAP by component are presented 
in the Appendix 1.  
90. Grievance  Redress  Mechanism  -  A  grievance  redress  mechanism  has  been 
developed  in  line  with  the  requirements  of  both  IFAD  as  well  as  the  GCF.  The  GRM 
reflects a three tiered approach for communities to submit their grievance, starting at 
the community level and ending at IFAD as an actor of last resort. CASP+ will ensure 
dissemination of the GRM to local communities prior to starting programme activities 
and maintain solid documentation for the received complaints during the operation of 
the  programme  and  track  the  level  of  responsiveness  (provision  of  feedback).  The 
outline of this GRM, which is part of the GCF funding proposal, is included in Appendix 
4 of the SECAP. The appendix also includes an overview of non-community stakeholders 
(such  as  research  institutions  and  international  organizations  that  will  be  regularly 
consulted  in  order  to  assure  that  the  project  remains  relevant  throughout 
implementation. 
7. Further studies needed 
91. Under  Component  1.  Strengthening  enabling  conditions  for  transformative 
climate  adaptive  natural  resources  management.    The  project  will  recruit  an 
international gender expert for (i) stocktaking tasks (policy review and analysis) and 
(ii) field work  to contribute to the diagnostic assessment (gender and Climate Change). 
The goal of the gender and climate change analysis is to better understand the national 
context, particularly focusing at gender  equality issues in key climate sectors  from a 
gender and climate change perspective. The  study will  provide concrete short term 
and long-term recommendations as part of: (i) policy dialogue and policy formulation 
to enhance gender and climate change agenda and (ii) detailed technical solutions to 
be provided to poor rural women in order to minimize the negative impact of climate 
change and strengthen their resilience.  The main findings and recommendations will 
be  discussed  during  thematic  workshops    on  gender  and  climate  change  at  national 
level for policy makers (through dissemination of findings from gender study, diagnostic 
,  assessment)  to    ensure  CC  and  NRM  policies/  legal  frameworks  consider  gender-
specific  recommendations.  The  study  will  then  be  published  to  contribute  to  wider 
dissemination of knowledge. 
8. Monitoring and evaluation  
92. The M&E system will give strong emphasis to monitoring of targeting performance. All 
implementing Partners (IP) will be required to provide disaggregated data on women 
and  youth  participation,  in  relation  to  overall  programme  targets,  including  further 
disaggregation by People with Disability (PWD) (where possible). The M&E system will 
collect  and  analyse  information  about  programme  outreach,  effectiveness  of  the 
targeting  strategy  and  specific  benefits  for  women  and  youth.  This  requires  strong 
coordination  and  collaboration  between  the  M&E  responsible  person  and  the  Gender 
and Social Development experts/Focal Points at all levels. Impact will be assessed on 
23 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
the  basis  of  methodologically  gender  sensitive  baseline,  mid-term  and  completion 
surveys  which  will  use  key  indicators  to  measure  women’s  empowerment  and  youth 
inclusion.  The  proposed  Social  Inclusion  and  Environment  and  Climate  Related 
Indicators are presented in Appendix 5. 
24 
References  
  Abdela, N.; Jilo, K. Impact of climate change on livestock health: A review. Global Vet. 2016, 
16, 419–424 
  ADB, Country Gender Assessment, 2016 
  Akhmadov, K. 2008. Geneva Timber and Forest Discussion Paper 46. Forest and forest products 
country profile: Tajikistan. UNECE and FAO.  
  CARECECO & PRISE. Tajikistan: Country situation assessment Working paper, 2015.  
  Duncam AJ, Ge´rard B, Rufina MC, Teufel N, van Rooyen A, van Wijk MT. 2012. Conservation 
agriculture in mixed  crop-livestock systems: Scoping  crop  residue trade-offs in Sub-Saharan 
Africa and South Asia. Field Crops Research 132:175–184. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EARSeL eProceedings. Wolfgramm, Bettina & Seiler, Bruno & Kneubuehler, Mathias & Liniger, 
Hanspeter.  (2007).  Spatial  assessment  of  erosion  and  its  impact  on  soil  fertility  in  the  Tajik 
foothills. 6. 10.5167/uzh-77957. 
FAO and UNECE. 2019. Overview of the State of Forests and Forest Management in Tajikistan. 
FAO AQUASTAT data (2017) 
FAO, National Gender Profile of Agricultural and Rural Livelihoods – Tajikistan, 2016 
FAO, Small Family Farm Country Factsheet, 2018 
FAO. 2018. Policy analysis of nationally determined contributions (NDC) in Europe and Central 
Asia. Budapest, 84 pp. 
FAO. Gerber, P.J., Steinfeld, H., Henderson, B., Mottet, A., Opio, C., Dijkman, J., Falcucci, A. & 
Tempio, G. 2013. Tackling climate change through livestock – A global assessment of emissions 
and mitigation opportunities, Rome. 
FAO.  L.  Lipper,  N.  McCarthy,  D.  Zilberman,  S.  Asfaw,  G.  Branca.  2018.  Climate  Smart 
Agriculture, Natural Resource Management and Policy 52, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-61194-5_10 
  GIZ. Adaptation to climate change through sustainable forest management in Tajikistan (2013-
2018): https://www.giz.de/en/worldwide/29916.html  
  GNR, Tajikistan Nutrition Profile, Global Nutrition Report, 2019 
  Government of the Republic of Tajikistan Agency for Hydrometeorology under the Committee 
on  Environmental  Protection  under  the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Tajikistan.  2018.  The 
First Biennial Report of the Republic of Tajikistan on Inventory of Greenhouse Gases Under the 
UN Framework Convention on Climate Change. 
  Government of the Republic of Tajikistan Resolution. 2018. On the Comprehensive Program for 
the Development of the Livestock Industry in the Republic of Tajikistan for 2018-2022. 
  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Tajikistan.  2015.  Water  Sector  Reforms  Programme  of  the 
Republic of Tajikistan  for 2016-2025. 
  Gret-Regamey  A,  Brunner  SH,  Kienast  F.  2012.  Mountain  ecosystem  services:  Who  cares? 
Mountain Research and Development 32(1):23–34.  
  Groll, M., Opp, C., Kulmatov, R. et al. Environ Earth Sci (2015) 73: 743. doi:10.1007/s12665-
013-2988-5 
 
IPCC, AR5, 2014. 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
 
IUCN. Larbodière, L., Davies, J., Schmidt, R., Magero, C., Vidal, Arroyo Schnell, A., Bucher, P., 
Maginnis,  S.,  Cox,  N.,  Hasinger,  O.,  Abhilash,  P.C.,  Conner,  N.,  Westerberg,  V.,  Costa,  L. 
(2020). Common ground: restoring land health for sustainable agriculture. Gland, Switzerland:  
  M.  Paudel;  E.J.  Nelson;  C.W.  Downer;  R.  Hotchkiss,  2011.  Comparing  the  capability  of 
distributed and lumped hydrologic models for analyzing the effects of land use change. ournal 
of Hydroinformatics (2011) 13 (3): 461–473. https://doi.org/10.2166/hydro.2010.100 
  Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Tajikistan. September 2012. Programme for Reforming 
the Agriculture Sector of the Republic of Tajikistan for 2012-2020. 
  Updated Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) towards the achievement of the global goal 
of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) by the Republic of Tajikistan, 
2021. 
  ND-GAIN, 2018: https://gain.nd.edu/our-work/country-index/rankings/  
  R.  Hijmans.  The  effect  of  climate  change  on  global  potato  production,  July  2003.  American 
Journal of Potato Research 80(4) Follow journal. DOI: 10.1007/BF02855363 
  SDC  [Swiss  Agency  for  Development  and  Cooperation],  CDE  [Centre  for  Development  and 
Environment].  Ariza  C,  Maselli  D, Kohler  T.  2013. Mountains: Our Life, Our Future. Progress 
and Perspectives on Sustainable Mountain Development from Rio 1992 to Rio 2012 and Beyond. 
Bern, Switzerland:  
  State Administration for Hydrometeorology Committee on Environmental Protection under the 
Government  of  the  Republic  of  Tajikistan.  2014.  The  Third  National  Communication  of  the 
Republic of Tajikistan under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change. 
  State Statistic Agency: Poverty Measurement in Tajikistan, a methodological note, 2015   
  State Statistics Agency, Demographic and Health Survey (DHS)Tajikistan, 2017 
  State Statistics Agency, Gender Indicators in Dekhan Farming, 2015 
  State Statistics Agency, Gender Statistics Database, 2015 
 
Tajikistan’s Third National Communication on Climate Change to the UNFCCC, 2014. 
  UN Women, Tajikistan Country Brief, 2019 
  UNDP, Human Development Report Tajikistan, 2019 
  UNDP, Mapping Registered Extreme Poverty in Rural Tajikistan, 2017 
  UNDP.  2013.  Human  development  report  2013.  The  rise  of  the  South:  human  progress  in  a 
diverse world. 
  UNECE and FAO. 2019. Overview of the State of Forests and Forest Management in Tajikistan. 
  UNECE. 2017. Environmental Performance Reviews. Third Review Synopsis. 
  United  Nations  Development  Program  (UNDP).  2012.  Capacity  for  climate  resiliency  in 
Tajikistan: Stocktaking and Institutional Assessment. 
  United Nations Human Rights: Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, 
Tajikistan's sixth report, 2018 
  Volf, M., Klimeš, P., Lamarre, G.P.A., Redmond, C.M., Seifert, C.L., Abe, T., Auga, J., Anderson-
Teixeira, K., Basset, Y., Beckett, S., Butterill, P.T.,  Drozd, P.,  Gonzalez-Akre, E., Kaman, O., 
Kamata, N., Laird-Hopkins, B., Libra, M., Manumbor, M., Miller, S.E., Molem, K., et al (2019) 
Quantitative  assessment  of  plant-arthropod  interactions  in  forest  canopies:  A  plot-based 
approach. PLOS ONE, 14. http://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0222119 
26 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
  WFP, Country Brief Tajikistan, 2020 
  WFP.  Climate  risks  and  food  security  in  Tajikistan.  A  Review  of  Evidence  and  Priorities  for 
Adaptation Strategies. April 2017. 
  WHO, Situational Analysis: State of Rehabilitation in Tajikistan, 2015   
  WOCAT  [World  Overview  of  Conservation  Approaches  and  Technologies]  and  Food  and 
Agriculture  Organization  of  United  Nations  [FAO].  Liniger  H,  Mekdaschi  Studer  R,  Hauert  C, 
Gurtner M. 2011. Sustainable Land Management in Practice—Guidelines and Best Practices for 
Sub-Saharan Africa. Rome, Italy: TerrAfrica,  
  World Bank, Addressing Challenges to Create More and Better Jobs, 2017 
  World Bank, Tajikistan Jobs Diagnostic: Strategic Framework for Jobs, 2017 
  World Bank. 2019: https://data.worldbank.org/  
  World 
Bank. 
Climate 
Change 
Knowledge 
Portal, 
2020: 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/ 
  World  Bank.  Feature  Story  May  2018.  “Sustainable  Management  of  Natural  Resources  Helps 
Change”. 
Tajik 
https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2018/05/04/sustainable-management-of-
natural-resources-helps-tajik-communities-adapt-to-climate-change 
Communities 
Climate 
Adapt 
to 
  World Bank. Feature Story. March 13, 2020. In Tajikistan, Better Water Resource Management 
is Critical to Food Security and Livelihoods. 
  World Bank. Tajikistan - Autonomous Adaptation to Climate Change: Economic Opportunities 
and Institutional Constraints for Farming Households. 2014. Washington, DC. 
27 
10. Environment and Social Management Plan Matrix  
ESMP Matrix 
Environment
al/ Social and 
climate 
Impacts  
All  possible 
adverse 
environment
al  and  social 
impacts  as  a 
result 
of 
CASP+ 
activities. 
Beneficiary 
Dissatisfaction 
and 
Discrimination  
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement measures 
Public 
Consultatio
n Activities 
(1) Apply  strictly  the  Grievance  Redress 
Mechanism  (GRM)  as  per  the  full 
design SECAP. 
(2) Ensure  dissemination  of  the  GRM  to 
local  communities  prior  to  starting 
programme activities 
(3) Maintain solid documentation for the 
received 
the 
operation  of  the  programme  and 
track  the  level  of  responsiveness 
(provision of feedback). 
complaints  during 
through 
Create  a  qualitative  assessment  of 
the aspirations of women and men of 
various  age  groups,  especially  the 
most  vulnerable  (female  head  of 
households,  youth-  especially  young 
girls), 
group 
discussions, to solicit feedback on the 
challenges being faced by them, their 
views  on  solutions  and  coping 
mechanisms, as well as feedback  on 
the  training  programs  and  how  they 
can 
all 
programme stage. 
improved 
during 
focus 
be 
Start-up 
workshop 
with  all  the 
stakeholder
s. 
Community 
focus 
groups 
(FGD) 
baseline 
and  during 
implementa
tion  
at 
Means of Verification 
(Monitoring 
reporting) 
and 
of 
Frequen
cy 
Verificati
on 
Cost 
Estimate 
Respon
sible 
Institut
ion 
In 
Implem
entatio
n Phase 
PMU 
Review of the number of 
complaints received. 
Monthly 
Review of the number 
of  complaints  solved, 
the mechanisms used 
and the time it took to 
solve them. 
PMU 
Focus 
Discussion 
beneficiaries  
Group 
with 
Monthly 
Costs 
under 
monitoring 
activities 
(C1,C2,C3
) 
Costed 
under 
social 
mobilisatio
n activities 
(C2) 
ESMP Matrix 
Environment
al/ Social and 
climate 
Impacts  
Social: 
and 
Women, 
Youth 
other 
vulnerable 
categories 
are  excluded 
from 
programme 
benefits  
Social: 
Gender 
Issues 
and 
all  forms  of 
Gender-
Based 
Violence, 
including 
sexual 
harassment 
(SH) 
Sexual 
Exploitation 
and 
Abuse 
(SEA)  due  to 
and 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement measures 
Public 
Consultatio
n Activities 
During 
the  mobilisation  process, 
conduct strong public consultation at 
different  levels  on  the  programme 
objectives,  eligibility  criteria  and 
selection 
specific 
activities  directed  to  specific  social 
categories,  and  available  grievance 
redress  mechanisms.  This  should  be 
done  in  partnership  with  community 
leaders. 
process 
for 
Start-up 
workshop 
with  all  the 
stakeholder
s. 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Respon
sible 
Institut
ion 
In 
Implem
entatio
n Phase 
PMU   
and 
other 
implem
enting 
partner
s  
Means of Verification 
(Monitoring 
reporting) 
and 
of 
Frequen
cy 
Verificati
on 
Cost 
Estimate 
Start  of 
program
me  
    Costed 
under 
social 
mobilisatio
n activities 
(C2   
on 
Reports 
the 
mobilisation  process 
of 
and 
selection 
should 
beneficiaries 
be 
properly 
documented, 
including  the  wealth 
criteria 
ranking 
planned  to 
identify 
the  poor  and  poorest 
categories.   
local  organisations 
(1)  Increase 
local 
engagement  to  work  with 
leaders 
and  male  household’s 
members  and  promote  campaign  for 
sensitisation  on  gender  equality  and 
against  gender  biases  and  GBV. 
Community and Household level. 
Start-up 
workshop 
with  all  the 
stakeholder
s 
PMU 
and 
Implem
enting 
Partner
s  
(2)  Conducting  gender-sensitive  and 
consultations  while 
participatory 
finalizing and designing the various sub-
programme  activities.  These  have  to 
include  safe  spaces/  women-only  focus 
groups to encourage women’s meaningful 
participation in consultations. 
(1) Collect 
gender- 
Annually  
disaggregated 
and 
monitoring 
evaluation  data 
to 
track  the  extent  to 
which  women  have 
to 
been 
participate 
and 
from 
benefit 
programme  activities 
( 
including  Women 
Head of Households)  
able 
(2) Cases 
sexual 
of 
harassment (SH) and 
exploitation 
sexual 
Costed 
under 
social 
mobilisatio
n activities 
(C2)which 
include 
gender 
awarness. 
29 
ESMP Matrix 
Environment
al/ Social and 
climate 
Impacts  
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement measures 
Public 
Consultatio
n Activities 
the 
increasing 
mobilisation 
of  women  to 
participate  in 
programme 
activities 
(3)  Create  female  only  spaces  for 
women to receive trainings and services 
(Women’s Groups) 
(4)  Gender  mainstreaming  actions 
should be developed as part of a Gender 
Development Plan (GDP) prepared by the 
IPs engaged in the implementation. 
(5)  Sensitize  the  IP  as 
the 
importance  of  addressing  SEA/SH  in  the 
programme,  and  the  mechanisms  that 
will be implemented.  
to 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Means of Verification 
(Monitoring 
reporting) 
and 
of 
Frequen
cy 
Verificati
on 
Cost 
Estimate 
Respon
sible 
Institut
ion 
In 
Implem
entatio
n Phase 
and  abuse  (SEA)  has 
to  be  dealt  with  in 
with 
compliance 
to 
IFAD’s 
and 
Preventing 
Responding 
to 
SH/SEA  and  reported 
directly to IFAD. 
Policy 
those 
to  get 
targeted  by 
(6)  As  part  of 
the  programme’s 
stakeholder  consultations,  property 
inform 
the 
programme  about  SEA/SH  risks  and 
programme  activities 
their 
feedback  on  programme  design  and 
safeguard  issues.  Consultations  need  to 
engage  with  a  variety  of  stakeholders 
(political,  cultural  or  religious  leaders, 
health 
local  councils,  social 
workers,  women’s  organizations  and 
groups) and should occur at the start and 
throughout  the  implementation  of  the 
programme.  
teams, 
30 
ESMP Matrix 
Environment
al/ Social and 
climate 
Impacts  
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement measures 
Public 
Consultatio
n Activities 
(7)  specific  procedures  for  SEA/SH, 
including confidential reporting with safe 
and ethical documenting of SEA/SH cases 
shoud be prepared.  
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Means of Verification 
(Monitoring 
reporting) 
and 
of 
Frequen
cy 
Verificati
on 
Cost 
Estimate 
Respon
sible 
Institut
ion 
In 
Implem
entatio
n Phase 
Clearly 
(8) 
SEA/SH 
define 
requirements and expectations in the bid 
documents.  
the 
(9) Evaluate the contractor’s SEA/SH 
Accountability  and  confirm  prior  to 
finalizing  the  contract  the  contractor’s 
ability to meet the programme’s SEA/SH 
prevention and response requirements.  
(10) Code of Conduct: The agreed CoC 
to address behavior which will be used on 
the  programme 
for  the  contractor’s 
workers,  including  sub-contractors  and 
suppliers are compliance with SH and SEA 
related regulations 
11)  Undertake  regular  M&E  of  progress 
on  SEA/SH  prevention  and  response 
activities, including reassessment of risks 
as appropriate.  
Environment
al 
climate: 
and 
Under  Component  1,  CASP+  will 
engage in institutional support in 
strengthening  institutional  and  local 
Start-up 
workshop 
with  all  the 
PMU 
and 
Implem
Stock taking of policy 
and 
development 
of 
mainstreaming 
every 
two 
years  + 
Costed 
under 
Sub-
31 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
ESMP Matrix 
Environment
al/ Social and 
climate 
Impacts  
Lack of policy 
and 
institutional 
coherence 
and  support 
for forest and 
pasture 
rehabilitation
.  
Respon
sible 
Institut
ion 
In 
Implem
entatio
n Phase 
enting 
Partner
s 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement measures 
Public 
Consultatio
n Activities 
and 
stakeholder
s 
During 
implementa
tion 
capacity 
evaluate 
management 
climate change related stresses.  
to  plan,  monitor  and 
resources 
increasing 
natural 
under 
aim 
institutional 
programme  will 
at 
The 
strengthening 
and 
regulatory systems (remote sensing, 
surveillance)  on  climate-adaptive 
planning  and  NR  monitoring.  CASP+ 
will  strengthen  the  capacities  of 
relevant 
local 
research 
institutions 
agencies/universities  for  evidence-
based  joint  climate-adaptive  natural 
resources  planning,  management 
and  monitoring  (e.g.  of  pasture, 
forest,  agricultural  land,  livestock, 
water / river basins).  
government, 
and 
the 
Under  the  component  1, 
programme  will  propose  relevant 
evidence-based  policy  and  regional 
framework 
(e.g., 
integrated NRM, land tenure, conflict 
resolution and registration, etc.).  
improvements 
Means of Verification 
(Monitoring 
reporting) 
and 
of 
Frequen
cy 
Verificati
on 
Cost 
Estimate 
Mid-term 
and 
completi
on 
sensitive 
gender 
climate 
adaptive 
agricultural practices. 
Mid-term 
and 
completion  :  use  of 
policy  support  tools 
such as SIPT, GLEAM, 
EXACT, B-INTACT 
of 
and 
activity 
1.2.1.1. 
Stock 
taking  of 
policy 
developm
ent 
mainstrea
ming 
gender 
sensitive 
climate 
adaptive 
agricultura
l  practices 
and  Sub-
activity 
1.2.1.2. 
Training 
on 
utilization 
of 
support 
tools  e.g.  
SIPT, 
GLEAM, 
policy 
the 
32 
ESMP Matrix 
Environment
al/ Social and 
climate 
Impacts  
Environment
al 
climate: 
and 
Intensification 
of  storms  and 
heavy  rainfall 
events  may 
affect  pasture 
land, 
increasing 
erosion, 
loss 
of  soils  and 
water 
runoff 
and 
maladaptation 
from  CASP+ 
activities. 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement measures 
Public 
Consultatio
n Activities 
Start-up 
workshop 
with  all  the 
stakeholder
s 
During 
implementa
tion 
and 
the 
component  2, 
Under 
the 
programme  will  promote  the  creation  of 
pasture  user  unions  and  pasture 
management plans under the CsCAP. The 
plans  will  promote  the  restoration  of 
degraded  pastures  through  rotation  and 
fencing,  and  improvement  of  vegetation 
cover  and  the  reforestation  of  upstream 
degraded  areas  for  DRR.  Specific  ESMP 
will  be  prepared  for each  CsCAP.  Under 
the  component  1,  the  combination  of 
remote  sensing  and  bee  monitoring  will 
allow  the  PMU  to  closely  follow  the 
impacts  of  the  activities  on  natural 
from  water  management, 
resources, 
pasture, forest  and soil’s  health,  erosion 
level and pollution. 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Respon
sible 
Institut
ion 
In 
Implem
entatio
n Phase 
PMU 
and 
Implem
enting 
Partner
s 
Means of Verification 
(Monitoring 
reporting) 
and 
of 
Frequen
cy 
Verificati
on 
Cost 
Estimate 
Monthly 
sensing 
Remote 
analysis, 
field 
monitoring  and  bee 
monitoring.  Indicator 
to  be  determined  at 
start up. 
PMP  monitoring  (by 
PMT).  Two  visits  per 
year per PUU by  PMT 
officers 
EXACT,  B-
INTACT 
Costed 
under 
Activity 
1.1.2: 
Introduce 
combined 
remote 
and 
participato
ry  Natural 
Resources 
monitoring 
and 
managem
ent (CEP)  
Sub-
Activity 
2.2.1.2: 
Implemen
t  Pasture 
Managem
ent Plan  
33 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Respon
sible 
Institut
ion 
In 
Implem
entatio
n Phase 
PMU 
and 
Implem
enting 
Partner
s 
Means of Verification 
(Monitoring 
reporting) 
and 
of 
Frequen
cy 
Verificati
on 
Cost 
Estimate 
Monthly 
sensing 
Remote 
analysis, 
field 
monitoring  and  bee 
monitoring.  Indicator 
to  be  determined  at 
start up. 
Costed 
under 
Activity 
1.1.2: 
Introduce 
combined 
remote 
and 
participato
ry  Natural 
Resources 
monitoring 
and 
managem
ent (CEP) 
ESMP Matrix 
Environment
al/ Social and 
climate 
Impacts  
Environment
al 
climate: 
and 
of 
at 
Lack  of  water 
summer 
in 
pasture 
for 
livestock, 
gathering 
animals 
strategic 
locations, 
increasing 
pollution 
streams. 
winter, 
concentration 
cattle 
of 
in 
manure 
and 
barn 
pollution 
of 
soils and close 
streams. 
of 
In 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement measures 
Public 
Consultatio
n Activities 
Start-up 
workshop 
with  all  the 
stakeholder
s 
During 
implementa
tion 
and 
the 
component  2, 
Under 
the 
programme  will  promote  the  creation  of 
pasture  user  unions  and  pasture 
management plans under the CsCAP. The 
plans  will  promote  the  restoration  of 
degraded  pastures  through  rotation  and 
fencing,  and  improvement  of  vegetation 
cover  and  the  reforestation  of  upstream 
degraded  areas  for  DRR.  Furthermore, 
the  programme  will  support  of  manure 
management and compost activities, the 
rehabilitation  and  installation  of  water 
areas,  water 
points 
management  measures  e.g.  fences  for 
shade,  measures  to  retain  water  in  soil, 
drainage,  riverine  and  water  spring 
restoration, protection and shade through 
reforestation in water points. Under the 
component  1, 
the  combination  of 
remote  sensing  and  bee  monitoring  will 
allow  the  PMU  to  closely  follow  the 
impacts  of  the  activities  on  natural 
from  water  management, 
resources, 
pasture, forest and soil’s  health,  erosion 
level and pollution. 
pastoral 
in 
Environment
al 
climate: 
and 
the 
component  2, 
the 
Under 
programme  will  promote the  sustainable 
management  of  water  by  creating  a 
rainwater  harvesting  network  at  river 
Start-up 
workshop 
with  all  the 
PMU 
and 
Implem
sensing 
Remote 
analysis, 
field 
monitoring  and  bee 
Monthly 
Activity 
1.1.2: 
Introduce 
34 
ESMP Matrix 
Environment
al/ Social and 
climate 
Impacts  
can 
Risk 
of 
droughts  and 
water  scarcity 
during 
summer 
months 
affect 
beneficiaries 
and  activities 
as the amount 
rainfall 
of 
decreases 
in 
areas, 
some 
snow 
cover 
declines,  and 
extreme 
temperatures 
rises. 
Social: 
The  opening 
roads 
of 
could  lead  to 
increase 
an 
in 
traffic 
accidents, 
especially 
among 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Means of Verification 
(Monitoring 
reporting) 
and 
of 
Frequen
cy 
Verificati
on 
Cost 
Estimate 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement measures 
Public 
Consultatio
n Activities 
the 
under 
the 
CsCAPs. 
basin 
level 
Furthermore, 
programme  will 
promote  sustainable  management  of 
with 
pastures 
rehabilitation/establishment  of  water 
points for livestock.  
and 
stakeholder
s 
During 
implementa
tion 
Respon
sible 
Institut
ion 
In 
Implem
entatio
n Phase 
enting 
Partner
s 
monitoring.  Indicator 
to  be  determined  at 
start up. 
Under  the  component  2,  the  programme 
will  promote  the  creation  of  pasture  user 
unions  and  pasture  management  plans 
under the CsCAP. The plans will promote the 
restoration  of  degraded  pastures  through 
rotation  and  fencing,  and  improvement  of 
vegetation  cover  and  the  reforestation  of 
upstream degraded areas for DRR.  
Start-up 
workshop 
with  all  the 
stakeholder
s 
During 
implementa
tion 
and 
PMU 
and 
Implem
enting 
Partner
s 
Feasibility studies and 
monitoring  
Monthly 
combined 
remote 
and 
participato
ry  Natural 
Resources 
monitoring 
and 
managem
ent (CEP) 
Monthly 
reports, 
yearly 
reports 
to  GCF 
and IFAD 
Costed 
under 
Sub-
Activity 
2.1.3.1: 
CsCAP 
planning 
and design 
35 
ESMP Matrix 
Environment
al/ Social and 
climate 
Impacts  
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement measures 
Public 
Consultatio
n Activities 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Means of Verification 
(Monitoring 
reporting) 
and 
of 
Frequen
cy 
Verificati
on 
Cost 
Estimate 
Respon
sible 
Institut
ion 
In 
Implem
entatio
n Phase 
agricultural 
workers. 
Physical 
resettlement 
or  economic 
displacement
: 
not 
If 
carefully 
aligned, rural 
road 
development 
may  require 
displacement 
and 
resettlement
, 
particularly 
involve 
of 
agricultural 
land. 
or  will 
loss 
Environment
al 
climate: 
and 
Risk 
negative 
of 
investments, 
CASP+  will  also  support  Climate  Resilient 
infrastructure 
through 
screening  and  defined  restrictions  and 
safeguards,  will  make  sure  that  CsCAPs 
include  a  balanced  mix  of 
investment 
activities, and that they properly capture the 
need  for  specific  interventions  on  climate 
risk 
change  adaptation  and  disaster 
reduction.  
Rural roads  will help improve  transport and 
communications  for  the  most  vulnerable  in 
rural areas. Improving mobility allows access 
to:  (i)  services  (agriculture,  education, 
health, finance);  (ii)  markets (inputs,  agro-
industry, wholesale trade, retail, export); (iii) 
income-generating  activities;  (iv)  social, 
political  and  community  activities;  and  (v) 
technology transfer. All the potential climate 
threats  will  be  recognized  under  the  CsCAP 
planning  and  design  and  design  standards 
for  rural  roads  -  especially  for  drainage  - 
need  to  be  adjusted  to  avoid  increased 
environmental damage. With climate change 
and  the  increased  risks  associated  with 
climatic hazards, the period of recurrence of 
events  will  have  to  be  increased,  adapting 
installation  of  drainage  works  and  river 
crossings. 
Sub-
Activity 
2.1.4.1: 
Strengthe
ning  local 
institution
s  capacity 
to  monitor 
and 
evaluate 
CsCAPs 
36 
ESMP Matrix 
Environment
al/ Social and 
climate 
Impacts  
impacts  on 
natural 
resources 
from 
infrastructur
e 
rehabilitation
/contruction 
and 
plantation 
especially 
nearby 
protected 
areas 
(buffers). 
forest 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement measures 
Public 
Consultatio
n Activities 
Means of Verification 
(Monitoring 
reporting) 
and 
of 
Frequen
cy 
Verificati
on 
Cost 
Estimate 
Respon
sible 
Institut
ion 
In 
Implem
entatio
n Phase 
the 
soils, 
impacts, 
The  project  will  seek  to  align  for  minimal 
negative impact - when the project involves 
the  realignment  of  an  existing  road,  it  will 
consider all the alternatives and choose the 
road  that  will  have  the  least  direct  and 
indirect  negative 
into 
taking 
account 
climate,  geology, 
topography, hydrology, ecology, land tenure, 
existing  uses  and  other  socio-economic 
factors (via the participatory approach of the 
project).  No  physical 
resettlement  or 
economic displacement will be expected. In 
the 
project 
addition, 
consultative design of road sites using local 
knowledge,  and  safety  measures  will  be 
included in the design of road  rehabilitation 
activities  according  to  national  law.  The 
development of infrastructures will be linked 
to  the  needs  expressed  in  the  participatory 
approach.  Design 
for  road  safety  will 
accommodate all  prospective  users  and  will 
not  exceed  the  national  standard  design 
speed  for  rural  roads;  and  provide  speed 
bumps (with accompanying warning signs) in 
highly  populated  areas  such  as  villages, 
schools, markets and other centres. 
foresees 
the 
Road safety assessment will be done for each 
phase  of  the  project,  and  will  monitor 
37 
ESMP Matrix 
Environment
al/ Social and 
climate 
Impacts  
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement measures 
Public 
Consultatio
n Activities 
incidents  and  accidents  and  implement 
measures  to  resolve  them,  and  prepare 
regular  reports  for  this  type  of  activity’s 
monitoring 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Means of Verification 
(Monitoring 
reporting) 
and 
of 
Frequen
cy 
Verificati
on 
Cost 
Estimate 
Respon
sible 
Institut
ion 
In 
Implem
entatio
n Phase 
taking 
into  consideration 
Forest plantation in  the  buffer  areas  will  be        
done with autochthonous and non- invasive 
species, 
the 
importance  of  a  differentiated  germplasm. 
(see Guidance statements 1&5 of the SECAP) 
without  use  of  agrochemicals    (Guidance 
statement  2  of  the  SECAP).  Furthermore, 
proper  forest  management  and  planning 
aligned with the protected area management 
plan will be put in place as described in the 
PIM  (project  support  to  strengthening 
existing management plans or development 
of new plans). 
the 
The PMU will hire experts (2 env&CC and 2 
social inclusion) over  the  CsCAPs’  design to 
evaluate  the  draft  activities  proposed  and 
ensure 
integration  of  mitigation 
measures  under  an  ESMP  for  each  CsCAP. 
Furthermore, for activities in buffer areas of 
reserves and national parks (plantation), the 
experts will produce an ESIA as presented in 
the PIM. 
38 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement measures 
Public 
Consultatio
n Activities 
Organization of training of 18 PMU and 8 CEP 
PIU District Officers on compliance with GCF 
requirements (e.g.ESIA) 
the 
component  3, 
Under 
the 
programme  will  promote  the  extension 
services to the beneficiaries. Provision of 
inputs,  including  concentrate  feed  and 
veterinary  drugs  and  the  production  of 
quality fodder will be a key priority in the 
programme  approach.  Provision  of 
veterinary  services,  including  preventive 
health  care,  to  reduce  the  impact  of 
production climate induced diseases (See 
Chapter 1 of Feasibility study ). Improved 
in-barn conditions for animal welfare. 
the 
component  3, 
promote 
the 
Under 
programme  will 
artificial 
insemination  campaign  and  improved 
veterinary services.  Provision of artificial 
insemination  services,  using  semen  of 
improved  breeds  adapted 
local 
conditions. 
to 
During 
implementa
tion 
During 
implementa
tion 
ESMP Matrix 
Environment
al/ Social and 
climate 
Impacts  
Environment
al 
climate: 
and 
Climate 
variability  can 
stimulate 
emergence  of 
diseases 
in 
livestock  and 
forest.  
Environment
al 
climate: 
and 
More 
productive 
cattle  breeds 
in 
Tajikistan 
not adapted to 
environment 
and 
conditions. 
climatic 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Respon
sible 
Institut
ion 
In 
Implem
entatio
n Phase 
PMU 
and 
Implem
enting 
Partner
s 
PMU 
and 
Implem
enting 
Partner
s 
Means of Verification 
(Monitoring 
reporting) 
and 
of 
Frequen
cy 
Verificati
on 
Cost 
Estimate 
FFS  reports,  annual 
reports. 
Annually 
 FFS  reports,  annual 
reports. 
FFS 
reports, 
annual 
reports. 
Costed 
under 
Sub-
activity 
3.1.3.3: 
Roll  out  of 
FFS 
Costed 
under 
Sub-
activity 
3.1.3.3: 
Roll  out  of 
FFS 
39 
ESMP Matrix 
Environment
al/ Social and 
climate 
Impacts  
Environment
al 
climate: 
and 
not 
VCs 
climate 
resilient  and 
CIGs  do  not 
the 
have 
capacity 
to 
start 
business. 
Pollution 
issues 
use 
pesticides 
and  mineral 
inputs. 
from 
of 
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement measures 
Public 
Consultatio
n Activities 
During 
implementa
tion 
be 
focus  will 
Under the component 3, CASP+ will 
individuals 
and 
facilitate 
groups 
interest 
common 
(CIGs) 
support 
to  access 
services  to  identify,  analyze 
and  invest  in  climate  resilient 
and  profitable  value  chains. 
on 
The 
strengthening  the  capacity  of 
smallholders  to  adapt  their 
production systems to become 
to  changing 
more  resilient 
climate conditions and identify 
access  to  local  and  national 
markets. 
CASP+  will  support  training  of 
farmers in the adequate use of 
pesticides  and  mineral  inputs. 
Furthermore,  the  use  organic 
input will be supported, linking 
the livestock production to hail 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Respon
sible 
Institut
ion 
In 
Implem
entatio
n Phase 
PMU 
and 
Implem
enting 
Partner
s 
Means of Verification 
(Monitoring 
reporting) 
and 
of 
Frequen
cy 
Verificati
on 
Cost 
Estimate 
FFS  reports,  annual 
reports. 
Annually 
Costed 
under 
Sub-
activity 
3.1.3.3: 
Roll  out  of 
FFS  
Sub-
activity 
3.3.1.3 
Capacity 
building 
on  climate 
smart 
resilient 
technologi
es 
for 
Window  1 
and 
2 
beneficiari
es 
Sub-
activity 
3.2.1.2. 
and 
40 
ESMP Matrix 
Environment
al/ Social and 
climate 
Impacts  
Recommended 
Mitigation/Enhancement measures 
Public 
Consultatio
n Activities 
production  and  other  VCs 
through  manure  management 
and compost activities.  
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Means of Verification 
(Monitoring 
reporting) 
and 
of 
Frequen
cy 
Verificati
on 
Cost 
Estimate 
Respon
sible 
Institut
ion 
In 
Implem
entatio
n Phase 
Feasibility 
studies  of 
proposed 
business 
arrangeme
nts 
including 
Productive 
Alliances 
41 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Appendix 1: Gender, targeting and social inclusion startegies  
93. Laws and Policies on Gender Equality: In the last decade, the social gender equality 
framework  has  been  expanded  and  strengthened  through  the  adoption  of  new  laws, 
amendment  of  existing  laws,  development  of  national  programs,  and  incorporation  of 
objectives  within  general  policy  documents.  For  the  most  part,  however,  such 
developments  have  focused  on  raising  the  status  of  women  and  girls  and  eliminating 
barriers  to  the  realization  of  their  rights,  rather  than  on  equalizing  responsibilities  and 
opportunities for women and men or addressing gender stereotypes. 
94. The Constitution of the Republic of Tajikistan recognizes international law as a component 
part of the national legal system100, and Tajikistan is a State Party to the Convention on 
the  Elimination  of  All  Forms  of  Discrimination  Against  Women  (CEDAW)  and  to  other 
fundamental human rights treaties. In 2014, the parliament ratified the Optional Protocol 
to CEDAW, which allows individual women in Tajikistan to submit complaints to the CEDAW 
Committee and gives them an additional remedy for violations of the convention. Important 
steps have also been taken to implement UN Security Council resolutions on women, peace, 
and security (1325 and 2122) with the drafting of a national action plan. The Constitution 
guarantees equal rights on the basis of sex (Article 17), and principles of non-discrimination 
are enshrined in basic legislation, for example, the Family Code, the Labor Code, the Land 
Code, the Criminal Code, the Law on Education, and the Law on Public Health.  
95. In 2005, Tajikistan adopted the Law on State Guarantees of Equal Rights and Opportunities 
for Men and Women, which is the only law to define the concepts of gender and sex-based 
discrimination.  The  law  prohibits  discrimination  on  the  basis  of  sex,  while  distinguishing 
special  measures  to  protect  pregnancy  and  the  health  of  women  and  men,  and  it 
guarantees equal rights in public authorities, civil service, education, labor, and the family.  
96. Other legislative reforms are aimed at greater protection of women’s rights, for example, 
laws combating human trafficking (2008), and domestic violence (2013), and protection of 
breastfeeding (2006). In 2010, the Family Code was amended to raise the legal marital 
age to 18 (for both women and men), which brought it in line with CEDAW. 
97. Since  2006,  Tajikistan  has  adopted  several  policy  documents,  national  programs,  and 
strategies that support gender equality goals. Some were intended to implement specific 
laws, for instance the Comprehensive Program to Combat Trafficking in Persons for 2006–
2010, and the State Program for the Prevention of Domestic Violence for 2014– 2023, the 
State Program for the Education, Selection and Placement of Capable Women and Girls in 
Leadership Positions for 2007–2016 (adopted in 2006) aims to mitigate the barriers that 
prevent women from entering senior management. 
98. The stand-alone policy, adopted in 2010, the National Strategy on Enhancing the Role of 
Women in the Republic of Tajikistan for 2011–2020, recognizes  a lack of public gender 
equality understanding and gender policy support, the role of stereotypes, and the need to 
implement the formal equality that exists, but it nevertheless covers areas in which women 
encounter  barriers:  political  participation,  the  labor  market,  entrepreneurship,  and 
education. The strategy lists concrete actions for each sector, but does not establish the 
100 Article 10, Constitution of the Republic of Tajikistan. 
1 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
responsible  agencies,  a  timeframe  with  milestones,  sources  of  funding,  or  a  monitoring 
plan. 
99. The  government  has  made  significant  progress  in  mainstreaming  gender  into  national 
socioeconomic  development  strategies,  beginning  with  the  adoption  of  the  Poverty 
Reduction Strategies for the Republic of Tajikistan for 2007–2009 and 2010–2012.These 
strategies  and  the  current  Living  Standards  Improvement  Strategy  for  2013–2015  and 
National  Development  Strategy  for  2015  all  dedicate  chapters  to  gender  equality  as  a 
component  of  developing  the  country’s  human  potential.  Inclusion  of  gender  equality 
targets in these strategic documents ensures that indicators, implementing agencies, and  
financing are also delineated.   
100.  Despite a solid legal and policy framework for protecting the rights of women and, to 
a lesser extent, advancing gender equality, many planned measures are never realized due 
to insufficient implementation mechanisms, weak monitoring and evaluation, and lack of 
dedicated finances.   
101.  National mechanisms: The Committee for Women’s and Family Affairs (the Women’s 
Committee) was established in 1991, and its authority was increased in 2006, making it 
the central authority carrying out state policy on protecting women’s interests and rights. 
The Women’s Committee has a broad mandate that includes cultivating women’s rights, 
addressing women’s socioeconomic participation, and delivering public services101.  
102. 
The Women’s Committee operates regional information-consultation and crisis centers 
throughout  the  country  (110  in  total)  and  funded  locally.  The  Chair  of  the  Women’s 
Committee  is  a  government  appointee,  with  22  central  offices  as  of  2014.  Women’s 
Committee activities are diverse, ranging from research to considering citizen complaints, 
promoting  women’s  rights  through  the  media,  monitoring  international  standard 
compliance, coordinating government and nongovernment gender equality activities, and 
training. The Women’s Committee work plan, which supports the branch offices, covers, 
among  other  items,  climate  change,  support  for  labor  migrants’  wives,  and  peace  and 
security issues.   
103. 
The  Committee  is  also  part  of  the  coordinating  council  on  Prevention  of  Violence 
against Women, which consists of representatives from the Ministry of Justice, Ministry of 
Labour and Social Security, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Internal Affairs, court officials, 
representatives of the General Prosecutor’s Office and NGOs. 
104.  Gender  Based  Domestic  Violence:  According  to  the  Demographic  and  Health 
Survey Tajikistan (TjDHS 2017)102, 24% of women age 15-49 have experienced physical 
violence since age 15, and 17% experienced physical violence in the 12 months preceding 
the survey. Only two percent of women have ever experienced sexual violence. In terms 
of  spousal  violence,  it  is  reported  that  31%  of  ever-married  women  have  experienced 
physical,  sexual,  or  emotional  violence  by  their  current  or  most  recent  husband.  The 
prevalence of spousal violence has increased by 7 percentage points in the 5 years since 
the 2012 TjDHS. Among ever-married women who have experienced spousal physical or 
sexual violence, 23% have sustained some form of injury, one in 10 women sought help 
101 Approved by Government Decision No. 608, 9 December 2006.  
102 Demographic and Health Survey Tajikistan(DHS) Tajstat 2017.  
Document available at: https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR341/FR341.pdf 
2 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
to stop the violence they had experienced. Three in four women neither sought help nor 
told anyone about the violence.   
105. 
In general, women’s experience of spousal physical, sexual, or emotional violence by 
their current or most recent husband increases with age and number of children. Women 
who  are  divorced,  separated,  or  widowed  are  more  likely  to  have  experienced  spousal 
violence  (47%)  than  those  who  are  currently  married  (30%).  The  proportion  of  women 
who have experienced spousal violence varies greatly by region, from 16% in Dushanbe 
to 43% in Khatlon (TjDHS, 2017)103. 
106. 
According to the Government of Tajikistan’s sixth periodic report to the Committee on 
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) on October 2018, covering the 
period 2013-2017, a total of 1,296 complaints of domestic abuse were made to police, of 
which 1,036 were investigated by district police inspectors, and 260 by specially-appointed 
and  trained  inspectors  for  the  prevention  of  domestic  violence.  996  of  those  filed  were 
complaints  against  men,  compared  with  296  made  against  women.  Only  65  criminal 
prosecutions were initiated under  various articles of the  Criminal Code. The  commission 
reviewing the report stressed that there is a great need to increase to domestic violence 
awareness in both the population and law enforcement staff on the National Law on the 
Prevention  of  Violence  in  the  Family  (adopted  in  2013)  and  the  corresponding  State 
Programme (CEDAW Report, October 2018) 104. 
107.  Women’s role in agriculture activities: According to the Tajikistan Country Gender 
Assessment conducted by the Asian Development Bank (ADB, 2016)105 women are heavily 
engaged  throughout  the  entire  crop  production  process.  Women’s  involvement  (owners, 
users,  or  workers)  in  agriculture  formally  counts  only  when  they  are  registered  as  legal 
entities  or  farm  workers.  Women  are  also  heavily  involved  in  unpaid  family  labor—they 
take  care  of  a  multigenerational  family  and  are  responsible  for  the  home  garden  and 
securing water and food. Although the agriculture output of kitchen gardens significantly 
contributes  to  production  and  food  security,  it  is  presented  without  sex  attribution  in 
statistics and national reports (ADB, 2016).  
108. 
There  is  little  evidence  that  women  have  become  empowered  through  agriculture. 
Gender experts point to the agricultural sector as one of the most exploitative. As explained 
above, women’s agricultural work is characterized by seasonal, low-wage, and low-paid or 
unpaid  positions,  job  insecurity,  back-breaking  conditions,  lack  of  access  to  and  control 
over  productive  resources,  limited  participation  in  decision-making  activities  and  low 
technical and specialized knowledge (ADB, 2016)106.  
109.  Women are often described as lacking the appropriate skills and knowledge required, 
whether as farmers or farm managers, influencing their ability to take on these roles.  Their 
continued participation as informal, seasonal laborers reinforce the perception that women 
have  no  experience  or  knowledge  of  farming.  This  is  further  strengthened  by  the 
103 Ibidem  
104 United Nations Human Rights: Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, Tajikistan's sixth report (31 
October 2018) https://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=23807&LangID=E 
Full report available at: 
https://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/15/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=CEDAW/C/TJK/6&Lang=en 
105 Tajikistan Country Gender Assessment, ADB, 2016.  
Document available at: https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-document/185615/tajikistan-cga.pdf 
106 Ibidem  
3 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
widespread belief that men, as breadwinners and heads of households, are farm managers 
regardless of whether or not they are active in the sector. Due to this, women’s tasks are 
largely restricted to field labor, such as weeding, sowing, transplanting, and harvesting, 
which do not require decision-making, whereas the selection of seeds, fertilizers, and plant 
protection  materials  is  controlled  by  men.  Further,  although  both  men  and  women  are 
involved  in  livestock-raising,  it  is  men  who  decide  on  the  purchase,  sale  and  other 
operations linked to its management (ADB, 2016)107. 
110. 
Animal husbandry is a major agricultural activity, and raising livestock is the norm for 
rural  households  (73  percent  of  households  have  livestock,  including  cattle,  horses, 
donkeys, mules, pigs, sheep, goats and poultry). There are gender differences in the extent 
to which households are engaged in raising livestock. Households headed by men are more 
likely  than  female-headed  households  to  keep  livestock  and  to  have  a  larger  number  of 
animals across all categories of animal ownership. When FHH do have livestock, they tend 
to have cattle and poultry, possibly because dairy farming is traditionally seen as “female” 
work  or  because  selling  extra  milk  and  eggs  is  a  relatively  low  intensity  means  of 
supplementing household income (FAO, 2016)108.  
111. 
The  pattern  of  livestock  ownership  is  generally  the  same  for  women  and  men;  the 
majority  of  household  own  cattle  (54  percent  and  66  percent  of  FHH  and  MHH, 
respectively).  Poultry  are  the  next  most  commonly-owned  form  of  livestock  (owned  by 
around a third of rural households). 
112.  Women-led Dekhan farms: A particular concern is the serious underrepresentation 
of women either as agricultural title owners or decision makers. Dekhan farms are the most 
common type of agricultural enterprise in Tajikistan. They are privately-owned commercial 
farms that function as legal enterprises and can be based on the work of an individual (a 
sole  entrepreneur),  a  family  or  a  group  of  people  (a  collective).  Family  and  collective 
dekhan  farms  are  managed  by  a  head  who  officially  holds  the  farm’s  land  registration 
certificate and represents the legal interests of the farm. The number of dekhan farms has 
increased annually, from a total of 30,842 in 2008 to 108,035 in 2014 (FAO, 2016)109.  
113. 
Looking specifically at dekhan farms, the number managed by women has been rising 
alongside their general growth. In 2014, women headed 13% of dekhan farms (up from 
8% the previous year)110. The growth in women-led dekhan farms from 2013 to 2014 is 
attributed to state and donor efforts to increase women’s involvement in dekhan farming 
and to register individuals who once worked on collective farms as individual farmers (FAO, 
2016). 
107 ibidem 
108 National Gender Profile of agriculture and Rural Livelihood Tajikistan (FAO, 2016). 
See footnote 21 for link to document on line. 
109 Ibidem  
110 State Statistics Agency. Gender Statistics Database, 2013 
http://oldstat.ww.tj/img/en/seling.pdf 
4 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Figure7:  Trends  in  Dekhan  Farm  Management  by  Women  and  Men,  2008-2014  (%)  Source:  FAO  Gender 
Assessment, 2016 
114.  However, the average size of female-headed farms is smaller than those managed by 
men, and in 2014, women managed only 6.4% of all planted crop land on dekhan farms111. 
Dekhan  farms  headed  by  females  also  have  fewer  shareholders  (but  more  female 
shareholders) than farms headed by males. Customarily, family plots and presidential lands 
are  registered  to  the  household  head,  most  often  a  male.  Furthermore,  documents  that 
stipulate  the  right  to  use  collective  dekhan  farm  lands  are  generally  not  issued  to  all 
members, most of whom are women, but instead are issued in the name of the male head, 
most often the husband, brother, or, if a woman is widowed, her eldest son (ADB, 2016).112 
115. 
The low level of leadership, suggests women face gender-based barriers to assuming 
the responsibility of dekhan farms. Although few women are legal heads of dekhan farms, 
women  are  assuming  the  de  facto  leadership  on  some  dekhan  farms  because  of  male 
migration.  
The Main Gender Activities under CASP+ by component are presented below: 
116.  Under  Component  1.  Strengthening  enabling  conditions  for  transformative 
climate adaptive natural resources management, the project will support universities 
to develop curricula specific on climate change and number of students will be enrolled and 
some of them will be granted a scholarship. The scholarship available will be for 50 students 
in total (BA, MA and PhD level) and 25 will be young girls from target areas. The aim of 
the  scholarship  programme  is  to  increase  the  climate  resilience  of  communities  by 
enhancing the capacities of young women and men in NRM, climate change and climate-
resilient,  diversified  production  systems.  Another  activity  proposed  is  described  in  the 
section below (studies needed). 
117.  Under  Component  2:    Investments  in  community  capacity  for  adaption  and 
resilience  to  climate  change,    the  project  will  benefit  women  trough  participation  in 
CsCAPs development. Women will be 50% beneficiaries (of which 20% WHHs) and 30% 
representatives in decision making process (VOs, PUUs, FMGs). Furthermore it is expected 
that Women (minimum 30%) will participate  in the final workshop to determine CsCAPs. 
During the mobilisation and consultation process, separate consultations with women will 
take place: women will be informed about the opportunities of the project, including acting 
111 Ibidem  
112 Gender Assessment, ADB, 2016,  
Document avallabile at: https://www.adb.org/documents/tajikistan-country-gender-assessment-2016 
5 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
as representatives in VOs, PUUs, FMGs. They will be encouraged to develop clear ideas of 
their priorities for what concerns CsCAPs.   
118. 
The  outcome of the consultation is to  ensure  that women’s needs and priorities are 
identified  and  that  during  the  community  prioritization  process  forCsCAPs,  they  are 
participating  (at  least  30%  of  workshops  participants)  and  able  to  clearly  express  their 
view. Training to women’s representatives will be provided by the community facilitators 
to ensure that women’s take action to ensure that their priorities are integrated into the 
CsCAPs.  As part of direct targeted interventions, trainings for women leaders (targeting 6 
women per village, for a total of 2,400 women across the 400 targeted villages) will also 
be conducted. The objective is preparing women members of community organizations to 
be  leaders  and  change  agents  in  their  organizations.  They  will  be  provided  with 
sensitization  on  topics  including  gender  relations,  self-awareness,  leadership  and 
accountability,  negotiation  and  conflict  management,  advocacy  and  lobbying,  effective 
communication (among others).   
119.  Component  3:  Strengthening  livelihoods  for  enhanced  resilience  through 
market based approaches, specifically, activity 3.2.3: Support adoption of climate smart 
innovations  through  demonstrations  and  FFS,  women  will  account  for  50%  beneficiaries 
corresponding to 6,280 women (20% will be women head of households) and they will able 
to access the main climate resilient technologies that will be disseminated.   
120. 
Based on the livelihood analisis and the role of women in agriculture, all the proposed 
technologies and trainings are suitable for women. It is also expected that their presence 
will be particularly prominent given their strong engagement in livestock related activities. 
In order to allow farmers to access to these demonstrations, field days will be organized 
and women will account for 30% participants. The total target for this activity will be 8,000 
people  and  therefore  3,200  women  are  expected  to  benefit  from  technologies 
demonstration (through demonstration plots). 
121. 
In addition to participation in FFS women will also be trained through CIGs (Activity 
3.3.1.  Identify individuals and establish Common  Interest  Groups around selected value 
chains and capacitate them) and receive trainings on climate smart resilient technologies 
and  organization  of  business  trainings:  farm  as  business,  business  planning,  proposal 
writing to enhance their business capacity and apply for grant financing. It is expected that 
women accessing Grant Financing Opportunities (windows 1 for individuals) for livelihood 
diversification for vulnerable households will be 612 (out of 1020) and women led-groups, 
accessing Grant Financing Opportunities (windows 2 for groups) for commercialization and 
agribusiness development will be 50% ( out of a total target of 110). Detailed description 
is provided in Appendix I to the SECAP, section I on  Gender strategy and programme 
opportunites for Women. 
Gender Strategy  
122.  Gender mainstreaming in the project will be done with a focus on gender responsive 
and  equitable  participation  for  development  planning  and  implementation,  as  well  as 
ensuring  participation  of  women  and  other  vulnerable  groups  in  project  implementation 
and community representation and decision-making. This includes training and awareness 
raising  in  (i)  gender  responsive  participatory  approach  in  identification  of  development 
6 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
needs with specific focus on social inclusion of women and other vulnerable groups in the 
community decision making process such as PUUs committees, village organisations (VOs) 
committees,  etc.,  (ii)  gender  responsive  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  project 
implementation and progress, (iii) training in community mobilization, management and 
leadership skills, including training in economic diversification business advisory services 
and business plan formulation. 
123.  One  of  the  Project’s  objectives  is  to  ensure  that  all  project  targets  groups  (men, 
women, young people, including vulnerable groups such as women headed households and 
the  elders)  have  equal  access  to  opportunities  resulting  from  the  Project,  especially  in 
terms of information. For this reason, there is a plan to organize a strong communication 
campaign to inform about project opportunities, including  awareness raising sessions with 
community leaders and men, on the role of women in the development process through 
their representation in grassroots community organizations. Their awareness will also be 
raised on the benefits the community can derive from the involvement of women in these 
development processes. 
124. 
The  communication  and  mobilisation  strategy  will  also  be  supported  by  a  strong 
diagnostic  process  whose  objective  is  to  identify  the  main  environmental  challenges 
affecting  the  communities  (including  from  a  gender  perspective)  and  properly  inform 
communities to take decisions on the opportunities created under the project. This includes 
opportunities for Climate Sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAPs) as well as livelihood 
diversification  through  Common  Interest  Groups  (CiGs)  and  access  to  climate  smart 
technologies and practices trainings through participation in Farmers Field Schools (FFs).   
125. 
Access  to  information  by  women  at  village  level  largely  depends  on  the  channel  by 
which  this  information  arrives.  To  account  for  this,  the  Project  will  conduct  separate 
consultations with women, using existing formal/inform women groups  at village level (if 
existing)  or  forming  new  ones.  The  separate  consultation  sessions  will  be  conducted  by 
community facilitators (CF) in every targeted village. They will also ensure involvement of  
women head of households and women from very poor households (below poverty line). 
The  consultation  will  be  in  line  with  women’s  need  to  accommodate  proper  time  and 
location. The ToRs of community facilitators reflect the tasks above and are presented in 
the PIM.  
126. 
A strong monitoring process during the information/mobilisation activities will be put 
in place to ensure that information reach the intended beneficiaries (including vulnerable 
socio-economic categories) and indicators will be gender disaggregated. 
Women’s access to education, technical knowledge, and skills 
127. 
As reported in the gender assessment women have lower level of education, technical 
knowledge and skill to apply climate smart agriculture practices. Women often are not able 
to attend trainings and they account for small percentage of training recipients.   
128. 
An example from ADB survey (as reported in the Country Gender Assessment, 2016) 
reveals  that  1,800  farmers  indicate  that  women  are  more  likely  to  have  no  specialized 
training than men and specifically to lack vocational training (19.3% of men as compared 
to 7.9% of women) and higher education (5.1% of men and 2.2% of women) in agriculture. 
7 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
129. 
CASP+ remote design Mission organized  4 separate Focus Groups Discussion (FGD) 
with  women’s  participants  (26)  from  the  districts  of  Hamadoni,  Mashcoh,  Sharituz  and 
S.Shohin (Khatlong). They drew attention to the need for: (i)  increasing their knowledge 
about  improved  agriculture  practices;  (ii)  marketing  and  (iii)  how  to  expand  their 
businesses and move from unskilled low income production to commercial agriculture. They 
also show interest to increase knowledge about  diversification of economic activities. Rural 
women  expressed  their  constrained  by:(i)  their  limited  agricultural  technological 
knowledge, and (ii) lack of training relevant to areas where they could start businesses. 
They also highlighted the need to participate in exposure visits. 
130.  Most  of  the  women  interviewed,  had  rarely  received  training  (on  agricultural 
techniques,  financial  management  of  their  operation  and  climate  smart  agriculture 
practices).  For  this  reason  the  project  aims  to  include  training    for  women  (50% 
beneficiaries) in Farmers Field Schools (FFs) and Common Interests Groups (CIG) as well 
as  trainings  on  climate  smart  resilient  technologies  and  business  trainings:  farm  as 
business,  business  planning,  proposal  writing.  This  is  key  to  support  preparation  of 
business plans and access grant financing schemes: livelihood development ( window 1 for 
individuals from vulnerable categories) and commercialization and agribusiness (window 2 
for groups).  
Women’s access to services and technologies provided by CASP+ 
131. 
The project has a strong focus on gender-equality. Access to services and technologies 
provided  by  the  project  will  equally  benefit  men  and  women.  Design  of  services  and 
promotion  of  technologies  are  also  taking  into  account  the  different  needs  of  men  and 
women and the different livelihood and economic activities they are engaged.  
132. 
The  assessment  found  that  the  productivity  and  resilience  to  climate  change  of 
traditional livestock production systems (where majority of women are engaged) is limited 
by  the  poor  capacities  of  farmers  on  animal  husbandry,  in  particular  related  to  fodder 
cultivation, fodder conservation and stall feeding, and the availability of and awareness on 
technical  innovations  that  could  improve  productivity,  resilience  to  climate  change,  and 
reduce environmental impact. This is particularly relevant for women as emerged during 
the  FGDs.  The  project  will  support  the  dissemination  of  these  technical  innovations  and 
their adoption by smallholder farmers through a combination of demonstrations and hands 
on training activities.  
133. 
As  part  of  the  activities  planned  under  component  3:  specifically,  activity  3.2.3: 
Support adoption of climate smart innovations through demonstrations and FFS, women 
will  account  for  50%  beneficiaries  corresponding  to  6,280  women  (20%  will  be  women 
head of households) and they will able to access the main climate resilient technologies 
that will be disseminated: 
  New varieties and species of drought and heat resistant fodder; 
  Affordable  and  simple  fodder  conservation  techniques,  in  order  to  reduce 
seasonality of production and dependance on pasture in winter; 
  Biogaz production (in order to reduce utilization of wood, dried cotton plants and 
cow dungs as fuel); 
  Composting and manure management; 
8 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
  Husbandry  of  alternative  livestock  species,  not  or  less  dependent  of  pasture 
resources, and resilient to climate change; 
  Prevention and management of animal diseases; 
  Reproductive  management  (detection  of  heats,  calving  and  calf  care,  drying  off 
management). 
134. 
In communities where the project will support marketing and processing of milk, milk 
hygiene  and  milk  quality/safety  management  will  also  be  addressed  under  this  activity. 
Based  on  the  livelihood  analisis  and  the  role  of  women  in  agriculture,  all  the  proposed 
technologies and trainings are suitable for women. It is also expected that their presence 
will be particularly prominent given their strong engagement in livestock related activities. 
The  type  of  proposed  training  and  technology  introduction  correspond  to  the  need 
expressed by women during consultation through Focus Group Discussions (FGDs).  
135. 
It is also suggested that training location and time take into account women’s need. 
Furthermore, the mission acknowledges the need expressed by women during consultation 
to have separate trainings groups (only women FFs/groups). In line, the project will form 
only women FFs (where needed) and time and location for schools will take into account 
women’s  needs.  FFs  facilitators,  will  be  trained  to  provide  gender-sensitive  responsive 
services.  The  type  of  trainings,  of  interest  for  women,  coupled  with  increased  gender 
sensitiveness  of  FFs  facilitators,  will  ensure  women  access  to  services,  trainings  and 
technologies promoted. 
136. 
The thematic focus of FFS will put priority on fodder management and conservation 
(contribution to climate resilience), as well as milk hygiene (needed for market access) and 
processing.  All  topics  are  of  interest  for  women,  however,  as  required  by  the  FFS 
methodology, thematic topics will be selected by participants according to their needs and 
this will also take into account women’s need and preferences in addition to the above.  
137. 
Furthermore, women will access information about climate resilient technologies and 
innovations that have been tested, adapted and validated by research institutions under 
Component 1. These will be demonstrated in the field to enable men and women farmers 
to  acknowledge  their  benefits  and  feasibility,  and  select  those  that  will  be  further 
popularized and tested in real farm conditions through FFS. 
138. 
In  order  to  allow  farmers  to  access  to  these  demonstrations,  field  days  will  be 
organized and women will account for 50% participants. The total target for this activity 
will  be  20,000  people  and  therefore  10,000  women  are  expected  to  benefit  from 
technologies demonstration (through demonstration plots).  
139. 
In addition to participation in FFS women will also be trained through CIGs (Activity 
3.3.1.  Identify individuals and establish Common  Interest  Groups around selected value 
chains and capacitate them) and receive trainings on climate smart resilient technologies 
and  organization  of  business  trainings:  farm  as  business,  business  planning,  proposal 
writing to enhance their business capacity and apply for grant financing. It is expected that 
women will account for 50% of participants for climate resilient technologies and business 
planning (2,250). The total target for beneficiaries involved in trainings is 4,500. It is also 
expected that women accessing Grant Financing Opportunities (windows 1 for individuals) 
for livelihood diversification for vulnerable households will be 200 (out of 400) and women 
led-groups,  accessing  Grant  Financing  Opportunities  (windows  2  for  groups)  for 
9 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
commercialization  and  agribusiness  development  will  be  30%  women  led  (target  260 
groups). 
140. 
The  productive  areas  to  organize  women  around  CIGs  will  be  identified  during  the 
consultation process, in line with findings from the diagnostic study. As for FFs the training 
topics, location, time, will take into account the needs of women, to ensure the services is 
fully gender-sensitive and women are able to access.  
141. 
Component 1: Support to University Students through scholarships. The project will 
also offer services relevant for young women. In addition of being indirect beneficiaries (as 
HHs members) the project will provide direct targeted services for young girls (students). 
It  is  expected  that  the  project  will  support  universities  to  develop  curricula  specific  on 
climate change and number of students will be enrolled and some of them will be granted 
a scholarship.  
142. 
from 
The scholarship available will be for 50 students in total (BA, MA and PhD level) and 
25  will  be  young  girls  from  target  areas.  The  aim  of  the  scholarship  programme  is  to 
increase the climate resilience of communities by enhancing the capacities of young women 
and  men  in  NRM,  climate  change  and  climate-resilient,  diversified  production  systems. 
Vulnerable  youth 
in  studying 
the  project  areas  who  are 
a bachelor’s/master’s/PhD programme  (e.g.  bee-keeping,  horticulture,  forestry  and 
pasture management) at the Tajik Agrarian University will be identified. Their scholarship 
should cover expenses so that they can undertake research in their communities on natural 
resource management and climate resilience of production systems. During their studies, 
students should be coached and supported in identifying possibilities to take up posts in 
their areas of speciality in local public institutions or to develop start-ups. Support for start-
ups on an individual or collective basis could be provided through CASP+. In addition, the 
Tajik Agrarian University is considering the development of a start-up programme so close 
coordination  with  them  in  the  identification  of  additional  funding  possibilities  will  be 
necessary.  
interested 
143.  Once  youth  return  to  their  villages,  they  should  be  involved  in  the  preparation  and 
implementation  of  the  CsCAPs  to  share  their  knowledge  and  expertise.  This  is  an 
opportunity  for  youth  to  take  a  leading  role  in  mobilising  communities  around  certain 
activities to manage NRM and increase their climate resilience.  
Women in decision-making  
144.  Women’s decision-making role is limited, although it varies depending on the types of 
decisions  under  consideration  and  if  it  is  at  households  or  community  level.  From  the 
consultation with women in FGDs it appears that consultation among family members and 
joint  decision-making  is  prevalent.    This  include  expenses/income  related  to  agriculture 
production. Kitchen gardens are mainly in the domain of women who decide on type and 
quantity of crops, how much to spend on production inputs, and whether to consume or 
sell their produce. The same apply for milk-product, although sale of animals remain in the 
domain of men.  
145. 
From  the  consultation  from  remote  with  women  through  FGD,  it  also  emerged  that 
younger women, and particularly daughters-in-law, have few assets and little power in the 
household.  Intra-household  hierarchies  among  female  members  exist.  Elder  women  are 
best positioned to make decisions that are accepted by other household members.  
10 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
146. 
Conventionally,  males  conduct  all  the  decision-making  within  Tajik  households. 
However, due to male outmigration, women have become de facto heads of the household 
and decision makers. Land plots may be left to be operated by female heads, given for use 
of close relatives or rented out. In some cases, males formalize the land rights in the name 
of their wives to prevent additional problems during their absence. 
147. 
Consultation with female dehkan farmers during FGDs confirm that they make most of 
the production decisions alone or with the support of male family members, especially on 
buying  quality  seeds  and  fertilizers.  Decision  over  milk  and  dairy  products  is  entirely 
controlled by women while decision over livestock is controlled by men.  
148. 
At community level most of decisions are taken by male household members, as they 
are  represented  in  higher  percentage  in  Community  Based  Organisations.  Presence  of 
women in village development committees (as reported from women’s interviews) is lower 
compared to men and they lack leadership skills to have their voice heard. This is confirmed 
by  presence  of  women  in  decision  making  as  per  data  reported  in  this  assessment  in 
relation to women in PUUs and WUAs. 
Promotion of Women Leadership under CASP+ 
149.  Women  limited  capacity  to  assume  leadership  role  is  often  associated  to  cultural 
constraints and determining factors which include:  
  Low status due to persistent gender discrimination and gender stereotyping, where 
women  are  generally  viewed  to  be  unfit  for  leadership,  and  subsequent  lack  of 
support for women’s entry to leadership structures;  
  Limited opportunity to engage full time in activities outside the home due to unequal 
burden of care work that falls upon them;  
  Low self-esteem and inadequate leadership skills and experience as a result of the 
above factors. 
150. 
In light of the above constrains which were also identified in the target areas through 
discussion with women, the project intends to support women’s and women’s leaders to 
increase their awareness about their rights, their presence in the decision making process 
of CBO and ability to exercise their rights and express their opinion/voice. Specifically, the 
project will set quotas to ensure a minimum representation of women in decision making 
and representation positions.  
151. 
In line with available data it is confirmed that women are 30% representative in PUUs. 
The same strategy for quotas is also applied by the CASP gender strategy to have women 
as 30% representatives in Village Organisations (VOs). CASP + will apply quotas for women 
as  decision  makers  in  key  committees  such  as  Pasture  Users  Unions  /  Groups  (PUUs, 
PUGs), Forest Management Groups (FMG) and Village Organisations (VOs). 
152.  Women  participation  as  registered  in  the  IFAD  funded  Livestock  and  Pasture 
Development Project II (LPDPII) is 30% women in the PUU board. Similar findings emerged 
from  Focus  Group  Discussion  (FGDs)  held  with  women  groups  during  Concept  Note  and 
Project  Design  (October  2020  and  April  2021  respectively)  where  women  interviewed 
(some  of  them  members  and  representatives  of  PUUs)  confirmed  the  30%  presence  of 
women as board representatives and recognized the need to receive leadership trainings.  
Key notes from the consultation are available in Annex II of this report. In order to create 
11 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
an enabling environment for women and ensure they can perform have an active role, the 
following activities are planned: 
153. 
Raise the awareness of women and men leaders and members of CBOs (i.e. VOs and 
PUUs)  on  the  manifestations  of  gender  bias  (against  women)  and  on  the  effects  of 
discrimination against women on the personal and interpersonal growth of its leaders and 
members, as well as on the organizational development of the organisation. The activity 
will be part of gender awareness session taking place in all targeted villages. 
154. 
The awareness session will also include briefing on women’s legal status ( equality of 
rights) and legislation about women in representation and key position as outlined by the 
national  gender  strategy.  Other  gender  sensitive  topics  will  be  touched  with  particular 
attention to women and climate change. 
155. 
Trainings for women leaders, targeting 6 women per village, for a total of 2,400 women 
across the 400 targeted villages. The objective is preparing women members of community 
organizations to be leaders and change agents in their organizations. They will be provided 
with  sensitization  on  topics  including  gender  relations,  self-awareness,  leadership  and 
accountability,  negotiation  and  conflict  management,  advocacy  and  lobbying,  effective 
communication. The training will specifically include abut 4 modules: Effective and gender-
coping  with 
responsive 
challenges/conflict resolution strategy; and personal development. 
comunication;  group  management; 
leadership  and 
156. 
The  module  on  “Personal  Development,”  provides  the  trainees  with  tools  for  self-
analysis,  reflection  and  development.  This  module  is  seen  to  be  critical  because  the 
enhancement  of  the  skills  of  women  can  only  be  translated  into  their  more  effective 
participation in leadership structures if they know how to constantly check themselves for 
deep-seated internalization of gender stereotypes, as well as to sustainably develop their 
self-esteem and confidence for leadership.  
157. 
The  training  is  planned  to  take  place  during  year  1  (5  trainings  in  each  district  (21 
total),  including  20  partiicpatn  per  training)  specialised  service  provider  will  be  hire  to 
conduct the training in the 21 districts covering 400 villages. It is suggested that the same 
Service provider consucting the mobilisation will also deliver the leadership training ( ToRs 
are presented in the PIM).   
Men  and  women  needs  and  priorities  captured  by  participatory  processes  under 
CASP+ 
158.  Men  and  women  in  the  target  areas  have  different  needs  and  priorities  and  this  
depends  on  their  livelihood,  age  and  also  socio-economic  status.    Desk  review  analisis 
shows the following gender differences and links to climate change vulnerability: 
Women  
Men  
Role   Produce 
household- 
oriented  crops 
and 
livestock 
products  
Produce 
market-
oriented 
crops  and 
livestock 
products 
to 
change 
climate 
Link 
vulnerability  
Both  crops  and  livestock  are 
affected by climate change, and 
this has profound consequences 
for household food security. Men 
often  claim  safer/more  fertile 
land 
for  growing  market-
oriented  crops,  leaving  women 
12 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
to  grow  household-oriented 
crops. 
Resourc
e  
Are 
responsible 
for 
food 
storage  and 
preparation  
Have 
lower 
incomes  and 
more 
are 
likely  to  be 
economically 
dependent  
less 
to 
Have 
access 
education 
and 
information  
Powe
r  
Have 
less 
power  over 
family 
finances  and 
other assets  
Have  limited 
engagement 
in 
community 
politics  
for 
Are 
responsibl
e 
selling 
valuable 
produce 
and 
livestock  
are 
Have 
higher 
incomes 
and 
more 
likely 
to 
land 
own 
and  other 
assets  
Have 
more 
access  to 
education 
and 
informatio
n  
Have 
more 
power 
over 
family 
finances 
and  other 
assets  
Have 
greater 
involveme
nt/ 
decision-
making 
power 
communit
y politics  
in 
for 
for 
implications 
food  stores 
In  addition  to  the  challenges 
described above, climate change 
has 
food 
preparation  and  storage  (in 
food 
terms  of  water 
preparation and the vulnerability 
of 
to  extreme 
events).  Harvests  may  be 
reduced  or  even  wiped  out  by 
floods or droughts.  
Men typically have more money 
and  other  assets  than  women. 
Men’s savings provide a “buffer” 
during  tough  times  and,  along 
with other assets, make it easier 
for them to invest in alternative 
livelihoods.  
agricultural 
technologies, 
Managing  climate-related  risks 
production 
to 
requires  new  information,  skills 
and 
such  as 
seasonal forecasts, risk analysis 
and  water-saving  agricultural 
practices. Men are more likely to 
have  access  to  these  resources 
and the power to use them and 
are therefore, better equipped to 
adapt. 
Without the power to decide on 
family  resources  and  finances, 
women’s ability to manage risks 
by,  for  example,  diversifying 
crops,  storing  food  or  seeds  or 
putting  money  into  savings,  is 
limited.  
Men  are  likely  to  have  more 
influence over local governance-
and 
promoting 
policies 
programmes 
that  may  not 
support  women’s  rights  and 
priorities.  
13 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Face  many 
cultural 
restrictions/li
mited 
mobility  
few 
Face 
cultural 
restriction
s/  limited  
mobility 
Mobility 
accessing 
services.  
is  a  key 
factor 
information 
in 
and 
159. 
The activities proposed by CASP+ are relevant to both men and women, including from 
different  socio-economic  categories  and  vulnerable  groups.  Stakeholder  engagement 
process  has  taken  place  and  both  men  and  women  express  their  concern  in  relation  to 
climate change and proposed solutions. In some cases, men and women shared the same 
view, while in other cases they expressed different opinions (major details can be found in 
the stakeholder report). 
160. 
This  has  taken  place  during  project  design  mission  and  reflected  into  the  proposed 
activities. Furthermore, in order to comprehensively capture men and women’s needs and 
priorities for investments, the project will undertake a diagnostic study in the 21 targeted 
districts. The analisis will integrate gender considerations.  
161. 
Technical  assistance  (TA)  to  conduct  gender  analisis  in  the  target  area  has  been 
planned. This will be done in close coordination with the overall diagnostic process. Findings 
will support the identification of women’s needs, potential priorities and opportunities to 
inform the development of CsCAPs and also the sectors for CIGs development. The findings 
from  the  study  will  then  be  discussed  and  validated  by  women’s  groups  from  targeted 
communities.  
162.  During  the  mobilisation  and  consultation  process  (community  level)  separate 
consultations with women will take place: women will be informed about the opportunities 
of the project, including acting as representatives in VOs, PUUs, and validate the findings 
from the diagnostic. They will be encouraged to develop clear ideas of their priorities for 
what concerns CsCAPs and CIGs. 
163. 
The  outcome of the consultation is to  ensure  that women’s needs and priorities are 
identified  and  that  during  the  community  prioritisation  process  for  public  and  private 
investments, they are participating (at least 30% of workshops participants) and able to 
clearly  express  their  view.  Training  to  women’s  representatives  will  be  provided  by  the 
facilitators to ensure that women’s take action to ensure that their priorities are integrated 
into the CsCAPs and for CIGs.  The ToR of community facilitators (CF) are presented in the 
PIM.  
CASP+ Gender Strategy  
164. 
CASP+ while promoting positive shifts in the natural resource management through 
policy  instruments,  capacity  building  and  investments  for  adaptation  and  mitigation, 
presents a major opportunity to mainstream gender empower women and eliminate, where 
possible, gender stereotypes and patriarchal attitudes in the forestry and livestock sectors 
whereby  gender  equality  and  women’s  rights  have  faced  a  number  of  challenges.  The 
gender strategy of CASP+ is informed by the Gender Assessment and recognizes that rural 
women  in  Tajikitan  play  a  key  role  in  the  natural  resource  management,  and  that  they 
have a high stake in both climate change adaptation and mitigation measures.  
14 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
165. 
It also reflects the understanding that women’s equal participation and as active actors 
and  agents  of  change  in  the  project  needs  to  be  facilitated  through  a  set  of  specific 
measures,  including  those,  related  to  leadership  and  decision-making  skills.  The  gender 
strategy  therefore aims to use every possible opportunity in the project actions to advance 
towards gender equality and women’s rights. Underlying principles and key features of the 
gender strategy are as follows:  
  Women will equally participate in the project implementation at all levels and benefit from 
its opportunities. A minimum of women’s quotas will be set for specific activities. 
  The  project,  through  the  inclusive  participation  of  stakeholders  will  support  the 
strengthening of gender mainstreaming in the policy dialogue. Gender and climate change 
study will be prepared and finding disseminated through gender workshops at national 
level involving key stakeholders engaged in policy formulation. 
  Women’s  informed  engagement  in  decision  making  processes  on  related  matters  (e.g. 
livelihood adaptation, natural resource management) – both at community and household 
levels – will be facilitated;  
  Opportunities for women’s social and economic empowerment, as well as their leadership 
and  decision-making  opportunities,  will  be  identified  and  supported.  The  project  will 
target women and women head of households to participate at decision-making level in 
the executive committees of  Pasture Users Unions (PUUs), Village Organisations (VOs) 
and Forest management groups (FMG). 
  needs for women’s capacity enhancement on relevant topics will be addressed and acted 
upon, and all trainings will take gender issues into consideration in the modules, selection 
of  participants,  communication  and  mobilization  channels,  selection  of  venues  and 
logistical issues.  
  all  project  stakeholders  will  be  sensitized  and  trained  on  the  importance  of  gender 
mainstreaming,  under  the  project  and  of  specific  Gender  Action  Plan  GAP  actions  (see 
GAP Annex 8 of GCF proposal);  
  gender equality and mainstreaming are adequately introduced to the target communities, 
project staff and other stakeholders; all communication materials and project messages 
address gender aspects and use gender-sensitive languages.  
  As part of the programme’s stakeholder consultations, property inform those targeted by 
the programme about SEA/SH  risks and programme activities to get  their feedback on 
programme design and safeguard issues. 
  Staff  in  the  project  unit  will include  a  qualified  personnel  (Gender  and  Social  Inclusion 
Specialist) who oversees gender mainstreaming in the project and GAP implementation; 
including definition of SEA and SH procedures. 
  knowledge management of the project mainstreams gender, and the project will monitor 
and  evaluate  gender-differentiated  outputs  and  outcomes  through  sex-disaggregated 
M&E indicators and other tools . Gender impact assessment will also be conducted. 
Youth strategy.  
With youth continue to face multiple challenges especially in relation to employment leading 
them  to  migrate  CASP  will  main  stream  youth  throughout  all  project  components.  CASP+ 
interventions aim at including youth at the community to increase their say in the future of 
the  community  and  pursue  them  to  remain  a  part  of  this  community.  Youth  will  also  be 
15 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
supported asth main beneficiaries of scholarships allowing them to develop academic carreers. 
Finally, youth will be actively included as part of FFS, are trained as AI inseminators and para-
vets.  Finally,  youth  will  be  also  beneficiaries  of  matching  grants.  Below  are  the  youth 
dimensions of the different components and pathways/outcomes of this intervention including 
budget notes. 
Activity 
Youth dimension 
Outcome 
pathway. 
and 
Budget  allocated 
to youth.  
1: 
Component 
Strengthening  public 
sector  capacity 
for 
transformative 
climate-resilient 
management 
natural resources  
of 
2: 
Component 
in 
Investments 
capacity 
community 
for 
and 
adaption 
resilience  to  climate 
change  
from 
1)  Youth  will  indirectly 
the 
benefit 
improved 
curricula. 
2) 
Young/aspiring 
reserachers  will  be 
targeted 
gran 
recipients.  
as 
1)  100%  of  the 
scholarship budget 
is for youth. 
1)  Youth  will  have 
improved  access 
to 
curricula  -    indirectly 
this  will  allow  them  to 
climate 
address 
change 
issues.  
2)  Creating  academic 
pathways  for  aspiring 
young researchers. 
1)  Youth  have  an 
increased  say  in  their 
and 
communities 
be 
hence  might 
incentivised 
to 
reside/remain  in  rural 
communities.  
2)  Nourishing  future 
young leaders.  
in 
in 
Youth  will 
be 
1) 
included 
the 
consultation  processes 
to 
the 
assuring 
adequate buy-in of this 
group.  Minumum  40% 
of  youth  needs  to  be 
present 
the 
conulstation  process.  
2)  Including  youth  in 
common 
interest 
groups  allowing  them 
to actively benefit from 
activities.  
the 
3) 
Identification  of 
market  and  business 
opportunities 
/ 
Feasibility studies to be 
undertaken 
should 
take gender and youth 
issues 
into  account. 
This  means  that  the 
studies  should  aim  at 
proposing  acvitities  in 
which 
can 
participate. 
youth 
  budget 
N/A.  - 
allocated 
to 
integrated  in  the 
overall 
planning 
processes.  
16 
3 
Component 
Strengthening 
for 
livelihoods 
resilience 
enhanced 
through market based 
approaches  
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
The 
1) 
enitre 
budget  for  AI  is 
dedicated 
to 
youth. 
2)  40%  of 
the 
budget  for  vets  is 
dedicated 
to 
youth. 
3)  Thresholds  for 
youth  in  matching 
grant budget.  
from 
1) Youth are intices to 
stay in the rural areas 
due 
increased 
to 
livilihood 
opportunities.  
2)  Youth  as  well  as 
beneficiairies 
other 
an 
benefit 
improved 
livestock 
system.  
3) Youth increase their 
on 
knowledge 
agricultural  practices. 
4)  Youth  are  offered 
employment 
direct 
through 
activities 
matching grants.  
is 
youth 
1) The rationale of this 
to 
component 
include 
in 
resilient 
climate 
livestock 
activities 
allowing them not only 
to benefit from income 
generating 
opportunities  but  also 
to  create  a  longterm 
sustinable 
livestock 
sector.  
2) By including youth in 
FFS,  their  knowledge 
on 
smart) 
agricultural  practices. 
implementing 
The 
agency  will 
to 
try 
include as many young 
people  as  possible  in 
the  activitity  at  least 
25%.  
3) Including youth as a 
seleciton  criteria 
for 
matching grants.  
(climate 
Targeting Mechanisms  and Social Inclusion Strategy  
166.  Beneficiaries: The programme will benefit about 100 000 HHs (average 6.5 members 
each  in  rural  areas)113  corresponding  to  2  918  426  Millions  individuals.  These  include 
communities  affected  by  climate  change  and  specifically  poor  smallholder  farming 
households. Specific focus will be on vulnerable categories such as: women, female heads 
of  households,  youth  (including  young  returning  migrants)  and  Persons  with  Disability 
(PWD). Women should be 50% beneficiaries  (of which 20% FHHS) and youth 40% of total 
target beneficiaries. 
167. 
Target  areas:  The  Programme  will  be  implemented  in  21  selected  districts  in  the 
regions of DRS (3) Sughd (2) and, Khatlon (16).  
168. 
 The selected districts have a large amplitude of elevation, from high mountains in the 
South-East of Khatlon (Sh.Sholin, Khovaling and Baljuvon districts) and in the West of RRS 
(Gissor and Shakrinav districts) with mountains up to more than 4000 meters high, to the 
113 Household size and composition DHS, Tajstat, 2017 
17 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
medium  and  low  lands  in  the  rest  of  the  districts  with  elevation  down  to  less  than  400 
meters high.  
169. 
The project area represents a bit more than 15% of the total country area and includes 
47%  of  the  national  population114With  more  than  50%  of  the  total  livestock  heads  at 
national  level,  it  has  around  27%  of  the  total  pasture  area,  most  of  which  is  highly 
degraded. Average poverty levels of these districts is above 15%, spanning from the lowest 
relative poverty incidence in Rudaki (DRS) district (6,9%) and Mastchoh in Sughd as the 
highest, at 34%. 
170. 
The project area is situated in a high agricultural production zone with a bit less than 
50%  of  rainfed  and  irrigated  crops.  Only  8%  of  the  actual  forest  land  is  situated  in  the 
project area, however it includes more than 21% of potential area for reforestation115 of 
the country.  
171.  Methodology  for  the  geographic  targeting:    The  selection  of  the  districts  was 
based  on  a  vulnerability  index  including  social,  environmental  and  climatic  and 
infrastructure parameters116. The average vulnerability index of the project area is higher 
than  the  national  average.  Indeed,  the  area  has  suffered  repeated  long  term  drought 
events117  in  the  past  decades  in  most  of  the  selected  districts  (excluding  Farkhor  and 
Danghara).  Furthermore,  they  experienced  heavy  precipitation  events,  specifically  in 
Sh.Sholin,  Khovaling,  Baljuvon,  Gissor  and  Shakrinav  districts  in  Khatlon.    Most  of  the 
project area is also situated in the area where the average maximum temperature is the 
highest in the country (except high mountain areas). 
172. 
The  design  team  in  coordination  with  National  Partners  has  undertaken  a  ranking 
exercise  based  on  climate  vulnerability  (including  rainfall  trends,  drought,  erosion,  land 
degradation) crossed checked with other socio-economic indicators (poverty percentage,  
rural  population  density).  The  vulnerability  mapping  helped  to  identify  the  broad 
geographical area and related number of districts/municipalities encompassing degraded 
agro-ecological  zones  where  the  population  is  highly  vulnerable  to  climate  change  and 
suffer from very high levels of poverty.  
173. 
The selection of districts has also considered: (i) overlaying with watershed/river basin 
boundaries;  (ii)  adjacency  of  selected  districts  to  facilitate  implementation;  (iii)  equal 
representation of the three agro-ecologic zones for inclusion of upstream and downstream 
communities highly affected by climate change. Below is presented the final list including 
key  socio-economic  indicators  such  as  population,  households,  including  percentage  of 
poverty and percentage of FHHs. 
# 
Oblast 
District 
Number 
of 
jamoats 
Number 
of villages 
Population 
Househ
olds 
Women 
led HH 
% 
FHH 
1 
2 
Khatlon 
Kulob 
Khatlon 
Sh. Shohin 
4 
7 
57 
53 
116461 
14476 
1738 
12,01 
46106 
6284 
388 
6,17 
15,9 
30576,49 
9323,92 
Poverty 
at 
distrist 
level 
18,8 
Pastures, 
ha 
Сrop land, 
ha 
9376,8 
7802,88 
114 Tajstat 2020 
115 Based on the analysis of IFAD (2020) using dataset from Bastin et al. 2019 on potential reforestation in the world. 
116 Climate vulnerability index of Tajikistan, IFAD 2021. 
117 Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration Index (SPEI) on 18 months. Climate vulnerability index of Tajikistan, IFAD 2021. 
18 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
Khatlon 
Vose 
Khatlon 
Baljuvon 
7 
5 
Khatlon 
Farkhor 
10 
Khatlon 
Dangara 
Khatlon 
Hamadoni 
Khatlon 
Khovaling 
8 
7 
5 
Khatlon 
Temurmalik  6 
Khatlon 
Panj 
Khatlon 
Yovon 
Khatlon 
A.Jomi 
Khatlon 
A. Balkhi 
5 
8 
7 
7 
Khatlon 
Kushoniyon  4 
Khatlon 
Vakhsh 
Khatlon 
Khuroson 
DRS 
DRS 
DRS 
Sugd 
Sugd 
Gisar 
Rudaki 
Shahrinav 
Zafarobod 
Mastchoh 
6 
6 
10 
12 
6 
5 
7 
65 
31 
80 
81 
59 
49 
45 
54 
87 
72 
82 
58 
105 
85 
167 
155 
80 
21 
38 
189188 
21007 
3116 
14,83  17,8 
30291,19 
21906,2 
34144 
4466 
579 
12,96  18,8 
14282 
3628 
179604 
23471 
1403 
5,98 
16,8 
29816,4 
22690,72 
149944 
23017 
2302 
10,00  12,4 
42765,66 
21837,47 
129414 
16707 
3250 
19,45  19,7 
26334 
13404,06 
49335 
54658 
6232 
8333 
436 
671 
7,00 
25,6 
20329 
7194,5 
8,05 
18,6 
12582 
6666 
105752 
18314 
1689 
9,22 
16,4 
32297 
13104 
22119 
2321 
164405 
24421 
122 
533 
5,26 
18,7 
24486 
9196,5 
2,18 
13,6 
24486 
9196,5 
193638 
29931 
2273 
7,59 
14,7 
23919,83 
15863,29 
110269 
12440 
884 
7,11 
18,7 
3701 
22267 
189996 
24803 
1700 
6,85 
17 
57000 
13124,91 
133939 
15536 
2688 
17,30  18,7 
24524,56 
11015,45 
276904 
36764 
5861 
15,94  8,5 
15140,92 
8446,35 
318834 
48192 
NA 
NA 
6,9 
66844 
23878 
106296 
15045 
407 
2,71 
13 
38343 
8977 
76494 
14114 
1182 
8,37 
20,3 
130813 
17639 
1753 
9,94 
34 
816 
8536 
21919 
23320 
Total 
142 
1524 
2778313 
383513 
32975 
8,60 
15,2 
536447,85  294761,75 
174. 
Selection of Villages: The CASP+ will target 400 Villages of 21 districts in the regions 
of Khatlon (16 districts), Sughd (2 districts) and DRS (3 districts). Targeting at village level 
will be conducted at the beginning of the project in collaboration with relevant stakeholders 
and  taking  into  account  criteria  encompassing  environmental  and  climate  related 
challenges,  as  well  as  socio-economic  indicators,  i.e.:  population  and  number  of 
households, also presence  of pastures, and  for forestry investment also the presence of 
forest areas.Specific selection criteria have been developed:  
 Adaptation Investment:  
i.  Necessary criteria for Village eligibility and ranking 
1.  Excluding villages with less than 50HH 
2.  Excluding villages with previous/ongoing meaningful intervention 
providing the community with similar community investments 
3.  Excluding  villages  with  less  than  1,000  Sheep  Units  (SU).  1 
sheep/goat = 1 Sheep Unit; 1 cow = 0.2 Sheep Unit)118 
4.  Excluding  villages  with  less  than  100ha  pasture119  for  their 
livelihoods  
ii.  Ranking criteria to select 400 villages:  
1.  Sub-catchments  vulnerability,  based  on  Climate  Vulnerability 
Index for sub-catchments mapped at design stage. 
Forestry Investment:  
118 average was 2,990 under LPDP 2 and only 5 had less than 1,000 
119 Average was 450 under LPDP 2 and only 5 had less than 100 ha.  
19 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
iii.  Necessary  criteria  for  villages  eligible  for  Forestry  investment 
include: 
1.  a subset of the AI villages where at least 100 ha of JFM120 can be 
implemented over the lifetime of the project. 
2.  Villages with no previous/ongoing relevant intervention providing 
the community with reforestation investments similar to CASP+  
175. 
Validation of selection of villages for AI and FI investments will occur during project 
implementation, to ensure that the selected villages meeting the necessary criteria above 
are also meeting qualitative criteria of social sustainability, commitment, gender equality 
in accessing information and decision etc. it is expected that at least 70% of the community 
members  have  been  informed  about  project  opportunity  and  they  participate  in  the 
community consultation and that 50% are women (attendance list should be provided). It 
is  expected  that  final  agreement  to  participate  in  the  project  is  provided  by  village 
representatives  and  50%  are  women  (  attendance  list  should  be  provided).  Presence  of 
youth in the process will be highly encouraged. Details are described in the PIM (targeting 
section). 
176.  Presence of other interventions in the targeted area and synergies: Geographic 
coverage  of  CASP+  is  not  excluding  districts  where  other  IFAD-funded  investments 
operational (LPDP I and II) as well as other donors’ programmes with whom CASP+ may 
find  areas  for  synergies/complementarity  (i.e.  the  GCF  Smallholder  building  climate 
resilience of vulnerable and food insecure communities through capacity strengthening and 
livelihood  diversification  in  mountainous  regions  of  Tajikistan  implemented  by  WFP). 
Interventions  in  each  village  and  district  will  be  preceded  by  an  evidence-based  and 
participatory review of NRM status and opportunities (Diagnostic Study). The review will 
highlight specific needs for each village and will produce the evidence for CsCAPs. In turn, 
this  will  inform  the  village  level  targeting  with  direct  ad  hoc  investment  and  technical 
support provided by the programme.  
177. 
Communities targeted by IFAD-funded interventions that are already receiving support 
for development of Community Action Plans (CAPs) will not be eligible for complementary 
support (i.e. not a duplication) to what was previously received. Priority will be  given to 
communities  that  have  not  received  such  support  under  previous  investments.  Those 
villages  are  expected  to  receive  the  full  support  package  (Including  CsCAPs  and  other 
programme services). The inclusion will be based on a prior assessment and interventions 
will be tailored accordingly, including the criteria described above.  
178. 
Furthermore,  as  part  of  the  support  to  rural  institutions  and  organizations,  the 
programme will form new PUUs and will also support and strengthen existing ones (formed 
under  previous  interventions)  in  order  to  enable  rural  institutions  to  conduct  effective 
grazing/pasture  management  planning,  including  improving  their  knowledge  and 
awareness  on  climate  change  issues  and  integrated  NRM.  This  represents  an  additional 
element, aimed to strengthen communities’ capacities to address climate change related 
challenges in a way to  maximize the ecosystem services from the integration of natural 
resources management. 
120 Based on 15 Leskhoz having the capacity to implement 500 ha annually for 5 years = 37,500. Divide over 400 villages = 93.75 
Ha 
20 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
179. 
Selection of Households: After final village selection, a participatory wealth ranking 
exercise will be conducted at community level to identify the poorest and the better off, 
following  the  example  of  the  LPDPII  where  such  exercise  was  conducted  by  Aga  Khan 
Foundation (AKF)121. The programme will promote services in line with needs of all target 
groups.  Some  activities  will  be  of  interest  for  the  community  as  a  whole:  i.e.  Climate 
Sensitive Community Action Plan (CsCAPs) for productive infrastructures/adaptation and 
mitigation  activities  and  therefore  all  members  will  be  mobilised  through  Village 
Organisations (VOs), PUUs, and Women Groups (WG) where existing. Targeted activities 
will be designed for specific groups, especially the poorest and vulnerable ones. Poor and 
poorest  households  will  be  identified  and  selected  through  the  wealth  ranking  exercise 
(which requires validation from the community to avoid elite capture and keep tracking of 
process  transparency)  and  key  criteria  related  to  poverty  and  vulnerability  set  for  their 
participation  in  Farmers  Field  Schools  (FFS),  Common  Interests  Groups  (CIGs)  and 
prioritisation for accessing grant financing.  
180. 
Community Facilitators will be in charge to undertake the wealth ranking exercise and 
trained  facilitators  will  be  in  charge  to  train  others  (ToT)  on  the  application  of  the 
methodology.  The  overall  supervision  will  be  under  the  responsibility  if  the  gender  and 
social  inclusion  expert  of  PMU  (  see  ToRs  in  the  PIM).  Details  for  implementation  are 
reported in annex to  the PIM and they build on LPDP-II model. 
181. 
Social  inclusion  strategy  for  vulnerable  groups:  Gender  assessment  and 
stakeholder consultations informed that certain groups in the rural community are socially 
disadvantaged,  particularly  poor  families,  women-headed  households  and  youth,  due  to 
their weak social and economic standings. 
182.  Youth  (14-30)  are  largely  unemployed,  underemployed,  and  underpaid,  and  they 
rank among the working poor. The level of youth unemployment (working age 15-24) is 
20.9%  (WB,  2020)122.  According  to  the  WB  (2017)  study  on  addressing  challenges  to 
create more and better jobs in Tajikistan, only 43 percent of Tajikistan’s total working age 
population are in the labor force. The majority of those working are in low quality jobs in 
the informal sector. Moreover, too many jobs in Tajikistan are seasonal or temporary, and 
their share has increased over time. Women and youth are the least  represented in the 
labor force. Inactive youth, i.e. those who are neither employed nor in school, represent 
40 percent of the total youth population, which is high by international standards. While 
youth are more likely than adults to work in private sector wage jobs, almost one third of 
employed  young  people  are  in  unpaid  (informal)  jobs,  compared  to  15  percent  of 
adults123.  
183. 
For  youth,  in  addition  to  ensuring  their  equal  access  to  project  information  and 
benefits,  particular  attention  will  be  paid  to  promote  their  engagement  in  business 
opportunities  in  the  project  supported  value  chains  by  proactively  including  them  in 
business  related  capacity  building  activities.  It  is  expected  that  youth  will  be  40% 
participants in CIGs. It is also expected that 25% of common interest groups will be youth-
led. Furthermore, ranking criteria for evaluation of grant proposal include priority for youth.  
121 Consultation with AKF representative during the CN design mission on the validity of the proposed methodology and lesson learned.  
122 World Bank, 2020:  https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.UEM.1524.ZS?locations=TJ 
123 Tajikistan: Addressing Challenges to Create More and Better Jobs, WB 2017 
available at https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/tajikistan/publication/tajikistan-addressing-challenges-to-create-more-and-
better-jobs 
21 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
184.  Workshops bringing together different parties in the Value Chain will be provided where 
they will have an opportunity to engage and share information with each other and discuss 
specific problems within the value chain. This will be done as part of PPP approach and the 
programme will ensure that this social category (youth and also returning migrants) will 
be  included  in  any  platform/consultation  held.  In  line  with  activities  and  programme 
conducted by the Ministry of Youth and Sport, the programme will also explore coordination 
with  activities  and  initiatives  undertaken  at  district  and  village  level  such  as:  Young 
farmers’ schools, Young entrepreneurs club and related national competition for innovative 
ideas. To support youth mobilisation and information the programme will rely on support 
from existing youth unions and youth committees (districts and village levels) formed and 
organized under the Ministry of Youth and Sport.  
185.  Women headed households: about 40% of all extreme poor registered in rural and 
township jamoats in 2015 are women. Of the 30,404 extremely poor households listed in 
the same table, 11,013 were headed by women, which translates into a 36.2 % share of 
female-headed  households  (FHHs)  among  all  extreme  poor  households.  (UNDP,  2016). 
since they are a vulnerable category and extremely poor,  women headed households are 
expected to be 20% members of FFS and 20% in CIGs. Furthermore, the grant financing 
schemes include priority for poor households and women headed households. In order to 
mobilise poor women and very poor households, the project will work in close collaboration 
with Ministry of Health and Social Protection. 
186.  Persons with Disabilities (PWD): The programme will make extra effort to include 
PWDs  (with  focus  on  women  with  disability)  in  its  activities  through:  (i)  assessment  on 
activities where PWD can be included; (ii) special awareness sessions at community level 
to  ensure  inclusion  of  PWD  in  selected  activities  (ii)  priority  in  accessing  grants.      The 
programme will work in coordination with Community Based Organisations (CBOs) already 
supporting the work of the Social Protection Units (Ministry of Health and Social Protection) 
to mobilise and engage with PWD and ensure they can be included in CIGs and /or priority 
for participation  be given to families with PWDs. 
187. 
Targeting:  Similar  to  the  gender  strategy  above,  the  project  will  raise  awareness 
among stakeholders on the risks of potential exclusion of the disadvantaged groups and 
importance of inclusive approach, and ensure their informed participation through a set of 
specific actions.   
188. 
Selection will be conducted in a series of steps as follows: (i) mobilisation campaign 
to  present  the  programme;  (ii)  wealth  ranking  exercise  conducted  by  the  Community 
facilitators (CF) including support from local CBOs, given their knowledge of poorest and 
disadvantaged households, especially recipients of social aid, pensions and also PWD; (iii) 
involvements  of  the    local  community  leaders/committee  to  validate  the  proposed 
beneficiaries and avoid risk of elite capture; (iv) verification by programme staff through 
physical visits to the households and checking the community validation process (minutes 
of  meetings  and  other  documentation  provided  to  ensure  process  is  transparent  and 
records are duly kept as part of M&E requirements including the way potential complaints 
are  addressed  during  the  process).  Specific  selection  criteria  to  prioritize  poor  and 
disadvantaged  household  in  grant  financing  have  been  elaborated  and  are  presented 
below.  
22 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
 Description of Target Groups and programme opportunities 
Key Characteristics  Major Challenges 
Opportunities  under 
CASP+ 
below 
  Food 
insecurity 
  Empowerment 
Target 
Group 
Poor 
household
s  
(including 
Women 
and 
WHHs) 
26.3 
Poverty 
national 
level 
  Households 
poverty line 
  Subsistence farmers 
with household plots 
(‘kitchen gardens’ of 
about 0.2 ha) and a 
small  number  of 
animals  (1-2  cattle, 
small 
5-10 
ruminants) 
  Work  as  labourers 
on others’ farm 
(10% 
extreme 
poverty). 
  WHHs, 
including 
those  headed  by 
‘abandoned wives’ 
20% 
WHHs 
total 
national 
populatio
n  
Transitory 
Poor HHs  
(subsisten
ce 
and 
semi-
subsisten
ce 
farmers 
producing 
surplus)  
  Women  and  WHHs 
ranking  among  the 
poorest 
(40%  of 
registered 
those 
among  poorest  are 
women). 
  Receiving assistance 
from  National  Aid 
schemes 
  Smallholder farmers 
with  access  to  land 
beyond  household 
plots 
through 
leasing 
arrangements 
(about 1 ha) 
  Vulnerable 
to 
fall 
back into poverty 
  In  possession  of 
about  5  cattle  and 
small 
15-20 
that 
ruminants, 
and malnutrition 
  Low 
production/produc
to 
tivity 
negative  effects  of 
CC. 
due 
  Decrease 
of 
income  due  to  a 
drop of remittance 
  Lack  of  productive 
infrastructures/co
nnectivity 
market 
to 
  Women 
representation 
decision-making 
bodies. 
lack 
in 
through  participation 
in  VOs/PUUs  and  its 
CsCAP process. 
  Improved  well-being 
through  access 
to 
community (social and 
productive) 
infrastructure 
  Opportunities for cash 
through 
generation 
income 
income 
activities,  
  Leadership 
training 
and representation for 
women 
  Access  to 
livelihood 
and 
diversification 
value chain grants 
  Low 
farm 
productivity due to 
lack  of  access  to 
mechanized 
irrigation, 
power, 
seeds  and  other 
inputs 
and 
marketing 
opportunities 
  Vulnerable 
to 
climate  and  price 
shocks  
  Decrease 
of 
income  due  to  a 
In addition to the above: 
  Increased  productivity 
and 
farm  efficiency 
from 
productive 
and 
infrastructure 
farm  mechanization 
(CSCAPs) 
  Higher  cash 
income 
through  participation 
in  CIGs  and  linkages 
with Private Sector 
23 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
graze on community 
pasture land 
drop 
remittances 
  Family 
dekhan 
farms  with  similar 
size  of  productive 
resources  (land  and 
livestock) 
  Work  as  labourers 
on others’ farm 
  No  assistance  from 
aid 
national 
schemes 
(full 
productive capacity) 
of 
  Higher 
production 
capacity  through  PFS 
and FFs. 
  Access  to  grants  for 
commercialisation and 
agribusiness 
development  targeted 
at  individuals  groups 
with 
enough 
economic-productive 
capacity to apply for a 
matching grants  
and 
Unemploy
ed 
under 
employed 
rural 
youth 
  No  agricultural  land 
or livestock 
  Assist  parents’  or 
relatives’ farming 
  Difficult  entry  to 
farming due to lack 
of access to land 
  Sharp  decrease  in 
  Some with relatively 
of 
level 
good 
education  
migration 
opportunities 
  Lack  of  knowledge 
related  to  farming 
as 
a 
business/agribusin
ess  opportunities 
along VCs 
Returning 
migrants  
  Developed  technical 
capacity abroad  
  Some  have  also 
good  education  and 
can be innovative 
  Some 
agriculture 
and 
commercial 
orientation 
access 
inputs 
have 
  Lack 
job 
of 
opportunities  and 
access to BDS. 
  Lack 
of 
with 
information/conne
ction 
agribusiness 
platforms 
and 
actors from private 
sector. 
  Empowerment 
and 
learning  of  leadership 
and 
organizational 
management  through 
in 
participation 
VO/PUUs 
its 
CsCAP process. 
and 
  Access  to  vocational 
training  opportunities, 
business 
including 
and 
development 
to  start  up 
access 
packages 
through 
grants (both livelihood 
and 
commercialisation) 
  Access 
to  business 
development  services 
and 
enterprise 
development  training 
and 
linkages  with 
financial services; 
  Inclusion 
into 
dialogue/consultation 
Knowledge  sharing  at 
community  level  and 
with 
from  
actors 
Private Sector 
24 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
  Grant 
Scheme  
commercialisation and 
agribusiness 
  Ranking  among  the 
  Difficulties 
People 
with 
Disability 
(PWD) 
identification 
suitable jobs, 
in 
of 
  negative  attitudes 
of 
and 
and 
education 
skills 
lack 
poorest 
  Rely  exclusively  on 
income  from  social 
pension (very low) 
  Social  stigma  and 
marginalisation  
faced 
  Women 
double 
marginalisation  and 
discrimination 
for 
of 
Assessment 
PWD 
activities 
awareness 
sessions 
targeting communities 
to  ensure  inclusion  of 
PWD 
identified 
training (IGA) 
in 
  Special 
trainings 
to 
support  self-employed 
PWD  along  activities 
they can perform. 
  Access to grants  
Eligibility Criteria and Conditions for Participation 
Eligibility Criteria 
Any organization/institution in targeted villages intending to access assistance through the 
MGF should meet any of the criteria listed below.  
General criteria and conditions:  
  The applicant is a Tajik national 
 
Is older than 18  
  Be resident in the beneficiary village  
  Relying on agriculture as main income 
  Being an individual or CIG member trained under CASP+  
  Pay a cash contribution of 10% for Window 1 and 20 % for Window 2.  
  For  Window  1  the  application  must  be  below  the  national  poverty  line  on  monthly 
consumption of less than TJS162 for poor and less than TJS230 for vulnerable.  
Criteria for assessing applications 
For group application:  
  The highest percentage of women participating in each group application. 
  Number of persons receiving national aid assistance per group application. 
25 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
  Percentage of youth participation within each group application. 
  Percentage of PWD within each group application. 
For individuals  
  Registered in the registry ( Ministry of Health and Social Protection) for social assistance 
as extremely poor  
  Women head of household (priority) below poverty line  
  Families with PWD in the family 
  Youth-led poor family 
Criteria for funding 
 
Improving climate change adaptation and mitigation  
  Enhance farmers resilience to CC through Income generating potential 
 
Improving  environmental  conditions  through  livelihood  diversification  (for  reducing 
pressure on degraded environmental/natural resources)  
Expected target for individuals  
  Disaggregation: 25% applicants youth 
  50% applicants women 
  20% applicants women headed households.  
Expected target for groups 
  30% women-led groups 
  20% youth-led groups 
General conditions for participating in Windows 1 and 2 
1)  Involvement  in  agriculture/livestock/horticulture  production,  and/or  rural  agribusiness- 
processing, input supply, technical services delivery, cold storage 
2)  Operating in the value chains of commodities supported by CASP+ 
3)  Providing  or  intend  to  provide  services  such  as  inputs  support  services,  market  access, 
technical  services,  financial/credit  support  services  to  smallholder  farmers/producers 
and/or their groups. 
4)  Has  undertaken  training  in  Farming  as  a  Business  or  show  commitment  to  undertake 
Farming as a business if required 
5)  Financial viability or demonstrated ability to become financially viable with the support of 
the MGF 
26 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Appendix 2: Institutional analysis and Relevant Environmental, Health and Safety 
Laws in Tajikistan124 
Alignment with existing policies such as NDCs, NAMAs, and NAPs 
189.  The current project is aligned with the existing policies and priorities of 
the  country  given  that  the  GoRT    prioritises  of  reducing  the  country’s 
vulnerability  to  climate  change  via  adaptation  and  increased  resilience. 
Tajikistan has developed a National Development Strategy, which defines 
socio-economic  development  priorities  for  the  country  until  2030.  This 
strategy  integrates  climate  change  needs,  disaster  risk  reduction,  and 
social  inclusiveness,  specifically  focusing  on  gender-based  development. 
CEP  has  also  prepared  a  Country  Programme  for  the  GCF  (2019  – 
2021)125  in  order  to  define  short-term  and  long-term  investment 
priorities for the GCF in Tajikistan. There are five Strategic Pillars defined 
by  the  Country  Programme  where  GCF  investments  are  needed:  I) 
Agriculture and Forests; II) Transport; III) Energy; IV) Water resources; 
V) Cross-sectoral areas of activity (Education, Public Health Services, and 
Migration). The current project is focused on the first pillar and to some 
extent on developing the water resources of the country.  The project will 
focus on the pasture and forestry sectors where development has lagged 
behind. While the country has a pasture law, it needs assistance in building 
technical capacity at the national level for green investments, enhanced 
adaptation  policy  and  planning,  improved  capacity  for  disaster  risk 
reduction  and    improved  pasture  and  forestry  development  and 
management.  The  Government 
forest  renewal, 
conservation and sustainable management, contributing to climate change 
mitigation. However, while there is an up-to-date forestry legislation it is 
not  being  implemented  as  a  result  of  lack  of  capacity  and  financial 
resources.  Its other  objectives are to maintain biodiversity, improve the 
livelihoods of local people and leverage public and private finance. 
is  committed  to 
190.  CASP+  investments  provide  incentives  for  the  government  to  take 
action and implement a range of policies and strategies designed to reform 
and strengthen natural resource management. Responding to country and 
stakeholders  needs,  CASP+  builds  on  successful  ongoing  and  past 
practices  and is designed to mobilize climate finance (GCF and  IFAD) to 
address the national climate change adaptation and mitigation goals in line 
with  the  national  commitments  and  strategic  framework  on  climate 
change,  natural  resources  management,  disaster  risk  reduction  and 
SDGs.126  Besides  supporting  the  Updated  Nationally  Determined 
Contribution  (2021),127  the  National  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  Strategy 
(2019-2030), and the National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy 2030, 
124 Ministry of Health and Social Protection & the Asian Development Bank, Initial Environmental Examination, 2018. 
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/project-documents/51010/51010-002-iee-en.pdf  
125 Tajikistan Country Program for Green Climate Fund – (GCF) 2019-2021. June 2019.  
126 SDG 1, SDG 2, SDG 5, SDG 12, SDG 13, SDG 15 
127 
available 
updated 
UNFCCC 
2021 
NDC 
The 
the 
on 
is 
https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/Tajikistan%20First/NDC_TAJIKISTAN_ENG.pdf   
website: 
27 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
the project will contribute to operationalize and strengthen the execution 
of key government priorities outlined below.   
191.  At  the  “macro”  level,  among  the  different  action  areas  of  Tajikistan’s 
National Development Strategy of the Republic of Tajikistan for the period 
up to 2030  and objectives of the Mid-Term Development Programme of 
the  Republic  of  Tajikistan  for  2016-2020,  are  the  promotion  of  agrarian 
and  water  reform  and  increased  access  to  resources  and  ensuring  their 
rational use. A major reform is the Water Sector Reform Programme 
of  the  Republic  of  Tajikistan  for  2016-2025,  where  hydrological, 
rather  than  administrative,  boundaries  now  demarcate  “management 
areas”. The Agriculture Reform Programme 2012-2020 addresses a range 
of  issues  pertaining  to  strengthening  the  enabling  environment  for 
ensuring food security, while noting the inefficient use and management 
of natural resources, imperfection of land relations in the agrarian sector 
and weak irrigation systems. 
192.  The Agriculture Reform Programme 2012-2020 (ARP) was adopted 
by the governmental resolution No 383 of 1st August 2012, and covers a 
wide range of issues. A key element of this Programme is the institutional 
reform  of  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture128.  This  Reform  Programme  also 
identifies  priorities  for  adaptation  to  climate  change,  including,  among 
other activities, the scaling-up of successful practices in Joint Pasture and 
Forest  Management  with  a  focus  on  rehabilitation,  conservation,  and 
rotational use. It does not refer to the Strategy on Adaptation to Climate 
Change,  because  this  was  prepared  after  the  Agricultural  Reform 
Programme; the Adaptation Strategy does, however, clearly refer to the 
Agricultural Reform Programme. The Water Sector Reform Programme 
of  the  Republic  of  Tajikistan  for  2016-2025  details  proposed  water 
sector reforms in all sub-sectors related to water use. These are based on 
the  principles  of  Integrated  Water  Resources  Management  (IWRM)  and 
focus on taking into account social, economic and environmental interests 
through sustainable and balanced management and development of water 
resources.  As  an  integral  part  of  IWRM,  the  Water  Sector  Reform 
Programme  introduced  the  river  basin  management  approach  to  water 
resources management as one of the main principles of the water sector 
reform.  This  is  supported  by  institutional  reforms  to  the  water  sector, 
which addresses structural changes to current water sector organizations, 
and  the  establishment  of  new  organizations  at  national,  basin  and  sub-
basin  levels129.  Tajikistan’s  Strategy  for  the  Development  of  the 
Forestry Sector for the period 2016–2030 is currently considered to 
be in draft format, as it has not yet been approved by the Government of 
Tajikistan. Hence, while the Strategy was developed in 2015, the last draft 
version  will  be  revised130.This  Strategy  will  be  the  basis  for  both 
128  Ministry  of  Agriculture  of  the  Republic  of  Tajikistan.  September  2012.  Programme  for  Reforming  the  Agriculture  Sector  of  the 
Republic of Tajikistan for 2012-2020. 
129 Government of the Republic of Tajikistan. 2015. Water Sector Reforms Programme of the Republic of Tajikistan  
for 2016-2025. 
130 Personal communication with CEP/Forestry Agency, August, 2020. 
28 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
sustainable  forest  management  and  for  the  successful  integrated 
development  of  the  entire  forest  sector131.  The  main  objective  is  to 
undertake  reforestation  and  afforestation  activities  together  with 
measures  to  limit  pressures  associated  with  unsustainable  livestock 
grazing.  The  Strategy  also  looks  to  enhance  natural  forest  regeneration 
potential,  and  establish  industrial  fuelwood  plantations  in  areas  less 
favourable for grazing and which are closer to villages, in order to reduce 
illegal firewood collection132.  
193.  The  Comprehensive  Program  for  the  Development  of  the 
Livestock Sector in the Republic of Tajikistan for 2018-2022 focuses 
on  the  development  of  the  livestock  sector,  covering  a  range  of 
zootechnical, biotechnological and economic measures aimed at growing, 
preserving  and  increasing  the  number  of  cattle,  poultry,  bees,  fish,  and 
their  breeds,  including  through  breeding  for  high-yielding  livestock. This 
Programme  also  includes  pasture  improvement,  recognizing  that  this  is 
essential for the country’s food security, as pastures are the main source 
of  food  for  animals,  and  provide  up  to  60-70  percent  of  their  annual 
demand.  Therefore,  quality  improvement,  productivity,  correct  and 
rational  use  of  pastures  are  key  factors  identified  for  improving  the 
livestock  sector133.  Mainly  implemented  through  programmes,  the 
Pasture  Development  Programme  for  Tajikistan  2016-2020  is 
ongoing.  This  Programme  aims  at  supporting  the  rolling  out  of  the 
institutional  mechanisms  institutionalized  by  the  Pasture  Law  –  Pasture 
User Unions (PUUs), Pasture Commissions and Pasture Management Plans.  
194.  Climate  change  is  expected  to  increasingly  impact  productive  sub-
sectors  in  agriculture.  The  National  Development  Strategy  2015-
2030, in its efforts jointly with the Mid-Term Development Programme 
(2016-2020)  to  promote  increased  access  to  resources  and  ensuring 
rational and sustainable use of agricultural land and water.  Key elements 
of Tajikistan’s National Strategy on Adaptation to Climate Change of 
the  Republic  of  Tajikistan  for  the  Period  Until  2030  are  the  risks 
associated  with  climate  change  and  adaptation  measures,  and  reducing 
the consequences of these risks for the population and key sectors of the 
economy. The Strategy therefore identifies adaptation needs and options 
by sector, favouring cross-sectoral adaptation options such as IWRM and 
ecosystem-based  adaptation.  The  range  of  sectors  addressed  include 
agriculture, water and environment, but also social issues, such as gender 
and vulnerable groups. The three goals of the Strategy are to reduce the 
vulnerability  of:  the  most  vulnerable  groups  of  the  population,  priority 
sectors  and  cross-cutting  areas  to  climate  change  and  extreme  climate 
events;  identify  investment  priorities  for  adaptation;  and  design, 
implement, monitor, and assess climate risk management and adaptation 
131 FAO and UNECE. 2019. Overview of the State of Forests and Forest Management in Tajikistan. 
132 UNECE. 2017. Environmental Performance Reviews. Third Review Synopsis. 
133 Government of the Republic of Tajikistan Resolution dated March 27, 2018, No. 160 On the Comprehensive Program for the 
Development of the Livestock Industry in the Republic of Tajikistan for 2018-2022. 
29 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
measures for reducing current and future vulnerability to climate change 
and extreme weather events.  
195.  In  the  Medium-Term  Development  Program  of  the  Republic  of 
Tajikistan  for  2021-2025  (MDP  2021-2025),  adopted  by  the 
Government of the Republic of Tajikistan on April 30, 2021, under Decree 
No. 168, a special section is devoted to environmental protection, climate 
change  and  natural  disasters.  The  adoption  of  NSACC  strengthens  the 
mechanisms for deploying capacity building processes on climate change 
adaptation  of  employees  of  authorized  bodies  and  civil  servants. 
Furthermore,  the  development  of  gender-sensitive  indicators  for  climate 
change  were  noted  as  adaptive  measures.  Within  the  framework  of  this 
program, sectoral measures for adaptation to climate change have been 
formulated. 
196.  With  technical  support  from  FAO,  MoA  has  recently  formulated  the 
National  Agricultural  Investment  Plan  (NIP)  for  Sustainable 
Agriculture  Development  and  Food  Security  2021-2030.  The  NIP 
defines investment priorities for public and development partners, as well 
as  measures  to  unlock  private  sector  investments  for  food  and  nutrition 
security and sustainable agriculture. These include investments in forestry, 
pasture, livestock intensification. 
197.  The  2003  National  Action  Plan  for  Climate  Change  Mitigation 
outlines the priorities and measures to be undertaken by the Republic of 
Tajikistan to address the problem of climate change; develop the capacity 
for further research and analysis of the climate system, its variability and 
change;  and  strengthen  international  cooperation  and  joint  efforts  to 
mitigate  climate  change.  The  measures  indicated  in  the  National  Action 
Plan serve as a basis for planning and decision making at all state levels 
and in all relevant sectors. This Action Plan is outdated, although in 2021, 
Tajikistan  submitted  its  Updated  Nationally  Determined  Contribution 
(NDC). 
198.  Laws, Policies, and Institutional Mechanisms to Promote Gender 
Equality:    Equality  between  men  and  women  is  provided  under 
Tajikistan’s constitution and enforced in legislation. No laws or regulatory 
provisions  discriminate  against  women.  The  National  Strategy  for 
Enhancing the Role of Women in the Republic of Tajikistan, lists concrete 
actions to improve women’s participation in education, the labor market, 
entrepreneurship,  and  in  politics,  albeit  without  identifying  responsible 
agencies,  timeframes  with  milestones,  funding  sources,  and  monitoring 
plans.  
199.  Equal rights and opportunities for men and women are also codified in 
the 2005  Law  on State Guarantees  of Equal Rights for  Men and Women 
and Equal Opportunities in the Exercise of Rights. Gender-related priorities 
are reflected in sector policies on education, health, social protection, and 
agricultural 
initiatives, 
implementation and enforcement is weak, given limited funding. Tajikistan 
Notwithstanding 
development. 
these 
30 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
has  ratified  the  Convention  on  the  Elimination  of  All  Forms  of 
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) in 1993 and its Optional protocol 
in 2014, as well as the International Convention on the Protection of the 
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families in 2002. 
200.  The primary institution responsible for gender policy is the Committee 
for  Women’s and  Family  Affairs  (Women’s  Committee),  which  has 
diverse  functions  ranging  from  conducting  research  to  considering 
complaints  from  citizens,  promoting  women’s  rights  through  the  media, 
monitoring  international  standards  compliance,  coordinating  the  work 
government  and  nongovernment  bodies  do  on  gender  equality,  and 
training.  The  Women’s  Committee  operates  110  regional  information-
consultation  and  crisis  centres  throughout  the  country,  funded  through 
local  budgets.  A  network  for  gender  mainstreaming  also  links  seven 
ministries and agencies, including the Women’s Committee.   
201.  Ministry of Health and Social Protection (MHSP): Major decisions 
about  social  protection  are  made  by  several  ministries  and  departments 
operating  at  the  central  level.  The  main  government  bodies  involved  in 
social  protection  policy  design,  implementation  and  monitoring  are  the 
Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, the Ministry of Labour, Migration and 
Employment (MLME) and the ASIP. 
202.  The  administration  of  social  protection is  divided  by  the  State  Agency 
for  Social  Protection  (SASP,  a  specialized  agency  within  the  Ministry  of 
Health and Social Welfare) and the ASIP (a direct subordinate agency of 
the central government). The former is responsible for the administration 
of social assistance schemes, the latter for social insurance programmes.   
203.  The  Ministry  of  Health  and  Social  Protection  develops  and  submits 
proposals to improve state social protection policy. Develops state social 
protection  programmes  for  the  poor  and  oversees  their  implementation. 
Plans  the  budget  of  the  Targeted  Social  Assistance  (TSA)  programme. 
Monitors  the  implementation  of  health  and  social  protection  legislation. 
Together with the government and local executive bodies, it is responsible 
for  the  creation  and  development  of  a  network  of  integrated  and 
specialized,  state,  regional,  local  and  other  social  services.  Provides 
guidance and control over the activities of social services, including social 
service  facilities.  Develops  and  maintains  social  service  standards.    The 
Targeted  Social  Assistance  (TSA)  programme  is  an  unconditional  cash 
transfer  where  beneficiaries  are  identified  through  a  proxy  means  test 
(PMT).  The  TSA  programme is  expected  to  fully  replace  the  ongoing 
schemes by 2018. Its objective is to improve the living conditions of the 
most  vulnerable  by  providing  overarching  support  to  families  instead  of 
delivering transfers for specific purposes. A further objective is to enhance 
the  capacity  of  government  at  all  levels  to  achieve  more  efficient 
management  and  administration  processes 
in  social  protection 
programming. The TSA programme is managed by the Ministry of Health 
and  Social  Protection  (MHSP)  and  is  currently  in  place  in  40  districts.  It 
31 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
replaced the cash compensations for education and energy, which are still 
provided in the remaining 28 districts.  
204.  Among others, the MHSP is responsible for the implementation of a 5-
year  National  Strategic  Plan  for  the  Rehabilitation  of  People  with 
Disabilities which was developed and validated by the Presidency in 2016. 
In 2017 a Plan of Action in line with strategic objectives and international 
standards  was  developed  to  support  the  implementation  of  the  national 
strategy for PWD. 
205.  The table below lists the relevant environmental, health and safety laws 
in Tajikistan. 
Table 6: Relevant Environmental, Health and Safety Laws in Tajikistan 
Law 
Law  on 
Environ
mental 
Protectio
n 
Enacted 
and 
Amended 
August  2, 
2011, 
No.760 
Responsible 
Agency 
on 
Committee 
Environment 
Protection  and  its 
subdivisions 
at 
the districts 
Law  on 
Environ
mental 
Impact 
Assessm
ent 
Land 
Code  
18.07.2017 
No.1448 
Enacted  in 
1996, 
last 
amended 
in 2016 
Law  on 
Special 
Protecte
d Areas 
Enacted  in 
26.12.201
1, 
amended 
in 2014 
last 
on 
Committee 
Environment 
Protection  and  its 
at 
subdivisions 
the districts 
on 
Committee 
Land 
Management  and 
Geodesy  of  the 
Republic 
of 
Tajikistan  and  its 
subdivisions 
at 
the districts 
Institution 
State 
on 
Specially 
Protected  Natural 
Areas  of  Forestry 
Agency under the 
Government 
of 
the  Republic  of 
Tajikistan  and  its 
in 
subdivisions 
the districts 
Brief Description 
The Law defines legal state principles of environment 
protection  and  aimed  at  provision  of  sustainable 
social  and  economic  development,  guarantees  of 
human rights for healthy and friendly environment, 
law  enforcement  strengthening,  prevention  of 
negative impact of business and other operations on 
the  environment,  management  of  rational  use  of 
nature resource and securing environmental safety. 
Chapter  6  requires  an  Environmental  Impact 
Assessment  and  Chapter  7  specifies  requirements 
for the location, design, construction, reconstruction 
and  commissioning  of  enterprises,  buildings  and 
other facilities 
The  Law  establishes  the  legal  and  organizational 
framework for assessing the environmental impact, 
relationship with state environmental expertise, and 
the procedure for registering and classifying impact 
of assessment objects on the environment. 
Land legislation governs the relations of land use and 
protection,  land  use  property  relation  which  arise 
from getting (acquisition) of convey land use rights. 
The Law defines legal, organizational and economic 
principles  of  specially  protected  natural  areas, 
establishes the assignments, activity operations and 
zoning 
32 
Law 
Law  on 
Plant 
Protectio
n 
Enacted 
and 
Amended 
Enacted  in 
16.04.201
2 No. 817 
Law  on 
Protectio
and 
n 
Use 
of 
Plants 
Enacted  in 
17.05.200
4, 
amended 
in 2008 
last 
Enacted  in 
2.08.2011 
Enacted  in 
03.03.200
6 
Forestry 
Code  of 
the 
Republic 
of 
Tajikista
n 
The  Law 
on 
Conserva
tion  and 
Usage  of 
the 
Historica
l 
Cultural 
Heritage 
and 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Responsible 
Agency 
Brief Description 
of 
of 
on 
on 
Committee 
Environment 
Protection  and  its 
subdivisions 
at 
districts 
the 
Ministry 
of 
Agriculture 
Forestry  Agency 
the 
under 
Government 
of 
the  Republic  of 
Tajikistan 
Academy 
Sciences 
Committee 
Environment 
Protection  and  its 
subdivisions 
at 
districts 
the 
Ministry 
of 
Agriculture 
Forestry  Agency 
the 
under 
Government 
of 
the  Republic  of 
Tajikistan 
Academy 
Sciences 
Forestry  Agency 
the 
under 
of 
Government 
the  Republic  of 
Tajikistan 
Committee 
Environment 
Protection  and  its 
subdivisions 
at 
districts 
the 
Ministry 
of 
Agriculture 
Ministry of culture 
of the Republic of 
Tajikistan 
Academy 
of 
Sciences  of  the 
of 
Republic 
Tajikistan 
Committee 
Environment 
Protection  under 
the  Government 
of the Republic of 
Tajikistan 
Forestry  Agency 
the 
under 
Government 
of 
the  Republic  of 
Tajikistan  
on 
on 
The Law defines legal, organizational and economic 
principles  of  plants  and  agricultural  commodities 
protection from pests, diseases and weeds. 
The  Law  establishes  state  policy  of  the  Republic  of 
Tajikistan on protection and efficient use of plants, 
defines legal,  economic and social principles of the 
field  and  aimed  preservation  and  reproduction  of 
plants 
Regulates  relations 
for  protection,  possession, 
sustainable  use  &  reproduction  of  the  forest  in 
Tajikistan. Defines prohibited activities in protected 
forest  zones  &  their  regimes  &conditions  when 
undertaking allowed activities in the utilization zone 
forests & their regimes. 
The Law regulates legal framework on conservation 
and use of historical and cultural heritage objects at 
the territory of the Republic of Tajikistan and being 
national property of Tajik people. 
33 
Law 
Law  on 
Subsoil 
Enacted 
and 
Amended 
Enacted  in 
20.07.199
4, 
amended 
in 2013 
last 
Law  on 
Soil 
Conserva
tion 
Enacted  in 
16.10.200
9 
Water 
Code 
Enacted  in 
20.10.200
0 
amended 
in 2012 
last 
Law  On 
Protectio
n 
of 
Atmosph
eric Air 
Enacted  in 
1995  and 
amended 
2012 
in 
Enacted  in 
28.12.201
2 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Responsible 
Agency 
Brief Description 
of 
on 
on 
on 
on 
Geology 
Head 
Office  under  the 
Government 
of 
the  Republic  of 
Tajikistan 
Committee 
Environment 
Protection  under 
the  Government 
of the Republic of 
Tajikistan 
Committee 
Environment 
Protection  under 
the  Government 
of the Republic of 
Tajikistan 
Committee 
Land 
Management  and 
Geodesy  of  the 
Republic 
of 
Tajikistan 
Ministry 
Agriculture 
Committee 
Environment 
Protection  under 
the  Government 
of the Republic of 
- 
Tajikistan 
Ministry of Energy 
and 
Water 
Resources  of  the 
Republic 
of 
Tajikistan 
Ministry 
Agriculture 
Geology 
Head 
Office  under  the 
of 
Government 
the  Republic  of 
Tajikistan 
Ministry of Health 
of the Republic of 
Tajikistan 
Committee 
Environment 
Protection  under 
the  Government 
of the Republic of 
Tajikistan 
Ministry of Health 
of the Republic of 
Tajikistan 
Hydrometeorolog
y Agency 
on 
of 
Regulates relations concerning the use & protection 
of  subsoil  in  the  interests  of  present  and  future 
generations. 
The law defines main principles of state policy, legal 
framework of public authorities, individual and legal 
entities  for  the  efficient  and  safe  use  of  soils, 
preservation  of  quality,  fertility  and  soil  protection 
from negative impacts and regulates the variety of 
relationship related to soil protection 
The aims of Water Code of the Republic of Tajikistan 
are  protection  of  state  water  fund  and  state  water 
fund lands for the improvement of population social 
condition and environment, water pollution control, 
impurity, depletion, prevention and control of water 
adverse  effect,  enhancement  and  protection  of 
water  objects,  strengthening  legality  and  rights 
protection  of  individual  and  legal  entities  in  water 
management field. 
The  Law  regulates  relations  of  individual  and  legal 
entities irrelevant of ownership form with an aim of 
conservation,  rehabilitation  of  atmospheric  air  and 
securing of environmental safety 
34 
Law 
Public 
Health 
Code  of 
the 
Republic 
of 
Tajikista
n 
Law  on 
Producti
on 
and 
Consump
tion 
Waste 
Enacted 
and 
Amended 
Enacted 
in30.05.20
17 
Enacted  in 
10.05.200
2, 
amended 
in 2011 
last 
Enacted  in 
15.07.200
7 
and 
On 
Protectio
of 
n 
Populati
on 
Territori
es 
Natural 
and Man-
Made 
Emergen
cies 
from 
Law  on 
wildlife 
Enacted  in 
05.01.200
8 
Law  on 
Labor 
Protectio
n 
Enacted  in 
19.05.200
9 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Responsible 
Agency 
Brief Description 
Ministry  of  Health 
of the Republic of 
Tajikistan 
The Code regulates public health relations and aimed 
at implementation of constitutional rights and health 
protection  of  citizens.  Chapter  17  of  the  Code 
secures sanitary and epidemiological safety 
on 
Committee 
Environment 
Protection  under 
the  Government 
of the Republic of 
Tajikistan 
Ministry of Health 
of the Republic of 
Tajikistan  State 
Unitary Enterprise 
Municipal 
on 
and 
Housing 
the 
Utilities  of 
Republic 
of 
Tajikistan 
Committee 
Emergency 
and 
Situations 
Defence 
Civil 
the 
under 
Government 
of 
the  Republic  of 
Tajikistan  and  its 
structural 
subdivisions 
for 
of 
on 
Committee 
Environment 
Protection  under 
the  Government 
of the Republic of 
Tajikistan 
Ministry 
Agriculture 
Academy 
of 
Sciences  of  the 
Republic 
of 
Tajikistan 
Forestry  Agency 
the 
under 
Government 
of 
the  Republic  of 
Tajikistan 
Ministry  of  Labor, 
and 
Migration 
Employment 
of 
the  Republic  of 
Tajikistan, 
The Law regulates the relations arising in the process 
waste  generation,  collection,  storage,  utilization, 
transport,  deactivation  and  landfilling  of  wastes, 
state management, supervision and control of waste 
management and is aimed to prevent the negative 
impact of production and consumption wastes on the 
environment and human health when handling with 
them, 
into  economic  and 
production turnover as an additional stock source. 
involvement 
their 
The Law defines organizational and legal framework 
on  protection  of  population  of  the  Republic  of 
Tajikistan  and  persons  without  citizenship  at  the 
territory of the Republic of Tajikistan, as well as the 
lands, interiors, water, airspace, animals and plants 
and other natural resources of Tajikistan, objects of 
industrial and social purpose and environment from 
natural  and  man-made  emergencies.  Regulates 
public  relations  on  prevention,  occurrence  and 
development of emergencies, reduction of damages 
and losses, elimination of emergency situations and 
timely notification of population in dangerous zones 
on natural and man-made emergencies. 
The  Law  regulates  public  relations  in  protection, 
restoration  and 
reasonable  use  of  wildlife, 
establishes legal, economic and social framework of 
the field and is aimed at protection and restoration 
of wildlife resources. 
The  Law  establishes  legal  framework  of  labor 
relations  between  employers  and 
protection 
employees  and  is  aimed  at  creation  of  conditions 
that meet the requirements of employees lives and 
health preserving gin the work process. 
35 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Law 
Enacted 
and 
Amended 
Responsible 
Agency 
Brief Description 
Labor 
Code  of 
the 
Republic 
of 
Tajikista
n 
Law  on 
Fire 
Safety 
Enacted  in 
23.07.201
6 
Enacted  in 
20.04.200
8la 
amended 
in2010 
st 
Ministry of Health 
of the Republic of 
Tajikistan 
Ministry  of  Labor, 
and 
Migration 
Employment 
of 
the  Republic  of 
Tajikistan 
Ministry of Health 
of the Republic of 
Tajikistan 
Main  Department 
of 
Fire 
State 
Prevention 
the 
Agency  of 
Ministry 
of 
Internal  Affairs  of 
the  Republic  of 
Tajikistan 
The Code regulates labor and other relations directly 
aimed at them, protection of the rights and freedoms 
of  the  parties  of  labor  relations,  securing  minimal 
guarantees of labor rights and freedoms. 
state  authorities, 
The Law defines general legal, economic, social and 
organizational  principles  of  fire  prevention  in  the 
Republic  of  Tajikistan,  regulates  the  relations 
between 
local  authorities, 
organizations,  other  legal  entities  irrelevant  of 
organizational  and  legal  forms,  as  well  as  between 
public  amalgamations,  officials  and  citizens  of  the 
Republic  of  Tajikistan,  foreign  citizens  and  persons 
without citizenship 
During the concept note and the full design stages, a stakeholder mapping was done 
in order to ensure that the consultation process is inclusive and aligned with national 
policies.  In  addition  to  line  ministries,  the  following  are  the  main  stakeholders 
mapped at this stage with the methods of engagement that are included in CASP+ 
budget: 
Stakeholder 
Committee 
The 
Environmental 
(CEP) 
for 
protection 
Food 
Organisation (FAO) 
and 
Agriculture 
Link 
Components 
to 
Component 1, 2, 3 
CASP+ 
Method of Engagement 
CEP  is  the  GCF’s  National 
Designated  Authority  (NDA) 
and  an  executing  agency  of 
the  project.  Coordination 
with  CEP  will  be  extensive 
sub-
and  will 
components 
are 
executed  by  the  SEPMU. 
Coordination  will  also  be  for 
IFAD-funded  activities  not 
only GCF-funded activities.  
include 
that 
Component 1, 2, 3 
FAO 
is  a  co-financier  of 
CASP+  on  outputs  1.1,  1.2 
and 
CEP, 
coordination with FAO will be 
extensive. 
addition, 
In 
potential  synergies  between 
Like 
3.1. 
36 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
CASP+  and  ongoing  FAO 
projects will be identified. 
Pasture  Meliorative  Trust 
(PMT) 
Component 1, 2 
Pasture Users Union (PUU) 
Component 1, 2 
Pasture  Users  Associations 
(PUAs) 
Component 1 
providing 
CASP+  will  strengthen  the 
capacities of the PMT in order 
to help it fulfil its mandate of 
enforcing  the  Pasture  Law 
technical 
and 
assistance to PUUs, PUAs and 
PCs.  The  PMT  will  also 
pasture 
management 
investments and will support 
the 
and 
implementation 
monitoring 
Pasture 
Management  Plans  (PMPs) 
planned under component 2. 
of 
to 
addition 
In 
their 
engagement  in the  activities 
related to the PMT, the PUUs 
will  play  a  major  role  in 
monitoring  NRM.  The  PUUs 
will  send  quantitative  and 
qualitative  data  on  pasture 
management to the PMT and 
Geodesy 
the 
department. 
After 
verification of the data, it will 
then  be  shared  with  the 
Remote  Sensing  Unit  of 
CASP+,  housed  at  CEP. 
Under  component  2,  the 
project will also help with the 
establishment 
and 
registration of PUUs. 
Land 
providing 
CASP+  will  strengthen  the 
capacities of the PMT in order 
to help it fulfil its mandate of 
enforcing  the  Pasture  Law 
technical 
and 
assistance to PUAs. The PMT 
would  then  help  the  PUAs 
through  helping  in  the  roll 
community-based 
out  of 
pasture 
governance 
mechanisms  and  providing 
training 
technical 
and 
backstopping.  CASP+  will 
ensure 
are 
consulted in activities related 
PUAs 
that 
37 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
to PMT. 
Pasture Commissions (PCs) 
Component 1 
Tajik  Agrarian  University 
(TAU) 
Component 1, 3 
providing 
CASP+  will  strengthen  the 
capacities of the PMT in order 
to help it fulfil its mandate of 
enforcing  the  Pasture  Law 
and 
technical 
assistance  to  PCs.  The  PMT 
would  then  help  the  PCs 
through  helping  in  the  roll 
community-based 
out  of 
governance 
pasture 
mechanisms  and  providing 
training 
technical 
and 
backstopping.  CASP+  will 
are 
ensure 
consulted in activities related 
to PMT. 
that 
PCs 
on 
TAU 
that 
intends 
CASP+ will provide technical 
to 
to 
assistance 
integrate 
change 
climate 
aspects  in  a  new  Master’s 
curriculum 
the 
to 
University 
develop,  to  complement  the 
Bachelor’s 
existing 
programme 
Pasture 
Management developed with 
the  support  of  IFAD’s  LPDP. 
The  project  will  provide 
technical  expertise  for  the 
development  of  the  masters 
curriculum, but also financial 
support  to  cover  the  costs 
related  to  the  international 
the 
accreditation 
curriculum.  The  project  will 
also partner with TAU as well 
as SEABAI to provide training 
for  50  young  technicians  on 
AI. 
of 
Tajik Academy of Agricultural 
Science (TAAS) 
Component 1 
CASP+ will provide technical 
to 
to 
assistance 
TAAS 
education 
new 
develop 
curricula 
training  of 
for 
climate  change  specialists, 
and for the review of existing 
post  graduate  curricula  for 
foresters, 
agronomists, 
38 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Forest Research Institute 
Component 1 
State Enterprise for Capacity 
Development 
Component 1, 3 
zootechnicians 
and 
veterinarians,  to  streamline 
ecosystem management and 
climate change aspects in the 
tuition programs. 
(i) 
Alongside TAU and TAAS, the 
Forest Research Institute will 
receive  financial  support  to 
climate 
to 
develop 
technical 
sensitive 
that  will  be 
innovations 
disseminated  at  community 
scope  of 
level 
the 
in 
extension 
activities 
(demonstration  plots  and 
FFS),  and  to  (ii)  generate 
evidence  and  lessons  learnt 
on  climate  smart  practices 
for feeding in policy dialogue. 
CASP+  will  launch  bi-yearly 
calls 
for  proposals  and 
research projects that are in 
line with the project strategy. 
by 
adapted 
CASP+  will  build  on  climate 
resilient 
technologies  and 
innovations  that  have  been 
and 
tested, 
research 
validated 
institutions 
under 
Component  1  through  field 
demonstrations  established 
in partnership with the State 
Enterprise 
Capacity 
for 
Development  who  already 
some  demonstration 
has 
sites  in  the  field.In  order  to 
allow farmers to access these 
demonstrations,  field  days 
and 
be 
will 
the  State 
facilitated  by 
Enterprise 
Capacity 
for 
Development. An MoU will be 
signed for this purpose. 
organized 
National Veterinary Authority  Component 1 
assist 
CASP+  will 
the 
National Veterinary Authority 
in providing veterinary public 
health  services  such  as 
surveillance  and 
disease 
39 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
against 
vaccination 
Transboundary 
Animal 
Diseases  Zoonoses  through 
an annual contribution to the 
purchase  of  vaccines  and 
provision 
technical 
of 
assistance and equipment for 
the surveillance system.   
Tajik  Veterinary  Association 
(TVA) 
Component 3 
State  Enterprise  for  Animal 
Artificial 
and 
Breeding 
Insemination (SEABAI) 
Component 1, 3 
service. 
programmes 
CASP+  will  support  TVA  to 
help  establish  a  private 
veterinary 
The 
project will sign an MoU with 
TVA. TVA’s responsibility will 
include  the  replication  of 
training 
to 
other  regions  of  Tajikistan, 
the  development  of  district 
veterinary  associations,  and 
the  preparation  of 
the 
conditions  for  establishing  a 
Veterinary Statutory Body in 
the  country  in  accordance 
OIE’s 
the 
with 
recommendations.  TVA  will 
also  be  responsible  for  the 
development  of  a  system  of 
veterinary 
continuing 
education, 
the 
project will provide payment 
for 1 staff unit of a specialist 
on  veterinary  education. 
Furthermore,  the  TVA  will 
actively  participate  in  the 
selection of veterinarians for 
their  participation  in  project 
activities in the field. 
for  which 
improve 
the 
CASP+  will 
breeding 
of 
outreach 
services  provided  by  SEABI 
to  areas  and  communities 
targeted  by 
the  project 
the  provision  of 
through 
additional  equipment.  The 
project will also partner with 
SEABI  and  TAU  to  provide 
young 
training 
technicians on AI. 
for 
50 
40 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
for 
Agency 
Land 
Management,  Geodesy  and 
Cartography 
Component 1 
National Platform for Climate 
Change Adaptation 
Component 1 
Donor  Coordination  Council 
development 
(including 
partners) 
Component 1, 2, 3 
for 
Ministry 
Development 
(MEDT) 
Economic 
Trade 
and 
Component 1 
strong 
remote  and 
As  part  of 
participatory 
natural 
resources  monitoring  and 
management, the project will 
build 
linkages 
between the Agency for Land 
Management,  Geodesy  and 
Cartography  of  the  Republic 
of Tajikistan and CEP who are 
responsible 
for  preventing 
further  land  degradation  to 
flow  of 
ensure 
information. 
smooth 
through 
this 
CASP+  will  support 
policy 
platform 
briefs and workshops for the 
integration  of  policy 
in 
climate policy processes such 
as  the  NDC  enhancement 
process,  the  GCF  Readiness 
projects and the NAP process 
ongoing 
CASP+  will  support 
the 
Donor  Coordination  Council 
through  policy  briefs  and 
knowledge  management  as 
well  as  coordination  with 
projects 
other 
seeking  synergies  during 
implementation.  CASP+  will 
cooperate  with  other  donors 
as well as other development 
partners 
that 
CASP+ 
complement 
ongoing efforts. 
to  ensure 
can 
carry 
In  collaboration  with  MEDT, 
CASP+  will 
out 
analyses  of  agro-industry 
from  a  Green 
activities 
Economy  perspective  and 
hold  a  validation  workshop 
with  all  stakeholders.  MEDT 
will  also  receive  capacity 
Green 
development 
Economy 
by 
CASP+. 
on 
concepts 
Productive Alliances 
Component 3 
CASP+  will 
17 
create 
identify  and 
Productive 
41 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
in 
Alliances  between  groups  of 
smallholder  farmers  on  the 
one hand, and private sector 
particular 
actors, 
aggregators  and  processors 
on the other hand, to enable 
mutually  beneficial  business 
selected 
partnerships  on 
livestock value chains (dairy, 
poultry  and  beef).  The 
project  will  also  strengthen 
the  technical  and  business 
capacities of producers in the 
Productive Alliances. 
42 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Appendix 3. Guiding questions for environment, social and climate risk screening 
IFAD classifies all programmes into one of three environmental and social categories (A, B or C) and 
one of three climate risk classifications (high, moderate and low). Where IFAD is jointly financing a 
programme with other agencies, IFAD will cooperate with the partner agency and agree on a common 
approach for the assessment and the categorization of the programme. 
Determination of the category and classification will also depend on the national requirements and 
the  existing  national  capacity  to  promote  and  implement  environmental  and  social  mitigation 
measures.  The  determination  is  informed  by  existing  assessments  of  national  frameworks  and 
capacities. 
A  positive  response  to  any  question  between  1  and  22  (see  questions  below)  will  categorize  the 
programme as A. Similarly, a positive response to question 23 to 38 will categorize the programme 
as B. In case all answers are negative, the programme will be categorized as C. 
This list of questions can be used at different stages of the programme design and should be used in 
conjunction with the respective guidance statements. 
The checklists for environmental and social and climate risks will: 
initially be filled in during concept development to help guide in the identification of opportunities 
and possible risks and activities that will need to be considered in the programme design; 
1. 
2.  be attached to the Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) review note; 
and 
3.  be reviewed during programme design phases and updated as required. 
Programme title: 
Community-based 
Programme – Phase II (CASP+) 
Agriculture 
Support 
IFAD project no.: 
Country: 
Checklist  prepared  by 
(name, 
and 
institution) 
title 
Tajikistan 
Version 
checklist:  
of 
Date  of  this 
version: 
2 
08/06/2021 
Renaud  Colmant,  Environment  and  Climate  Programme 
Officer, NEN/ECG, IFAD 
In  completing  the  checklist,  both  short-  and  long-term  impacts  should  be  considered.  This  list  of 
questions can be used at different stages of the programme cycle and should be used in conjunction 
with the respective guidance statements. Capitalize on information based on reports and field visits 
during design. The details of the elaboration on issues that arise as a result of screening should be 
clearly articulated in the SECAP review note. 
Guiding  questions 
social screening 
for  environment  and 
Yes/no 
Comments/explanation 
Category A – the following may have significant and often irreversible or not readily 
remedied adverse environmental and/or social implications. 
Project location 
1.  Would  the  project  develop  any  wetlands? 
(Guidance statement 1) 
2.  Would  the  project  cause  significant  adverse 
impacts  to  habitats  and/or  ecosystems  and 
their  services  (e.g.  conversion  of  more  than 
No 
No 
43 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
50 hectares  of  natural  forest,  loss  of  habitat, 
erosion/other 
land  degradation, 
fragmentation  and  hydrological  changes)? 
(Guidance statements 1, 2 and 5) 
form  of 
3.  Does the proposed project target area include 
ecologically  sensitive  areas,134  areas  of 
global/national  significance  for  biodiversity 
conservation,  and/or  biodiversity-rich  areas 
and  habitats  depended  on  by  endangered 
species? (Guidance statement 1) 
4.  Is  the  project  location  subjected  to  major 
destruction as a result of geophysical hazards 
(tsunamis,  landslides,  earthquakes,  volcanic 
eruptions)? 
Natural resources 
5.  Would  the  project  lead  to  unsustainable 
resource  management  practices 
natural 
(fisheries, forestry, livestock) and/or result in 
exceeding  carrying  capacity.  For  example,  is 
the  development  happening  in  areas  where 
little  up-to-date 
information  exists  on 
sustainable yield/carrying capacity? (Guidance 
statements 4, 5 and 6) 
development 
6.  Would  the  project  develop 
large-scale135 
aquaculture or mariculture projects, or where 
significant 
their 
alteration of ecologically sensitive areas? 
7.  Would  the  project  result  in  significant  use  of 
lead 
to 
which  may 
agrochemicals 
long-term 
and 
illness 
life-threatening 
public health  and  safety  concerns?  (Guidance 
statement 14) 
involves 
8.  Does 
and/or 
surface 
the  project 
rely  on  water-based 
(groundwater 
water) 
development where there is reason to believe 
that significant depletion and/or reduced flow 
has  occurred  from  the  effects  of  climate 
change  or  from  overutilization?  (Guidance 
statement 7) 
9.  Does  the  project  pose  a  risk  of  introducing 
potentially  invasive  species  or  genetically 
modified organisms which might alter genetic 
traits of indigenous species or have an adverse 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
in 
The programme aim to 
reduce  the  number  of 
cattle 
improving 
their  productivity  and 
health. 
Sustainable 
NRM is the backbone of 
with, 
project 
the 
the 
among  others, 
of 
management 
pastures.  Thus, 
the 
project  should  have  a 
on 
positive 
pasture and erosion. 
impact 
project 
will 
The 
promote 
water 
harvesting  techniques 
and efficient water use 
technologies  using  a 
river basin approach, 
The 
will 
project 
promote the plantation 
of 
local  plants  and 
trees and try to reduce 
134 “Sensitive areas” include: protected areas (national parks, wildlife/nature reserves, biosphere reserves) and their buffer zones; 
areas of global significance for biodiversity conservation; habitats depended on by endangered species; natural forests; wetlands; 
coastal ecosystems, including coral reefs and mangrove swamps; small island ecosystems; areas most vulnerable to climate change 
and variability; lands highly susceptible to landslides, erosion and other forms of land degradation, areas that include physical 
cultural resources (of historical, religious, archaeological or other cultural significance), and areas with high social vulnerability. 
135 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary based on the country context and 
fragility of specific locations. Some countries have regulations on minimum size (usually ranging from a unit area of 10 to 50 
hectares) and these will be adopted where they exist. However, where there are no standards, it is proposed to use 25 hectares as 
an aquaculture unit size to trigger an ESIA. 
44 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
effect  on 
statement 1) 
local  biodiversity? 
(Guidance 
10.  Does the project make use of wastewater (e.g. 
effluent)? 
sewage 
industrial,  mining, 
(Guidance statement 7) 
Infrastructure development 
11.  Does  the  project  include  the  construction/ 
rehabilitation/upgrade  of  dam(s)  and/or 
reservoir(s)  meeting  at  least  one  of  the 
following criteria?  
-  more than 15 metre high wall;  
-  more than 500 metre long crest;  
-  more than 3 million m3 reservoir capacity; or  
-  incoming flood of more than 2,000 m3/s  
(Guidance statement 8) 
12.  Does the project involve large-scale irrigation 
schemes  rehabilitation  and/or  development 
than  100 hectares  per scheme)?136  
(more 
(Guidance statement 7) 
13.  Does 
include 
the  project 
construction/ 
rehabilitation/upgrade  of  roads  that  entail  a 
total area being cleared above 10 km long, or 
any farmer with more than 10 per cent of his 
(Guidance 
land 
or  her  private 
statement 10). Will the works entail temporary 
and/or permanent resident workers?  
taken? 
14.  Does the project include drainage or correction 
waterbodies  
of 
(e.g. river training)? (Guidance statement 7) 
natural 
will 
present 
the  impact  of  invasive 
species 
in 
pasture  areas.  The 
project 
also 
support  the  use  and 
protection of neglected 
underutilized 
and 
species 
(e.g. 
(NUS) 
forest 
non-timber 
products)  and  work 
with 
experienced 
partner  on  the  field 
(e.g. 
Food, 
Slow 
already present in DRS 
and GBAO). 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
The  rehabilitation  of 
roads does not involve 
area being cleared, the 
road  already  exist  but 
are in poor condition. 
136 The size threshold to trigger an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) may vary based on the country context and 
fragility of specific locations. Some countries have regulations determining size of irrigation development requiring a full ESIA and 
these will be adopted where they exist. However, where there are no standards, it is proposed to use 100 hectares as an irrigation 
development unit size to trigger an ESIA. 
45 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
15.  Does 
the 
project 
involve 
significant 
extraction/diversion/containment  of  surface 
water, leaving the river flow below 20 per cent 
environmental  flow  plus  downstream  user 
requirements?  
(Guidance statement 7) 
Social 
16.  Would 
result 
the  project 
in  economic 
displacement137  or  physical  resettlement  of 
more than 20 people, or impacting more than 
10  per  cent  of  an  individual  household’s 
assets?  
(Guidance statement 13) 
17.  Would the project result in conversion and/or 
loss of physical cultural resources? (Guidance 
statement 9) 
18. Would  the  project  generate  significant  social 
adverse  risk/impacts  to  local  communities 
(including  disadvantaged  and  vulnerable 
groups,indigenous people, persons vulnerable 
to GBV and sexual exploitation and abuse and 
people  with  disabilities)  or  other  project-
affected 
(Guidance statement 13) 
Other 
parties?  
19. Does the project include the manufacture and 
toxic 
transportation  of  hazardous  and 
materials  which  may  affect  the  environment? 
(Guidance statement 2) 
20. Does the project include the construction of a 
large or medium-scale industrial plant? 
21. 
 Does the project include the development 
forestry?  
production 
of 
large-scale 
(Guidance statement 5) 
Rural finance 
22. Does  the  project  support  any  of  the  above 
(Question  1 to  Question  21)  through  the 
provision of a line of credit to financial service 
providers? (Guidance statement 12) 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Category  B  –  the  following  may  have  some  adverse  environmental  and/or  social 
implications which can be readily remedied. 
Location 
23.  Does 
the 
project 
involve 
agricultural 
intensification  and/or  expansion  of  cropping 
area  in  non-sensitive  areas  that  may  have 
adverse  impacts  on  habitats,  ecosystems 
livelihoods?  
and/or 
(Guidance statements 1, 2 and 12) 
Natural resource management 
No 
137 Economic displacement implies the loss of land, assets, access to assets, income sources, or means of livelihoods (guidance 
statement 13). 
46 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
24.  Do the project activities include rangeland and 
development?  
livestock 
(Guidance statement 6) 
zones 
25.  Does the project involve fisheries where there 
is  information  on  stocks,  fishing  effort  and 
sustainable  yield?  Is  there  any  risk  of 
overfishing, habitat damage and knowledge of 
fishing 
seasons?  
(Guidance statement 4) 
project 
the 
26.  Would 
activities 
include 
aquaculture  and/or  agriculture 
in  newly 
introduced  or  intensively  practiced  areas?  Do 
project  activities 
include  conversion  of 
wetlands  and  clearing  of  coastal  vegetation, 
change  in  hydrology  or  introduction  of  exotic 
species? (Guidance statement 4) 
and 
27.  Do  the  project  activities 
include  natural 
resource-based  value  chain  development? 
(Guidance statements 1, 6 and 12) 
28.  Do  the  project  activities  include  watershed 
management or rehabilitation? 
29.  Does  the  project  include  large-scale  soil  and 
water  conservation  measures?  (Guidance 
statements 1 and 5)  
Infrastructure 
30.  Does the project include small-scale irrigation 
and  drainage,  and  small  and  medium  dam 
subprojects  (capacity  <  3  million  m3)? 
(Guidance statements 7 and 8) 
include 
the  project 
small  and 
microenterprise  development  subprojects? 
(Guidance statements 12 and 13) 
31.  Does 
32.  Does  the  project  include  the  development  of 
facilities?  
agroprocessing 
(Guidance statements 2, 6 and 12) 
33.  Would  the  construction  or  operation  of  the 
project  cause  an  increase  in  traffic  on  rural 
roads? (Guidance statement 10) 
Social 
34.  Would any of the project activities have minor 
cultural 
adverse 
physical 
resources? (Guidance statement 9) 
impacts 
on 
35.  Would 
result 
the  project 
in  physical 
resettlement of 20 people or less, or impacting 
less  than  10  per  cent  of  an  individual 
household’s 
assets  
(Guidance statement 13)? 
36.  Would 
the  project  result 
and 
public health 
(Guidance statement 14) 
safety 
in  short-term 
concerns?  
Yes 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
It is a possibility due to 
Milk  Collection  Center 
and processing units in 
villages. 
During 
infrastructure 
construction, 
safeguards  should 
be  established  for 
47 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
worker  safety  and 
local communities 
37.  Would the project require a migrant workforce 
or seasonal workers (for construction, planting 
and/or harvesting)? (Guidance statement 13) 
Rural finance 
38.  Does  the  project  support  any  of  the  above 
(Question  23  to  Question  37)  through  the 
provision of a line of credit to financial service 
providers? (Guidance statement 12) 
No 
No 
Guidance for categorization 
“Yes”  response  to 
questions 
any 
between 1 and 22 
Environmental 
and 
category is A 
social 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment or 
an  Environmental  and  Social  Management 
Framework 
required 
(full  or  specific) 
depending on availability of information. 
is 
Also, some specific questions would require the 
below specific actions: 
Yes to question 16 – A Resettlement Action Plan 
is 
required  depending  on  availability  of 
information. 
Yes  to  question  17  –  A  Physical  Cultural 
Resources  Management  Plan  is  required  that 
includes provisions for managing chance finds at 
implementation. 
Yes  to  question  18  –  Free,  prior  and  informed 
consent  should  be  obtained/Free,  Prior  and 
Informed  Consent 
is 
required  depending  on  whether  the  affected 
communities are identifiable. In instances where 
indigenous  peoples  are  affected  an  Indigenous 
Peoples  Plan  is  required.  A  Social  Impact 
Assessment is required. 
Yes to question 8 and/or question 15 – A water 
resources  management  plan  for  the  project  is 
required. 
Yes to question 7, question 9 and/or question 19 
– A pest management plan is required. 
Implementation  Plan 
 
 
 
 
 
Environmental 
and 
category is B 
social 
An environmental and social analysis to develop 
an  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plan 
(ESMP) is required. 
“No”  response  to 
questions 
all 
between  1 and  22 
and 
“Yes” 
response 
to  any 
questions  between 
23 and 38 
“No”  response  to 
all 
questions 
between 1 and 38 
Environmental 
and 
category is C 
social 
No further analysis is required. 
48 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
In case projects fall under both category A and B, the highest category will be taken as reference. 
The determination of the project category and classification will depend on the magnitude of impacts 
and would depend on the scale of such activities; a cautious approach to the concern of cumulative 
impacts is considered essential. In such cases, the necessary environmental and social analysis and 
associated budget should be incorporated into project design. Such projects may be considered for 
category B. 
Determining  the  environmental  and  social  category  A,  including  the  extent  of  assessments  and 
studies  to  be  conducted,  will  also  take  into  account  available  information,  i.e.  recent  studies  and 
assessments,  including  other  initiatives  in  the  country,  to  the  extent  these  are  relevant  to  the 
proposed project. 
Declassification (from A to B or from B to C) may also be possible in case negative externalities are 
being addressed by other projects or activities implemented by third parties. 
Guiding questions for climate risk screening 
Yes 
No 
Additional 
explanation 
“yes” response* 
of 
1.  Is the project area subject to extreme climatic events, 
such  as  flooding,  drought,  tropical  storms  or  heat 
waves? 
2.  Do  climate  scenarios  for  the  project  area  foresee 
changes  in  temperature,  rainfall  or  extreme  weather 
that  will  adversely  affect 
impact, 
sustainability or cost over its lifetime? 
the  project 
3.  Would  the  project  make  investments  in  low-lying 
coastal areas/zones exposed to tropical storms? 
4.  Would  the  project  make  investments  in  glacial  areas 
and mountains zones? 
5.  Would  the  project  promote  agricultural  activity  in 
marginal  and/or  highly  degraded  areas  that  have 
increased  sensitivity  to  climatic  events  (such  as  on 
hillsides, deforested slopes or floodplains)? 
x 
x 
x 
6.  Is 
the  project 
rural 
development  projects  have  experienced  significant 
weather-related losses and damages in the past? 
in  areas  where 
located 
x 
x 
x 
The 
programme 
are 
activities 
mainly  adaptive  to 
climate change. 
The  programme  is 
on 
working 
reducing 
water 
runoff  and  erosion 
by 
improving 
pasture 
management. 
programme 
at 
The 
aim 
rehabilitating 
degraded 
forests 
and  pastures  and 
at 
reducing 
number  of  cattle 
per  hectare  with 
pasture 
management  plan 
and AI. 
49 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
x 
The 
significant 
negative  trend  of 
rainfall  in  pasture 
in 
programme 
areas  could  affect 
yield and quality of 
the pasture. 
7.  Would  the  project  develop/install  infrastructure  in 
areas with a track record of extreme weather events? 
8.  Is  the  project  target  group  entirely  dependent  on 
natural  resources  (such  as  seasonal  crops,  rainfed 
agricultural  plots,  migratory  fish  stocks)  that  have 
been affected by in the last decade by climate trends 
or specific climatic events? 
9.  Would  climate  variability  likely  affect  agricultural 
to 
productivity  (crops/livestock/fisheries),  access 
markets and/or the associated incidence of pests and 
diseases for the project target groups? 
10. Would weather-related risks or climatic extremes likely 
adversely impact upon key stages of identified value 
chains in the project (from production to markets)? 
11. Is the project investing in climate-sensitive livelihoods 
that are diversified? 
x 
x 
x 
x 
12. Is  the  project  investing  in  infrastructure  that  is 
x 
exposed to infrequent extreme weather events? 
13. Is  the  project  investing  in  institutional  development 
and  capacity-building  for  rural  institutions  (such  as 
farmer 
climatically 
cooperatives) 
heterogeneous areas? 
groups, 
in 
14. Does the project have the potential  to become  more 
resilient through the adoption of green technologies at 
a reasonable cost? 
15. Does  the  project  intervention  have  opportunities 
to strengthen  indigenous  climate  risk  management 
capabilities? 
16. Does  the  project  have  opportunities  to  integrate 
climate  resilience  aspects  through  policy  dialogue  to 
improve agricultural sector strategies and policies? 
17. Does  the  project  have  potential  to  integrate  climate 
resilience measures without extensive additional costs 
(e.g.  improved  building  codes,  capacity-building,  or 
including climate risk issues in policy processes)? 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
18. Based on the information available would the project 
benefit  from  a  more  thorough  accounting  of  GHG  
emission ? 
x 
*The  additional  explanation,  where  possible,  will  provide  the  justification  for  classification. 
Consideration should be given particularly to provide additional explanations for questions 13 to 17. 
50 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Guidance for classification  
“Yes”  response  to  any of 
the questions 1 to 7 
The 
classification is high 
climate 
risk 
detailed 
A 
required 
analysis 
is 
“Yes”  response  to  any of 
the questions 8 to 17 
The 
classification is moderate 
climate 
risk 
A basic analysis is required 
“Yes” 
question 18 
response 
to 
GHG assessment  
For example, EX-ACT tool 
“No”  response  to  almost 
all questions 
The 
classification is low 
climate 
risk 
further 
No 
required, 
measures 
incorporated 
but 
analysis 
is 
voluntary 
be 
can 
51 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Appendix 4. Grievance Redress Mechanism 
IFAD-supported  projects  and  programmes  are  designed  in  a  participatory  process 
thus taking into account the concerns of all stakeholders. IFAD works to ensure that 
all  IFAD  investments  are  implemented  in  accordance  with  the  Fund’s  policies, 
standards and safeguards. IFAD considers it equally important that parties adversely 
or potentially adversely affected by IFAD-supported projects and programmes should 
be able to bring issues to the Fund’s attention.            
IFAD’s  Grievance  Redress  Mechanism  (GRM)  can  be  accessed  when  necessary  to 
manage project-related grievances that cannot be resolved by the project’s Executing 
Entity. The purpose of the GRM is to provide a complaints procedure for alleged non-
compliance with GCF’s social and environmental policies and mandatory aspects of 
IFAD’s  Social,  Environmental  and  Climate  Assessment  Procedures  (SECAP).  IFAD’s 
Complaints  Procedure  aims  to  serve  as  an  accountability  mechanism  with  a  clear 
entry  point  and  transparent  process  for  people  and  communities  to  raise  concerns 
with  IFAD-supported  projects  and  to  provide  effective  sustainable  solutions.  Its 
mandate  is  to:  i)  facilitate  the  resolution  of  complaints  from  people  who  may  be 
affected  by  projects  or  subprojects  in  a  manner  that  is  fair,  objective  and 
constructive; ii) enhance the environmental and social outcomes of projects; and iii) 
foster  public  accountability  and  learning  to  enhance  the  environmental  and  social 
performance  of  IFAD  and  reduce  the  risk  of  harm  to  people  and  the  environment.  
The Procedure is organized in two complementary functions: 
●  Problem  solving 
function:  to  help  resolve 
issues  raised  about  the 
environmental  and/or  social 
impacts  of  project  through  a  neutral, 
collaborative, problem-solving approach and contribute to improved social and 
environmental outcomes of the project.  
●  Impartial review function: to carry out reviews of IFAD’s compliance with its 
SECAP and other related policies, assess harm done, and recommend remedial 
actions where appropriate.  
Project-level GRM 
The  project  team  will  establish  communication  channels  at  field  level  to  file 
complaints  within  6  months  after  Start-up.  Contact  information  (including  contact 
postal  code,  phone  number  and/or  email)  and  information  on  the  process  to  file  a 
complaint  will  be  disclosed  in  all  meetings,  workshops  and  other  related  events 
throughout  the  life  of  the  project.  The  project  will  include  in  the  capacity  building 
program  information  on  the  GRM  and  will  organize  consultations  to  determine  the 
most suitable way for beneficiaries and stakeholders to communicate their concerns 
52 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
and ideas (i.e. assess existing national/local formal and informal grievance redress 
processes). 
The project-level GRM and guidelines will be developed for CASP+ taking into account 
IFAD’s corporate Complaints Procedure to receive and facilitate resolution of concerns 
and  complaints  with  respect  to  alleged  non-compliance  of  its  environmental  and 
social  policies  and  the  mandatory  aspects  of  its  SECAP.  The  project  will  also  be 
responsible for documenting and reporting to IFAD and GCF as part of the safeguards 
performance monitoring on any grievances received and how they were addressed. 
Complaints  can  be  raised  directly  to  the  SEPMU/CEP  representative  at  the  district 
level at the concerned project area and the field team should help the complainant 
fill the complaint ensure the following information is included: 
●  Name  and  contact  details  of  the  person(s)  (and/or  their  representative)  or 
community affected by CASP+; 
●  Clear statement of CASP+ adverse impact(s). This includes direct and material 
harm which can be actual present harm, or harm that is expected in the future;  
●  Whether the complainants wish to keep their identity confidential. 
The full complaint procedure at IFAD is stipulated in the sections below. 
Compliance with IFAD's social and environmental policies 
IFAD  Complaints  Procedure  for  alleged  non-compliance  with  its  social  and 
environmental  policies  and  mandatory  aspects  of  its  Social,  Environmental  and 
Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) 
IFAD-funded  projects  and  programmes  are  designed  in  a  participatory  manner, 
taking into account the concerns of all stakeholders. IFAD requires that projects are 
carried  out  in  compliance  with  its  policies,  standards  and  safeguards.  Moreover, 
IFAD's Strategic Framework calls for ensuring that projects and programmes promote 
the sustainable use of natural resources, build resilience to climate change and are 
based  upon  ownership  by  rural  women  and  men  themselves  in  order  to  achieve 
sustainability. 
The  objective  of  the  IFAD  Complaints  Procedure  is  to  ensure  that  appropriate 
mechanisms are in place to allow individuals and communities to contact IFAD directly 
and  file  a  complaint  if  they  believe  they  are  or  might  be  adversely  affected  by  an 
IFAD-funded project/programme not complying with IFAD's Social and Environmental 
Policies and mandatory aspects of SECAP. 
53 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
Complaints must concern environmental, social and climate issues only and should 
not  be  accusations  of  fraudulent  or  corrupt  activities  in  relation  to  project 
implementation – these are dealt with by IFAD's Office of Audit and Oversight. 
Eligibility criteria  
To file a complaint for alleged non-compliance with IFAD's social and environmental 
policies  and  mandatory  aspects  of  its  SECAP,  IFAD  will  consider  only  complaints 
meeting the following criteria: 
The  complainants  claim  that  IFAD  has  failed  to  apply  its  social  and  environmental 
policies and/or the mandatory provisions set out in SECAP. 
The complainants claim that they have been or will be adversely affected by IFAD's 
failure to apply these policies. 
Complaints must be put forward by at least two people who are both nationals of the 
country concerned and/or living in the project area. Complaints from foreign locations 
or anonymous complaints will not be taken into account. 
Complaints  must  concern  projects/programmes  currently  under  design  or 
implementation. Complaints concerning closed projects, or those that are more than 
95 per cent disbursed, will not be considered. 
The process 
The complainants should first bring the matter to the attention of the government or 
non-governmental organisation responsible for planning or executing the project or 
programme (the Lead Agency), or to any governmental body with the responsibility 
for overseeing the Lead Agency. If the Lead Agency does not adequately respond, 
then the matter may be brought to the attention of IFAD. The issue may be brought 
straight to IFAD if the complainants feel they might be subject to retaliation if they 
went to the Lead Agency directly. 
The Regional Division will examine the complaint and, if necessary, will contact the 
Lead  Agency,  or  the  governmental  body  with  the  responsibility  for  overseeing  the 
Lead Agency, to decide if the complaints  are justified. If the complainants request 
that their identities be protected, IFAD will not disclose this information to the Lead 
Agency or anyone else in government. 
If the complaint is not justified, the Regional Division will inform the complainants in 
writing. 
54 
CASP+ SECAP: Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
October 2021 
If the Regional Division finds the complaint is justified and there is proof of actual or 
likely harm through IFAD's failure to follow its policies and procedures, IFAD will take 
action. This may consist of making changes to the project/programme, or requiring 
that the government observes its obligations under the Financing Agreement. IFAD's 
response will focus bringing the project/programme into compliance and no monetary 
damages will be available or paid in response to such complaints. The complainants 
will be informed of the outcome of the issue by the Regional Division.  
In all cases, if the complainants disagree with IFAD's response, they may submit a 
request to SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org and request that an impartial review be carried 
out by the Office of the Vice-President. 
The Office of the Vice-President will decide on the steps to be taken to examine such 
complaints, including, if necessary, contracting external experts to review the matter. 
The complainants will be informed of the results of the review. 
IFAD will include in its Annual Report a list of received complaints and a summary of 
actions taken to address them. 
How to submit a complaint 
A complaint relating to  non-compliance with IFAD’s Social and Environmental Policies 
and mandatory aspects of its SECAP can be submitted in any of the following ways: 
Download the complaints form (Word) 
Send an email to SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org 
If you email or mail your complaint, please include the following information: 
  Name, address, telephone number and other contact information 
  Whether the complainants wish to keep their identity confidential, and if so, 
why 
  Name, location, and nature of the IFAD project/programme (if known) 
  How the Complainants believe they have been, or are likely to be, adversely 
affected by the IFAD-supported project or programme 
Complaints sent by mail should be addressed to: 
IFAD 
SECAP Complaints (PMD) 
Via Paolo di Dono 44 
00142 Rome, Italy 
55 
SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL AND CLIMATE ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES 
Figure 2 CASP+ GRM
56 
SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL AND CLIMATE ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES 
Appendix 5. Proposed Social Inclusion and Environment and Climate Related 
Indicators 
Social Inclusion Related Indicators 
Gender Indicators 
Outreach  disaggregated  by  gender,  including  women  head  of  Households  Proposed 
Indicators shall consider:  
Output:  
2.1.2 Percentage of women in leadership position (board of committees) 
2.1.3 Number and percentage CsCAPs designed in consultation with women.  
2.2.2.Number of women accessing improved pasture land under PM plans. 
2.2.3 Number of women being selected for JFM Contracts  
3.3.1 Number of women receiving trainings on Climate smart resilient technologies  
3.3.2 Number of approved individual grants for women  
3.3.2 Number of approved group grants from women-led groups 
Outcome:  
2.1.2    (Number)  Percentage  of  women  reporting  increased  participation  in  decision 
making   
2.1.3    (Number)  Percentage  of    women    reporting  increased  and  more  equitable 
participation in community planning process  (CsCAPs) 
2.2.2 (Number) Percentage of  women  reporting increased access to pasture and better 
management practices 
2.2.3  (Number) Percentage of women reporting  increased access to forest resurces 
and management  
3.3.1    (Number)  Percentage  of  women  reporting  adoption  of  environmentally 
sustainable and climate-resilient technologies and practices 
3.3.2 (Number) Percentage of women reporting improved production and income as a 
result of accessing grants   
Youth Indicators 
Outreach disaggregated by age. Proposed indicators shall consider: (i)Youth members 
of  FFS  and  (ii)  number  of  youth  accessing  grants  and  (iii)  Youth  accessing  job  and 
entrepreneurial opportunities along the Value Chains.   
Environment and Climate Related Indicators 
Outputs 
1.1.4 Number of persons trained in production practices and/or technologies 
3.1.1  Number  of  groups  supported  to  sustainably  manage  natural  resources  and 
climate-related risks 
3.1.3  Number  of  persons  accessing  technologies  that  sequester  carbon  or  reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions 
3.1.4 Number of hectares of land brought under climate-resilient management  
Outcomes 
57 
SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL AND CLIMATE ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES 
1.2.2 (Number) Percentage of persons/ households reporting adoption of new/improved 
inputs, technologies or practices 
1.2.3  (Number)  Percentage  of  persons/households  reporting  reduced  water  shortage 
vis-a-vis production needs 
3.2.1 Number of tons of greenhouse gas emissions (CO2e) avoided and/or sequestered 
3.2.2 
reporting  adoption  of 
environmentally sustainable and climate-resilient technologies and practices 
(Number)  Percentage  of  persons/households 
An  indicator  on  natural  resources  monitoring  (complementary  approach  of  remote 
sensing  and  bee  monitoring)  will  be  introduced  during  the  start  up  of  CASP+  when 
validating with the PMU.  
58 
SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL AND CLIMATE ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES 
Appendix 6: Integrating Agro-Ecological principles in CASP+ 
Component 
Outcome 
Output 
Sub-
output 
Activities 
Compliance 
with AE 
principles - 
high 
(compliant)
, medium 
(require 
tweaking), 
low 
(require 
substantial 
changes) 
Additional comments 
Component 1. 
Strengthening 
enabling 
conditions for 
transformativ
e climate 
adaptive 
natural 
resources 
management 
Strengthene
d 
institutional 
and 
regulatory 
systems for 
climate-
responsive 
planning and 
development 
Output 1.a: 
Capacities of 
relevant entities 
for evidence-
based joint 
climate-adaptive 
natural 
resources 
planning, 
management 
and monitoring 
are 
strengthened.  
Activity 1.1.1: 
Capacity 
development 
of a range of 
national and 
local 
institutions on 
ecosystem 
management, 
integrated 
NRM, climate 
change, 
environmental 
safeguards, 
etc. 
High 
Provide capacity building on community NRM, promote better 
coordination and policy coherence between different 
governmental organisations, particularly the environment and 
agriculture entities, as well as among scientific institutes and 
local and national government agencies. Promote policy support 
in the form of incentives and subsidies to small-scale farmers 
implementing agroecological (AE) practices (in particular the 
integration of trees and shrubs into agriculture and rangelands) 
conserving local cultivars and breeds, as well as their wild crop 
relatives, and conserving other ecosystems services for 
increased climate resilience. Support to extension services and 
training on agroecological production and processes, particularly 
agroforestry and silvopastoralism for climate adaptation and 
ecosystem restoration. Promote the recognition of farmers as 
custodians of local varieties through registeries of local varieties 
and traditional knowledge and ensure fair access and benefit 
sharing in the case they are selected by the State Variety Testing 
Commissions for release and patenting. Ensure access to water 
and land tenure security of small-scale producers, both of which 
are fundamental for long-term investments in agroforestry for 
climate resilience. Ensure representation of small-scale 
producers in water use associations and decentralisation of water 
infrastructure (check whether this is necessary in project area as 
in mountaineous region where conflict for water with large-scale 
farmers downstream may not be an issue).  
59 
SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL AND CLIMATE ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES 
Activity 1.1.2: 
Support 
research and 
academia 
(curricula, 
enrollment, 
studies) on 
climate 
resilient NRM 
and climate 
resilient 
animal health 
Activity 1.1.3: 
Strengthen 
animal health 
institutions 
and their 
private 
organizations' 
representative
s and 
members to 
ensure 
efficient 
provision of 
animal health 
services 
Activity 1.1.4:  
Remote 
sensing for 
NRM 
monitoring 
(pasture, 
forest, land, 
river basins, 
etc.) 
Actiivity 1.2.1: 
- Review 
relevant policy 
and regulatory 
frameworks 
and suggest 
modifications 
High 
Promote participatory action research (PAR) methods that 
actively involve small-scale producers in the development of 
innovations by sharing knowledge and practically testing 
together with support of research and extension services.  
Medium 
Provision of animal health services based on AE such as: 
improved nutrition by supporting a diversity of resilient and 
nutritious grass, as well as other fodder plants and scrub species 
(including medicinal plants for self-medication by livestock) and 
when feasible integrating of fodder trees balancing the need for 
high nutrition value for livestock and of other tree species for soil 
erosion control; improvement of grazing and stocking practices 
to avoid overgrazing and degradation; reserve areas for use as a 
fodder buffer only in case of a particular difficult year with low 
fodder availability; increase water availability for livestock in the 
rangeland; improve animal housing and sheds for animal welfare 
and health; support for local programmes for exchange and 
improvement of the diversity of animal breeds adequate for 
agroecology systems and resilient to climate shocks and 
stresses. 
High 
Ensure public availability of this information and include 
community mapping in the process (creation and validation). 
High 
Service providers and project staff to involve a wide array of 
stakeholders including small-scale producers in the development 
of suggested modifications (Regulatory Impact Assessment for 
policy review). Adopt an integrated approach to policy reform, 
considering climate resilience, food and nutrition security, One 
Health, etc. Promotion of institutionalisation of carbon accounting 
linked to good management of pastures and contribution to NDC 
goals. 
60 
Output 1.b: 
Relevant 
evidence-based 
policy/regulator
y framework 
improved.  
SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL AND CLIMATE ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES 
Activity 1.2.2: 
FAO's to 
provide 
climate 
change 
analysis and 
policy dialogue 
support  
Activity 1.2.3: 
Technical 
assistance for 
policy review 
Medium 
Activity 1.2.4: 
Organization 
of the OIE 
mission on 
veterinary 
legislation 
Medium 
Activity 1.2.5: 
Improvement 
of veterinary 
legislation 
Medium 
Activity 2.1.1: 
Designing of 
CsCAPs and 
validation by 
relevant local 
institutions 
High 
Component 2. 
Climate-
sensitive 
investments 
in climate 
change 
vulnerable 
rural areas  
Improved 
managemen
t of land or 
forest areas 
contributing 
to emissions 
reductions 
Output 
2.a:Climate-
sensitive 
Community 
Action Plans 
(CCAP) are 
designed, 
implemented, 
monitored and 
evaluated 
Sub-
output 
2.a.1: 
CCAPs are 
designed 
and 
validated by 
relevant 
local 
institutions 
High 
Ensure that FAO is providing analysis in line with the specific 
project objectives (on livestock, pasture etc.) and focused on 
CASP+ beneficiaries (participatory) 
Capacity building should include the principles of agroecology 
and training on participatory policy and planning processes, in 
particular how to ensure the inclusion of producers (including 
women and youth). May also require capacity building of 
producer and other community organisations to increase 
awareness of their rights according to national and international 
law and their advocacy skills. 
Mission of OIE (World Organisation for Animal Health) to support 
improvement of veterinary system and legislation - The results 
of the OIE evaluation missions, carried out at the request of 
Tajikistan, indicate that the country's veterinary system does not 
meet international standards. According to OIE experts, at the 
TAU Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, the existing infrastructure is 
completely inadequate for students to gain experience in working 
with animals, as well as for clinical and laboratory studies. 
OIE to include local associations and local and internatonal 
organizations working on agroecology (Slow Food etc.). 
Veterinary legislation to recognize and protect local breeds (e.g. 
Darvaz Sheep, Pamir Yak etc.). Inclusion of more disadvantaged 
youth to education at the TAU Faculty of Veterinary Medicine 
(new curriculum supported by OIE and CASP+). Curriculum 
should include community-based AE approaches. 
Ensure active participation of the community members in state 
of highest vulnerability, particularly women and youth, 
throughout the development of the CsCAPs. Develop set of 
criteria/conditions for the investments that ensures they are in 
line with AE principles (increased resource use efficiency, 
recycling, synergies, diversification and resilience). The self-
awareness and leadership trainings are crucial for women and 
youth as they will increase their confidence and allow them to 
participate more actively in decision-making, as well as adopting 
leadership roles in community organisations.  
61 
SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL AND CLIMATE ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES 
and 
relevant 
public 
bodies 
Activity 2.1.2: 
Mobilization of 
Community 
institutions 
High 
In the case of horticulture and fruticulture as alternative income 
generating activities, it may be necessary to encourage the 
establishment of specific associations in the project area. 
Encourage associations to develop and maintain inventories of 
the local cultivars and animal breeds they conserve to ensure the 
recognition of their rights and benefit sharing in the case of the 
use of those genetic resources. These inventories could be 
developed together with national research institutions.  
Medium 
Ensure the staff has experience in leading AE processes or that 
their AE capacities are developed prior to the engagement with 
the communities. 
Ensure that the unions are aware of their rights according to 
international and national laws, as well as of existing Tajik 
initiatives and programmes supporting small-scale producers and 
related organisations. Increase their advocacy skills (particular 
focus on youth) to be able to participate actively in policy 
dialogue. If not already familiarised, introduce them to 
agroecology. Consider the formation of a national umbrella 
organisation of PUUs to strengthening small-scale farmers' role 
in policy. 
High 
High 
Activity 2.1.3: 
Recruit and 
deploy CEP 
expert, 
technical and 
support staff  
Activity 2.1.4: 
Pasture User 
Union 
establishment 
and set up in 
250 villages. 
Activity 2.1.5: 
PUA 
establishment 
and 
strengthening 
for 250 
villages 
Activity 2.1.6: 
PUU 
establishment 
and set up 
(facilitators, 
equipment, 
land titling...) 
- IFAD12 
financed (150 
villages) 
62 
SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL AND CLIMATE ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES 
Activity 2.1.7: 
PUA 
establishment 
and 
strengthening 
- IFAD12 
financed (150 
villages) 
Activity 2.1.8: 
CsCAP 
planning and 
design (GCF 
financed - 250 
villages) 
Activity 2.1.9: 
CsCAP 
planning and 
design IFAD12 
financed (150 
villages) 
Activity 
2.1.10: 
Strengthening 
local 
institutions 
capacity to 
monitor and 
evaluate 
CsCAPs- GCF 
financed (250 
villages) 
Activity 
2.1.11: 
Strengthening 
local 
institutions 
capacity to 
monitor and 
evaluate 
CsCAP  
(IFAD12 
financed (150 
villages) 
High 
High 
High 
High 
63 
SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL AND CLIMATE ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES 
Activity 2.2.1: 
CsCAP 
implementatio
n and 
monitoring  
Medium/high 
Based on Jamoat Council, Village Organizations councils, 
Common interest groups (same approach used in CASP) 
Sub-
output 
2.a.2: 
Climate-
sensitive 
CCAPs are 
implemente
d by local 
institutions 
in timely 
and 
effective 
manner.  
Activity 2.2.2: 
Undertake 
mechanism for 
CsCAPs 
financing  
Medium 
Activity 2.2.3: 
Prepare and 
implement 
Pasture action 
plan 
High 
Assess feasibility of a decentralised funding mechanism managed 
by the community organisations themselves. Proposals for 
income-generating sub-projects, such as farm machinery or milk 
collection centres, should clearly show that a minimum % of the 
community would benefit.  
Community Driven Development (CDD) as a potential form in 
which communities also have direct control over key project 
decisions by managing community development funds (CDFs). 
(More information in the IOE analysis of IFAD projects including 
CDD : 
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714182/41898849/ESR+CD
D+-+final+with+cover.pdf/d2e08746-c023-da36-3c3d-
2b50ab0ab90e ) 
Ensure that Pasture Action Plans are AE, supporting practices 
such as: establishment and/or strengthening of PUUs for 
rangeland rehabilitation and management including the 
management of water points; rehabilitation of degraded 
rangelands with native nutritious grasses, shrubs and trees 
(assisted natural regeneration by collecting seeds, multiplying or 
growing seedlings, and broadcasting of seeds and planting of 
seedlings of local multi-benefit species) to reduce grazing 
pressure in natural forests; protecting areas from grazing to 
allow for recovery if needed and agreement on stocking density; 
rainwater harvesting and increased soil water storage techniques 
to increase water availability for livestock in the rangeland 
(spreading of water harvesting and other livestock water points 
throughout the rangeland to avoid overcrowding and grazing 
around a few points, divert water to drinking troughs away from 
the water source, when relevant, to avoid over trampling around 
and contamination of the water source); improvement of grazing 
and stocking practices (agree on sustainable rotational grazing 
rules among all rangeland users to avoid overgrazing and 
degradation; reserve areas for use as a fodder buffer only in 
case of a particular difficult year with low fodder availability; 
promote participatory biodiversity monitoring by the PUUs. Build 
the institutional and community capacity to protect and regulate 
forests against illegal activities.  
64 
SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL AND CLIMATE ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES 
Activity 2.2.4: 
Design and 
implement 
climate 
adaptive 
infrastructures 
investment  
(road rehab, 
river basins 
rehabilitation) 
High 
Where possible use this opportunity to provide vocational 
training and jobs to beneficiaries, particularly youth. Adopt 
ecosystem and watershed-based approaches to river basin 
rehabilitation. 
Activity 2.2.5: 
Design and 
implement 
Forestry action 
plan 
High 
Establishment or strengthening of Joint Forest Management 
(JFM) groups for forest and woodland conservation and 
management; participatory diagnostic of forest resources, their 
potential ecosystem services status, uses and drivers for 
deforestation and forest degradation and participatory 
development of forest or woodland management plans; 
conservation and rehabilitation of forest ecosystems services 
(demarcation, support for community tree nurseries and tree 
planting of native endangered and multi-beneficial tree species, 
use of Assisted Natural Regeneration (ANR) techniques on lands 
with forest vocation (along contour lines on slopes and upper 
parts of watersheds and along water courses protecting water 
provisioning and soil conservation services, habitats for forest 
and woodland dependent biodiversity, areas important for forest 
carbon sinks etc.)); raise awareness of the negative impacts of 
deforestation and overexploitation of natural forest resources 
and support community management and sustainable harvesting 
of forest resources and products (wood, roots, fruits, nuts, 
honey, mushrooms, MAP, etc.). Particular attention should be 
paid to the conservation of native fruit and nut tree wild 
relatives, many of which originate in and are in danger of 
extinction in Tajikistan and harbour a wide array of useful traits 
such as climate and pest resilience. 
In addition to JFM, renewable energy technology (RET) for 
heating and cooking should be promoted to reduce pressure on 
forests. The socio-cultural factors related to the use of fuelwood 
should be considered in the choice of alternative RETs. 
65 
SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL AND CLIMATE ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES 
Activity 3.1.1 
Studies, 
market and 
business 
opportunity 
assessment 
Medium 
Component 3: 
Strengthening 
livelihoods for 
enhanced 
resilience 
through 
market based 
approaches 
Output 3.1: 
Improved 
environment for 
agribusiness 
As opposed to identifying and promoting specific value chains, 
identify and develop market opportunities for a wide array of 
agroecological produce produced on rangelands, in mixed home 
gardens (fruit, vegetables and produce from small livestock) and 
in forests (Non Timber Forest Products) if sustainably harvested, 
including adapted local varieties such as apricots, apples, grapes, 
pears. Value addition through local processing (i.e. production of 
fruit juice, jams, drying of fruit, leather products, yoghurt, 
cheese, wool), labelling and marketing of produce as specific 
alternative income generating activities for women and youth 
should also be promoted. Promoting markets for AE produce 
could include public procurement of AE produce for school 
feeding programmes, promotion of local and regional farmes 
markets for small-scale producers, support for innovations in 
linking consumers and producers of agroecological products 
reducing intermediary costs, shortening supply chains and 
building circular and solidarity economies (e.g. systems for food 
baskets ordered online directly from producer groups, 
organization of local farmers’ markets, Community Supported 
Agriculture (CSA)), promotion of Participatory Guarantee 
Systems (PGS) (a very economically accessible and grassroots 
way of certifying AE produce), linking producers to renowned 
chefs and other celebrities in Tajikistan for procurement but also 
championing the consumption of AE produce from small-scale 
farmers, subsidies and incentives for AE production to support 
preferential prices. In order to promote local varieties it may be 
necessary to support awareness-raising amongst consumers on 
their superior taste, nutritional qualities and their cultural 
identity. With particular regard to meat identify a number of 
potential markets (local, national and international) that allow 
producers to get fair prices for their produce.  
Activity 3.1.2 
FAO's TCP2 for 
capacity 
development 
for agrifood 
VC marketing 
platforms 
Activity 3.1.3 
Policy dialogue 
through 
agribusiness 
platforms 
Medium/high 
Ensure inclusion of communities, women, youth in the platforms. 
Make sure the platforms are not coming from a top-down 
decision making but from willingness from farmers. Do not 
impose platforms without any pre-existing structure and/or 
existing production.  
Medium 
Service provider (or extension services) to ensure a transparent 
process. 
66 
SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL AND CLIMATE ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES 
Activity 3.1.4 
Support to 
national 
platforms 
Activity 3.1.5. 
Support to 
local platforms 
Activity 3.1.6 
Improvements 
to the policy 
and regulatory 
frameworks 
regarding 
agribusiness 
development 
High 
High 
Medium 
Service provider to include communities and farmers' will and 
need in Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA) to support the draft 
of new/modified existing laws.  
Activity 3.2.1 
Undertake 
breed 
improvement 
through 
Artificial 
Insemination 
Medium 
Due to their adaptability to local conditions and food cultures, 
the use of local animal breeds should be prioritised. Furthermore, 
combining livestock species that have complementary grazing 
behaviours can increase overall biomass harvesting and 
productivity, while reducing health risks related to animal 
parasitism. Agroecological breeding traits to be considered 
include reproductive capacities, functional longevity, and health 
and behavioural traits. The skills to undertake artificial 
insemination at community or producer group level should be 
promoted to ensure accesibility of the technology for the 
duration required to improve the breeds. Breeding efforts should 
focus on the co-creation of knowledge and close collaboration of 
farmers and researchers (including relevant ministries) to select 
the best breeds for particular circumstances. As opposed to 
centralized national breeding schemes, community-based 
breeding programs can help to improve locally adapted genetic 
resources whilst at the same time empowering and considering 
the specific needs of producers. 
Activity 3.2.2: 
Establish Off-
Farm Mating 
stations 
Activity: 
3.2.3: Train 
private 
veterinarians 
Medium 
Ensure the ownership by local communities and the sustainability 
of this type of infrastructure (physically and technically).  
Medium 
If possible choose individuals, including women, from the local 
communities to offer job opportunities particularly for local 
youth. Training of local veterinaries together with local  less 
qualified young technicians. 
67 
Output 3.2: 
Enhanced 
Livestock 
productivity 
SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL AND CLIMATE ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES 
Activity 3.2.4: 
FAO TCP 3 
Techncial 
Assistance to 
Design Farmer 
Field Schools 
High 
Activity 3.2.5: 
Conduct 
Pastoral and 
Farmer Field 
Schools 
High 
Ensure that the service providers undertaking the FFS have in-
depth experience of agroecology or are trained in it prior to 
carrying out the FFS. 
Focusing both on livestock (including milk), alternative on-farm 
income generating activities like mixed home gardens 
(biointensive market gardening, orchards and small livestock), 
processing and marketing. The methods taught should be AE in 
nature (recycling, efficiency, synergies, diversity), i.e. supporting 
the development of silvopastoral systems particularly on 
degraded and steep areas to prevent erosion, provide nutritious 
food sources and shade for livestock; mixed farming with: a) 
biointensive market gardening (achieving maximum yield on 
small areas whilst increasing soil fertility) with production of 
high-value fruits and vegetables (promotion of local cultivars as 
they require fewer external inputs and are more adapted to the 
local biotic and abiotic stresses), accompanied by development 
of small-scale irrigation (sprinkler and drip) and greenhouses, b) 
restoring and developing orchards focusing on traditional local 
fruit and nut varieties that are climate and pest resilient, 
accompanied by support in grafting and production of seedlings 
(nurseries as potential IGA) and processing facilities and 
practices c), small livestock (eggs, meat, milk) for additional 
income, improved household-level nutrition and manure for 
compost production for market gardens, d) general rehabilitation 
including integration of wind barriers to create microclimates, 
that acts as fencing and to provide additional sources of fodder, 
fuel and food. In order to ensure the availability and accesibility 
of agroecological equipment for the home gardens and to provide 
additional local business opportunities for youth, the FFS should 
provide wood work, soldering and equipment design and 
production training. Whilst men are predominantly involved in 
fruit production, women tend to do the processing so special 
attention should be given to its promotion. 
In order to ensure subsequent scaling out of the practices 
amongst producers beyond those attending the FFS and to 
facilitate intergenerational knowledge exchange (some older 
farmers have a lot of knowledge on sustainable mixed farming 
and use of local cultivars), farmer-to-farmer exchange should be 
promoted through the PUU and other common interest groups, 
as well as visits to particularly successful and innovative farmers. 
These innovative farmers could further be supported to receive 
other farmers or aspiring farmers, particularly young individuals, 
68 
SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL AND CLIMATE ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES 
for specific periods of time (e.g. one month) to work on the farm 
and learn the agroecological practices through hands-on 
experience.  
Activity 3.2.6: 
Establish 
Demonstration 
plots for 
fodder 
production 
High 
Consider demonstration plots developed by particularly 
knowledgeable and innovative local farmers and support farmer-
to-farmer exchange to promote adoption by other farmers. 
Identify local fodder tree varieties with high nutritional and 
medicinal value, as well as climate resilience. Agroforestry 
systems such as silvopastoralism, with fodder trees 
69 
SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL AND CLIMATE ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES 
Activity 3.2.7: 
Promote links 
between 
farmers and 
research and 
extension 
services 
Activity 3.3.1: 
Market 
assessments 
for specific 
value chains 
Activity 3.3.2: 
Meetings with 
private sector 
for 
establishing 
linkages  
Activity 3.3.3: 
Organize 
Common 
Interest 
Groups around 
selected value 
chains 
Activity 3.3.4: 
Procurement 
and 
distribution of 
equiment and 
facilities for 
production 
and 
processing 
High 
In the case of fruticulture, this could include the Tajikistan 
apricot centre, as well as the Institute of Horticulture and 
Vegetable Growing of the Tajik Academy of Agricultural Sciences 
with the aim of promoting exchange of expertise among farmers, 
forest dwellers, researchers and policymakers (Results and 
lessons learned to feed activity 1.1.2). 
See 3.1.1 
Medium 
Identify private sector actors that are interested in supporting 
agroecological produce and approaches promoting the territorial 
identity of the product. 
Medium 
Horticultural and fruiticulture associations. See 3.1.1 
Medium 
In the case of equipment (i.e. colinear and oscillating hoes, 
broadforks, etc. for biointensive market gardening) for home 
gardens, promote its local production as much as possible as an 
income-generating alternative for youth. Facilities for production 
could include storage and processing facilities for fruits, 
vegetables, meat and milk. Support to vehicles for transportation 
to market may also be required.   
Output 3.3: 
Strengthened 
value chains 
most vulnerable 
to climate 
change 
70 
SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL AND CLIMATE ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES 
Output 3.4: 
Diversifying 
Liveihoods for 
vulnerable 
households 
Project 
Management 
Component 
Activity 3.4.1: 
Provision of 
Business 
advisory 
servcies for 
off-farm 
livelihoods 
Activity 3.4.2: 
Provision of 
productive 
assets 
Acitivity 3.4.2: 
Promote 
markets for 
biodiverse 
agroecological 
produce  
High 
Medium 
High 
In particular for youth vocational training in development of farm 
equipment and small-scale infrastructure (greenhouses), as well 
as businesses linking producers and consumers through labelling, 
logistics, transport and marketing, including through e-platforms. 
Use all infrastructure development as an opportunity to provide 
jobs to locals and provide vocational training. In the context of 
rangeland rehabilitation and reforestation, provide support to the 
development of nurseries of native (and endangered trees) to 
support the ecosystem restoration efforts.  
As the agroecological approach tries to reduce the external 
inputs required for production the focus should be on providing 
training in producing own inputs such as high-quality compost, 
seeds, tree saplings, etc.  
Raise awareness amongst policy makers, private sector and 
consumers of the nutritional, taste and cultural benefits of 
diverse agroecological produce (including through AE champion 
chefs and celebrities), including through biodiversity fairs 
celebrating the contribution of farmers to agrobiodiversity 
(possible service provider includes Slow Food already present in 
the country and willing to collaborate with IFAD on CASP+) 
Promote SSTC and exchange of knowledge amongst different 
farmers organisations in Tajikistan. Support farmer-led 
knowledge exchange networks.  
71 
Tajikistan
Community-based Agricultural Support Project Plus (CASP+)
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Mission Dates:
01 April - 09 June 2021
Document Date:
16/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002204
5854-TJ
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Worksheet in C  Users j.topacio Desktop NEN 03_TJK CASP+ CASP+ PDR (22 Aug 2021).docx
Tajikistan
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ - Phase II (CASP+)
AWPB 2022
(USD)
ID
1
1.1
102.00
103.00
104.00
105.00
106.00
107.00
108.00
109.00
111.00
113.00
114.00
115.00
116.00
121.00
122.00
123.00
124.00
125.00
1.2
143.00
144.00
145.00
146.00
147.00
148.00
149.00
150.00
152.00
155.00
156.00
157.00
165.00
2
2.1
200.00
201.00
202.00
203.00
204.00
205.00
207.00
208.00
209.00
210.00
211.00
212.00
213.00
214.00
215.00
216.00
219.00
221.00
222.00
226.00
227.00
228.00
229.00
231.00
232.00
235.00
236.00
237.00
241.00
242.00
243.00
246.00
247.00
248.00
249.00
250.00
251.00
252.00
253.00
254.00
255.00
2.2
257.00
258.00
261.00
262.00
263.00
265.00
266.00
267.00
Totals Including Contingencies 
Impl.
Expenditures by Financiers 
Cumulative
2022
Disb. Acct.
Agency
IFAD 11 
GRANT
IFAD 12 
GRANT
IFAD 11 
Loan
GCF 
Loan
GCF 
GRANT
FAO Beneficiaries
CEP
SFA
MoA
GOVT: 
Taxes
Component 1: Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources
Output 1.1: By year 7, capacities of relevant national institutions for climate-resilient natural resources management are strengthened
Service provider for training
Forester curriculum rolled out in the 11 leskhoz
International GIS expert
Travel of International GIS expert
International Expert for Participatory NRM  planning
Travel of International Expert for Participatory NRM planning
National Botany expert
National GIS specialist - full-time (including Social Fund 25%)
Purchase of computer plotter plus ink, paper etc.
Purchase of a server (to store data)
Monitoring and Evaluation Consultant for CEP (including social fund)
Travel for CEP M&E Specialist
Annual outcome survey
National Expert on Epidemiology and One Health approach (including social fund)
Purchase of a mini truck-refrigerator for FSC
Purchase of a disinfection machine for FSC
Training, workshop, round tables for State Veterinary staff
Participation in the international events/workshops (SV staff)
Output 1.2: By year 7, enabling environment for climate adaptive, inclusive and integrated management of pasture, forestry and livestock resources is enhanced
Policy dialogue workshops
SFA staff time to be involved in policy dialogues
Purchase and printing of communication materials (including Publication: Gender and Climate Change in Tajikistan (based on CASP experience)
Conduct of thematic workshops on gender and climate change at national level for policy makers /a
Recruitment of pasture policy expert
Missions of the pasture policy expert
Consultation workshops on Pasture Law
Interpreter/Translators (including 25% social fund)
Workshops, round tables, conferences
Provision of technical assistance on the formulation of breeding strategies
Organization of workshops (2 consultations and 1 validation)
Recruitment of International Green Economy Expert
Software for Monitoring and Analysis of Public Investment Projects (including advisory and installment)
Component 2: Investments in community capacity for adaption and resilience to climate change
Output 2.1: By year 3, 400 Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAP) based on 21 District level Climate Resilience Diagnostics are developed
Compile District dignostic /a
Community district-level meetings /b
National communication expert to create videos,animations, communications material to explain diagnostic /c
CEP in-kind contribution: Conducting different campaign at local and national levels on Project activities
Communication Specialist (including 25% social fund)
District community meetings /d
National Pasture Specialist (SEPMU)
Per diem for travels of National Pasture Specialist (SEPMU)
Recruit a local NGO to set baseline socio-economic status of households with particular focus on capacity to deal with climate change and risks
Community facilitator to establish VO
Training of VO executives by community facilitator
Equipment of VO or PUU or PUG: office equipment, mobile phone for pasture monitoring
Community facilitator to establish PUU (or PUG under VO)
Training of PUU executives on formulation of PMP, pasture monitoring
Community facilitator to establish PUA at District level
Community facilitator to establish PC at district level
Community facilitator to establish - Common Interest Groups /f
Women representatives  trained in leadership skills by a specialized NGO /g
Development of CsCAPs, including forestry (conerning design and allocation of JFM plots and layout of direct afforestation areas), pastures, infrastructure and mechanisation aspects in 400 villages /h
Training in monitoring & evaluation, use of Smartphone reporting tools
16 PMU District officers /i
In-kind PMU (MoA) co-financing - Involvement of specialists from agricultural departments of target districts in Project implementation
Vehicles for 16 District Officers in Component 2 and 4 key project management staff
Organization of training of 16 PMU and 5 CEP Project forestry specialists on compliance with GCF requirements (e.g.ESIA)
Trainer fee for training (including material preparation) of 16 PMU and 5 CEP Project forestry specialists on compliance with GCF requirements (e.g.ESIA)
Community development specialist (including social fund)
Gender and Youth policy specialist (including social fund)
MIS system operational support
Monitoring and Evaluation Consultant for SEPMU (including social fund)
Travel for SEPMU M&E Specialist
Monitoring and Evaluation Assistant for SEPMU (including social fund)
Purchase of field vehicles for CEP PIU (3 units)
CEP in-kind contribution: Involving of CEP staffs (including CEP specialists from 21 districts, drivers and other technical staff)
Office equipment - SFA in-kind co-financing (computre, printer, camera, etc.)
SFA staff Travel (per diems) - 3 persons - 2 times per month each
SFA office space
SFA vehicles O&M
SFA running costs
Operations of PUAs: meeting cost and travel
Operations of PCs: meetings and travel
Operating costs for PMU vehicles /l
Output 2.2: By year 7, 400 Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAP) implemented in 21 districts benefitting at least 100,000 rural households
PMP monitoring (by PMT). Two visits per year per PUU by PMT officers /a
Implement cross-village Pasture Management Plan: these are activities that benefit more than one PUU and are best planned at the multi-PUU or district level.
Field training for JFM beneficiaries on planting and aftercare of trees
Equipment package for forest establishment, site preparation  to be used across multiple FMPs /b
SFA in-kind co-financing - Leshoze staff time
Equipment package for forest establishment, site preparation to be used across multiple FMPs /c
SFA in-kind co-financing - Seedlings
SFA in-kind co-financing - Leshoze staff time
399 295
265 956
14 000
7 500
15 000
2 500
15 000
2 500
2 700
13 500
12 805
12 805
12 000
2 000
5 000
8 000
85 366
48 780
4 000
2 500
133 339
1 000
25 200
2 439
1 500
9 000
2 500
1 500
19 200
6 000
20 000
10 000
-
35 000
6 781 786
3 598 201
84 000
21 000
10 000
37 143
6 000
21 000
12 000
450
70 000
160 000
160 000
780 488
80 000
160 000
21 000
31 500
102 000
50 000
380 000
80 000
153 600
42 857
731 707
2 000
4 000
12 000
12 000
5 000
12 000
2 000
12 000
91 463
50 000
13 510
19 600
1 500
21 000
10 383
31 500
31 500
72 000
3 183 585
28 000
673 941
20 000
1 707 317
35 000
682 927
18 200
18 200
Page 1
TRW_DA
TRW_DA
TA_DA
TRAV_DA
TA_DA
TRAV_DA
TA_DA
TA_DA
399 295
265 956
14 000
7 500
15 000
2 500
15 000
2 500
2 700
13 500
12 805 CW/EG_DA
12 805 CW/EG_DA
12 000
2 000
5 000
8 000
TA_DA
TRAV_DA
TA_DA
TA_DA
85 366 CW/EG_DA
48 780 CW/EG_DA
4 000
2 500
133 339
1 000
TRW_DA
TRW_DA
TRW_DA
TRW_DA
TA_DA
TRAV_DA
TRW_DA
TA_DA
TRW_DA
TA_DA
TRW_DA
TA_DA
TA_DA
25 200 IN_KIND_DA
2 439 CW/EG_DA
1 500
9 000
2 500
1 500
19 200
6 000
20 000
10 000
-
35 000
6 781 786
3 598 201
84 000
21 000
10 000
37 143 IN_KIND_DA
TA_DA
TRW_DA
TA_DA
6 000
21 000
12 000
450
70 000
160 000
160 000
780 488 CW/EG_DA
TA_DA
TRW_DA
TA_DA
TRAV_DA
TA_DA
TA_DA
TRW_DA
80 000
160 000
21 000
31 500
102 000
50 000
380 000
80 000
153 600
TA_DA
TRW_DA
TA_DA
TA_DA
TA_DA
TA_DA
TA_DA
TRW_DA
TA_DA
42 857 IN_KIND_DA
731 707 CW/EG_DA
TRW_DA
TA_DA
TA_DA
TA_DA
TA_DA
TA_DA
TRAV_DA
TA_DA
2 000
4 000
12 000
12 000
5 000
12 000
2 000
12 000
91 463 CW/EG_DA
50 000 IN_KIND_DA
13 510 IN_KIND_DA
19 600 IN_KIND_DA
1 500 IN_KIND_DA
21 000 IN_KIND_DA
10 383 IN_KIND_DA
31 500
31 500
72 000
3 183 585
28 000
OE_DA
OE_DA
OE_DA
TRAV_DA
673 941 CW/EG_DA
20 000
TRW_DA
1 707 317 CW/EG_DA
35 000 IN_KIND_DA
682 927 CW/EG_DA
18 200 IN_KIND_DA
18 200 IN_KIND_DA
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
UNFAO
UNFAO
CEP_PIU
SEPMU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
-
-
187 000
-
-
146 000
-
-
14 000
-
-
7 500
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
8 000
-
-
70 000
-
-
40 000
-
-
4 000
-
-
2 500
-
-
41 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
6 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
35 000
-
525 000
21 000 266 600
-
21 000 266 600
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
21 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
70 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 153 600
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
12 000
-
-
-
-
-
5 000
-
-
12 000
-
-
2 000
-
-
12 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 525 000
-
-
-
-
- 525 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
127 900
91 200
-
-
15 000
2 500
15 000
2 500
2 700
13 500
10 500
10 500
12 000
2 000
5 000
-
-
-
-
-
36 700
1 000
-
2 000
1 500
9 000
2 500
1 500
19 200
-
-
-
-
-
4 833 950
2 825 950
84 000
21 000
10 000
-
6 000
-
12 000
450
-
160 000
160 000
640 000
80 000
160 000
21 000
31 500
102 000
50 000
380 000
80 000
-
-
600 000
2 000
4 000
-
12 000
-
-
-
-
75 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
31 500
31 500
72 000
2 008 000
28 000
-
20 000
1 400 000
-
560 000
-
-
30 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
30 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
20 000
10 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
27 632
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
27 632
-
27 632
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
25 200
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
25 200
-
25 200
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
87 143 137 393
65 993
87 143
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
37 143
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
50 000
13 510
-
19 600
-
1 500
-
21 000
-
10 383
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
71 400
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
35 000
-
-
-
18 200
-
18 200
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
42 857
42 857
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
42 857
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
29 195
28 756
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2 305
2 305
-
-
-
-
15 366
8 780
-
-
439
-
-
439
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
840 212
288 659
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
140 488
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
131 707
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
16 463
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
551 553
-
121 309
-
307 317
-
122 927
-
-
Worksheet in C  Users j.topacio Desktop NEN 03_TJK CASP+ CASP+ PDR (22 Aug 2021).docx
3
3.1
306.00
307.00
308.00
309.00
310.00
311.00
312.00
313.00
328.00
329.00
3.2
330.00
331.00
332.00
333.00
334.00
335.00
3.3
344.00
359.00
360.00
4
400.00
401.00
402.00
403.00
404.00
405.00
406.00
407.00
408.00
409.00
410.00
411.00
412.00
413.00
414.00
415.00
416.00
418.00
419.00
420.00
421.00
422.00
423.00
424.00
425.00
427.00
428.00
429.00
430.00
431.00
432.00
433.00
434.00
435.00
436.00
437.00
438.00
439.00
440.00
441.00
442.00
443.00
444.00
445.00
446.00
447.00
448.00
449.00
450.00
Component 3: Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market-based approaches
Output 3.1: By end of year 7, 105,600 smallholder livestock farmers receive AI, animal health or training services to increase productivity of their livestock
Renovation of TVA office and Training Center
Purchase of office equipment and furniture for the training room (TVA office)
Office maintenance (TVA)
Purchase of a vehicle for TVA
Recruitment of Nat Specialist on ontinuous Veterinary Education
Participation in the international events/workshops
Training and workshops, including kick off meetings
Purchase of Veterinary package for 284 vets
Awarenes raising work and selection of FFS member and to promote FFS (hard investments)
Awarenes raising work and selection of FFS member and to promote FFS (TA)
Output 3.2: By end of year 4, 9 productive alliances between livestock producers’ groups and private aggregators established and operational
Livestock specialist (zootechnician or veterinarian), covering animal production and animal health
Livestock specialist per diem for travels
Market/value chain specialist (with experience in Dairy)
Market/value chain specialist per diem for travels
Organization of VC consultation meetings gathering potential PA partners /a
Contracting of the Regional Chamber of Commerce for facilitation
Output 3.3: By end of year 7, 12,400 smallholders have strengthened climate resilient production practices and private sector market linkages
Provision of rooms and halls for meetings, trainings and activities of the Project in the target districts
Grant management specialist (including Social Fund)
Per diem for travels
Project Management Component
 I. Investment Costs
A. SEPMU investment costs
1. Contracting an audit firm to audit PMU each year
2. Training of PMU on FM, Procurement and other issues
3. FM Software installation and support for PMU
4. Office Renovation
5. PMU Office Equipment and Furniture
Computer Desktop
Computer - laptop /a
Printer 3 in 1
Printer high speed
Set of office furniture (Table, armchair, bookcase, side table attachment and othres)
Tablet /b
Camera
Equipment for online conferences (Kulob and Bokhtar reg. office)
B. CEP PIU investment costs
Contracting an audit firm to audit CEP each year
Training of PMU on FM, Procurement and other issues
FM Software installation and support for PMU
Office Renovation
Purchase of office furniture and equipment for CEP PIU
II. Recurrent Costs
A. SEPMU
1. Salaries and Allowances
PMU Project Coordinator
Financial management specialist
Project Accountant
Disbursement specialist
Procurement specialist
Procurement Assistant
Administrator
Administrator Assistants (2 persons)
Office Cleaner (4 persons)
Drivers (10 persons)
Security Guards (6 persons)
Social Fund (25%)
Travel (per diems)
2. Operating Expenses
Utility payments, office supplies, communication, bank fees etc. (PMU office in Dushanbe in 2 in regions)
Provision of office for PMU in Dushanbe
Provision of office for Project Regional Antenna in Kulob city
Provision of office for Project Regional Antenna in Bokhtar city
B. CEP PIU
1. Salaries and Allowances
CEP Project Coordinator
Financial management specialist
Disbursement specialist
Procurement specialist
Project Assistant
Office Cleaner
Drivers (3 persons)
Interpreter/Translator
Social Fund (25%)
Travel (per diems)
2. Operating Expenses
Utility payments, office supplies, communication, bank fees etc.
CEP in-kind contribution: Rent of premises: Implenting Group office, conference hall, warehouses
CEP in-kind contribution: Rent of machineries and equipment (not include fuel, maintanence cost)
Vehicle Maintainance & Operations (3 vehicles)
C. FAO
1. FAO Admin costs
563 328
493 878
18 293
7 561
1 220
28 049
12 000
6 000
28 400
346 341
33 415
12 600
50 400
6 000
450
6 000
450
30 000
7 500
19 050
12 600
6 000
450
858 552
10 000
3 000
30 488
73 171
7 171
32 927
10 244
1 463
37 317
19 073
6 098
5 366
10 000
3 000
30 488
36 585
60 976
14 400
13 200
9 600
12 000
12 000
9 600
7 680
15 360
4 800
24 000
7 200
32 460
12 443
44 400
19 717
13 484
9 731
14 400
13 200
12 000
12 000
9 600
1 800
7 200
7 680
19 470
12 000
14 400
30 000
10 000
10 800
563 328
493 878
18 293 CW/EG_DA
7 561 CW/EG_DA
1 220 CW/EG_DA
28 049 CW/EG_DA
12 000
6 000
28 400
TA_DA
TRW_DA
TRW_DA
TA_DA
346 341 CW/EG_DA
33 415 CW/EG_DA
12 600
50 400
6 000
450
6 000
450
30 000
7 500
19 050
-
12 600 IN_KIND_DA
TA_DA
TRAV_DA
TA_DA
TRAV_DA
TRW_DA
TRW_DA
6 000
450
858 552
TA_DA
TRAV_DA
10 000
3 000
TA_DA
TRW_DA
30 488 CW/EG_DA
73 171 CW/EG_DA
7 171 CW/EG_DA
32 927 CW/EG_DA
10 244 CW/EG_DA
1 463 CW/EG_DA
37 317 CW/EG_DA
19 073 CW/EG_DA
6 098 CW/EG_DA
5 366 CW/EG_DA
-
UNFAO
UNFAO
UNFAO
UNFAO
UNFAO
UNFAO
UNFAO
UNFAO
UNFAO
UNFAO
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
10 000
3 000
TA_DA
TRW_DA
30 488 CW/EG_DA
36 585 CW/EG_DA
60 976 CW/EG_DA
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
14 400
13 200
9 600
12 000
12 000
9 600
7 680
15 360
4 800
24 000
7 200
32 460
12 443
OE_DA
OE_DA
OE_DA
OE_DA
OE_DA
OE_DA
OE_DA
OE_DA
OE_DA
OE_DA
OE_DA
OE_DA
OE_DA
OE_DA
44 400
19 717 IN_KIND_DA
13 484 IN_KIND_DA
9 731 IN_KIND_DA
14 400
13 200
12 000
12 000
9 600
1 800
7 200
7 680
19 470
12 000
OE_DA
OE_DA
OE_DA
OE_DA
OE_DA
OE_DA
OE_DA
OE_DA
OE_DA
OE_DA
OE_DA
14 400
30 000 IN_KIND_DA
10 000 IN_KIND_DA
10 800
OE_DA
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
SEPMU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
CEP_PIU
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
472 263
6 450
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
6 450
-
6 000
450
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
20 000 220 110
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
40 000
454 714
404 314
15 000
6 200
1 000
23 000
12 000
6 000
17 114
284 000
27 400
12 600
50 400
6 000
450
6 000
450
30 000
7 500
-
-
-
-
42 933
11 286
11 286
-
-
-
-
-
-
11 286
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
23 049
-
3 000
25 000
60 000
5 880
27 000
8 400
1 200
30 600
15 640
5 000
4 400
-
3 000
25 000
30 000
-
14 400
13 200
9 600
12 000
12 000
9 600
7 680
15 360
4 800
24 000
7 200
32 460
12 443
44 400
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1 800
7 200
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
50 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
14 400
13 200
12 000
12 000
9 600
-
-
7 680
19 470
12 000
14 400
-
-
10 800
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
30 000
10 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
19 717
13 484
9 731
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
5 488
6 585
10 976
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
12 600
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
12 600
12 600
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
78 278
78 278
3 293
1 361
220
5 049
-
-
-
62 341
6 015
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
40 197
-
-
5 488
13 171
1 291
5 927
1 844
263
6 717
3 433
1 098
966
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
44 560
8 602 961
44 560
8 602 961
OE_DA
UNFAO
-
680 263
-
293 050
44 560
745 110
-
40 000
-
5 459 497
-
64 334
-
27 632
-
-
87 143 162 593
-
55 457
-
987 882
Page 2
Tajikistan
Community-based Agricultural Support Project Plus (CASP+)
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Mission Dates:
01 April - 09 June 2021
Document Date:
16/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002204
5854-TJ
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
STATE ENTITY “PROJECT MANAGEMENT UNIT” (SEPMU) AND PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION GROUP OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION (PIG CEP) 
Procurement Plan (Initial 18 months) 
I. 
General 
1.  Project information: Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘Plus’ (CASP+), Tajikistan 
2.  Version of the Plan: Version 1.0 dated July, 2021 
3.  Approval Date of the procurement Plan:  - 
4.  Date of General Procurement Notice:  - 
5.  Period covered by this procurement plan: June 2022 – December 2023 
6.  Other  Arrangements:  The  project  will  provide  loan/grants  to  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Tajikistan. 
Procurement will be carried out by SEPMU and PIG CEP themselves according IFAD Procurement Guidelines and 
procurement plan will be agreed between the IFAD and Grant Recipients. 
II.  Goods, Works and Non-Consulting services 
1.  Prior Review Threshold: Procurement Decisions subject to Prior Review by the IFAD: 
Procurement Method 
Threshold for use of method 
Prior Review Threshold 
Comments 
GOODS AND NON-CONSULTING SERVICES 
International Competitive Bidding 
1. 
(ICB) 
National Competitive Bidding (NCB) 
2. 
3. 
National Shopping (NS) 
> US$70,000 to  
< US$200,000 
< US$70,000 
> US$200,000 
All contracts based on ICB 
All contracts based on NCB 
The first three (3) contracts 
regardless of value shall be subject to 
prior review 
All contracts based on DC 
As an exception and if warranted 
by circumstances in line with IFAD 
procurement guidelines 
4. 
Direct Contracting (DC) 
< US$2,000 
1 | P a g e  
Procurement Method 
CIVIL WORKS AND NON-CONSULTING SERVICES 
1. 
International Competitive Bidding 
(ICB) 
National Competitive Bidding (NCB) 
2. 
3. 
National Shopping (NS) 
> US$800,000 
> US$190,000 to 
< US$800,000 
< US$190,000 
Threshold for use of method 
4. 
Direct Contracting (DC) 
< US$3,000 
Prior Review Threshold 
Comments 
All contracts based on ICB 
All contracts based on NCB 
The first three (3) contracts 
regardless of value and thereafter all 
contracts >US$150,000 shall be 
subject to prior review 
All contracts based on DC 
As an exception and if warranted 
by circumstances in line with IFAD 
procurement guidelines 
2.  Prequalification (for complex Civil Works) – N/A 
3.  Procurement Packages with Methods and Time Schedule  
1 
Ref. No. 
2 
Contract 
(Description) 
3 
Source of 
Funds 
4 
Planned vs 
Actual 
5 
Estimated 
Cost in 
US$ 
6 
Procurement 
Method 
7 
Pre 
qualification 
(yes/no) 
8 
Domestic 
Preference 
(yes/no) 
9 
Review 
by IFAD 
(Prior / Post) 
10 
Date of 
issuance 
of doc’s 
11 
Bid-Opening 
Date 
13 
Completion 
12 
Date of 
contract 
/order 
signature 
Component 1: Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources 
1.1.1  SEPMU. Logistical support to the 
GCF Grant  Planned 
Shopping 
30 000 
Prior 
No 
No 
Dec-2023  Dec-2023 
Jan-2023 
Feb-2023 
regional PMT office in Kulob 
(Refurbishment) 
Actual 
1.1.1  SEPMU. Logistical support to the 
GCF Grant  Planned 
20 000 
Shopping 
No 
No 
Post 
Jan-2023  Jan-2023  Feb-2023  Mar-2023 
Actual 
Actual 
GCF Grant  Planned 
21 000 
Shopping 
No 
No 
Prior 
Jun-2022  Jun-2022 
Jul-2022 
Aug-2022 
regional PMT office in Kulob 
(Procurement of Equipment) 
1.1.2  PIG CEP. Office and server 
equipment (computer, server to 
data storage, plotter, ink, paper 
etc.) 
1.1.3  SEPMU. Mini truck-refrigerator and 
disinfection machine for FSC 
1.1.3  SEPMU. Laboratory equipment 
and AI kits for SEABAI 
Actual 
IFAD Grant  Planned 
110 000 
NCB 
Actual 
IFAD Grant  Planned 
37 500 
Shopping 
Actual 
1.1.3  SEPMU. Liquid nitrogen machine 
IFAD Grant  Planned 
120 000 
NCB 
1.2.1  PIG CEP. Printing of 
GCF Grant  Planned 
4 000 
Shopping 
communication materials (including 
Actual 
Actual 
2 | P a g e  
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Prior 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Nov-2022 
Post 
Apr-2023  Apr-2023  May-2023 
Jun-2023 
Prior  Mar-2023  Apr-2023  May-2023 
Jul-2023 
Post 
Jul-2023  Aug-2022  Sep-2022 
Feb-2023 
1 
Ref. No. 
2 
Contract 
(Description) 
3 
Source of 
Funds 
4 
Planned vs 
Actual 
5 
Estimated 
Cost in 
US$ 
6 
Procurement 
Method 
7 
Pre 
qualification 
(yes/no) 
8 
Domestic 
Preference 
(yes/no) 
9 
Review 
by IFAD 
(Prior / Post) 
10 
Date of 
issuance 
of doc’s 
11 
Bid-Opening 
Date 
13 
Completion 
12 
Date of 
contract 
/order 
signature 
Publication: Gender and Climate 
Change in Tajikistan (based on 
CASP+ experience) 
Component 2:  Investments in community capacity for adaption and resilience to climate change 
2.1.2  SEPMU. Equipment for 
GCF Grant  Planned 
640 000 
ICB 
No 
VO/PUU/PUG (Office equipment, 
mobile phone for pasture 
monitoring) 
2.1.4  SEPMU. Vehicles for 16 District 
Officers and 4 key project 
management staff 
2.2.1  SEPMU. Implement cross-village 
Pasture Management Plan 
2.2.1  SEPMU. Implement Pasture 
Management Plan-1 
2.2.1  SEPMU. Implement Pasture 
Management Plan-2 
2.2.1  SEPMU. Implement Climate 
Resilient infrastructure investments 
Actual 
GCF Grant  Planned 
600 000 
ICB 
Actual 
IFAD Loan  Planned 
525 000 
ICB 
Actual 
GCF Loan  Planned 
Actual 
1 800 
000 
ICB 
GCF Grant  Planned 
200 000 
ICB 
Actual 
IFAD Grant  Planned 
Actual 
1 872 
736 
ICB 
2.2.1  SEPMU. Implement Agriculture 
IFAD Grant  Planned 
766 380 
ICB 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Prior 
Jun-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Nov-2022 
No 
Prior 
Aug-2022  Oct-2022  Nov-2022  Dec-2022 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Prior 
Jul-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2022 
Dec-2022 
Prior  Mar-2023  May-2023 
Jun-2023 
Sep-2023 
Prior  Mar-2023  May-2023 
Jun-2023 
Aug-2023 
Prior 
Apr-2023  Jun-2023 
Jul-2023 
Oct-2023 
Mechanization investments from 
CsCAP: Procurement of 
community-shared equipment-1 
2.2.1  SEPMU. Implement Agriculture 
Mechanization investments from 
CsCAP: Procurement of 
community-shared equipment-2 
Actual 
IFAD Grant  Planned 
833 620 
ICB 
No 
No 
Prior 
Actual 
No 
Prior 
2.2.1  PIG CEP. JFM Investment: Forest 
GCF Grant  Planned 
& Pasture Management Plans 
May-
2023 
May-
2023 
Jul-2023  Aug-2023  Oct-2023 
Jul-2023  Aug-2023  Oct-2023 
Actual 
GCF Grant  Planned 
Actual 
2 749 
516 
1 400 
000 
ICB 
ICB 
No 
No 
No 
Prior 
Jun-2023  Aug-2023  Sep-2023  Dec-2023 
No 
Prior 
Aug-2022  Oct-2022  Nov-2022 
Jan-2023 
GCF Grant  Planned 
560 000 
ICB 
No 
No 
Prior 
Aug-2022  Oct-2022  Dec-2022 
Jan-2023 
Actual 
2.2.1  PIG CEP. Equipment package for 
forest establishment, site 
preparation to be used across 
multiple FMPs-1 
2.2.1  PIG CEP. Equipment package for 
forest establishment, site 
3 | P a g e  
1 
Ref. No. 
2 
Contract 
(Description) 
3 
Source of 
Funds 
4 
Planned vs 
Actual 
5 
Estimated 
Cost in 
US$ 
6 
Procurement 
Method 
7 
Pre 
qualification 
(yes/no) 
8 
Domestic 
Preference 
(yes/no) 
9 
Review 
by IFAD 
(Prior / Post) 
10 
Date of 
issuance 
of doc’s 
11 
Bid-Opening 
Date 
13 
Completion 
12 
Date of 
contract 
/order 
signature 
preparation to be used across 
multiple FMPs-2 
2.2.1  PIG CEP. Leskhoz Investment: 
Forest & Pasture Management 
Plans 
GCF Grant  Planned 
525 154 
ICB 
Actual 
2.2.1  PIG CEP. JFM Investment: 
GCF Grant  Planned 
85 330 
NCB 
Protected Area Buffer Zones 
Actual 
No 
No 
No 
Prior 
Jul-2023  Sep-2023  Oct-2023 
Nov-2023 
No 
Prior 
Jan-2023  Feb-2023  Apr-2023  May-2023 
Component 3: Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market-based approaches 
3.1.1  SEPMU. AI kits 
IFAD Grant  Planned 
Shopping 
7 500 
No 
3.1.1  SEPMU. Consumables including 
cows (5 out of 10 days are 
practical sessions) 
3.1.1  SEPMU. Doses and 
synchronization for AI 
Actual 
IFAD Grant  Planned 
12 500 
Shopping 
No 
Actual 
IFAD Grant  Planned 
400 000 
ICB 
Actual 
3.1.1  SEPMU. Procurement of bulls 
IFAD Grant  Planned 
300 000 
ICB 
3.1.2  SEPMU. Motorbike for 264 vets 
IFAD Grant  Planned 
284 000 
ICB 
Actual 
3.1.3  SEPMU. Establishment of demo 
GCF Grant  Planned 
55 000 
Shopping 
plots (1 demo plot by district) 
Actual 
3.1.3  SEPMU. O&M of demo plots - 5 
GCF Grant  Planned 
63 000 
Shopping 
years each 
Actual 
3.3.1  SEPMU. Printing of handover 
GCF Grant  Planned 
50 000 
Shopping 
Actual 
materials, etc. 
3.3.2  SEPMU. Provision of 
goods/equipment/inputs to grant 
beneficiaries under Window 1 
IFAD 
Loan+Grant 
Actual 
Planned 
Actual 
Component 4:  Project Management Component 
480 000 
ICB 
IFAD Grant  Planned 
30 000 
Shopping 
Actual 
IFAD Grant  Planned 
67 520 
Shopping 
Actual 
4 
4 
SEPMU. FM Software installation 
and support 
SEPMU. Office equipment 
(Computer Desktop, Computer 
Laptop, Printer 3 in 1, Printer high 
speed, Tablet, Camera, Equipment 
for online conferences (Kulob and 
Bokhtar reg. office)) 
4 | P a g e  
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Post 
Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Apr-2023  May-2023 
Post 
Feb-2023  Feb-2023  May-2023  May-2023 
Prior 
Feb-2023  Apr-2023  May-2023 
Jul-2023 
Prior  Mar-2023  May-2023 
Jul-2023 
Aug-2023 
Prior 
Aug-2023  Oct-2023  Nov-2023  Dec-2023 
Post 
Aug-2023  Aug-2023  Sep-2023  Oct-2023 
Post 
Aug-2023  Aug-2023  Sep-2023  Oct-2023 
Post 
Oct-2023  Oct-2023  Nov-2023  Nov-2023 
Prior 
Jul-2023  Sep-2023  Oct-2023 
Dec-2023 
Prior 
Jun-2022  Jun-2022 
Jul-2022 
Dec-2023 
Prior 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022 
Sep-2022 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
1 
Ref. No. 
2 
Contract 
(Description) 
3 
Source of 
Funds 
4 
Planned vs 
Actual 
5 
Estimated 
Cost in 
US$ 
6 
Procurement 
Method 
7 
Pre 
qualification 
(yes/no) 
8 
Domestic 
Preference 
(yes/no) 
9 
Review 
by IFAD 
(Prior / Post) 
10 
Date of 
issuance 
of doc’s 
11 
Bid-Opening 
Date 
13 
Completion 
12 
Date of 
contract 
/order 
signature 
IFAD Grant  Planned 
30 600 
Shopping 
No 
No 
Post 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022 
Sep-2022 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
SEPMU. Office furniture (Table, 
armchair, bookcase, side table 
attachment and others) 
SEPMU. Office Renovation 
Actual 
IFAD Grant  Planned 
60 000 
Shopping 
Actual 
PIG CEP. FM Software installation 
and support 
PIG CEP. Office renovation 
IFAD Grant  Planned 
30 000 
Shopping 
Actual 
IFAD Grant  Planned 
30 000 
Shopping 
Actual 
PIG CEP. Office furniture and 
equipment 
PIG CEP. Field vehicles (3 units)  GCF Grant  Planned 
GCF Grant  Planned 
Actual 
50 000 
Shopping 
75 000 
Shopping 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Prior 
Jun-2022  Jun-2022 
Jul-2022 
Aug-2022 
Prior 
Jun-2022  Jun-2022 
Jul-2022 
Dec-2023 
Prior 
Jun-2022  Jun-2022 
Jul-2022 
Aug-2022 
Post 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022 
Sep-2022 
Prior 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022 
Sep-2022 
Total for Goods and Works in US$:   14,925,356 
Actual 
5 | P a g e  
III.  Selection of Consultants and Non-Consulting services 
1.  Prior Review Threshold: Selection decisions subject to Prior Review by IFAD: 
1. 
2 
3 
4. 
Selection Method 
Quality and Cost Based 
Selection (QCBS) 
Quality Based Selection 
(QBS), Fixed Budget Selection 
(FBS) and Least Cost 
Selection (LCS) 
Selection Based on 
consultants’ qualification 
(CQS) 
Individual Consultant Selection 
(ICS) 
Threshold for use of method 
> US$100,000 
Prior Review Threshold 
All contracts based on QCBS 
< US$100,000 
< US$70,000 
Any contracts regardless of 
value may be awarded on the 
basis of ICS 
The first three (3) contracts regardless of 
value and thereafter all contracts 
>US$60,000 shall be subject to prior 
review 
The first three (3) contracts regardless of 
value and thereafter all contracts 
>US$60,000 shall be subject to prior 
review 
The first three (3) contracts regardless of 
value and thereafter all contracts 
>US$60,000 shall be subject to prior 
review 
All contracts based on SSS 
5. 
Single Source Selection (SSS)  Firms < US$2,000 
Individual < US$1,000 
Comment 
Advertising of REOI shall be international for 
any contract >US$100,000. Otherwise the 
advertising shall national 
Advertising of REOI shall be international for 
any contract where there is expected to be 
interest internationally. Otherwise the 
advertising shall national 
Advertising of REOI shall be international for 
any contract where there is expected to be 
interest internationally. Otherwise the 
advertising shall national 
As an exception and if warranted by 
circumstances in line with IFAD procurement 
guidelines 
2.  Short list comprising entirely of national consultants:  Short  list  of  consultants  for  services,  estimated  to 
cost  less  than  $100,000  equivalent  per  contract,  may  comprise  entirely  of  national  three  to  six  consultants  in 
accordance with the IFAD’s interest in encouraging the development and use of National Consultants from partner 
countries of operation.  
3.  Any Other Special Selection Arrangements: N/A  
6 | P a g e  
4.  Consultancy Assignments with Selection Methods and Time Schedule 
1 
Ref. No. 
2 
Description of Assignment 
3 
Source of 
Funds 
3 
Estimated 
Cost in US$ 
4 
Selection 
Method 
5 
Review 
by IFAD 
(Prior / Post) 
6 
Issuance of 
Expression of 
Interest 
7 
Finalize 
shortlist and 
issue RFP 
8 
Proposals 
Submission 
Date 
9 
Complete 
Technical 
Evaluation 
10 
Complete 
Financial 
Evaluation 
11 
Negotiate 
and Award 
Completion 
Component 1: Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources 
1.1.1 
Dec-2022  Dec-2022  Dec-2022  Jan-2023 
GCF Grant 
12 000 
Post 
ICS 
Jan-2023 
Jan-2023 
Jan-2024 
1.1.1 
1.1.1 
1.1.2 
1.1.2 
1.1.2 
1.1.2 
1.1.2 
1.1.2 
1.1.3 
1.1.3 
1.1.3 
1.1.3 
SEPMU. Staff (2 national 
pastures specialists) 
PIG CEP. Upgrade the technical 
skills of the Forestry 
Department: Service provider for 
training 
PIG CEP. Trainings: Forester 
curriculum rolled out in the 11 
leskhoz 
PIG CEP. International GIS 
expert (Including travels) 
PIG CEP. International Expert 
for Participatory NRM planning 
(Including travels) 
PIG CEP. National Botany 
expert 
PIG CEP. National GIS 
specialist 
PIG CEP. Monitoring and 
Evaluation Consultant (Including 
travel) 
PIG CEP. Annual outcome 
survey 
SEPMU. International Veterinary 
Management Expert (Including 
travels) 
SEPMU. International Expert on 
veterinary surveillance and 
public veterinary health service 
(Including travels) 
SEPMU. National Expert on 
Epidemiology and One Health 
approach 
SEPMU. Training, workshop, 
round tables for State Veterinary 
staff 
7 | P a g e  
IFAD Grant 
28 000 
CQS 
Post 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Apr-2023 
IFAD Grant 
15 000 
CQS 
Post 
Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2022  Oct-2022  Nov-2022  Nov-2023 
GCF Grant 
35 000 
ICS 
Post 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2023 
GCF Grant 
17 500 
ICS 
Post 
Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2022  Nov-2022 
GCF Grant 
5 400 
ICS 
Prior 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  May-2023 
GCF Grant 
27 000 
ICS 
Prior 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Dec-2023 
GCF Grant 
28 000 
ICS 
Prior 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022  Dec-2023 
GCF Grant 
10 000 
CQS 
Prior 
Nov-2022  Nov-2022  Nov-2022  Dec-2022  Dec-2022  Jan-2023  Dec-2023 
IFAD Grant 
9 250 
ICS 
Post 
Jan-2023 
Jan-2023 
Jan-2023  Feb-2023  Feb-2023  Mar-2023  Apr-2023 
IFAD Grant 
9 250 
ICS 
Post 
Jan-2023 
Jan-2023 
Jan-2023  Feb-2023  Feb-2023  Mar-2023  Apr-2023 
IFAD Grant 
20 000 
ICS 
Post 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Dec-2023 
IFAD Grant 
10 000 
CQS 
Post 
Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2022  Oct-2023 
2 
Description of Assignment 
3 
Source of 
Funds 
3 
Estimated 
Cost in US$ 
4 
Selection 
Method 
5 
Review 
by IFAD 
(Prior / Post) 
Prior 
6 
Issuance of 
Expression of 
Interest 
N/A 
7 
Finalize 
shortlist and 
issue RFP 
Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2022  Oct-2023 
8 
Proposals 
Submission 
Date 
10 
Complete 
Financial 
Evaluation 
9 
Complete 
Technical 
Evaluation 
11 
Negotiate 
and Award 
Completion 
5 000 
SSS 
1 
Ref. No. 
1.1.3 
1.1.4 
1.1.4 
1.2.1 
1.2.1 
1.2.1 
1.2.1 
1.2.2 
1.2.2 
1.2.2 
1.2.2 
1.2.2 
1.2.2 
1.2.3 
1.2.3 
GCF Grant 
GCF Grant 
GCF Grant 
GCF Grant 
GCF Grant 
GCF Grant 
IFAD Grant 
SEPMU. Participation in the 
international events/workshops 
(SV staff) 
PIG CEP. Development of 1 new 
curriculum for CC specialists 
PIG CEP. Develop gender 
modules for the CC curricula of 
schools and specialized 
universities 
PIG CEP. International Policy 
Expert (Including travels) 
PIG CEP. International Gender 
Expert (Including travels) 
PIG CEP. Policy dialogue 
workshops 
PIG CEP. Conduct of thematic 
workshops on gender and 
climate change at national level 
for policy makers to ensure CC 
and NRM policies/ legal 
frameworks consider gender-
specific recommendations 
SEPMU. Pasture Policy Expert 
(Including mission travels) 
SEPMU. Consultation 
workshops on Pasture Law 
SEPMU. Interpreter/Translator  GCF Grant 
IFAD Grant 
SEPMU. Organization of the OIE 
mission on veterinary legislation 
SEPMU. Workshops, round 
tables, conferences 
SEPMU. International Vet 
Legislation Expert (Including 
travels) 
PIG CEP. International Green 
Economy Expert (Including 
travels) 
PIG CEP. National Green 
Economy Expert 
IFAD Grant 
IFAD Grant 
GCF Grant 
GCF Grant 
GCF Grant 
GCF Grant 
8 | P a g e  
40 000 
CQS 
Post 
Feb-2023 
Feb-2023  Feb-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Apr-2023 
Jun-2023 
5 000 
CQS 
Post 
Feb-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Apr-2023  Apr-2023 
Jun-2023 
11 500 
ICS 
Post 
Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Apr-2023  Apr-2023  May-2023  Jun-2023 
11 500 
ICS 
Post 
Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Apr-2023  Apr-2023  May-2023  Jun-2023 
2 000 
SSS 
Prior 
N/A 
Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2023 
3 000 
SSS 
Prior 
N/A 
Oct-2022  Oct-2022  Nov-2022  Nov-2022  Nov-2022  Nov-2023 
23 000 
ICS 
Post 
Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2022  Oct-2023 
3 000 
CQS 
Post 
Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2022  Oct-2023 
38 400 
35 000 
ICS 
CQS 
Post 
Prior 
Jun-2022 
Apr-2023 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Dec-2023 
Apr-2023  Apr-2023  May-2023  May-2023  Jun-2023  Sep-2023 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022 
12 000 
SSS 
Prior 
N/A 
Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2022  Oct-2023 
9 250 
ICS 
Post 
Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Apr-2023  Apr-2023  May-2023  Jun-2023 
20 500 
ICS 
Post 
Apr-2023 
Apr-2023  Apr-2023  May-2023  May-2023  Jun-2023  Aug-2023 
5 400 
ICS 
Post 
Apr-2023 
Apr-2023  Apr-2023  May-2023  May-2023  Jun-2023  Aug-2023 
2 
Description of Assignment 
3 
Source of 
Funds 
3 
Estimated 
Cost in US$ 
4 
Selection 
Method 
GCF Grant 
2 000 
SSS 
5 
Review 
by IFAD 
(Prior / Post) 
Prior 
6 
Issuance of 
Expression of 
Interest 
N/A 
7 
Finalize 
shortlist and 
issue RFP 
Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Apr-2023  Apr-2023  May-2023 
8 
Proposals 
Submission 
Date 
10 
Complete 
Financial 
Evaluation 
9 
Complete 
Technical 
Evaluation 
11 
Negotiate 
and Award 
Completion 
GCF Grant 
1 000 
SSS 
Prior 
N/A 
May-2023  May-2023  Jun-2023 
Jun-2023 
Jun-2023 
Jul-2023 
GCF Grant 
1 000 
SSS 
Prior 
N/A 
May-2023  May-2023  Jun-2023 
Jun-2023 
Jun-2023 
Jul-2023 
GCF Grant 
17 500 
SSS 
Prior 
N/A 
Jul-2023 
Jul-2023 
Jul-2023 
Jul-2023  Aug-2023  Dec-2023 
IFAD Grant 
35 000 
CQS 
Prior 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Nov-2022 
Component 2:  Investments in community capacity for adaption and resilience to climate change 
Jul-2022 
2.1.1 
GCF Grant 
84 000 
Prior 
ICS 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2022 
Jan-2023 
GCF Grant 
21 000 
CQS 
Post 
Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2022  Oct-2022  Nov-2022  Nov-2022  Dec-2022 
GCF Grant 
10 000 
ICS 
Post 
Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2022  Oct-2022  Nov-2022 
GCF Grant 
18 000 
ICS 
Post 
Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Dec-2023 
IFAD Grant 
21 000 
CQS 
Post 
Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2022  Dec-2022 
1 
Ref. No. 
1.2.3 
1.2.3 
1.2.3 
1.2.3 
1.2.3 
2.1.1 
2.1.1 
2.1.1 
2.1.1 
PIG CEP. Organization of 
consultation and validation 
workshop 
PIG CEP. Organization of 
training on Green economy 
carried out by the National GE 
Expert to MEDT 
PIG CEP. Organization of ToT 
for subnational MEDT staff that 
can be autonomously repeated 
on district level by MEDT staff 
PIG CEP. Organization of study 
tour to learn from best practice 
experience in the sector from a 
partner country 
SEPMU. Software for Monitoring 
and Analysis of Public 
Investment Projects (Including 
advisory and installment) 
PIG CEP. Compile District 
diagnostic. National experts in 
GIS/climate change/geobotany 
with assistance of International 
consultant. 
PIG CEP. Community district-
level meetings to a) explain 
diagnostic report and how it 
should be used in development 
planning and b) to collect 
qualitative elements to be used 
in village selection process 
PIG CEP. National 
communication expert to create 
videos, animations, 
communications material to 
explain diagnostic including 
gender sensitive  
PIG CEP. Communication 
Specialist 
SEPMU. District community 
meetings to a) explain diagnostic 
9 | P a g e  
1 
Ref. No. 
2 
Description of Assignment 
3 
Source of 
Funds 
3 
Estimated 
Cost in US$ 
4 
Selection 
Method 
5 
Review 
by IFAD 
(Prior / Post) 
6 
Issuance of 
Expression of 
Interest 
7 
Finalize 
shortlist and 
issue RFP 
8 
Proposals 
Submission 
Date 
9 
Complete 
Technical 
Evaluation 
10 
Complete 
Financial 
Evaluation 
11 
Negotiate 
and Award 
Completion 
report and how it should be used 
in development planning and b) 
to collect qualitative elements to 
be used in village selection 
process. 
SEPMU. National Pasture 
Specialist (Including travels) 
SEPMU. Community facilitator to 
establish VO 
SEPMU. Training of VO 
executives by community 
facilitator 
SEPMU. Community facilitator to 
establish PUU (or PUG under 
VO) 
SEPMU. Training of PUU 
executives on formulation of 
PMP, pasture monitoring 
SEPMU. Community facilitator to 
establish PUA at district level 
SEPMU. Operations of PUAs: 
meeting cost and travel 
SEPMU. Community facilitator to 
establish PC at district level 
SEPMU. Operations of PCs: 
meetings and travel 
PIG CEP. Community facilitator 
to establish - Forest User 
Groups 
PIG CEP. JFM mobilization from 
first field visit through, plot id, 
user selection, signing JFM 
Contracts. Numbers are to give 
effort phasing (will operate in all 
200 villages immediately) 
SEPMU. Community facilitator to 
establish - Common Interest 
Groups 
SEPMU. Training of CIGs by 
community facilitator 
2.1.2 
2.1.2 
2.1.2 
2.1.2 
2.1.2 
2.1.2 
2.1.2 
2.1.2 
2.1.2 
2.1.2 
2.1.2 
2.1.2 
2.1.2 
10 | P a g e  
GCF Grant 
25 350 
ICS 
Post 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Dec-2023 
GCF Grant 
160 000 
QCBS 
Prior 
Sep-2022  Oct-2022  Nov-2022  Dec-2022  Jan-2022  Feb-2022  May-2023 
GCF Grant 
160 000 
QCBS 
Prior 
Oct-2022  Nov-2022  Dec-2022  Jan-2023  Feb-2023  Mar-2023 
Jul-2023 
GCF Grant 
80 000 
LCS 
Prior 
Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2022  Nov-2022  Dec-2022  Jan-2023  Mar-2023 
GCF Grant 
160 000 
QCBS 
Prior 
Oct-2022  Nov-2022  Dec-2022  Jan-2023  Feb-2023  Mar-2023 
Jun-2023 
GCF Grant 
21 000 
CQS 
Post 
Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2022  Nov-2022 
GCF Grant 
31 500 
LCS 
Post 
Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2022  Oct-2022  Nov-2022  Dec-2022  Jan-2023 
GCF Grant 
31 500 
CQS 
Post 
Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2022  Nov-2022  Dec-2022 
GCF Grant 
31 500 
LCS 
Post 
Sep-2022  Oct-2022  Oct-2022  Nov-2022  Nov-2022  Dec-2022  Jan-2023 
GCF Grant 
20 000 
CQS 
Post 
Jun-2023 
Jun-2023 
Jun-2023 
Jul-2023 
Jul-2023  Aug-2023  Sep-2023 
GCF Grant 
197 500 
QCBS 
Prior 
Jun-2023 
Jul-2023  Aug-2023  Sep-2023  Oct-2023  Nov-2023  Feb-2024 
GCF Grant 
102 000 
QCBS 
Prior 
Nov-2022  Dec-2022  Jan-2023  Feb-2023  Mar-2023  Apr-2023 
Jul-2023 
GCF Grant 
51 000 
CQS 
Post 
Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Apr-2023  Apr-2023  May-2023 
Jul-2023 
2 
Description of Assignment 
3 
Source of 
Funds 
3 
Estimated 
Cost in US$ 
4 
Selection 
Method 
5 
Review 
by IFAD 
(Prior / Post) 
Prior 
6 
Issuance of 
Expression of 
Interest 
7 
Finalize 
shortlist and 
issue RFP 
8 
Proposals 
Submission 
Date 
9 
Complete 
Technical 
Evaluation 
10 
Complete 
Financial 
Evaluation 
11 
Negotiate 
and Award 
Completion 
Oct-2022  Nov-2022  Dec-2022  Jan-2023  Feb-2023  Mar-2023 
Jun-2023 
100 000 
QCBS 
1 
Ref. No. 
2.1.2 
2.1.3 
2.1.3 
2.1.3 
2.1.4 
2.1.4 
2.1.4 
2.1.4 
2.1.4 
2.1.4 
GCF Grant 
GCF Grant 
GCF Grant 
GCF Grant 
SEPMU. Women 
representatives trained in 
leadership skills by a specialized 
NGO 
SEPMU. Development of 
CsCAPs, including forestry 
(concerning design and 
allocation of JFM plots and 
layout of direct afforestation 
areas), pastures, infrastructure 
and mechanization aspects in 
400 villages 
SEPMU. Environmental and 
social impact assessments 
(ESIA) (2 Environment/Climate 
Change specialists) (Including 
travels) 
SEPMU. Environmental and 
social impact assessments 
(ESIA) (2 Social Inclusion 
specialists) (Including travels) 
SEPMU. Training in monitoring 
& evaluation, use of Smartphone 
reporting tools 
SEPMU. 16 PMU District officers  IFAD Grant 
GCF Grant 
SEPMU. Operating costs for 
vehicles of District Officers and 
key project management staff 
SEPMU. Organization of training 
of 16 PMU and 5 CEP Project 
forestry specialists on 
compliance with GCF 
requirements (e.g. ESIA) 
SEPMU. Trainer fee for training 
(including material preparation) 
of 16 PMU and 5 CEP Project 
forestry specialists on 
compliance with GCF 
requirements (e.g. ESIA) 
SEPMU. Community 
development specialist 
IFAD Grant 
GCF Grant 
GCF Grant 
GCF Grant 
11 | P a g e  
380 000 
QCBS 
Prior 
Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2022  Nov-2022  Dec-2022  Jan-2023  Apr-2023 
29 000 
ICS 
Post 
Feb-2023 
Feb-2023  Feb-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Apr-2023  May-2023 
29 000 
ICS 
Post 
Feb-2023 
Feb-2023  Feb-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Apr-2023  May-2023 
80 000 
LCS 
Prior 
Oct-2022  Oct-2022  Nov-2022  Dec-2022  Jan-2022  Feb-2023  Apr-2023 
307 200 
144 000 
ICS 
QCBS 
Prior 
Prior 
Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2022  Nov-2022  Dec-2022  Jan-2023  Dec-2023 
Jan-2023  Feb-2023  Mar-2023  Apr-2023  May-2023  Dec-2023 
Dec-2022 
2 000 
SSS 
Prior 
N/A 
Oct-2022  Oct-2022  Nov-2022  Nov-2022  Dec-2022  Jan-2023 
4 000 
ICS 
Post 
Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2022  Oct-2022  Nov-2022  Dec-2022  Jan-2023 
24 000 
ICS 
Post 
Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2022  Nov-2022  Dec-2023 
2 
Description of Assignment 
3 
Source of 
Funds 
3 
Estimated 
Cost in US$ 
4 
Selection 
Method 
GCF Grant 
24 000 
ICS 
5 
Review 
by IFAD 
(Prior / Post) 
Post 
6 
Issuance of 
Expression of 
Interest 
9 
Complete 
Technical 
Evaluation 
Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2022  Oct-2022  Nov-2022  Nov-2022  Dec-2023 
7 
Finalize 
shortlist and 
issue RFP 
8 
Proposals 
Submission 
Date 
10 
Complete 
Financial 
Evaluation 
11 
Negotiate 
and Award 
Completion 
GCF Grant 
26 250 
ICS 
Post 
Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Apr-2023  Apr-2023  May-2023  Dec-2023 
IFAD Grant 
3 500 
ICS 
Post 
Feb-2023 
Feb-2023  Feb-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Apr-2023  May-2023 
GCF Grant 
GCF Grant 
56 000 
40 000 
CQS 
CQS 
Post 
Post 
Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2022  Oct-2022  Nov-2022  Nov-2022  Dec-2023 
Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2022  Oct-2022  Nov-2022  Nov-2022  Jun-2023 
Component 3: Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market-based approaches 
3.1.1 
IFAD Grant 
27 500 
CQS 
Post 
Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Apr-2023  Apr-2023  May-2023  Jun-2023 
IFAD Grant 
2 400 
ICS 
Post 
Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Apr-2023  Apr-2023  May-2023  Jun-2023 
GCF Grant 
GCF Grant 
25 000 
19 350 
CQS 
ICS 
Post 
Post 
Jul-2023 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2023  Aug-2023  Aug-2023  Sep-2023  Dec-2023 
Jul-2023 
Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Dec-2023 
GCF Grant 
19 350 
ICS 
Post 
Jul-2022 
Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Dec-2023 
GCF Grant 
30 000 
LCS 
Post 
Oct-2022  Oct-2022  Nov-2022  Nov-2022  Dec-2022  Jan-2022  May-2023 
GCF Grant 
7 500 
SSS 
Prior 
N/A 
Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2022  Oct-2022  Nov-2022 
IFAD Grant 
10 000 
CQS 
Post 
Feb-2023 
Feb-2023  Feb-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Apr-2023  May-2023 
GCF Grant 
20 000 
CQS 
Post 
Feb-2023 
Feb-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Apr-2023  May-2023  Jun-2023 
1 
Ref. No. 
2.1.4 
2.1.4 
2.2.1 
2.2.1 
2.2.2 
3.1.1 
3.1.3 
3.2.1 
3.2.1 
3.2.1 
3.2.1 
3.2.1 
3.3.1 
SEPMU. Gender and Youth 
policy specialist 
PIG CEP. 5 Project forestry 
specialists (Including travels) 
SEPMU. Cross-village PMP 
monitoring (by PIU or appointed 
consultants) 
SEPMU. PMP monitoring  
PIG CEP. Field training for JFM 
beneficiaries on planting and 
aftercare of trees 
SEPMU. Participants' travel and 
per diems (10 days stay in 
Dushanbe) - 50 young 
specialists 
SEPMU. Trainers' fee (2 
trainers) 
SEPMU. Exchange visits 
SEPMU. Livestock specialist 
covering animal production and 
animal health (Including travels) 
SEPMU. Market/value chain 
specialist (Including travels) 
SEPMU. Organization of VC 
consultation meetings gathering 
potential PA partners (Producers 
groups and business operators) 
SEPMU. Contracting of the 
Regional Chamber of Commerce 
for facilitation 
SEPMU. Feasibility study 
(addressing technical, economic 
and market aspects) 
SEPMU. ToT for district officers 
and agro departments experts 
on business and climate-resilient 
technologies for W1 and W2 
activities 
12 | P a g e  
1 
Ref. No. 
2 
Description of Assignment 
3 
Source of 
Funds 
3 
Estimated 
Cost in US$ 
4 
Selection 
Method 
GCF Grant 
3 000 
CQS 
5 
Review 
by IFAD 
(Prior / Post) 
Post 
6 
Issuance of 
Expression of 
Interest 
Feb-2023 
7 
Finalize 
shortlist and 
issue RFP 
Feb-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Apr-2023  May-2023  Jun-2023 
8 
Proposals 
Submission 
Date 
10 
Complete 
Financial 
Evaluation 
9 
Complete 
Technical 
Evaluation 
11 
Negotiate 
and Award 
Completion 
3.3.1 
3.3.1 
3.3.1 
3.3.1 
3.3.1 
3.3.1 
3.3.1 
3.3.1 
3.3.1 
3.3.1 
3.3.1 
SEPMU. Service Provider for 
training material preparation on 
Window 1  
SEPMU. Training delivery 
specialist (Service Provider for 
the first 100 villages), including 
per diem and travel  
SEPMU. Rent of training facility 
(venue) for first 100 villages to 
be trained by SP  
SEPMU. Rent of training facility 
(venue) for the rest 410 villages 
to be trained by district officers 
and agro department experts  
SEPMU. Recruitment of 10 
facilitators for 3 months each   
SEPMU. Organization of 1 
meeting in each village with local 
communities (in 110 villages)  
SEPMU. Service Provider for 
training material preparation on 
Window 2 business planning, 
proposal writing and looking at 
farm as a business  
SEPMU. Training delivery 
specialist (Service Provider to 
110 villages), including per diem 
and travel  
SEPMU. Rent of training facility 
(venue) for 110 villages to be 
trained by SP  
SEPMU. Service Provider for 
training material preparation on 
climate-resilient technologies in 
6 different VCs  
SEPMU. Training delivery 
specialist (Service Provider for 
the first 100 villages), including 
per diem and travel  
13 | P a g e  
GCF Grant 
20 000 
ICS 
Post 
Apr-2023 
Apr-2023  Apr-2023  May-2023  May-2023  Jun-2023 
Jul-2023 
GCF Grant 
10 000 
LCS 
Post 
Apr-2023 
Apr-2023  May-2023  May-2023  Jun-2023 
Jul-2023  Aug-2023 
GCF Grant 
10 000 
LCS 
Post 
Apr-2023 
Apr-2023  May-2023  May-2023  Jun-2023 
Jul-2023  Aug-2023 
GCF Grant 
12 000  
ICS 
Post 
Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Apr-2023  Apr-2023  Apr-2023  May-2023  Aug-2023 
GCF Grant 
33 000  
CQS 
Post 
Jun-2023 
Jun-2023 
Jun-2023 
Jul-2023 
Jul-2023  Aug-2023  Sep-2023 
GCF Grant 
1 800  
CQS 
Post 
May-2023  May-2023  May-2023  Jun-2023 
Jun-2023 
Jul-2023  Aug-2023 
GCF Grant 
22 000  
ICS 
Post 
Jun-2023 
Jun-2023 
Jun-2023 
Jul-2023 
Jul-2023  Aug-2023  Sep-2023 
GCF Grant 
27 500  
LCS 
Post 
Jun-2023 
Jun-2023 
Jul-2023 
Jul-2023  Aug-2023  Sep-2023  Oct-2023 
GCF Grant 
4 000 
CQS 
Post 
Jul-2023 
Jul-2023 
Jul-2023  Aug-2023  Aug-2023  Sep-2023  Oct-2023 
GCF Grant 
20 000 
ICS 
Post 
Aug-2023  Aug-2023  Aug-2023  Sep-2023  Sep-2023  Sep-2023  Oct-2023 
2 
Description of Assignment 
3 
Source of 
Funds 
3 
Estimated 
Cost in US$ 
4 
Selection 
Method 
GCF Grant 
10 000 
LCS 
5 
Review 
by IFAD 
(Prior / Post) 
Post 
6 
Issuance of 
Expression of 
Interest 
9 
Complete 
Technical 
Evaluation 
Aug-2023  Sep-2023  Sep-2023  Oct-2023  Oct-2023  Nov-2023  Dec-2023 
7 
Finalize 
shortlist and 
issue RFP 
8 
Proposals 
Submission 
Date 
10 
Complete 
Financial 
Evaluation 
11 
Negotiate 
and Award 
Completion 
GCF Grant 
9 000 
ICS 
Post 
Jul-2023 
Jul-2023 
Jul-2023  Aug-2023  Aug-2023  Sep-2023  Nov-2023 
IFAD Grant 
19 350 
ICS 
Post 
Jul-2022 
Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Dec-2023 
IFAD Grant 
38 400 
ICS 
Post 
Jan-2023 
Feb-2023  Feb-2023  Feb-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Dec-2023 
IFAD Grant 
10 000 
CQS 
Post 
Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2023  Oct-2023  Nov-2023  Nov-2023  Dec-2023 
Component 4:  Project Management Component 
IFAD Grant 
IFAD Grant 
30 000 
6 000 
LCS 
SSS 
Prior 
Prior 
Oct-2022  Nov-2022  Dec-2022  Jan-2023  Feb-2023  Mar-2023 
Jul-25 
N/A 
Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Dec-2023 
IFAD Grant 
70 000 
CQS 
Prior 
Nov-2022  Nov-2022  Dec-2022  Dec-2022  Jan-2023  Feb-2023  Mar-2023 
IFAD Grant 
10 000 
CQS 
Post 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2022  Dec-2023 
IFAD Grant 
28 000 
ICS 
Prior 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Dec-2023 
IFAD Grant 
24 000 
ICS 
Post 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Dec-2023 
IFAD Grant 
IFAD Grant 
30 000 
6 000 
LCS 
SSS 
Prior 
Prior 
Oct-2022  Nov-2022  Dec-2022  Jan-2023  Feb-2023  Mar-2023 
Jul-25 
N/A 
Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Dec-2023 
IFAD Grant 
28 800 
ICS 
Prior 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Dec-2023 
1 
Ref. No. 
3.3.1 
3.3.1 
3.3.2 
3.3.2 
3.3.2 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
SEPMU. Rent of training facility 
(venue) for first 100 villages to 
be trained by SP  
SEPMU. Sub-projects 
implementation expert (2 part-
time experts, supporting local 
community to run the facilities 
and use the equipment) 
including travels 
SEPMU. Grant management 
specialist (Including travels) 
SEPMU. PMU District Officers to 
provide Capacity development 
for CIGs / matching grant 
schemes recipients (Win1 and 
Win 2) 
SEPMU. Communication 
campaign (printing of materials, 
advertising on TV and 
magazines, etc.) 
SEPMU. Audit for first 3 years 
SEPMU. Training on FM, 
Procurement and other issues 
SEPMU. Baseline socio-
economic status of households 
with particular focus on capacity 
to deal with climate change and 
risks 
SEPMU. Project MIS system 
operational support 
SEPMU. Monitoring and 
Evaluation Consultant (Including 
travel) 
SEPMU. Monitoring and 
Evaluation Assistant 
PIG CEP. Audit for first 3 years 
PIG CEP. Training on FM, 
Procurement and other issues  
SEPMU. Project Coordinator 
14 | P a g e  
1 
Ref. No. 
2 
Description of Assignment 
3 
Source of 
Funds 
3 
Estimated 
Cost in US$ 
4 
Selection 
Method 
5 
Review 
by IFAD 
(Prior / Post) 
Prior 
6 
Issuance of 
Expression of 
Interest 
Jun-2022 
7 
Finalize 
shortlist and 
issue RFP 
Jun-2022 
8 
Proposals 
Submission 
Date 
Jul-2022 
9 
Complete 
Technical 
Evaluation 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Dec-2023 
10 
Complete 
Financial 
Evaluation 
11 
Negotiate 
and Award 
Completion 
Prior 
Prior 
Prior 
Post 
Post 
Post 
Post 
Post 
Post 
Prior 
Post 
Prior 
Prior 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Dec-2023 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Dec-2023 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Dec-2023 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022  Dec-2023 
Jul-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022  Dec-2023 
Jul-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022  Dec-2023 
Jul-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022  Dec-2023 
Jul-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022  Dec-2023 
Jul-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Dec-2023 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Dec-2023 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Dec-2023 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Dec-2023 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Dec-2023 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022 
26 400 
ICS 
19 200 
24 000 
24 000 
19 200 
15 360 
30 720 
9 600 
48 000 
14 400 
64 920 
24 886 
28 800 
26 400 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
SSS 
ICS 
ICS 
24 000 
ICS 
Prior 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Dec-2023 
24 000 
ICS 
Prior 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Dec-2023 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Dec-2023 
Jul-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022  Dec-2023 
Jul-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Dec-2023 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Dec-2023 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Dec-2023 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Dec-2023 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Dec-2023 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022 
19 200 
3 600 
14 400 
15 360 
38 940 
24 000 
21 600 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
ICS 
SSS 
CQS 
Post 
Post 
Post 
Post 
Post 
Prior 
Post 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022 
QBS -   Quality Based Selection 
LCS -   Least Cost Selection 
CQS -   Consultant Qualification Selection 
ICS -  
SSS -   Single Source Selection 
Individual Consultants Selection 
4 
4 
4 
IFAD Grant 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
IFAD Grant 
IFAD Grant 
SEPMU. Financial management 
specialist 
SEPMU. Project Accountant 
SEPMU. Disbursement 
specialist 
IFAD Grant 
SEPMU. Procurement specialist 
IFAD Grant 
SEPMU. Procurement assistant 
SEPMU. Administrator 
IFAD Grant 
SEPMU. Administrator assistant  IFAD Grant 
IFAD Grant 
SEPMU. Office Cleaner (4) 
IFAD Grant 
SEPMU. Drivers (10) 
IFAD Grant 
SEPMU. Security Guards (6) 
IFAD Grant 
SEPMU. Social Fund (25%) 
IFAD Grant 
SEPMU. Travels 
GCF Grant 
PIG CEP. Project Coordinator 
GCF Grant 
PIG CEP. Financial 
management specialist 
PIG CEP. Disbursement 
specialist 
PIG CEP. Procurement 
specialist 
GCF Grant 
PIG CEP. Project Assistant 
IFAD Grant 
PIG CEP. Office Cleaner 
PIG CEP. Drivers (3) 
IFAD Grant 
PIG CEP. Interpreter/Translator  GCF Grant 
GCF Grant 
PIG CEP. Social Fund (25%) 
GCF Grant 
PIG CEP. Travels 
GCF Grant 
PIG CEP. Operating expenses - 
Vehicle Maintenance & 
Operations (3 vehicles) 
Total for Services in US$:   4,186,686 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
GCF Grant 
GCF Grant 
4 
4 
Competitive Methods are the following: 
International Competitive Bidding 
National Competitive Bidding 
ICB -  
NCB -  
Shopping -   National/Local Shopping 
DC -  
QCBS -   Quality and Cost Based Selection 
Direct Contracting 
15 | P a g e  
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS (FAO UN) 
Procurement Plan (Initial 18 months) 
I. 
General 
1.  Project information: Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘Plus’ (CASP+), Tajikistan 
2.  Version of the Plan: Version 1.0 dated July, 2021 
3.  Approval Date of the procurement Plan:  - 
4.  Date of General Procurement Notice:  - 
5.  Period covered by this procurement plan: June 2022 – December 2023 
6.  Other  Arrangements:  The  project  will  provide  loan/grants  to  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Tajikistan. 
Procurement will be carried out by FAO themselves according FAO Procurement Guidelines and procurement plan 
will be agreed between the FAO and Grant Recipients. 
II.  Goods, Works and Non-Consulting services 
1.  Prior Review Threshold (IFAD):  
Procurement Method 
Threshold for use of 
method 
GOODS AND NON-CONSULTING SERVICES 
1. 
2. 
International Competitive Bidding (ICB) 
National Competitive Bidding (NCB) 
3. 
National Shopping (NS) 
> US$200,000 
> US$70,000 to  
< US$200,000 
< US$70,000 
4. 
Direct Contracting (DC) 
< US$2,000 
1 | P a g e  
Prior Review Threshold 
Comments 
All contracts based on ICB 
All contracts based on NCB 
The first three (3) contracts 
regardless of value shall be subject to 
prior review 
All contracts based on DC 
As an exception and if warranted by 
circumstances in line with IFAD 
procurement guidelines 
Procurement Method 
Threshold for use of 
method 
Prior Review Threshold 
Comments 
CIVIL WORKS AND NON-CONSULTING SERVICES 
International Competitive Bidding (ICB) 
1. 
National Competitive Bidding (NCB) 
2. 
3. 
National Shopping (NS) 
> US$800,000 
> US$190,000 to 
< US$800,000 
< US$190,000 
4. 
Direct Contracting (DC) 
< US$3,000 
All contracts based on ICB 
All contracts based on NCB 
The first three (3) contracts 
regardless of value and thereafter all 
contracts >US$150,000 shall be 
subject to prior review 
All contracts based on DC 
As an exception and if warranted by 
circumstances in line with IFAD 
procurement guidelines 
2.  Prequalification (for complex Civil Works) – N/A 
3.  Procurement Packages with Methods and Time Schedule  
1 
Ref. No. 
2 
Contract 
(Description) 
3 
Source of 
Funds 
4 
Planned vs 
Actual 
5 
Estimated 
Cost in US$ 
6 
Procurement 
Method 
7 
Pre 
qualification 
(yes/no) 
8 
Domestic 
Preference 
(yes/no) 
9 
Review 
by IFAD 
(Prior / 
Post) 
10 
Date of 
issuance of 
doc’s 
11 
Bid-Opening 
Date 
12 
Date of 
contract 
/order 
signature 
13 
Completion 
Component 3: Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market-based approaches 
3.1.2  FAO. Renovation of TVA 
GCF Grant  Planned 
Shopping 
15 000 
No 
office and Training Center 
Actual 
3.1.2  FAO. Office equipment and 
GCF Grant  Planned 
6 200 
Shopping 
No 
furniture for the training 
room (TVA office) 
3.1.2  FAO. Office maintenance 
(TVA) 
Actual 
GCF Grant  Planned 
2 000 
Shopping 
Actual 
3.1.2  FAO. Vehicle for TVA 
GCF Grant  Planned 
23 000 
Shopping 
3.1.2  FAO. Veterinary package 
GCF Grant  Planned 
284 000 
ICB 
for 284 vets 
Actual 
3.1.3  FAO. FFS starting capital  GCF Grant  Planned 
72 000 
NCB 
Actual 
3.1.3  FAO. Establishment of trial 
GCF Grant  Planned 
16 000 
Shopping 
Actual 
sites 
3.1.3 
2 | P a g e  
Actual 
GCF Grant  Planned 
54 800 
Shopping 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Prior 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022 
Post 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022 
Post 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2023 
Prior 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022 
Prior 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022  Aug-2022  Oct-2022 
Prior 
Jan-2023 
Jan-2023  Feb-2023  Mar-2023 
Post 
Jan-2023 
Jan-2023  Feb-2023  Mar-2023 
Post 
Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Oct-2023 
1 
Ref. No. 
2 
Contract 
(Description) 
3 
Source of 
Funds 
4 
Planned vs 
Actual 
5 
Estimated 
Cost in US$ 
6 
Procurement 
Method 
7 
Pre 
qualification 
(yes/no) 
8 
Domestic 
Preference 
(yes/no) 
9 
Review 
by IFAD 
(Prior / 
Post) 
10 
Date of 
issuance of 
doc’s 
11 
Bid-Opening 
Date 
12 
Date of 
contract 
/order 
signature 
13 
Completion 
FAO. Awareness raising 
work and selection of FFS 
member and to promote 
FFS (hard investments) 
Total for Goods and Works in 
US$:   473,000 
Actual 
III.  Selection of Consultants and Non-Consulting services 
1.  Prior Review Threshold (IFAD): 
Selection Method 
Threshold for use of 
method 
Prior Review Threshold 
Comment 
1. 
Quality and Cost Based Selection 
(QCBS) 
> US$100,000 
All contracts based on QCBS 
2 
3 
Quality Based Selection (QBS), 
Fixed Budget Selection (FBS) and 
Least Cost Selection (LCS) 
< US$100,000 
Selection Based on consultants’ 
qualification (CQS) 
< US$70,000 
4. 
Individual Consultant Selection 
(ICS) 
5. 
Single Source Selection (SSS) 
Any contracts regardless of 
value may be awarded on 
the basis of ICS 
Firms < US$2,000 
Individual < US$1,000 
The first three (3) contracts regardless 
of value and thereafter all contracts 
>US$60,000 shall be subject to prior 
review 
The first three (3) contracts regardless 
of value and thereafter all contracts 
>US$60,000 shall be subject to prior 
review 
The first three (3) contracts regardless 
of value and thereafter all contracts 
>US$60,000 shall be subject to prior 
review 
All contracts based on SSS 
Advertising of REOI shall be 
international for any contract 
>US$100,000. Otherwise the 
advertising shall national 
Advertising of REOI shall be 
international for any contract where 
there is expected to be interest 
internationally. Otherwise the 
advertising shall national 
Advertising of REOI shall be 
international for any contract where 
there is expected to be interest 
internationally. Otherwise the 
advertising shall national 
As an exception and if warranted by 
circumstances in line with IFAD 
procurement guidelines 
3 | P a g e  
2.  Short list comprising entirely of national consultants: Short list of consultants for services, estimated to 
cost less than $100,000 equivalent per contract, may comprise entirely of national three to six consultants in 
accordance with the IFAD’s interest in encouraging the development and use of National Consultants from 
partner countries of operation.  
3.  Any Other Special Selection Arrangements: N/A  
4.  Consultancy Assignments with Selection Methods and Time Schedule 
1 
2 
Ref. No. 
Description of Assignment 
3 
Source of 
Funds 
3 
Estimated 
Cost in US$ 
4 
Selection 
Method 
5 
Review 
by IFAD 
(Prior / Post) 
6 
Issuance of 
Expression 
of Interest 
7 
Finalize 
shortlist and 
issue RFP 
8 
Proposals 
Submission 
Date 
9 
Complete 
Technical 
Evaluation 
10 
Complete 
Financial 
Evaluation 
11 
Negotiate and 
Award 
Completion 
Component 1: Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources 
1.2.1 
FAO Grant 
Jan-2023 
Jan-2023 
11 500 
Post 
ICS 
Jan-2023  Feb-2023  Feb-2023 
Feb-2023  Mar-2023 
FAO Grant 
11 500 
ICS 
Post 
Jan-2023 
Jan-2023 
Jan-2023  Feb-2023  Feb-2023 
Feb-2023  Mar-2023 
FAO Grant 
20 000 
ICS 
Prior 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022 
Aug-2022 
FAO Grant 
15 000  CQS/SS
Prior 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jun-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022 
Apr-2023 
S 
Component 3: Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market-based approaches 
3.1.2 
GCF Grant 
Jul-2022 
24 000 
Post 
ICS 
Jul-2022 
Jul-2022 
Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Dec-2023 
GCF Grant 
12 000 
SSS 
Prior 
N/A 
Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Dec-2023 
GCF Grant 
34 229 
CQS 
Post 
Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022 
Feb-2023 
FAO Grant 
22 571 
CQS 
Post 
Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022 
Feb-2023 
GCF Grant 
25 000 
ICS 
Post 
Feb-2023  Feb-2023 
Feb-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023 
Apr-2023 
1.2.1 
1.2.2 
1.2.2 
3.1.2 
3.1.2 
3.1.2 
3.1.3 
FAO. International Specialists on 
Carbon accounting Tools 
(Including travels) 
FAO. International Specialists on 
Livestock Planning Related 
Tools (LSIPT) (Including travels) 
FAO. Provision of technical 
assistance on the formulation of 
breeding strategies 
FAO. Organization of workshops 
(2 consultations and 1 validation) 
FAO. National Specialist on 
Continuous Veterinary Education 
FAO. Participation in the 
international events/workshops 
FAO. Training and workshops, 
including kick off meetings 
FAO. Training and workshops, 
including kick off meetings 
FAO. International Master 
Trainer on FFS (including fees 
and 2 missions) 
4 | P a g e  
1 
2 
Ref. No. 
Description of Assignment 
3 
Source of 
Funds 
3 
Estimated 
Cost in US$ 
4 
Selection 
Method 
5 
Review 
by IFAD 
(Prior / Post) 
6 
Issuance of 
Expression 
of Interest 
7 
Finalize 
shortlist and 
issue RFP 
8 
Proposals 
Submission 
Date 
9 
Complete 
Technical 
Evaluation 
10 
Complete 
Financial 
Evaluation 
11 
Negotiate and 
Award 
Completion 
3.1.3 
3.1.3 
3.1.3 
3.1.3 
FAO. Training of facilitators - 40 
people (including per diems and 
transport) 
FAO. Honorarium of National 
Master Trainers for training of 
facilitators 
FAO. Monitoring and evaluation 
(including DSA and honorarium) 
FAO. Awareness raising work 
and selection of FFS member 
and to promote FFS (TA) 
Total for Services in US$:   227,400 
GCF Grant 
10 400  CQS/SS
Post 
Feb-2023  Feb-2023 
Feb-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023 
Apr-2023 
S 
GCF Grant 
8 000 
SSS 
Prior 
N/A 
Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023 
Apr-2023 
GCF Grant 
8 000 
ICS 
Post 
Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Mar-2023  Apr-2023  Apr-2023 
Apr-2023  May-2023 
GCF Grant 
25 200 
ICS 
Post 
Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Aug-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022  Sep-2022 
Feb-2023 
Competitive Methods are the following: 
ICB - International Competitive Bidding 
NCB - National Competitive Bidding  
Shopping - National/Local Shopping  
DC - Direct Contracting 
QCBS - Quality and Cost Based Selection   
QBS - Quality Based Selection 
LCS - Least Cost Selection   
CQS - Consultant Qualification Selection 
ICS - Individual Consultants Selection 
SSS - Single Source Selection 
5 | P a g e  
Procurement Plan SUMMARY
Country:
Republic of Tajikistan 
Project Name:
Community-Based Agriculture Support Programme ‘Plus’ (CASP+)
Project ID:
Version
1.0
Version Date
August 2021
Prepared by:
Approved by:
Procurement 
Category
Plan
Actual
Currency
USD
LCU
USD
LCU
Goods
Works
Consulting 
Services
TOTAL
14,805,356.00 
120,000.00 
4,186,686.00 
19,112,042.00 
Prior Review Thresholds
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Thresholds
Goods
Works
Prior Review
> US$ 70 000
> US$ 150 000
Non-Consulting 
Services
> US$ 150 000
Firms - Consulting 
Services
Individuals - 
Consulting Services
> US$ 60 000
> US$ 60 000
All Direct Contracting, Single-Source, ICB and QCBS Procurements are  Prior Review .
Procurement Method Thresholds
NCB
> US$ 70 000 to < 
US$ 200 000
> US$ 190 000 to < 
US$ 800 000
< US$ 190 000
Shopping
< US$ 70 000
Works 
Goods
ICB
DC
> US$ 200 000
< US$ 2 000
> US$ 800 000
< US$ 3 000
Non-Consulting 
Services
< US$ 190 000
CQS
Individuals
< US$ 0.00
Firms
< US$ 70 000
> US$ 190 000 to < 
US$ 800 000
QBS/LCS
> US$ 0.00 to < US$ 
0.00
< US$ 100 000
> US$ 800 000
< US$ 3 000
QCBS
SSS
> US$ 0.00
< US$ 1 000
> US$ 100 000
< US$ 2 000
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 1 of 1
Printed on: 30/08/2021
Procurement Plan - Goods
Republic of Tajikistan 
Community-Based Agriculture Support Programme ‘Plus’ (CASP+)
Project ID: 
Prepared by: 
Approved by: 
Total Amount
USD
LCU
14,805,356.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Plan
Actual
Procurement Methods
NS: National Shopping 
IS: International Shopping 
NCB: National Competitive Bidding 
ICB: International Competitive Bidding 
LIB: Limited (International) Bidding 
DC: Direct Contracting
Version
1.0
August 2021
Basic Data
Pre-Qualification
Bid Evaluation
Contract Award & Signature
Contract data
AWPB/Component Ref 
№ 
Description 
Funding 
Lot №/ Description
Project Area
Plan vs. Actual
Package №
Pre-or Post 
Qualification
Prior or Post Review
Procurement 
Method
Envelopes
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Submission of PreQual 
Docs
No Objection Date
PreQual Invitation 
Date.
PreQual Closing 
Date
Submission of PreQual 
Report.
No Objection Date
Submission of BD 
to IFAD
No-objection
Date
Bid Invitation Date Bid Closing-Opening
Submission
Tech Eval Rpt
No-objection
Date
Submission
Combined Eval Rpt*
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
Date
Contract
Award
Date
Contract
Signature
Contract 
completion
Comments
Contract No.
Vendor Name/ID
Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU)
Component 1: Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources
Component 1; 
Item 1.1.1
Component 1; 
Item 1.1.2
Component 1; 
Item 1.1.3
Component 1; 
Item 1.1.3
Component 1; 
Item 1.1.3
Component 1; 
Item 1.2.1
1
2
3
4
5
6
SEPMU. Logistical support to the regional 
PMT office in Kulob (Procurement of 
Equipment)
GCF Grant
PIG CEP. Office and server equipment 
(computer, server to data storage, plotter, 
ink, paper etc.)
GCF Grant
SEPMU. Mini truck-refrigerator and 
disinfection machine for FSC
IFAD 
Grant
SEPMU. Laboratory equipment and AI 
kits for SEABAI
IFAD 
Grant
SEPMU. Liquid nitrogen machine
IFAD 
Grant
PIG CEP. Printing of communication 
materials (including Publication: Gender 
and Climate Change in Tajikistan (based 
on CASP+ experience)
GCF Grant
1
1
All targeted 
area
All targeted 
area
Multiple
All targeted 
area
Multiple
All targeted 
area
1
1
All targeted 
area
All targeted 
area
Component 2:  Investments in community capacity for adaption and resilience to climate change
SEPMU. Equipment for VO/PUU/PUG 
(Office equipment, mobile phone for 
pasture monitoring)
GCF Grant
Multiple
All targeted 
area
SEPMU. Vehicles for 16 District Officers 
and 4 key project management staff
GCF Grant
Multiple
All targeted 
area
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.2
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.4
Component 2; 
Item 2.2.1
7
8
9
SEPMU. Implement cross-village Pasture 
Management Plan
IFAD Loan
Component 2; 
Item 2.2.1
10
SEPMU. Implement Pasture Management 
Plan-1
GCF Loan
Component 2; 
Item 2.2.1
11
SEPMU. Implement Pasture Management 
Plan-2
GCF Grant
Component 2; 
Item 2.2.1
12
SEPMU. Implement Climate Resilient 
infrastructure investments
IFAD 
Grant
Component 2; 
Item 2.2.1
Component 2; 
Item 2.2.1
13
14
SEPMU. Implement Agriculture 
Mechanization investments from CsCAP: 
Procurement of community-shared 
equipment-1
SEPMU. Implement Agriculture 
Mechanization investments from CsCAP: 
Procurement of community-shared 
equipment-2
IFAD 
Grant
IFAD 
Grant
Component 2; 
Item 2.2.1
15
PIG CEP. JFM Investment: Forest & 
Pasture Management Plans
GCF Grant
Multiple
All targeted 
area
Multiple
All targeted 
area
Multiple
All targeted 
area
Multiple
All targeted 
area
Multiple
All targeted 
area
Multiple
All targeted 
area
Multiple
All targeted 
area
Component 2; 
Item 2.2.1
Component 2; 
Item 2.2.1
16
17
PIG CEP. Equipment package for forest 
establishment, site preparation (2 x 
tractors, 2 x 4x4 car, 1 x larger trucks for 
water/seedling transport)  to be used 
across multiple FMPs-1
GCF Grant
Multiple
All targeted 
area
PIG CEP.Equipment package for forest 
establishment, site preparation (2 x 
tractors, 2 x 4x4 car, 1 x larger trucks for 
water/seedling transport) to be used 
across multiple FMPs-2
GCF Grant
Multiple
All targeted 
area
Component 2; 
Item 2.2.1
18
PIG CEP. Leskhoz Investment: Forest & 
Pasture Management Plans
GCF Grant
Component 2; 
Item 2.2.1
19
PIG CEP. JFM Investment: Protected 
Area Buffer Zones
GCF Grant
Multiple
All targeted 
area
Multiple
All targeted 
area
Component 3: Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market-based approaches
Component 3; 
Item 3.1.1
20
SEPMU. AI kits
IFAD 
Grant
Component 3; 
Item 3.1.1
21
SEPMU. Consumables including cows (5 
out of 10 days are practical sessions)
IFAD 
Grant
1
1
All targeted 
area
All targeted 
area
Component 3; 
Item 3.1.1
22
SEPMU. Doses and synchronization for 
AI
IFAD 
Grant
Multiple
All targeted 
area
Plan
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NS
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Prior Review
ICB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
ICB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
ICB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
ICB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
ICB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
ICB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
ICB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
ICB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
ICB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
ICB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
ICB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
ICB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NCB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Prior Review
ICB
S-09
S-01
NCB-01
S-11
NCB-03
S-04
ICB-01
ICB-03
ICB-02
ICB-07
ICB-08
ICB-10
ICB-11
ICB-12
ICB-13
ICB-04
ICB-05
ICB-14
NCB-02
S-10
S-12
ICB-06
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
20,000.00 
-
21,000.00 
-
110,000.00 
-
37,500.00 
-
120,000.00 
-
4,000.00 
-
640,000.00 
-
600,000.00 
-
525,000.00 
-
1,800,000.00 
-
200,000.00 
-
1,872,736.00 
-
766,380.00 
-
833,620.00 
-
2,749,516.00 
-
1,400,000.00 
-
560,000.00 
-
525,154.00 
-
85,330.00 
-
7,500.00 
-
12,500.00 
-
400,000.00 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Jan-23
N/A
11-Jan-23
25-Jan-23
N/A
N/A
1-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Jun-22
8-Jun-22
9-Jun-22
23-Jun-22
N/A
N/A
30-Jun-22
7-Jul-22
1-Feb-23
3-Feb-23
5-Feb-23
1-Mar-23
20,000.00 
7-Jul-22
9-Jul-22
11-Jul-22
5-Aug-22
21,000.00 
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Jul-22
8-Jul-22
10-Jul-22
9-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
23-Aug-22
30-Aug-22
Plan
11-Sep-22
18-Sep-22
20-Sep-22
20-Nov-22
110,000.00 
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Apr-23
N/A
2-Apr-23
16-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
23-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
5-Mar-23
12-Mar-23
14-Mar-23
13-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
27-Apr-23
4-May-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
5-Jul-22
N/A
6-Jul-22
20-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
27-Jul-22
N/A
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
23-Apr-23
25-Apr-23
27-Apr-23
10-Jun-23
37,500.00 
16-May-23
23-May-23
25-May-23
5-Jul-23
120,000.00 
27-Jul-22
29-Jul-22
31-Jul-22
28-Feb-23
4,000.00 
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
5-Jun-22
12-Jun-22
14-Jun-22
29-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
19-Aug-22
26-Aug-22
Plan
7-Sep-22
14-Sep-22
16-Sep-22
16-Nov-22
640,000.00 
Actual
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Aug-22
8-Aug-22
10-Aug-22
24-Sep-22
N/A
N/A
15-Oct-22
22-Oct-22
Plan
3-Nov-22
10-Nov-22
12-Nov-22
30-Dec-22
600,000.00 
Actual
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Jul-22
17-Jul-22
19-Jul-22
2-Sep-22
N/A
N/A
23-Sep-22
30-Sep-22
Plan
12-Oct-22
19-Oct-22
21-Oct-22
30-Dec-22
525,000.00 
Actual
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Mar-23
17-Mar-23
19-Mar-23
3-May-23
N/A
N/A
24-May-23
31-May-23
Plan
12-Jun-23
19-Jun-23
21-Jun-23
21-Sep-23
1,800,000.00 
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Mar-23
22-Mar-23
24-Mar-23
8-May-23
N/A
N/A
29-May-23
5-Jun-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Apr-23
17-Apr-23
19-Apr-23
3-Jun-23
N/A
N/A
24-Jun-23
1-Jul-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-May-23
8-May-23
10-May-23
24-Jun-23
N/A
N/A
15-Jul-23
22-Jul-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-May-23
17-May-23
19-May-23
3-Jul-23
N/A
N/A
24-Jul-23
31-Jul-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Jun-23
22-Jun-23
24-Jun-23
8-Aug-23
N/A
N/A
29-Aug-23
5-Sep-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Aug-22
17-Aug-22
19-Aug-22
3-Oct-22
N/A
N/A
24-Oct-22
31-Oct-22
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
17-Jun-23
24-Jun-23
26-Jun-23
10-Aug-23
200,000.00 
13-Jul-23
20-Jul-23
22-Jul-23
22-Oct-23
1,872,736.00 
3-Aug-23
10-Aug-23
12-Aug-23
12-Oct-23
766,380.00 
12-Aug-23
19-Aug-23
21-Aug-23
30-Oct-23
833,620.00 
17-Sep-23
24-Sep-23
26-Sep-23
30-Dec-23
2,749,516.00 
12-Nov-22
19-Nov-22
21-Nov-22
21-Jan-23
1,400,000.00 
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
20-Aug-22
27-Aug-22
29-Aug-22
13-Oct-22
N/A
N/A
3-Nov-22
10-Nov-22
Plan
22-Nov-22
29-Nov-22
1-Dec-22
30-Jan-23
560,000.00 
Actual
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Jul-23
8-Jul-23
10-Jul-23
24-Aug-23
N/A
N/A
14-Sep-23
21-Sep-23
Plan
3-Oct-23
10-Oct-23
12-Oct-23
30-Nov-23
525,154.00 
Actual
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
25-Jan-23
1-Feb-23
3-Feb-23
5-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
19-Mar-23
26-Mar-23
Plan
7-Apr-23
14-Apr-23
16-Apr-23
30-May-23
85,330.00 
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
25-Mar-23
N/A
26-Mar-23
9-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
16-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Apr-23
N/A
16-Apr-23
30-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
7-May-23
N/A
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
16-Apr-23
18-Apr-23
20-Apr-23
10-May-23
7,500.00 
7-May-23
9-May-23
11-May-23
30-May-23
12,500.00 
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Feb-23
8-Feb-23
10-Feb-23
27-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
17-Apr-23
24-Apr-23
Plan
6-May-23
13-May-23
15-May-23
15-Jul-23
400,000.00 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 1 of 2
Printed on: 30/08/2021
Version
1.0
August 2021
Basic Data
Pre-Qualification
Bid Evaluation
Contract Award & Signature
Contract data
AWPB/Component Ref 
№ 
Description 
Funding 
Lot №/ Description
Project Area
Plan vs. Actual
Package №
Pre-or Post 
Qualification
Prior or Post Review
Procurement 
Method
Envelopes
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Submission of PreQual 
Docs
No Objection Date
PreQual Invitation 
Date.
PreQual Closing 
Date
Submission of PreQual 
Report.
No Objection Date
Submission of BD 
to IFAD
No-objection
Date
Bid Invitation Date Bid Closing-Opening
Submission
Tech Eval Rpt
No-objection
Date
Submission
Combined Eval Rpt*
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. Actual
Issue of 
NOITA&Standstill
Date
Contract
Award
Date
Contract
Signature
Contract 
completion
Comments
Contract No.
Vendor Name/ID
Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU)
Component 3; 
Item 3.1.1
22
SEPMU. Doses and synchronization for 
AI
IFAD 
Grant
Component 1: Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources
Actual
Component 3; 
Item 3.1.1
23
SEPMU. Procurement of bulls
Component 3; 
Item 3.1.2
24
SEPMU. Motobike for 284 vets
IFAD 
Grant
IFAD 
Grant
Component 3; 
Item 3.1.3
25
SEPMU. Establishment of demo plots (1 
demo plot by district)
GCF Grant
Component 3; 
Item 3.1.3
26
SEPMU. O&M of demo plots - 5 years 
each
GCF Grant
Component 3; 
Item 3.3.1
27
SEPMU. Printing of handover materials, 
etc
GCF Grant
Multiple
All targeted 
area
1
1
1
1
All targeted 
area
All targeted 
area
All targeted 
area
All targeted 
area
Component 3; 
Item 3.3.2
28
SEPMU. Provision of 
goods/equipment/inputs to grant 
beneficiaries under Window 1
IFAD 
Loan+Gran
t
Multiple
All targeted 
area
Component 4:  Project Management Component
Component 4
29
SEPMU. FM Software installation and 
support
IFAD 
Grant
1
All targeted 
area
Component 4
30
SEPMU. Office equipment (Computer 
Desktop, Computer Laptop, Printer 3 in 1, 
Printer high speed, Tablet, Camera, 
Equipment for online conferences (Kulob 
and Bokhtar reg. office))
IFAD 
Grant
Multiple
All targeted 
area
Component 4
31
SEPMU. Office furniture (Table, armchair, 
bookcase, side table attachment and 
othres)
IFAD 
Grant
Component 4
32
PIG CEP. FM Software installation and 
support
IFAD 
Grant
Component 4
33
PIG CEP. Office furniture and equipment GCF Grant
Component 4
34
PIG CEP. Field vehicles (3 units)
GCF Grant
1
1
1
1
All targeted 
area
All targeted 
area
All targeted 
area
All targeted 
area
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
ICB-06
ICB-09
ICB-16
S-13
S-14
S-15
ICB-15
S-02
S-05
S-06
S-03
S-07
S-08
Post-Qual
Prior Review
ICB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
ICB
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Prior Review
ICB
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NS
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NS
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NS
Post-Qual
Post Review
NS
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NS
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
-
300,000.00 
-
284,000.00 
-
55,000.00 
-
63,000.00 
-
50,000.00 
-
480,000.00 
-
30,000.00 
-
67,520.00 
-
30,600.00 
-
30,000.00 
-
50,000.00 
-
75,000.00 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
25-Mar-23
1-Apr-23
3-Apr-23
18-May-23
N/A
N/A
8-Jun-23
15-Jun-23
Plan
27-Jun-23
4-Jul-23
6-Jul-23
30-Aug-23
300,000.00 
Actual
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Aug-23
17-Aug-23
19-Aug-23
3-Oct-23
N/A
N/A
24-Oct-23
31-Oct-23
Plan
12-Nov-23
19-Nov-23
21-Nov-23
30-Dec-23
284,000.00 
Actual
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Aug-23
N/A
16-Aug-23
30-Aug-23
N/A
N/A
6-Sep-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
25-Aug-23
N/A
26-Aug-23
9-Sep-23
N/A
N/A
16-Sep-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Oct-23
N/A
2-Oct-23
16-Oct-23
N/A
N/A
23-Oct-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Jul-23
22-Jul-23
24-Jul-23
7-Sep-23
N/A
N/A
28-Sep-23
5-Oct-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Jun-22
22-Jun-22
23-Jun-22
7-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
14-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Jul-22
22-Jul-22
23-Jul-22
6-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
13-Aug-22
20-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
20-Jul-22
N/A
21-Jul-22
4-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
11-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Jun-22
22-Jun-22
23-Jun-22
7-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
14-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Jul-22
N/A
16-Jul-22
30-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
6-Aug-22
N/A
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
6-Sep-23
8-Sep-23
10-Sep-23
10-Oct-23
55,000.00 
16-Sep-23
18-Sep-23
20-Sep-23
20-Oct-23
63,000.00 
23-Oct-23
25-Oct-23
27-Oct-23
27-Nov-23
50,000.00 
17-Oct-23
24-Oct-23
26-Oct-23
26-Dec-23
480,000.00 
21-Jul-22
23-Jul-22
25-Jul-22
30-Dec-23
30,000.00 
20-Aug-22
22-Aug-22
24-Aug-22
24-Sep-22
67,520.00 
11-Aug-22
13-Aug-22
15-Aug-22
15-Sep-22
30,600.00 
21-Jul-22
23-Jul-22
25-Jul-22
30-Dec-23
30,000.00 
6-Aug-22
8-Aug-22
10-Aug-22
10-Sep-22
50,000.00 
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
20-Jul-22
27-Jul-22
28-Jul-22
11-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
18-Aug-22
25-Aug-22
Plan
25-Aug-22
27-Aug-22
29-Aug-22
29-Sep-22
75,000.00 
Actual
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 2 of 2
Printed on: 30/08/2021
Procurement Plan - Works
Republic of Tajikistan 
Community-Based Agriculture Support Programme ‘Plus’ (CASP+)
Project ID: 
Approved by: 
Prepared by: 
Version
1.0
August 2021
AWPB/Component 
Ref
№
Total Amount
USD
LCU
120,000.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Plan
Actual
Description
Funding
Lot №/ Description
Project Area
Plan vs. Actual
Package №
Basic Data
Pre-or Post 
Qualification
Prior or Post 
Review
Procurement Method
Envelopes
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU) Plan vs. Actual
Submission of PreQual 
Docs
No Objection 
Date
PreQual 
Invitation Date
PreQual Closing 
Date
Submission of 
PreQual Report
No Objection 
Date
Submission of BD 
to IFAD
No-objection
Date
Pre-Qualification
Component 1: Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources
Component 1; 
Item 1.1.1
1
SEPMU. Logistical support to the 
regional PMT office in Kulob 
(Refurbishment)
GCF Grant
Component 4:  Project Management Component
Component 4
Component 4
2
3
SEPMU. Office Renovation
IFAD Grant
PIG CEP. Office Renovation
IFAD Grant
1
1
1
All targeted 
area
All targeted 
area
All targeted 
area
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
S-03
S-01
S-02
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NS
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NS
Post-Qual
Prior Review
NS
1
1
1
-
30,000.00 
-
60,000.00 
-
30,000.00 
-
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
-
-
-
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Dec-22
8-Dec-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Jun-22
17-Jun-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Jun-22
22-Jun-22
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 1 of 2
Printed on: 30/08/2021
Procurement Plan - Works
Republic of Tajikistan 
Community-Based Agriculture Support Programme ‘Plus’ (CASP+)
Project ID: 
Approved by: 
Prepared by: 
Procurement Methods
NS: National Shopping 
IS: International Shopping 
NCB: National Competitive Bidding 
ICB: International Competitive 
Bidding 
LIB: Limited (International) Bidding 
DC: Direct Contracting
Version
1.0
August 2021
Bid Evaluation
Contract Award & Signature
Contract data
AWPB/Component 
Ref
№
Description
Bid Invitation 
Date
Bid Closing-
Opening
Submission
Tech Eval Rpt
No-objection
Date
Submission
Combined Eval Rpt*
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. Actual
Issue of NOITA& 
Standstill
Date
Contract
Award
Date
Contract
Signature
Contract 
completion
Comments
Contract No.
Vendor 
Name/ID
Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU)
Component 1: Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources
Component 1; 
Item 1.1.1
1
SEPMU. Logistical support to the 
regional PMT office in Kulob 
(Refurbishment)
Component 4:  Project Management Component
Component 4
Component 4
2
3
SEPMU. Office Renovation
PIG CEP. Office Renovation
9-Dec-22
23-Dec-22
N/A
N/A
30-Dec-22
6-Jan-23
Plan
6-Jan-23
8-Jan-23
10-Jan-23
28-Feb-23
30,000.00 
Actual
18-Jun-22
2-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
9-Jul-22
16-Jul-22
Plan
16-Jul-22
18-Jul-22
20-Jul-22
20-Aug-22
60,000.00 
Actual
23-Jun-22
7-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
14-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
Plan
21-Jul-22
23-Jul-22
25-Jul-22
25-Aug-22
30,000.00 
Actual
-
-
-
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 2 of 2
Printed on: 30/08/2021
Procurement Plan - Consulting Services
Republic of Tajikistan 
Community-Based Agriculture Support Programme ‘Plus’ (CASP+)
Project ID: 
Approved by: 
Prepared by: 
Total Amount
USD
LCU
4,186,686.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Plan
Actual
Selection Methods
QCBS: Quality and Cost-Based Selection
QBS: Quality-Based Selection
CQS: Selection by Consultants' Qualifications 
LCS: Least-Cost Selection
FBS Fixed Budget Selection
ICS: Individual Consultants Selection
SSS: Sole Source Selection
Version
1.0
August 2021
Basic Data
EOI  Shortlist Procedure
Proposal Process
Evaluation
Contract Award & Signature
Contract data
AWPB/Component 
Ref
№
Description*
Funding
Project Area
Plan vs. Actual
План
Shortlist
(Yes|No)
Prior or Post 
Review
Procurement Method
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Submission of 
REOI
No Objection Date
REOI Launch Date EOI Submission 
Deadline
Submission of 
Shortlist Report
No Objection Date
Preparation / 
Submission of 
RFP/RCQ
No-objection
Date
RFP/RCQ Launch 
Date
Proposal 
submission 
deadline
Submission of 
TER
No-objection
Date
Submission of 
CER
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. Actual
Issue of NOITA& 
Standstill
Negotiations 
completed
Submission of Draft 
Contract and MoN (if 
needed)
No-objection
Date
Date
Contract
Award
Date
Contract
Signature
Contract 
completion
Comments
Contract No.
Vendor Name/ID
Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU)
Component 1: Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources
Component 1; 
Item 1.1.1
Component 1; 
Item 1.1.1
Component 1; 
Item 1.1.1
Component 1; 
Item 1.1.2
Component 1; 
Item 1.1.2
Component 1; 
Item 1.1.2
Component 1; 
Item 1.1.2
Component 1; 
Item 1.1.2
Component 1; 
Item 1.1.2
Component 1; 
Item 1.1.3
Component 1; 
Item 1.1.3
Component 1; 
Item 1.1.3
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
SEPMU. Staff (2 national pastures 
specialists)
GCF Grant
PIG CEP. Upgrade the technical 
skills of the Forestry Department: 
Service provider for training 
IFAD Grant
PIG CEP. Trainings: Forester 
curriculum rolled out in the 11 
leskhoz
IFAD Grant
PIG CEP. International GIS expert 
(Including travels)
GCF Grant
PIG CEP. International Expert for 
Participatory NRM planning 
(Including travels)
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
12,000.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
28,000.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
15,000.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
35,000.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
17,500.00 
Actual
-
PIG CEP. National Botany expert
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
5,400.00 
Actual
-
PIG CEP. National GIS specialist
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
27,000.00 
Actual
-
PIG CEP. Monitoring and Evaluation 
Consultant (Including travel)
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
28,000.00 
Actual
-
PIG CEP. Annual outcome survey
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
CQS
10,000.00 
Actual
-
SEPMU. International Veterinary 
Management Expert (Including 
travels)
IFAD Grant
SEPMU. International Expert on 
veterinary surveillance and public 
veterinary health service (Including 
travels)
IFAD Grant
SEPMU. National Expert on 
Epidemiology and One Health 
approach
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
9,250.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
9,250.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
20,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 1; 
Item 1.1.3
13
SEPMU. Training, workshop, round 
tables for State Veterinary staff
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
10,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 1; 
Item 1.1.3
14
SEPMU. Participation in the 
international events/workshops (SV 
staff)
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
5,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 1; 
Item 1.1.4
15
PIG CEP. Development of 1 new 
curriculum for CC specialists
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
40,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 1; 
Item 1.1.4
16
PIG CEP. Develop gender modules 
for the CC curricula of schools and 
specialized universities
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
5,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 1; 
Item 1.2.1
17
PIG CEP. International Policy Expert 
(Including travels)
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
11,500.00 
Actual
-
Component 1; 
Item 1.2.1
18
PIG CEP. International Gender 
Expert (Including travels)
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
11,500.00 
Actual
-
Component 1; 
Item 1.2.1
19
PIG CEP. Policy dialogue workshops GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
2,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 1; 
Item 1.2.1
20
PIG CEP. Conduct of thematic 
workshops on gender and climate 
change at national level for policy 
makers to  ensure CC and NRM 
policies/ legal frameworks consider 
gender-specific recommendations
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
3,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 1; 
Item 1.2.2
21
SEPMU. Pasture Policy Expert 
(Including mission travels)
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
23,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 1; 
Item 1.2.2
22
SEPMU. Consultation workshops on 
Pasture Law
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
3,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 1; 
Item 1.2.2
23
SEPMU. Interpreter/Translator
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
38,400.00 
Actual
-
Component 1; 
Item 1.2.2
24
SEPMU. Organization of the OIE 
mission on veterinary legislation
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
CQS
35,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 1; 
Item 1.2.2
25
SEPMU. Workshops, round tables, 
conferences
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
12,000.00 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
1-Dec-22
N/A
3-Dec-22
17-Dec-22
24-Dec-22
N/A
14-Dec-22
N/A
16-Dec-22
23-Dec-22
2-Jan-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Jul-22
N/A
3-Jul-22
17-Jul-22
24-Jul-22
N/A
26-Jul-22
N/A
28-Jul-22
4-Aug-22
14-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Sep-22
N/A
3-Sep-22
17-Sep-22
24-Sep-22
N/A
26-Sep-22
N/A
28-Sep-22
5-Oct-22
15-Oct-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
5-Jul-22
N/A
7-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
28-Jul-22
N/A
30-Jul-22
N/A
1-Aug-22
8-Aug-22
18-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Aug-22
N/A
3-Aug-22
17-Aug-22
24-Aug-22
N/A
26-Aug-22
N/A
28-Aug-22
4-Sep-22
14-Sep-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Jun-22
8-Jun-22
10-Jun-22
24-Jun-22
1-Jul-22
8-Jul-22
10-Jul-22
17-Jul-22
19-Jul-22
26-Jul-22
5-Aug-22
12-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
5-Jun-22
12-Jun-22
14-Jun-22
28-Jun-22
5-Jul-22
12-Jul-22
14-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
23-Jul-22
30-Jul-22
9-Aug-22
16-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
5-Jun-22
12-Jun-22
14-Jun-22
28-Jun-22
5-Jul-22
12-Jul-22
14-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
23-Jul-22
30-Jul-22
9-Aug-22
16-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
1-Nov-22
8-Nov-22
10-Nov-22
24-Nov-22
1-Dec-22
8-Dec-22
10-Dec-22
17-Dec-22
19-Dec-22
26-Dec-22
5-Jan-23
12-Jan-23
N/A
N/A
5-Jan-23
N/A
7-Jan-23
21-Jan-23
28-Jan-23
N/A
30-Jan-23
N/A
1-Feb-23
8-Feb-23
18-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Jan-23
N/A
12-Jan-23
26-Jan-23
2-Feb-23
N/A
4-Feb-23
N/A
6-Feb-23
13-Feb-23
23-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Jul-22
N/A
12-Jul-22
26-Jul-22
2-Aug-22
N/A
4-Aug-22
N/A
6-Aug-22
13-Aug-22
23-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
5-Aug-22
N/A
7-Aug-22
21-Aug-22
28-Aug-22
N/A
30-Aug-22
N/A
1-Sep-22
8-Sep-22
18-Sep-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
5-Sep-22
12-Sep-22
14-Sep-22
21-Sep-22
N/A
N/A
28-Sep-22
5-Oct-22
1-Feb-23
N/A
3-Feb-23
17-Feb-23
24-Feb-23
N/A
26-Feb-23
N/A
28-Feb-23
7-Mar-23
17-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
5-Feb-23
N/A
7-Feb-23
21-Feb-23
28-Feb-23
N/A
2-Mar-23
N/A
4-Mar-23
11-Mar-23
21-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Mar-23
N/A
3-Mar-23
17-Mar-23
24-Mar-23
N/A
26-Mar-23
N/A
28-Mar-23
4-Apr-23
14-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Mar-23
N/A
3-Mar-23
17-Mar-23
24-Mar-23
N/A
26-Mar-23
N/A
28-Mar-23
4-Apr-23
14-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
5-Aug-22
12-Aug-22
14-Aug-22
21-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
28-Aug-22
4-Sep-22
14-Jan-23
21-Jan-23
24-Jan-23
N/A
26-Jan-23
29-Jan-23
29-Jan-24
26-Aug-22
2-Sep-22
5-Sep-22
N/A
7-Sep-22
10-Sep-22
10-Apr-23
27-Oct-22
3-Nov-22
6-Nov-22
N/A
8-Nov-22
11-Nov-22
11-Nov-23
30-Aug-22
6-Sep-22
9-Sep-22
N/A
11-Sep-22
14-Sep-22
14-Sep-23
26-Sep-22
3-Oct-22
6-Oct-22
N/A
8-Oct-22
11-Oct-22
11-Nov-22
24-Aug-22
31-Aug-22
3-Sep-22
10-Sep-22
12-Sep-22
15-Sep-22
15-May-23
28-Aug-22
4-Sep-22
7-Sep-22
14-Sep-22
16-Sep-22
19-Sep-22
30-Dec-23
28-Aug-22
4-Sep-22
7-Sep-22
14-Sep-22
16-Sep-22
19-Sep-22
30-Dec-23
24-Jan-23
31-Jan-23
3-Feb-23
10-Feb-23
12-Feb-23
15-Feb-23
30-Dec-23
2-Mar-23
9-Mar-23
12-Mar-23
N/A
14-Mar-23
17-Mar-23
30-Apr-23
7-Mar-23
14-Mar-23
17-Mar-23
N/A
19-Mar-23
22-Mar-23
30-Apr-23
4-Sep-22
11-Sep-22
14-Sep-22
N/A
16-Sep-22
19-Sep-22
30-Dec-23
30-Sep-22
7-Oct-22
10-Oct-22
N/A
12-Oct-22
15-Oct-22
15-Oct-23
N/A
12-Oct-22
15-Oct-22
22-Oct-22
24-Oct-22
28-Oct-22
28-Oct-23
29-Mar-23
5-Apr-23
8-Apr-23
N/A
10-Apr-23
13-Apr-23
13-Jun-23
2-Apr-23
9-Apr-23
12-Apr-23
N/A
14-Apr-23
17-Apr-23
17-Jun-23
26-Apr-23
3-May-23
6-May-23
N/A
8-May-23
11-May-23
30-Jun-23
26-Apr-23
3-May-23
6-May-23
N/A
8-May-23
11-May-23
30-Jun-23
N/A
11-Sep-22
14-Sep-22
21-Sep-22
23-Sep-22
27-Sep-22
27-Sep-23
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
12,000.00 
28,000.00 
15,000.00 
35,000.00 
17,500.00 
5,400.00 
27,000.00 
28,000.00 
10,000.00 
9,250.00 
9,250.00 
20,000.00 
10,000.00 
5,000.00 
40,000.00 
5,000.00 
11,500.00 
11,500.00 
2,000.00 
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Oct-22
8-Oct-22
10-Oct-22
17-Oct-22
N/A
N/A
24-Oct-22
31-Oct-22
Plan
N/A
7-Nov-22
10-Nov-22
17-Nov-22
19-Nov-22
23-Nov-22
23-Nov-23
3,000.00 
10-Aug-22
N/A
12-Aug-22
26-Aug-22
2-Sep-22
N/A
4-Sep-22
N/A
6-Sep-22
13-Sep-22
23-Sep-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Aug-22
N/A
12-Aug-22
26-Aug-22
2-Sep-22
N/A
4-Sep-22
N/A
6-Sep-22
13-Sep-22
23-Sep-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Jun-22
N/A
12-Jun-22
26-Jun-22
3-Jul-22
N/A
5-Jul-22
N/A
7-Jul-22
14-Jul-22
24-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Apr-23
8-Apr-23
10-Apr-23
24-Apr-23
1-May-23
8-May-23
10-May-23
17-May-23
19-May-23
26-May-23
5-Jun-23
12-Jun-23
N/A
N/A
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
5-Oct-22
12-Oct-22
15-Oct-22
N/A
17-Oct-22
20-Oct-22
20-Oct-23
5-Oct-22
12-Oct-22
15-Oct-22
N/A
17-Oct-22
20-Oct-22
20-Oct-23
5-Aug-22
12-Aug-22
15-Aug-22
N/A
17-Aug-22
20-Aug-22
30-Dec-23
24-Jun-23
1-Jul-23
4-Jul-23
11-Jul-23
13-Jul-23
16-Jul-23
30-Sep-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Aug-22
22-Aug-22
24-Aug-22
31-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
7-Sep-22
14-Sep-22
Plan
N/A
21-Sep-22
24-Sep-22
1-Oct-22
3-Oct-22
7-Oct-22
7-Oct-23
23,000.00 
3,000.00 
38,400.00 
35,000.00 
12,000.00 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 1 of 5
Printed on: 30/08/2021
Version
1.0
August 2021
Basic Data
EOI  Shortlist Procedure
Proposal Process
Evaluation
Contract Award & Signature
Contract data
Description*
Funding
Project Area
Plan vs. Actual
План
Shortlist
(Yes|No)
Prior or Post 
Review
Procurement Method
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Submission of 
REOI
No Objection Date
REOI Launch Date EOI Submission 
Deadline
Submission of 
Shortlist Report
No Objection Date
Preparation / 
Submission of 
RFP/RCQ
No-objection
Date
RFP/RCQ Launch 
Date
Proposal 
submission 
deadline
Submission of 
TER
No-objection
Date
Submission of 
CER
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. Actual
Issue of NOITA& 
Standstill
Negotiations 
completed
Submission of Draft 
Contract and MoN (if 
needed)
No-objection
Date
Date
Contract
Award
Date
Contract
Signature
Contract 
completion
Comments
Contract No.
Vendor Name/ID
Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU)
AWPB/Component 
Ref
Component 1; 
Item 1.2.2
№
25
SEPMU. Workshops, round tables, 
conferences
IFAD Grant
Actual
-
Component 1; 
Item 1.2.2
26
SEPMU. International Vet 
Legislation Expert (Including travels)
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
9,250.00 
Actual
-
Component 1; 
Item 1.2.3
27
PIG CEP. International Green 
Economy Expert (Including travels)
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
20,500.00 
Actual
-
Component 1; 
Item 1.2.3
28
PIG CEP. National Green Economy 
Expert
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
5,400.00 
Actual
-
Component 1; 
Item 1.2.3
29
PIG CEP. Organization of 
consultation and validation workshop
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
2,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 1; 
Item 1.2.3
Component 1; 
Item 1.2.3
Component 1; 
Item 1.2.3
Component 1; 
Item 1.2.3
30
31
32
33
PIG CEP. Organization of training on 
Green economy carried out by the 
National GE Expert to MEDT
GCF Grant
PIG CEP. Organization of ToT for 
subnational MEDT staff that can be 
autonomously repeated on district 
level by MEDT staff
GCF Grant
PIG CEP. Organization of study tour 
to learn from best practice 
experience in the sector from a 
partner country
GCF Grant
SEPMU. Software for Monitoring and 
Analysis of Public Investment 
Projects (Including advisory and 
installment)
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
1,000.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
1,000.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
17,500.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
CQS
35,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 2:  Investments in community capacity for adaption and resilience to climate change
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.1
34
PIG CEP. Compile District 
diagnostic. National experts in 
GIS/climate change/geobotany with 
assistance of International 
consultant.
GCF Grant
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.1
35
PIG CEP. Community district-level 
meetings to a) explain diagnostic 
report and how it should be used in 
development planning and b) to 
collect qualitative elements to be 
used in village selection process
GCF Grant
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.1
36
PIG CEP. National communication 
expert to create videos, animations, 
communications material to explain 
diagnostic including gender sensitive 
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
84,000.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
21,000.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
10,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.1
37
PIG CEP. Communication Specialist  GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
18,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.1
38
SEPMU. District community 
meetings to a) explain diagnostic 
report and how it should be used in 
development planning and b) to 
collect qualitative elements to be 
used in village selection process.
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
21,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.2
39
SEPMU. National Pasture Specialist 
(Including travels)
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
25,350.00 
Actual
-
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.2
40
SEPMU. Community facilitator to 
establish VO
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
160,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.2
41
SEPMU. Training of VO executives 
by community facilitator
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
160,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.2
42
SEPMU. Community facilitator to 
establish PUU (or PUG under VO)
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
LCS
80,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.2
43
SEPMU. Training of PUU executives 
on formulation of PMP, pasture 
monitoring
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
160,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.2
44
SEPMU. Community facilitator to 
establish PUA at district level
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
21,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.2
45
SEPMU. Operations of PUAs: 
meeting cost and travel
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
LCS
31,500.00 
Actual
-
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.2
46
SEPMU. Community facilitator to 
establish PC at district level
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
31,500.00 
Actual
-
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.2
47
SEPMU. Operations of PCs: 
meetings and travel
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
LCS
31,500.00 
Actual
-
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.2
48
PIG CEP. Community facilitator to 
establish - Forest User Groups
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
20,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.2
49
PIG CEP. JFM mobilization from first 
field visit through, plot id, user 
selection, signing JFM Contracts. 
Numbers are to give effort phasing 
(will operate in all 200 villages 
immediately)
GCF Grant
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.2
50
SEPMU. Community facilitator to 
establish - Common Interest Groups
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
197,500.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
102,000.00 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
5-Mar-23
N/A
7-Mar-23
21-Mar-23
28-Mar-23
N/A
30-Mar-23
N/A
1-Apr-23
8-Apr-23
18-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
5-Apr-23
N/A
7-Apr-23
21-Apr-23
28-Apr-23
N/A
30-Apr-23
N/A
2-May-23
9-May-23
19-May-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
5-Apr-23
N/A
7-Apr-23
21-Apr-23
28-Apr-23
N/A
30-Apr-23
N/A
2-May-23
9-May-23
19-May-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Feb-23
17-Feb-23
19-Feb-23
26-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
5-Mar-23
12-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-May-23
8-May-23
10-May-23
17-May-23
N/A
N/A
24-May-23
31-May-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
5-May-23
12-May-23
14-May-23
21-May-23
N/A
N/A
28-May-23
4-Jun-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Jul-23
8-Jul-23
10-Jul-23
17-Jul-23
N/A
N/A
24-Jul-23
31-Jul-23
10-Jul-22
17-Jul-22
19-Jul-22
2-Aug-22
9-Aug-22
16-Aug-22
18-Aug-22
25-Aug-22
27-Aug-22
3-Sep-22
13-Sep-22
20-Sep-22
N/A
N/A
15-Jul-22
22-Jul-22
24-Jul-22
7-Aug-22
14-Aug-22
21-Aug-22
23-Aug-22
30-Aug-22
1-Sep-22
8-Sep-22
18-Sep-22
25-Sep-22
N/A
N/A
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
30-Apr-23
7-May-23
10-May-23
N/A
12-May-23
15-May-23
15-Jun-23
31-May-23
7-Jun-23
10-Jun-23
N/A
12-Jun-23
15-Jun-23
15-Aug-23
31-May-23
7-Jun-23
10-Jun-23
N/A
12-Jun-23
15-Jun-23
15-Aug-23
N/A
19-Mar-23
22-Mar-23
29-Mar-23
31-Mar-23
4-Apr-23
4-May-23
N/A
7-Jun-23
10-Jun-23
17-Jun-23
19-Jun-23
23-Jun-23
30-Jul-23
N/A
11-Jun-23
14-Jun-23
21-Jun-23
23-Jun-23
27-Jun-23
30-Jul-23
N/A
7-Aug-23
10-Aug-23
17-Aug-23
19-Aug-23
23-Aug-23
30-Dec-23
2-Oct-22
9-Oct-22
12-Oct-22
19-Oct-22
21-Oct-22
24-Oct-22
24-Dec-22
9,250.00 
20,500.00 
5,400.00 
2,000.00 
1,000.00 
1,000.00 
17,500.00 
35,000.00 
7-Oct-22
14-Oct-22
17-Oct-22
24-Oct-22
26-Oct-22
29-Oct-22
29-Jan-23
84,000.00 
Plan
10-Sep-22
N/A
12-Sep-22
26-Sep-22
3-Oct-22
N/A
5-Oct-22
N/A
7-Oct-22
14-Oct-22
24-Oct-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
Plan
5-Nov-22
12-Nov-22
15-Nov-22
N/A
17-Nov-22
20-Nov-22
30-Dec-22
21,000.00 
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
15-Aug-22
N/A
17-Aug-22
31-Aug-22
7-Sep-22
N/A
9-Sep-22
N/A
11-Sep-22
18-Sep-22
28-Sep-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Aug-22
N/A
17-Aug-22
31-Aug-22
7-Sep-22
N/A
9-Sep-22
N/A
11-Sep-22
18-Sep-22
28-Sep-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
10-Oct-22
17-Oct-22
20-Oct-22
N/A
22-Oct-22
25-Oct-22
30-Nov-22
10,000.00 
10-Oct-22
17-Oct-22
20-Oct-22
N/A
22-Oct-22
25-Oct-22
30-Dec-23
18,000.00 
20-Aug-22
N/A
22-Aug-22
5-Sep-22
12-Sep-22
N/A
14-Sep-22
N/A
16-Sep-22
23-Sep-22
3-Oct-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
Plan
15-Oct-22
22-Oct-22
25-Oct-22
N/A
27-Oct-22
30-Oct-22
30-Dec-22
21,000.00 
15-Jul-22
N/A
17-Jul-22
31-Jul-22
7-Aug-22
N/A
9-Aug-22
N/A
11-Aug-22
18-Aug-22
28-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Sep-22
17-Sep-22
19-Sep-22
3-Oct-22
13-Oct-22
20-Oct-22
22-Oct-22
29-Oct-22
31-Oct-22
21-Nov-22
5-Dec-22
12-Dec-22
26-Dec-22
2-Jan-23
1-Oct-22
8-Oct-22
10-Oct-22
24-Oct-22
3-Nov-22
10-Nov-22
12-Nov-22
19-Nov-22
21-Nov-22
12-Dec-22
26-Dec-22
2-Jan-23
16-Jan-23
23-Jan-23
15-Sep-22
22-Sep-22
24-Sep-22
8-Oct-22
15-Oct-22
22-Oct-22
24-Oct-22
31-Oct-22
2-Nov-22
16-Nov-22
30-Nov-22
7-Dec-22
14-Dec-22
21-Dec-22
5-Oct-22
12-Oct-22
14-Oct-22
28-Oct-22
7-Nov-22
14-Nov-22
16-Nov-22
23-Nov-22
25-Nov-22
16-Dec-22
30-Dec-22
6-Jan-23
20-Jan-23
27-Jan-23
20-Aug-22
N/A
22-Aug-22
5-Sep-22
12-Sep-22
N/A
14-Sep-22
N/A
16-Sep-22
23-Sep-22
3-Oct-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
20-Sep-22
N/A
22-Sep-22
6-Oct-22
13-Oct-22
N/A
15-Oct-22
N/A
17-Oct-22
31-Oct-22
14-Nov-22
N/A
21-Nov-22
N/A
25-Aug-22
N/A
27-Aug-22
10-Sep-22
17-Sep-22
N/A
19-Sep-22
N/A
21-Sep-22
28-Sep-22
8-Oct-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
25-Sep-22
N/A
27-Sep-22
11-Oct-22
18-Oct-22
N/A
20-Oct-22
N/A
22-Oct-22
5-Nov-22
19-Nov-22
N/A
26-Nov-22
N/A
1-Jun-23
N/A
3-Jun-23
17-Jun-23
24-Jun-23
N/A
26-Jun-23
N/A
28-Jun-23
5-Jul-23
15-Jul-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
5-Jun-23
12-Jun-23
14-Jun-23
28-Jun-23
8-Jul-23
15-Jul-23
17-Jul-23
24-Jul-23
26-Jul-23
16-Aug-23
30-Aug-23
6-Sep-23
20-Sep-23
27-Sep-23
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
9-Sep-22
16-Sep-22
19-Sep-22
N/A
21-Sep-22
24-Sep-22
30-Dec-23
25,350.00 
14-Jan-23
28-Jan-23
31-Jan-23
7-Feb-23
9-Feb-23
14-Feb-23
14-May-23
160,000.00 
4-Feb-23
18-Feb-23
21-Feb-23
28-Feb-23
2-Mar-23
7-Mar-23
7-Jul-23
160,000.00 
2-Jan-23
12-Jan-23
15-Jan-23
22-Jan-23
24-Jan-23
27-Jan-23
27-Mar-23
80,000.00 
8-Feb-23
22-Feb-23
25-Feb-23
4-Mar-23
6-Mar-23
11-Mar-23
11-Jun-23
160,000.00 
15-Oct-22
22-Oct-22
25-Oct-22
N/A
27-Oct-22
30-Oct-22
30-Nov-22
3-Dec-22
13-Dec-22
16-Dec-22
N/A
18-Dec-22
21-Dec-22
21-Jan-23
20-Oct-22
27-Oct-22
30-Oct-22
N/A
1-Nov-22
4-Nov-22
4-Dec-22
8-Dec-22
18-Dec-22
21-Dec-22
N/A
23-Dec-22
26-Dec-22
26-Jan-23
27-Jul-23
3-Aug-23
6-Aug-23
N/A
8-Aug-23
11-Aug-23
11-Sep-23
21,000.00 
31,500.00 
31,500.00 
31,500.00 
20,000.00 
9-Oct-23
23-Oct-23
26-Oct-23
2-Nov-23
4-Nov-23
9-Nov-23
9-Feb-24
197,500.00 
5-Nov-22
12-Nov-22
14-Nov-22
28-Nov-22
8-Dec-22
15-Dec-22
17-Dec-22
24-Dec-22
26-Dec-22
16-Jan-23
30-Jan-23
6-Feb-23
20-Feb-23
27-Feb-23
Plan
11-Mar-23
25-Mar-23
28-Mar-23
4-Apr-23
6-Apr-23
11-Apr-23
11-Jul-23
102,000.00 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 2 of 5
Printed on: 30/08/2021
Version
1.0
August 2021
Basic Data
EOI  Shortlist Procedure
Proposal Process
Evaluation
Contract Award & Signature
Contract data
Description*
Funding
Project Area
Plan vs. Actual
План
Shortlist
(Yes|No)
Prior or Post 
Review
Procurement Method
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Submission of 
REOI
No Objection Date
REOI Launch Date EOI Submission 
Deadline
Submission of 
Shortlist Report
No Objection Date
Preparation / 
Submission of 
RFP/RCQ
No-objection
Date
RFP/RCQ Launch 
Date
Proposal 
submission 
deadline
Submission of 
TER
No-objection
Date
Submission of 
CER
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. Actual
Issue of NOITA& 
Standstill
Negotiations 
completed
Submission of Draft 
Contract and MoN (if 
needed)
No-objection
Date
Date
Contract
Award
Date
Contract
Signature
Contract 
completion
Comments
Contract No.
Vendor Name/ID
Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU)
AWPB/Component 
Ref
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.2
№
50
SEPMU. Community facilitator to 
establish - Common Interest Groups
GCF Grant
Actual
-
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.2
51
SEPMU. Training of CIGs by 
community facilitator
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
51,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.2
52
SEPMU. Women representatives 
trained in leadership skills by a 
specialized NGO
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
100,000.00 
Actual
-
SEPMU. Development of CsCAPs, 
including forestry (conerning design 
and allocation of JFM plots and 
layout of direct afforestation areas), 
pastures, infrastructure and 
mechanisation aspects in 400 
villages
SEPMU. Environmental and social 
impact assessments (ESIA) (2 
Environment/Climate Change 
specialists) (Including travels)
GCF Grant
GCF Grant
SEPMU. Environmental and social 
impact assessments (ESIA) (2 Social 
Inclusion specialists) (Including 
travels)
GCF Grant
SEPMU. Training in monitoring & 
evaluation, use of Smartphone 
reporting tools
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
380,000.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
29,000.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
29,000.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
LCS
80,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.3
53
54
55
56
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.3
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.3
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.4
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.4
57
SEPMU. 16 PMU District officers 
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
307,200.00 
Actual
-
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.4
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.4
58
59
SEPMU. Operating costs for vehicles 
of District Officers and key project 
management staff
GCF Grant
SEPMU. Organization of training of 
16 PMU and 5 CEP Project forestry 
specialists on compliance with GCF 
requirements (e.g.ESIA)
GCF Grant
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.4
60
SEPMU. Trainer fee for training 
(including material preparation) of 16 
PMU and 5 CEP Project forestry 
specialists on compliance with GCF 
requirements (e.g.ESIA)
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
QCBS
144,000.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
2,000.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
4,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.4
61
SEPMU. Community development 
specialist
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
24,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.4
62
SEPMU. Gender and Youth policy 
specialist
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
24,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 2; 
Item 2.1.4
63
PIG CEP. 5 Project forestry 
specialists (Including travels)
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
26,250.00 
Actual
-
Component 2; 
Item 2.2.1
64
SEPMU. Cross-village PMP 
monitoring (by PIU or appointed 
consultants)
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
3,500.00 
Actual
-
Component 2; 
Item 2.2.1
65
SEPMU. PMP monitoring
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
56,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 2; 
Item 2.2.1
66
PIG CEP. Field training for JFM 
beneficiaries on planting and 
aftercare of trees
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
40,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 3: Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market-based approaches
Component 3; 
Item 3.1.1
67
SEPMU. Participants' travel and per 
diems (10 days stay in Dushanbe) - 
50 young specialists
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
27,500.00 
Actual
-
Component 3; 
Item 3.1.1
Component 3; 
Item 3.1.3
68
SEPMU. Trainers' fee (2 trainers)
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
2,400.00 
Actual
-
69
SEPMU. Exchange visits
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
25,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 3; 
Item 3.2.1
70
SEPMU. Livestock specialist 
covering animal production and 
animal health (Including travels)
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
19,350.00 
Actual
-
Component 3; 
Item 3.2.1
71
SEPMU. Market/value chain 
specialist (Including travels)
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
19,350.00 
Actual
-
Component 3; 
Item 3.2.1
72
SEPMU. Organization of VC 
consultation meetings gathering 
potential PA partners (Producers 
groups and business operators)
GCF Grant
Component 3; 
Item 3.2.1
Component 3; 
Item 3.2.1
Component 3; 
Item 3.3.1
73
74
75
SEPMU. Contracting of the Regional 
Chamber of Commerce for 
facilitation
GCF Grant
SEPMU. Feasibility study 
(addressing technical, economic and 
market aspects)
IFAD Grant
SEPMU. ToT for district officers and 
agro departments experts on 
business and climate-resilient 
technologies for W1 and W2 
GCF Grant
Component 3; 
Item 3.3.1
76
SEPMU. Service Provider for training 
material preparation on Window 1 
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
LCS
30,000.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
7,500.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
10,000.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
20,000.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
3,000.00 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
5-Mar-23
N/A
7-Mar-23
21-Mar-23
28-Mar-23
N/A
30-Mar-23
N/A
1-Apr-23
8-Apr-23
18-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Oct-22
17-Oct-22
19-Oct-22
2-Nov-22
12-Nov-22
19-Nov-22
21-Nov-22
28-Nov-22
30-Nov-22
21-Dec-22
4-Jan-23
11-Jan-23
25-Jan-23
1-Feb-23
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
30-Apr-23
7-May-23
10-May-23
N/A
12-May-23
15-May-23
15-Jul-23
51,000.00 
13-Feb-23
27-Feb-23
2-Mar-23
9-Mar-23
11-Mar-23
16-Mar-23
16-Jun-23
100,000.00 
30-Aug-22
6-Sep-22
8-Sep-22
22-Sep-22
2-Oct-22
9-Oct-22
11-Oct-22
18-Oct-22
20-Oct-22
10-Nov-22
24-Nov-22
1-Dec-22
15-Dec-22
22-Dec-22
Plan
3-Jan-23
17-Jan-23
20-Jan-23
27-Jan-23
29-Jan-23
3-Feb-23
30-Apr-23
380,000.00 
10-Feb-23
N/A
12-Feb-23
26-Feb-23
5-Mar-23
N/A
7-Mar-23
N/A
9-Mar-23
16-Mar-23
26-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Feb-23
N/A
12-Feb-23
26-Feb-23
5-Mar-23
N/A
7-Mar-23
N/A
9-Mar-23
16-Mar-23
26-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Oct-22
22-Oct-22
24-Oct-22
7-Nov-22
14-Nov-22
21-Nov-22
23-Nov-22
30-Nov-22
2-Dec-22
16-Dec-22
30-Dec-22
6-Jan-23
13-Jan-23
20-Jan-23
30-Sep-22
7-Oct-22
9-Oct-22
23-Oct-22
30-Oct-22
6-Nov-22
8-Nov-22
15-Nov-22
17-Nov-22
24-Nov-22
4-Dec-22
11-Dec-22
N/A
N/A
5-Dec-22
12-Dec-22
14-Dec-22
28-Dec-22
7-Jan-23
14-Jan-23
16-Jan-23
23-Jan-23
25-Jan-23
15-Feb-23
1-Mar-23
8-Mar-23
22-Mar-23
29-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Oct-22
22-Oct-22
24-Oct-22
31-Oct-22
N/A
N/A
7-Nov-22
14-Nov-22
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
7-Apr-23
14-Apr-23
17-Apr-23
N/A
19-Apr-23
22-Apr-23
22-May-23
7-Apr-23
14-Apr-23
17-Apr-23
N/A
19-Apr-23
22-Apr-23
22-May-23
1-Feb-23
11-Feb-23
14-Feb-23
21-Feb-23
23-Feb-23
26-Feb-23
26-Apr-23
29,000.00 
29,000.00 
80,000.00 
23-Dec-22
30-Dec-22
2-Jan-23
9-Jan-23
11-Jan-23
14-Jan-23
30-Dec-23
307,200.00 
10-Apr-23
24-Apr-23
27-Apr-23
4-May-23
6-May-23
11-May-23
30-Dec-23
144,000.00 
N/A
21-Nov-22
24-Nov-22
1-Dec-22
3-Dec-22
7-Dec-22
7-Jan-23
30-Sep-22
N/A
2-Oct-22
16-Oct-22
23-Oct-22
N/A
25-Oct-22
N/A
27-Oct-22
3-Nov-22
13-Nov-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
Plan
25-Nov-22
2-Dec-22
5-Dec-22
N/A
7-Dec-22
10-Dec-22
10-Jan-23
30-Aug-22
N/A
1-Sep-22
15-Sep-22
22-Sep-22
N/A
24-Sep-22
N/A
26-Sep-22
3-Oct-22
13-Oct-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Sep-22
N/A
3-Sep-22
17-Sep-22
24-Sep-22
N/A
26-Sep-22
N/A
28-Sep-22
5-Oct-22
15-Oct-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Mar-23
N/A
12-Mar-23
26-Mar-23
2-Apr-23
N/A
4-Apr-23
N/A
6-Apr-23
13-Apr-23
23-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Feb-23
N/A
17-Feb-23
3-Mar-23
10-Mar-23
N/A
12-Mar-23
N/A
14-Mar-23
21-Mar-23
31-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Sep-22
N/A
3-Sep-22
17-Sep-22
24-Sep-22
N/A
26-Sep-22
N/A
28-Sep-22
5-Oct-22
15-Oct-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Sep-22
N/A
17-Sep-22
1-Oct-22
8-Oct-22
N/A
10-Oct-22
N/A
12-Oct-22
19-Oct-22
29-Oct-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Mar-23
N/A
12-Mar-23
26-Mar-23
2-Apr-23
N/A
4-Apr-23
N/A
6-Apr-23
13-Apr-23
23-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Mar-23
N/A
17-Mar-23
31-Mar-23
7-Apr-23
N/A
9-Apr-23
N/A
11-Apr-23
18-Apr-23
28-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Jul-23
N/A
3-Jul-23
17-Jul-23
24-Jul-23
N/A
26-Jul-23
N/A
28-Jul-23
4-Aug-23
14-Aug-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Jul-22
N/A
17-Jul-22
31-Jul-22
7-Aug-22
N/A
9-Aug-22
N/A
11-Aug-22
18-Aug-22
28-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
20-Jul-22
N/A
22-Jul-22
5-Aug-22
12-Aug-22
N/A
14-Aug-22
N/A
16-Aug-22
23-Aug-22
2-Sep-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
20-Oct-22
N/A
22-Oct-22
5-Nov-22
12-Nov-22
N/A
14-Nov-22
N/A
16-Nov-22
30-Nov-22
14-Dec-22
N/A
21-Dec-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
5-Sep-22
12-Sep-22
14-Sep-22
21-Sep-22
N/A
N/A
28-Sep-22
5-Oct-22
15-Feb-23
N/A
17-Feb-23
3-Mar-23
10-Mar-23
N/A
12-Mar-23
N/A
14-Mar-23
21-Mar-23
31-Mar-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
20-Feb-23
N/A
22-Feb-23
8-Mar-23
15-Mar-23
N/A
17-Mar-23
N/A
19-Mar-23
26-Mar-23
5-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
25-Oct-22
1-Nov-22
4-Nov-22
N/A
6-Nov-22
9-Nov-22
30-Dec-23
27-Oct-22
3-Nov-22
6-Nov-22
N/A
8-Nov-22
11-Nov-22
30-Dec-23
5-May-23
12-May-23
15-May-23
N/A
17-May-23
20-May-23
30-Dec-23
12-Apr-23
19-Apr-23
22-Apr-23
N/A
24-Apr-23
27-Apr-23
30-May-23
27-Oct-22
3-Nov-22
6-Nov-22
N/A
8-Nov-22
11-Nov-22
30-Dec-23
10-Nov-22
17-Nov-22
20-Nov-22
N/A
22-Nov-22
25-Nov-22
25-Jun-23
5-May-23
12-May-23
15-May-23
N/A
17-May-23
20-May-23
20-Jun-23
10-May-23
17-May-23
20-May-23
N/A
22-May-23
25-May-23
25-Jun-23
26-Aug-23
2-Sep-23
5-Sep-23
N/A
7-Sep-23
10-Sep-23
30-Dec-23
9-Sep-22
16-Sep-22
19-Sep-22
N/A
21-Sep-22
24-Sep-22
30-Dec-23
14-Sep-22
21-Sep-22
24-Sep-22
N/A
26-Sep-22
29-Sep-22
30-Dec-23
N/A
12-Oct-22
15-Oct-22
22-Oct-22
24-Oct-22
28-Oct-22
28-Nov-22
12-Apr-23
19-Apr-23
22-Apr-23
N/A
24-Apr-23
27-Apr-23
27-May-23
17-Apr-23
24-Apr-23
27-Apr-23
N/A
29-Apr-23
2-May-23
30-Jun-23
20-Feb-23
N/A
22-Feb-23
8-Mar-23
15-Mar-23
N/A
17-Mar-23
N/A
19-Mar-23
26-Mar-23
5-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
Plan
17-Apr-23
24-Apr-23
27-Apr-23
N/A
29-Apr-23
2-May-23
30-Jun-23
2-Jan-23
12-Jan-23
15-Jan-23
N/A
17-Jan-23
20-Jan-23
20-May-23
30,000.00 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2,000.00 
4,000.00 
24,000.00 
24,000.00 
26,250.00 
3,500.00 
56,000.00 
40,000.00 
27,500.00 
2,400.00 
25,000.00 
19,350.00 
19,350.00 
7,500.00 
10,000.00 
20,000.00 
3,000.00 
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 3 of 5
Printed on: 30/08/2021
Version
1.0
August 2021
Basic Data
EOI  Shortlist Procedure
Proposal Process
Evaluation
Contract Award & Signature
Contract data
Description*
Funding
Project Area
Plan vs. Actual
План
Shortlist
(Yes|No)
Prior or Post 
Review
Procurement Method
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Submission of 
REOI
No Objection Date
REOI Launch Date EOI Submission 
Deadline
Submission of 
Shortlist Report
No Objection Date
Preparation / 
Submission of 
RFP/RCQ
No-objection
Date
RFP/RCQ Launch 
Date
Proposal 
submission 
deadline
Submission of 
TER
No-objection
Date
Submission of 
CER
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. Actual
Issue of NOITA& 
Standstill
Negotiations 
completed
Submission of Draft 
Contract and MoN (if 
needed)
No-objection
Date
Date
Contract
Award
Date
Contract
Signature
Contract 
completion
Comments
Contract No.
Vendor Name/ID
Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU)
AWPB/Component 
Ref
Component 3; 
Item 3.3.1
Component 3; 
Item 3.3.1
Component 3; 
Item 3.3.1
Component 3; 
Item 3.3.1
№
76
77
78
79
SEPMU. Service Provider for training 
material preparation on Window 1 
GCF Grant
SEPMU. Training delivery specialist 
(Service Provider for the first 100 
villages), including per diem and 
travel 
GCF Grant
SEPMU. Rent of training facility 
(venue) for first 100 villages to be 
trained by SP 
GCF Grant
SEPMU. Rent of training facility 
(venue) for the rest 410 villages to 
be trained by district officers and 
agro department experts 
GCF Grant
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
20,000.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
LCS
10,000.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
LCS
10,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 3; 
Item 3.3.1
80
SEPMU. Recruitment of 10 
facilitators for 3 months each  
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
12,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 3; 
Item 3.3.1
81
SEPMU. Organization of 1 meeting 
in each village with local 
communities (in 110 villages) 
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
33,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 3; 
Item 3.3.1
82
SEPMU. Service Provider for training 
material preparation on Window 2 
business planning, proposal writing 
and looking at farm as a business 
GCF Grant
Component 3; 
Item 3.3.1
Component 3; 
Item 3.3.1
Component 3; 
Item 3.3.1
Component 3; 
Item 3.3.1
Component 3; 
Item 3.3.1
83
84
85
86
87
SEPMU. Training delivery specialist 
(Service Provider to 110 villages), 
including per diem and travel 
GCF Grant
SEPMU. Rent of training facility 
(venue) for 110 villages to be trained 
by SP 
GCF Grant
SEPMU. Service Provider for training 
material preparation on climate-
resilient technologies in 6 different 
VCs 
GCF Grant
SEPMU. Training delivery specialist 
(Service Provider for the first 100 
villages), including per diem and 
travel 
GCF Grant
SEPMU. Rent of training facility 
(venue) for first 100 villages to be 
trained by SP 
GCF Grant
Component 3; 
Item 3.3.1
88
SEPMU. Sub-projects 
implementation expert (2 part-time 
experts, supporting local community 
to run the facilities and use the 
equipment) including travels
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
1,800.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
22,000.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
LCS
27,500.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
4,000.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
20,000.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
LCS
10,000.00 
Actual
-
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
9,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 3; 
Item 3.3.2
89
SEPMU. Grant management 
specialist (Including travels)
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
19,350.00 
Actual
-
Component 3; 
Item 3.3.2
90
SEPMU. PMU District Officers to 
provide Capacity development for 
CIGs / matching grant schemes 
recipients (Win1 and Win 2)
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
38,400.00 
Actual
-
Component 3; 
Item 3.3.2
91
SEPMU. Communication campaign 
(printing of materials, advertising on 
TV and magazines, etc)
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
10,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 4:  Project Management Component
Component 4
92
SEPMU. Audit for first 3 years
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
LCS
30,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
93
SEPMU. Training on FM, 
Procurement and other issues
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
SSS
6,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
94
SEPMU. Baseline socio-economic 
status of households with particular 
focus on capacity to deal with 
climate change and risks  
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
CQS
70,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
95
SEPMU. Project MIS system 
operational support
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
10,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
96
SEPMU. Monitoring and Evaluation 
Consultant (Including travel)
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
28,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
97
SEPMU. Monitoring and Evaluation 
Assistant
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
24,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
98
PIG CEP. Audit for first 3 years
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
LCS
30,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
99
PIG CEP. Training on FM, 
Procurement and other issues 
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
6,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
100
SEPMU. Project Coordinator
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
28,800.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
101
SEPMU. Financial management 
specialist
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
26,400.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
102
SEPMU. Project Accountant
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
19,200.00 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
10-Apr-23
N/A
12-Apr-23
26-Apr-23
3-May-23
N/A
5-May-23
N/A
7-May-23
14-May-23
24-May-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Apr-23
N/A
17-Apr-23
1-May-23
8-May-23
N/A
10-May-23
N/A
12-May-23
26-May-23
9-Jun-23
N/A
16-Jun-23
N/A
15-Apr-23
N/A
17-Apr-23
1-May-23
8-May-23
N/A
10-May-23
N/A
12-May-23
26-May-23
9-Jun-23
N/A
16-Jun-23
N/A
15-Mar-23
N/A
17-Mar-23
31-Mar-23
7-Apr-23
N/A
9-Apr-23
N/A
11-Apr-23
18-Apr-23
28-Apr-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Jun-23
N/A
12-Jun-23
26-Jun-23
3-Jul-23
N/A
5-Jul-23
N/A
7-Jul-23
14-Jul-23
24-Jul-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
5-May-23
N/A
7-May-23
21-May-23
28-May-23
N/A
30-May-23
N/A
1-Jun-23
8-Jun-23
18-Jun-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Jun-23
N/A
12-Jun-23
26-Jun-23
3-Jul-23
N/A
5-Jul-23
N/A
7-Jul-23
14-Jul-23
24-Jul-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Jun-23
N/A
17-Jun-23
1-Jul-23
8-Jul-23
N/A
10-Jul-23
N/A
12-Jul-23
26-Jul-23
9-Aug-23
N/A
16-Aug-23
N/A
20-Jul-23
N/A
22-Jul-23
5-Aug-23
12-Aug-23
N/A
14-Aug-23
N/A
16-Aug-23
23-Aug-23
2-Sep-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Aug-23
N/A
3-Aug-23
17-Aug-23
24-Aug-23
N/A
26-Aug-23
N/A
28-Aug-23
4-Sep-23
14-Sep-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
5-Aug-23
N/A
7-Aug-23
21-Aug-23
28-Aug-23
N/A
30-Aug-23
N/A
1-Sep-23
15-Sep-23
29-Sep-23
N/A
6-Oct-23
N/A
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
5-Jun-23
12-Jun-23
15-Jun-23
N/A
17-Jun-23
20-Jun-23
20-Jul-23
28-Jun-23
8-Jul-23
11-Jul-23
N/A
13-Jul-23
16-Jul-23
16-Aug-23
28-Jun-23
8-Jul-23
11-Jul-23
N/A
13-Jul-23
16-Jul-23
16-Aug-23
10-May-23
17-May-23
20-May-23
N/A
22-May-23
25-May-23
25-Aug-23
5-Aug-23
12-Aug-23
15-Aug-23
N/A
17-Aug-23
20-Aug-23
20-Sep-23
30-Jun-23
7-Jul-23
10-Jul-23
N/A
12-Jul-23
15-Jul-23
15-Aug-23
5-Aug-23
12-Aug-23
15-Aug-23
N/A
17-Aug-23
20-Aug-23
20-Sep-23
28-Aug-23
7-Sep-23
10-Sep-23
N/A
12-Sep-23
15-Sep-23
15-Oct-23
14-Sep-23
21-Sep-23
24-Sep-23
N/A
26-Sep-23
29-Sep-23
30-Oct-23
26-Sep-23
3-Oct-23
6-Oct-23
N/A
8-Oct-23
11-Oct-23
30-Nov-23
18-Oct-23
28-Oct-23
31-Oct-23
N/A
2-Nov-23
5-Nov-23
30-Dec-23
20,000.00 
10,000.00 
10,000.00 
12,000.00 
33,000.00 
1,800.00 
22,000.00 
27,500.00 
4,000.00 
20,000.00 
10,000.00 
5-Jul-23
N/A
7-Jul-23
21-Jul-23
28-Jul-23
N/A
30-Jul-23
N/A
1-Aug-23
8-Aug-23
18-Aug-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
Plan
30-Aug-23
6-Sep-23
9-Sep-23
N/A
11-Sep-23
14-Sep-23
14-Nov-23
9,000.00 
14-Sep-22
21-Sep-22
24-Sep-22
N/A
26-Sep-22
29-Sep-22
30-Dec-23
19,350.00 
12-Mar-23
19-Mar-23
22-Mar-23
N/A
24-Mar-23
27-Mar-23
30-Dec-23
38,400.00 
5-Nov-23
12-Nov-23
15-Nov-23
N/A
17-Nov-23
20-Nov-23
30-Dec-23
10,000.00 
20-Jul-22
N/A
22-Jul-22
5-Aug-22
12-Aug-22
N/A
14-Aug-22
N/A
16-Aug-22
23-Aug-22
2-Sep-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Jan-23
N/A
17-Jan-23
31-Jan-23
7-Feb-23
N/A
9-Feb-23
N/A
11-Feb-23
18-Feb-23
28-Feb-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Sep-23
N/A
12-Sep-23
26-Sep-23
3-Oct-23
N/A
5-Oct-23
N/A
7-Oct-23
14-Oct-23
24-Oct-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
20-Oct-22
27-Oct-22
29-Oct-22
12-Nov-22
19-Nov-22
26-Nov-22
28-Nov-22
5-Dec-22
7-Dec-22
21-Dec-22
4-Jan-23
11-Jan-23
18-Jan-23
25-Jan-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
5-Aug-22
12-Aug-22
14-Aug-22
21-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
28-Aug-22
4-Sep-22
5-Nov-22
12-Nov-22
14-Nov-22
28-Nov-22
5-Dec-22
12-Dec-22
14-Dec-22
21-Dec-22
23-Dec-22
30-Dec-22
9-Jan-23
16-Jan-23
N/A
N/A
25-Jul-22
N/A
27-Jul-22
10-Aug-22
17-Aug-22
N/A
19-Aug-22
N/A
21-Aug-22
28-Aug-22
7-Sep-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
1-Jun-22
8-Jun-22
10-Jun-22
24-Jun-22
1-Jul-22
8-Jul-22
10-Jul-22
17-Jul-22
19-Jul-22
26-Jul-22
5-Aug-22
12-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
1-Jun-22
N/A
3-Jun-22
17-Jun-22
24-Jun-22
N/A
26-Jun-22
N/A
28-Jun-22
5-Jul-22
15-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
20-Oct-22
27-Oct-22
29-Oct-22
12-Nov-22
19-Nov-22
26-Nov-22
28-Nov-22
5-Dec-22
7-Dec-22
21-Dec-22
4-Jan-23
11-Jan-23
18-Jan-23
25-Jan-23
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
5-Aug-22
12-Aug-22
14-Aug-22
21-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
28-Aug-22
4-Sep-22
5-Jun-22
12-Jun-22
14-Jun-22
28-Jun-22
5-Jul-22
12-Jul-22
14-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
23-Jul-22
30-Jul-22
9-Aug-22
16-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
5-Jun-22
12-Jun-22
14-Jun-22
28-Jun-22
5-Jul-22
12-Jul-22
14-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
23-Jul-22
30-Jul-22
9-Aug-22
16-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
6-Feb-23
16-Feb-23
19-Feb-23
26-Feb-23
28-Feb-23
3-Mar-23
30-Jul-25
N/A
11-Sep-22
14-Sep-22
21-Sep-22
23-Sep-22
27-Sep-22
30-Dec-23
28-Jan-23
4-Feb-23
7-Feb-23
14-Feb-23
16-Feb-23
19-Feb-23
19-Mar-23
19-Sep-22
26-Sep-22
29-Sep-22
N/A
1-Oct-22
4-Oct-22
30-Dec-23
24-Aug-22
31-Aug-22
3-Sep-22
10-Sep-22
12-Sep-22
15-Sep-22
30-Dec-23
27-Jul-22
3-Aug-22
6-Aug-22
N/A
8-Aug-22
11-Aug-22
30-Dec-23
6-Feb-23
16-Feb-23
19-Feb-23
26-Feb-23
28-Feb-23
3-Mar-23
30-Jul-25
N/A
11-Sep-22
14-Sep-22
21-Sep-22
23-Sep-22
27-Sep-22
30-Dec-23
28-Aug-22
4-Sep-22
7-Sep-22
14-Sep-22
16-Sep-22
19-Sep-22
30-Dec-23
28-Aug-22
4-Sep-22
7-Sep-22
14-Sep-22
16-Sep-22
19-Sep-22
30-Dec-23
10-Jun-22
17-Jun-22
19-Jun-22
3-Jul-22
10-Jul-22
17-Jul-22
19-Jul-22
26-Jul-22
28-Jul-22
4-Aug-22
14-Aug-22
21-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
Plan
2-Sep-22
9-Sep-22
12-Sep-22
19-Sep-22
21-Sep-22
24-Sep-22
30-Dec-23
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
30,000.00 
6,000.00 
70,000.00 
10,000.00 
28,000.00 
24,000.00 
30,000.00 
6,000.00 
28,800.00 
26,400.00 
19,200.00 
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 4 of 5
Printed on: 30/08/2021
Version
1.0
August 2021
Basic Data
EOI  Shortlist Procedure
Proposal Process
Evaluation
Contract Award & Signature
Contract data
Description*
Funding
Project Area
Plan vs. Actual
План
Shortlist
(Yes|No)
Prior or Post 
Review
Procurement Method
Amount (USD)
Amount (LCU)
Plan vs. Actual
Submission of 
REOI
No Objection Date
REOI Launch Date EOI Submission 
Deadline
Submission of 
Shortlist Report
No Objection Date
Preparation / 
Submission of 
RFP/RCQ
No-objection
Date
RFP/RCQ Launch 
Date
Proposal 
submission 
deadline
Submission of 
TER
No-objection
Date
Submission of 
CER
No-objection
Date
Plan vs. Actual
Issue of NOITA& 
Standstill
Negotiations 
completed
Submission of Draft 
Contract and MoN (if 
needed)
No-objection
Date
Date
Contract
Award
Date
Contract
Signature
Contract 
completion
Comments
Contract No.
Vendor Name/ID
Amount
(USD)
Amount
(LCU)
AWPB/Component 
Ref
Component 4
№
102
SEPMU. Project Accountant
IFAD Grant
Actual
-
Component 4
103
SEPMU. Disbursement specialist
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
24,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
104
SEPMU. Procurement specialist
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
24,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
105
SEPMU. Procurement assistant
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
No
Post Review
ICS
19,200.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
106
SEPMU. Administrator
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
No
Post Review
ICS
15,360.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
107
SEPMU. Administrator assistant
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
No
Post Review
ICS
30,720.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
108
SEPMU. Office Cleaner (4)
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
No
Post Review
ICS
9,600.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
109
SEPMU. Drivers (10)
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
No
Post Review
ICS
48,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
110
SEPMU. Security Guards (6)
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
No
Post Review
ICS
14,400.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
111
SEPMU. Social Fund (25%)
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
No
Prior Review
ICS
64,920.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
112
SEPMU. Travels
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
No
Post Review
SSS
24,886.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
113
PIG CEP. Project Coordinator
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
28,800.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
114
PIG CEP. Financial management 
specialist
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
26,400.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
115
PIG CEP. Disbursement specialist
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
24,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
116
PIG CEP. Procurement specialist
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Prior Review
ICS
24,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
117
PIG CEP. Project Assistant
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
No
Post Review
ICS
19,200.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
118
PIG CEP. Office Cleaner
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
No
Post Review
ICS
3,600.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
119
PIG CEP. Drivers (3)
IFAD Grant
All targeted area
Plan
No
Post Review
ICS
14,400.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
120
PIG CEP. Interpreter/Translator
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
ICS
15,360.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
121
PIG CEP. Social Fund (25%)
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
No
Post Review
ICS
38,940.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
122
PIG CEP. Travels
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
No
Prior Review
SSS
24,000.00 
Actual
-
Component 4
123
PIG CEP. Operating expenses - 
Vehicle Maintenance & Operations 
(3 vehicles)
GCF Grant
All targeted area
Plan
Yes
Post Review
CQS
21,600.00 
Actual
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
10-Jun-22
17-Jun-22
19-Jun-22
3-Jul-22
10-Jul-22
17-Jul-22
19-Jul-22
26-Jul-22
28-Jul-22
4-Aug-22
14-Aug-22
21-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
1-Jun-22
8-Jun-22
10-Jun-22
24-Jun-22
1-Jul-22
8-Jul-22
10-Jul-22
17-Jul-22
19-Jul-22
26-Jul-22
5-Aug-22
12-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
5-Jun-22
N/A
7-Jun-22
14-Jun-22
24-Jun-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Jun-22
N/A
17-Jun-22
24-Jun-22
4-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Jun-22
N/A
17-Jun-22
24-Jun-22
4-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Jun-22
N/A
12-Jun-22
19-Jun-22
29-Jun-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Jun-22
N/A
12-Jun-22
19-Jun-22
29-Jun-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Jun-22
N/A
12-Jun-22
19-Jun-22
29-Jun-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
25-Jun-22
2-Jul-22
4-Jul-22
11-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
28-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Jul-22
22-Jul-22
24-Jul-22
31-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
7-Aug-22
14-Aug-22
5-Jun-22
12-Jun-22
14-Jun-22
28-Jun-22
5-Jul-22
12-Jul-22
14-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
23-Jul-22
30-Jul-22
9-Aug-22
16-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
5-Jun-22
12-Jun-22
14-Jun-22
28-Jun-22
5-Jul-22
12-Jul-22
14-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
23-Jul-22
30-Jul-22
9-Aug-22
16-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
10-Jun-22
17-Jun-22
19-Jun-22
3-Jul-22
10-Jul-22
17-Jul-22
19-Jul-22
26-Jul-22
28-Jul-22
4-Aug-22
14-Aug-22
21-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
1-Jun-22
8-Jun-22
10-Jun-22
24-Jun-22
1-Jul-22
8-Jul-22
10-Jul-22
17-Jul-22
19-Jul-22
26-Jul-22
5-Aug-22
12-Aug-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Jun-22
N/A
17-Jun-22
24-Jun-22
4-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Jun-22
N/A
12-Jun-22
19-Jun-22
29-Jun-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
10-Jun-22
N/A
12-Jun-22
19-Jun-22
29-Jun-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Jun-22
N/A
17-Jun-22
1-Jul-22
8-Jul-22
N/A
10-Jul-22
N/A
12-Jul-22
19-Jul-22
29-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
25-Jun-22
N/A
27-Jun-22
4-Jul-22
14-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15-Jul-22
22-Jul-22
24-Jul-22
31-Jul-22
N/A
N/A
7-Aug-22
14-Aug-22
20-Jul-22
N/A
22-Jul-22
5-Aug-22
12-Aug-22
N/A
14-Aug-22
N/A
16-Aug-22
23-Aug-22
2-Sep-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
2-Sep-22
9-Sep-22
12-Sep-22
19-Sep-22
21-Sep-22
24-Sep-22
30-Dec-23
24-Aug-22
31-Aug-22
3-Sep-22
10-Sep-22
12-Sep-22
15-Sep-22
30-Dec-23
6-Jul-22
13-Jul-22
16-Jul-22
N/A
18-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
30-Dec-23
16-Jul-22
23-Jul-22
26-Jul-22
N/A
28-Jul-22
31-Jul-22
30-Dec-23
16-Jul-22
23-Jul-22
26-Jul-22
N/A
28-Jul-22
31-Jul-22
30-Dec-23
11-Jul-22
18-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
N/A
23-Jul-22
26-Jul-22
30-Dec-23
11-Jul-22
18-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
N/A
23-Jul-22
26-Jul-22
30-Dec-23
11-Jul-22
18-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
N/A
23-Jul-22
26-Jul-22
30-Dec-23
9-Aug-22
16-Aug-22
19-Aug-22
26-Aug-22
28-Aug-22
31-Aug-22
30-Dec-23
N/A
21-Aug-22
24-Aug-22
31-Aug-22
2-Sep-22
6-Sep-22
30-Dec-23
28-Aug-22
4-Sep-22
7-Sep-22
14-Sep-22
16-Sep-22
19-Sep-22
30-Dec-23
28-Aug-22
4-Sep-22
7-Sep-22
14-Sep-22
16-Sep-22
19-Sep-22
30-Dec-23
2-Sep-22
9-Sep-22
12-Sep-22
19-Sep-22
21-Sep-22
24-Sep-22
30-Dec-23
24-Aug-22
31-Aug-22
3-Sep-22
10-Sep-22
12-Sep-22
15-Sep-22
30-Dec-23
16-Jul-22
23-Jul-22
26-Jul-22
N/A
28-Jul-22
31-Jul-22
30-Dec-23
11-Jul-22
18-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
N/A
23-Jul-22
26-Jul-22
30-Dec-23
11-Jul-22
18-Jul-22
21-Jul-22
N/A
23-Jul-22
26-Jul-22
30-Dec-23
10-Aug-22
17-Aug-22
20-Aug-22
N/A
22-Aug-22
25-Aug-22
30-Dec-23
26-Jul-22
2-Aug-22
5-Aug-22
N/A
7-Aug-22
10-Aug-22
30-Dec-23
N/A
21-Aug-22
24-Aug-22
31-Aug-22
2-Sep-22
6-Sep-22
30-Dec-23
14-Sep-22
21-Sep-22
24-Sep-22
N/A
26-Sep-22
29-Sep-22
30-Dec-23
24,000.00 
24,000.00 
19,200.00 
15,360.00 
30,720.00 
9,600.00 
48,000.00 
14,400.00 
64,920.00 
24,886.00 
28,800.00 
26,400.00 
24,000.00 
24,000.00 
19,200.00 
3,600.00 
14,400.00 
15,360.00 
38,940.00 
24,000.00 
21,600.00 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
IFAD-PP-Template-VersionJan2020
Page 5 of 5
Printed on: 30/08/2021
Goods & Works
Procurement Method
Submission of PreQual docs
No Objection Date
PreQual Invitation Date
PreQual Closing Date
Submission of PreQual Report
No Objection Date
Submission of BD
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Single Envelope
RFQ/Shopping (NS/IS)
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Direct Contracting
Two Envelope
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
4
4
4
0
0
0
0
4
4
4
0
0
0
0
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
0
0
0
0
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
0
0
0
0
7
7
5
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
1
Goods & Works
Procurement Method
Submission of BD
No-objection
Date
Bid Invitation Date
Bid Closing-Opening
Submission
Tech Eval Rpt
No-objection
Date
Submission
Combined Eval Rpt/Bid 
Evaluation Report
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Single Envelope
RFQ/Shopping (NS/IS)
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Direct Contracting
Two Envelope
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
3
7
7
7
14
14
14
3
7
7
7
14
14
14
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
10
10
10
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
N/A-Start Date
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
5
30
45
45
30
45
45
7
30
45
45
30
45
45
21
45
70
70
45
70
70
30
45
70
70
45
70
70
14
30
45
45
45
45
45
14
45
45
45
45
45
45
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
21
21
14
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
1
3
3
3
7
7
7
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
7
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
7
7
7
7
7
7
2
Goods & Works
Procurement Method
Submission
Combined Eval Rpt/Bid 
Evaluation Report
No-objection
Date
Issue of NOITA & Standstill
Date
Contract
Award
Date
Contract
Signature
Totals
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx
Single Envelope
RFQ/Shopping (NS/IS)
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
Direct Contracting
Two Envelope
NCB (no PreQual)
ICB (no PreQual)
LIB (no PreQual)
NCB (with PreQual)
ICB (with PreQual)
LIB (with PreQual)
7
14
21
21
14
21
21
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
11
11
11
11
11
11
0
11
11
11
11
11
11
0
15
15
15
15
15
15
0
15
15
15
15
15
15
0
12
12
12
12
12
12
0
12
12
12
12
12
12
3
14
14
14
5
5
5
14
14
14
14
5
5
5
2
7
7
7
5
5
5
7
7
7
7
5
5
5
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
24
68
83
83
110
125
123
34
78
93
93
120
135
135
60
130
155
155
206
231
231
96
147
172
172
223
247
247
40
81
103
103
164
171
171
45
99
117
117
178
185
185
1
7
7
7
1
1
1
7
7
7
7
1
1
1
3
Approx 
Months/Days
1m 9d 
2m 21d 
3m 12d 
3m 12d 
5m 12d 
5m 19d 
5m 19d 
1m 14d 
3m 8d 
3m 26d 
3m 26d 
5m 26d 
6m 3d 
6m 3d 
Services
Selection Method
Submission of REOI
No Objection Date
REOI Launch Date
EOI Submission Deadline
Submission of Shortlist 
Report
No Objection Date
Submission of RFP/RCQ/TOR
Min
Max
Approx
Min
Max
Approx Min
Max
Approx Min
Max
Approx Min
Max
Approx Min
Max
Approx Min
Max
Approx
QCBS (w/Shortlist)
FBS (w/Shortlist)
LCS (w/Shortlist)
QBS (w/Shortlist)
CQS (w/Shortlist)
ICS (w/Shortlist)
QCBS (noShortlist)
FBS (noShortlist)
LCS (noShortlist)
QBS (noShortlist)
CQS (noShortlist)
ICS (noShortlist)
SSS
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
4
2
4
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
3
3
3
3
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
30
30
30
30
30
30
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
14
14
14
14
14
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
21
21
21
21
21
21
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
10
7
10
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
7
7
7
7
5
5
7
5
7
7
5
5
7
2
2
2
2
2
2
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
N/A- Start Date
NOTE
1. Some procurement methods for low-value processes might require No Objections based on the Prior Review Thresholds. Where they do not require, No Objection number of days should be zero.
2. RFP: Request for Proposals: standard procurement document used for Services.
3. RCQ: Requests for Consultants Qualifications: Procurement document used for CQS and LCS. The RFP is used for all other procurement methods
4. Consulting services and Good/Works methods could either be used for Non-Consulting Services
5. All days are calendar days
1
Services
Selection Method
No-objection
Date
RFP/RCQ Launch Date
Proposal submission 
deadline
Submission of TER
No-objection
Date
Submission of CER
No-objection
Date
Issue of NOITA & Standstill
Min
Max
Approx Min
Max
Approx Min
Max
Approx Min
Max
Approx Min
Max
Approx Min
Max
Approx Min
Max
Approx Min
Max
Approx
14
14
14
14
10
10
14
14
14
14
10
10
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
7
14
14
14
0
0
0
14
14
14
0
0
0
21
14
14
7
0
0
0
14
14
7
0
0
0
7
7
7
7
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
7
10
10
10
0
0
0
10
10
10
0
0
0
10
7
7
7
0
0
0
7
7
7
0
0
0
7
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
0
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
0
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
0
QCBS (w/Shortlist)
FBS (w/Shortlist)
LCS (w/Shortlist)
QBS (w/Shortlist)
CQS (w/Shortlist)
ICS (w/Shortlist)
QCBS (noShortlist)
FBS (noShortlist)
LCS (noShortlist)
QBS (noShortlist)
CQS (noShortlist)
ICS (noShortlist)
SSS
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
21
21
14
21
7
7
21
14
14
21
7
7
7
60
60
60
60
30
30
60
30
30
60
30
30
30
21
21
14
21
7
7
21
14
14
21
7
7
7
14
14
14
14
10
10
14
7
7
14
10
10
0
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
0
2
Services
Selection Method
Negotiations completed
Submission of Draft 
Contract and MoN
No-objection
Date
Date Contract Award
Date
Contract
Signature
Totals
Min
Max
Approx Min
Max
Approx Min
Max
Approx Min
Max
Approx Min Max Approx Min Max Approx
QCBS (w/Shortlist)
FBS (w/Shortlist)
LCS (w/Shortlist)
QBS (w/Shortlist)
CQS (w/Shortlist)
ICS (w/Shortlist)
QCBS (noShortlist)
FBS (noShortlist)
LCS (noShortlist)
QBS (noShortlist)
CQS (noShortlist)
ICS (noShortlist)
SSS
14
14
10
14
7
7
14
14
10
14
7
7
7
21
21
21
21
14
14
21
21
21
21
14
14
21
14
14
10
14
7
7
14
14
10
14
7
7
7
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
5
5
3
5
3
3
5
5
3
5
3
3
4
139
139
128
125
100
100
102
88
84
88
63
63
49
283
283
281
259
218
218
205
173
175
181
142
142
136
157
157
134
136
106
106
115
108
95
94
67
67
53
Approx 
Months/Days
5m 5d 
5m 5d 
4m 13d 
4m 15d 
3m 15d 
3m 15d 
3m 24d 
3m 17d 
3m 4d 
3m 3d 
2m 7d 
2m 7d 
1m 22d 
3
REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN
COMMUNITY-BASED AGRICULTURE SUPPORT PROGRAMME ‘PLUS’ (CASP+)
PROCUREMENT PLAN FOR 18 MONTHS (FAO ACTIVITY)
Original: Final design
Period: June 2022 – December 2023
GOODS
Bid Ref.
Description
Source of 
Funds
Estimated Cost 
in US$
Procurement 
Method
Pre
qualification 
(yes/no)
Prior/ Post 
Review
Bid 
Preparation
Bid issuance/ 
Invitation              
Bid Opening
Bid 
Evaluation
Contract 
signature
Completion
Component 3: Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market-based approaches
3.1.2
FAO. Office equipment and furniture for the training room (TVA office) GCF Grant
6,200
FAO. Office maintenance (TVA)
FAO. Vehicle for TVA
FAO. Veterinary package for 284 vets
FAO. FFS starting capital
FAO. Establishment of trial sites
GCF Grant
GCF Grant
GCF Grant
GCF Grant
GCF Grant
2,000
23,000
284,000
72,000
16,000
3.1.2
3.1.2
3.1.2
3.1.3
3.1.3
3.1.3
FAO. Awareness raising work and selection of FFS member and to 
promote FFS (hard investments)
GCF Grant
54,800
Shopping
Shopping
Shopping
Shopping
ICB
NCB
Shopping
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Post
Post
Prior
Prior
Prior
Post
Post
Jul-2022
Jul-2022
Jul-2022
Aug-2022
Aug-2022
Aug-2022
Jul-2022
Jul-2022
Jun-2022
Jan-2023
Jan-2023
Jul-2022
Jul-2022
Jul-2022
Jan-2023
Jan-2023
Jul-2022
Jul-2022
Jul-2022
Jan-2023
Jan-2023
Aug-2022
Aug-2022
Aug-2023
Aug-2022
Aug-2022
Aug-2022
Aug-2022
Aug-2022
Oct-2022
Feb-2023
Feb-2023
Mar-2023
Feb-2023
Feb-2023
Mar-2023
Aug-2022
Aug-2022
Aug-2022
Sep-2022
Sep-2022
Oct-2023
Total For Goods:
458,000
CIVIL WORKS
Bid Ref.
Description
Source of 
Funds
Estimated Cost 
in US$
Procurement 
Method
Pre
qualification 
(yes/no)
Prior/ Post 
Review
Bid 
Preparation
Bid issuance/ 
Invitation             
Bid Opening
Bid 
Evaluation
Contract 
signature
Completion
Component 3: Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market-based approaches
3.1.2
FAO. Renovation of TVA office and Training Center
GCF Grant
Total For Works:
15,000
15,000
Shopping
No
Prior
Jun-2022
Jun-2022
Jun-2022
Jul-2022
Jul-2022
Jul-2022
 CONSULTING SERVICES
Bid Ref.
Description
Source of 
Funds
Estimated Cost 
in US$
Procurement 
Method
Prior/ Post 
Review
Issuance 
of REOI
Shortlist and 
issue RFP
Proposals 
Submission              
Technical 
Evaluation
Financial 
Evaluation
Negotiate 
and Award
Completion
Component 1: Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources
1.2.1
1.2.1
1.2.2
FAO. International Specialists on Carbon accounting Tools (Including 
travels)
FAO. International Specialists on Livestock Planning Related Tools 
(LSIPT) (Including travels)
FAO. Provision of technical assistance on the formulation of breeding 
strategies
FAO Grant
11,500
FAO Grant
11,500
FAO Grant
20,000
ICS
ICS
ICS
Post
Jan-2023
Jan-2023
Jan-2023
Feb-2023
Feb-2023
Feb-2023
Mar-2023
Post
Jan-2023
Jan-2023
Jan-2023
Feb-2023
Feb-2023
Feb-2023
Mar-2023
Prior
Jun-2022
Jun-2022
Jun-2022
Jul-2022
Jul-2022
Jul-2022
Aug-2022
1.2.2
FAO. Organization of workshops (2 consultations and 1 validation)
FAO Grant
15,000
CQS/SSS
Prior
Jun-2022
Jun-2022
Jun-2022
Jul-2022
Jul-2022
Jul-2022
Apr-2023
Component 3: Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market-based approaches
3.1.2
3.1.2
3.1.2
3.1.2
3.1.3
3.1.3
FAO. National Specialist on Continuous Veterinary Education
FAO. Participation in the international events/workshops
FAO. Training and workshops, including kick off meetings
FAO. Training and workshops, including kick off meetings
FAO. International Master Trainer on FFS (including fees and 2 
missions)
FAO. Training of facilitators - 40 people (including per diems and 
transport)
GCF Grant
GCF Grant
GCF Grant
FAO Grant
24,000
12,000
34,229
22,571
GCF Grant
25,000
ICS
SSS
CQS
CQS
ICS
Post
Prior
Post
Post
Post
Jul-2022
Jul-2022
Jul-2022
Aug-2022
Aug-2022
Aug-2022
Dec-2023
N/A
Sep-2022
Sep-2022
Sep-2022
Sep-2022
Sep-2022
Dec-2023
Aug-2022
Aug-2022
Aug-2022
Sep-2022
Sep-2022
Sep-2022
Feb-2023
Aug-2022
Aug-2022
Aug-2022
Sep-2022
Sep-2022
Sep-2022
Feb-2023
Feb-2023
Feb-2023
Feb-2023
Mar-2023
Mar-2023
Mar-2023
Apr-2023
GCF Grant
10,400
CQS/SSS
Post
Feb-2023
Feb-2023
Feb-2023
Mar-2023
Mar-2023
Mar-2023
Apr-2023
3.1.3
FAO. Honorarium of National Master Trainers for training of facilitators GCF Grant
8,000
3.1.3
FAO. Monitoring and evaluation (including DSA and honorarium)
GCF Grant
8,000
3.1.3
FAO. Awareness raising work and selection of FFS member and to 
promote FFS (TA)
GCF Grant
25,200
Total For Services:
227,400
SSS
ICS
ICS
Prior
N/A
Mar-2023
Mar-2023
Mar-2023
Mar-2023
Mar-2023
Apr-2023
Post
Mar-2023 Mar-2023
Mar-2023
Apr-2023
Apr-2023
Apr-2023
May-2023
Post
Aug-2022
Aug-2022
Aug-2022
Sep-2022
Sep-2022
Sep-2022
Feb-2023
Competitive Methods are the following:
ICB - International Competitive Bidding
NCB - National Competitive Bidding
Shopping - National/Local Shopping
DC - Direct Contracting
QCBS - Quality and Cost Based Selection
QBS - Quality Based Selection
LCS - Least Cost Selection
CQS - Consultant Qualification Selection
ICS - Individual Consultants Selection
SSS - Single Source Selection
Project Procurement Rules and Guidance 
1 
2 
Applicable Procurement Rules .............................................................................................................. 3 
Procurement Methods, Thresholds and Prior Review .......................................................................... 3 
Table of Contents 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
2.5 
2.6 
Procurement Plans (PP) ................................................................................................................ 3 
Contract Register (CR) and Contract Monitoring Tool (CMT) ....................................................... 4 
Tabular Summary of Applicable Methods and Thresholds ........................................................... 5 
Special Procurement Arrangements ............................................................................................. 6 
Standard Procurement Documents (SPD) to be used ................................................................... 7 
Guidance Offered in the IFAD Procurement Handbook ............................................................... 8 
2.6.1 
Application of the Handbook ................................................................................................ 8 
2.6.2 
Key Provisions of the Handbook ........................................................................................... 8 
2.7 
Prior Review Documentation ........................................................................................................ 9 
2.7.1 
Procurement Plan (PP) .......................................................................................................... 9 
2.7.2 
The General Procurement Notice(s) (GPN) ........................................................................... 9 
2.7.3 
ICB/NCB (Goods, Works, Non-Consulting Services) .............................................................. 9 
2.7.4 
Shopping (Goods, Works, Non-Consulting Services) .......................................................... 10 
2.7.5 
Consulting Services: QCBS, QBS, FBS, and LCS .................................................................... 10 
2.7.6 
Consulting Services: CQS and ICS ........................................................................................ 11 
2.7.7 
Direct Contracting and Single Source Selection .................................................................. 11 
2.7.8 
Other specific Prior Review requirements .......................................................................... 11 
2.8 
Other procurement-related coordination with IFAD .................................................................. 12 
3 
Critical Procurement Issues ................................................................................................................ 12 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
Cost and Schedule Estimate ........................................................................................................ 12 
Publication of Notices ................................................................................................................. 13 
Award of Grants/Loans ............................................................................................................... 13 
3.3.1 
Selection of Grant or Refinancing Partners ........................................................................ 14 
3.3.2 
Grant Beneficiary Selection ................................................................................................. 15 
3.4 
3.5 
Procurement Principles and Ethics ............................................................................................. 17 
Combatting Corruption and Sexual Harassment ........................................................................ 18 
3.6 
3.7 
Anti-Money Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism ............................................... 18 
Record Keeping ........................................................................................................................... 18 
4 
Procurement Transactions – Institutional Setup and RACI ................................................................. 19 
4.1 
4.2 
Accounting for Procurement by Local Entities and Partners ...................................................... 19 
Institutional Setup, Roles and Responsibilities ........................................................................... 19 
4.2.1 
Evaluation Committees ....................................................................................................... 19 
4.2.2 
IFAD-funded PMU staff selection ........................................................................................ 23 
4.2.3 
Roles & Responsibilities ...................................................................................................... 25 
Annex 1: Responsibility Assignment Matrix (RAM - RACI) Template ......................................................... 26 
Annex 2: Procurement Records and Files ................................................................................................... 29 
Annex 3: Guidance on using the Procurement Plan ................................................................................... 30 
Annex 4: Guidance on using the Contract Monitoring Tool ....................................................................... 31 
Annex 5: Guidance on using NOTUS ........................................................................................................... 32 
Annex 6: Vendor Assessment Form ............................................................................................................ 33 
Annex 7: Debrief, Protest and Appeal Timeline .......................................................................................... 36 
List of Tables and Figures: 
Table 1 - Applicable Methods, Thresholds and time limits 
Table 2 - Applicable Procurement Arrangements 
Table 3 - Applicable Standard Procurement Documents 
Table 4 - Mapping of Procurement Guidance in the Handbook 
Table 5 - Comparison between National Procurement Rules and IFAD's Guidelines 
Table 6 - Guidance on whether NOTUS and CMT apply for some types of contracts or agreements 
Table 6 - Inter-agency Procurement Roles and Responsibilities 
Figure 1 - Grants through Implementing Partners 
Figure 2 - Grants through PMU 
Figure 3- Flowchart for ICS procedure for selecting IFAD-funded project staff 
1  Applicable Procurement Rules 
As per the Letter to the Borrower (LTB), the following procurement rules shall apply: 
Procurement of goods, works and services shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the 
IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines1.   
The State Enterprise Project Management Unit (SEPMU) and the Project Implementation Group of the 
Committee  on  Environmental  Protection  (CEP  PIG)  are  responsible  for  the  management  of  entire 
procurement  process,  coordination of  activities  of  all  the  chains  involved  in  procurement  process  and 
clear segregation of duties among responsible persons or units. 
The  SEPMU and CEP PIG will fully abide  by the provisions of the Financing Agreement, Project Design 
Report, Letter to the Borrower/Recipient, and IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines as well as with IFAD 
Procurement Handbook based on the above. The provisions of such references are generally not repeated 
in this Chapter, and the SEPMU and CEP PIG shall persistently consult with the same. Whenever IFAD’s 
Operational Policy and Results Division (OPR) issues a circular, guidance or clarification, the SEPMU and 
CEP PIG will comply with the same and will amend the PIM accordingly. 
The  SEPMU  and CEP  PIG  will  endeavor  to  recruit,  train  and  sustain  procurement  staff  in  the  required 
numbers and qualifications as specified in the Project Design. The SEPMU and CEP PIG will ensure that 
any  procurement  staff  is well versed with  this Manual  and  with  National  procurement  rules  and  IFAD 
procurement Guidelines as well as with IFAD Procurement Handbook. 
2  Procurement Methods, Thresholds and Prior Review 
2.1  Procurement Plans (PP) 
The  PP  shall  be  prepared  using  IFAD’s  template,  shall  be  fully  aligned  with  the  AWP&B,  and  shall  be 
submitted for No Objection sufficiently in advance before the planned start of any procurement activity 
in the plan. No procurement activity shall start unless it is present in a PP that received a No Objection. 
The  PP  shall  be  updated  with  actual  dates/figures  and  shall  be  upgraded  for  any  changes  in  the 
procurement  methods,  addition  of  activities,  elimination  of  others,  increases  in  the  budget,  etc.  Any 
upgrade to the PP shall also be submitted for No Objection. Procurement activities and their respective 
methods and timelines shall be strictly adhered to. Further guidance on estimation of costs and schedule 
is provided under Section 3.2 of this PIM Chapter. The PP template is available at www.ifad.org/project-
procurement. 
The first PP shall be for an 18-months period and subsequent PP’s shall be submitted on an annual basis 
shortly before the start of the fiscal year. At the end of each fiscal period, all outstanding procurement 
1 Any reference to IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines includes also the IFAD Procurement Handbook. Compliance with both the Guidelines and 
the Handbook is mandatory. For both the Guidelines and the Handbook, the latest versions shall always apply.   
activities (i.e. not contracted yet) shall be transferred to the upcoming PP with its planned and achieved 
actual dates included as well. 
Regardless of the time limits established by National procurement rules (if applicable), the time limits pre-
designed into the PP template and automatically generated by it will be fully respected.  
IFAD’s No Objection needs to be sought prior to publishing any General Procurement Notice (GPN). The 
GPN template is available at www.ifad.org/project-procurement. While the publication of an initial GPN 
(covering first 18 months of implementation) is mandatory, the subsequent publication of annual updated 
GPNs is highly recommended. The GPN should mandatorily include all open procurement methods in the 
upcoming  period  covered  by  the  initial  PP  (i.e.  REOI,  Request  for  Prequalification,  openly  advertised 
consulting services, ICB and NCB) and preferably also other non-open procurement activities (e.g. prior-
list  based  consulting  services,  shopping,  Limited  International  Bidding,  Direct  Contracting  and  Single 
Source Selection). 
The use of the PP for activities entrusted to Implementing Partners (goods, works, consulting services, 
non-consulting services, grants or loans) is subject to the provisions elaborated in sections 3.4 and 4.3 
below. 
2.2  Contract Register (CR) and Contract Monitoring Tool (CMT) 
The CMT is a mandatory platform for the recording and monitoring of all contracts. It includes  
-  procurement  contracts  (goods, works,  services,  and non-consulting services):  all  contracts  and 
purchase orders signed based on the PP covering all procurement methods and contract types; 
-  Grants  (all  first-level  in  kind  and  monetary  grants):  The  procurement  method  for  Grants  will 
include competitive methods such as QCBS, QBS, FBS, CQS, ICS or non-competitive methods such 
as SSS or Selection based on project design/PIM; competitive methods are always recommended 
unless duly justified and exceptional; FBS is the closest method to grants where the ceiling is fixed; 
Implementing  Partner  contracts  (MoU,  MoA):  including  all  agreements  with  all  types  of  third 
parties  who  will  be  delegated  procurement  authority  such  as  UN  agencies  and  community 
participation contracts whether contracted competitively or not; procurement methods for these 
implementing partners are the following: 
- 
o  Community contract (single source selection) 
o  Community contract (recipient or selection process defined at design/PIM) 
o  Community contract (competitive selection) 
o  Governmental body / State owned enterprises 
o  UN agency (competitive selection) 
o  UN agency (single source selection) 
o  NGO / International Organization (competitive selection) 
o  NGO / International Organization (single source selection) 
- 
Subsidiary  financing  agreements  and  investment  agreements:  typically  include  financing 
contracts for micro-credit loans and other types of loans. In this case, only the first-level financing 
or refinancing contract selected using one of two methods shall be entered in the CMT: 
o  Selection as defined in Design/PIM; or  
o  Single Source Selection. 
The Contract Register will be extracted as a Report directly from the CMT. It will be a cumulative document 
that  is  augmented  progressively  and  automatically  with  the  new  contracts  signed  and  inserted  in  the 
system.   
The  SEPMU and  CEP  PIG  will  adopt  the  Contract  Monitoring  Tool  deployed  by  IFAD  and  will  dedicate 
sufficient resources to use and operate and generate reports from this system as instructed by IFAD. CMT 
Help section offers guidance and support on how to use this tool. 
The recording of contracts signed by Implementing Partners with third parties (goods, works, consulting 
services, non-consulting services, or grants) must also be made on the CMT and is subject to the provisions 
elaborated below in sections 3.4 and 4.3 below. 
2.3  Tabular Summary of Applicable Methods and Thresholds  
The default procurement method for goods, works and non-consulting services is the ICB; however, for 
procurement activities estimated to cost less than the ICB threshold, other procurement methods may be 
used as per the below table.  
The default procurement method for consulting services (and non-consulting services similar to them) is 
the  QCBS;  however,  for  procurement  activities  estimated  to  cost  less  than  the  QCBS  threshold,  other 
procurement methods may be used as per the below table.  
Procurement Methods 
➔ 
Project Types and Time 
limits  
Goods/NCS 
Works/NCS  
Minimum Time Limit to 
submit quotes/bids from 
launch 
Minimum Time limit for 
bidders to ask questions 
(measured from 
deadline) 
Minimum Time limit for 
PMU to answer 
questions (measured 
from deadline) 
Procurement Methods, Thresholds and Time-limits2 
DC  
(Direct 
Contracting) 
Shopping 
(limited Request 
for Quotations) 
< US$ 20 
000 
< US$ 20 
000 
< US$ 70 000 
< US$ 190 000 
NCB (National 
Open Bidding) 
> US$70 000 and 
< US$200 000 
> US$190 000 
and < US$ 800 
000 
ICB 
(International 
Open Bidding) 
PRIOR Review 
> US$ 200 000 
> US$ 70 000  
> US$ 800 000 
> US$ 150 000 
n/a 
14 days 
30 days 
45 days 
Same day 
7 days 
15 days 
25 days 
Same day 
5 days 
10 days 
20 days 
SSS 
CQS 
QBS, FBS, LCS 
QCBS 
PRIOR Review 
2  The  time  limits  in  this  table  are  minimum  periods;  the  actual  dates  generated  by  the  Procurement  Plan  for 
bid/proposal submission will be the ones adopted for each procurement activity. 
Consulting Services / 
NCS - Firms 
< US$ 20 
000 
< US$ 70 000 
< US$ 100 000 
> US$ 100 000 
> US$ 60 000 
Shortlisting 
Minimum Time Limit to 
submit proposals from 
launch 
Minimum Time limit for 
bidders to ask questions 
(measured from 
deadline) 
Minimum Time limit for 
PMU to answer 
questions (measured 
from deadline) 
Individual 
Shortlisting using REOI is mandatory for CQS and ICS; Shortlisting (REOI or 
Prior List) is mandatory for all other methods > US$ 70 000 
n/a 
21 days (REOI) 
21 days (RFP) 
21 days (REOI) 
45 days (RFP) 
21 days (REOI) 
45 days (RFP) 
Same day 
10 days (REOI) 
10 days (RFP) 
10 days (REOI) 
25 days (RFP) 
10 days (REOI) 
25 days (RFP) 
Same day 
< US$ 20 
000 
8 days (REOI) 
8 days (RFP) 
8 days (REOI) 
20 days (RFP) 
8 days (REOI) 
20 days (RFP) 
Competitive ICS for all other values: regardless of value 
> US$ 60 000 
n/a 
Same day 
21 days (REOI) 
21 days (RFP) 
Minimum Time Limit to 
submit proposals from 
launch 
Minimum Time limit for 
bidders to ask questions 
(measured from 
deadline) 
Minimum Time limit for 
PMU to answer 
questions (measured 
from deadline) 
DC or SSS below thresholds are cleared in advance as part of Procurement Plan approval. All DC or SSS procedures are 
subject to Prior Review 
Force Account may be used if justified and included in the LTB and Procurement Plan and is subject to Prior Approval. 
10 days (REOI) 
10 days (RFP) 
8 days (REOI) 
8 days (RFP) 
Same day 
Table 1 - Applicable Methods, Thresholds and time limits 
2.4  Special Procurement Arrangements 
Based  on  the  Financing  Agreement,  LTB  and  the  Project  Design  Report,  the  following  procurement 
arrangements apply:  
Arrangement 
Force Account (if applicable, insert total 
aggregate amount, specify what public entities 
and for what items) 
Procurement of Commodities (if applicable, 
specify what commodities) 
Procurement from UN Agencies (if applicable, 
specify what agencies and for what items) 
Procurement with Community Participation (if 
applicable, please elaborate the activities to 
be procured, the role of community, the 
community stakeholders, procurement 
methods, etc.) 
Domestic Preference for ICB Works (if 
applicable, specify percentage) 
Yes/No  Comments 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Domestic Preference for ICB Goods (if 
applicable, specify percentage) 
No 
Table 2 - Applicable Procurement Arrangements 
2.5  Standard Procurement Documents (SPD) to be used 
The LTB states which SPD’s will be used; in case national templates need to be used, they need to be 
reviewed by IFAD in advance. 
The following Standard Bidding Documents will be adopted by the Project for all procurement activities: 
 Procurement Method/Process 
Procurement Plan 
GPN 
SPN 
ICB Works/NCS 
ICB Goods/NCS 
NCB Goods/NCS 
NCB Goods/NCS 
Shopping Works/NCS 
Shopping Goods/NCS 
Direct Contracting 
Request for Pre-qualification 
REOI 
QCBS 
QBS, FBS, LCS 
CQS, ICS 
SSS 
Prequalification Report 
Shortlisting Report 
Evaluation Report 
Negotiation Report 
NOITA 
NoA 
Standard Procurement Documents 
IFAD template 
IFAD template 
IFAD template 
IFAD SPD 
IFAD SPD 
IFAD SPD 
IFAD SPD 
IFAD SPD 
IFAD SPD 
IFAD Standard Contract 
IFAD SPD 
IFAD SPD 
IFAD SPD 
IFAD SPD 
IFAD SPD 
IFAD Standard Contract 
IFAD SPD 
IFAD template 
IFAD template 
IFAD template 
IFAD template 
IFAD template 
Table 3 - Applicable Standard Procurement Documents 
If National documents and templates are permitted as per the above table, the SEPMU and CEP PIG will 
be  responsible  to  ensure absence  of  any contradictions  with  IFAD’s  Guidelines.  National  procurement 
documents shall be amended to eliminate any inconsistency highlighted in Section 3.1 below; they shall 
also include the mandatory Self-Certification Forms (at bidding stage and at contract stage).  
IFAD’s Standard Procurement Documents are available at www.ifad.org/project-procurement. 
2.6  Guidance Offered in the IFAD Procurement Handbook 
2.6.1  Application of the Handbook   
The  IFAD  Procurement  Handbook  includes  “best  practice  advice  on  all  elements  of  the  procurement 
process for any IFAD-financed operation. It serves as a guidance document when country systems are 
used, and as an operations’ manual when IFAD systems are solely used.”  
In the implementation of this Project: 
The SEPMU and CEP PIG will strictly adhere to the Handbook for implementing all procurement activities 
of the Project.  
2.6.2  Key Provisions of the Handbook   
Based on the above, the SEPMU and CEP PIG will refer to the Handbook following the below guidance on 
relevant sections for various procurement aspects: 
Procurement Aspect 
Procurement Planning and GPN 
Procurement and Selection Methods 
Direct Contracting and Single Sourcing 
Individual Consultants 
Technical Specifications and Terms of 
Reference 
Reference in the Handbook 
Module C 
Goods, Works and NCS: Module F1 
Consulting Services and NCS: Module F2 
Goods, Works and NCS: Module F1 (Section 6) 
Consulting Services and NCS: Module F2 (Section 6) 
Module F2 (Section 7) 
Need identification: Module D 
Requirements & Specifications for Goods:  Module E1 
Requirements & Specifications for Works:  Module E2 
Terms of Reference: Module E3 
Module G 
Bidding Process 
Evaluation 
Prequalification and Shortlisting 
Preparation of Procurement Documents  Goods: Module H1 
Works: Module H2 
Consulting Services: Module H3 
Contract Types: Module J 
Module I 
General: Module K1 
General Goods, Works and NCS: Module K2 
Goods: Module K3 
Works: Module K4 
General Consulting Services: Module K5 
QCBS: Module K6 
LCS: Module K7 
NCS: Module K8 
Abnormally Low Bids (all methods): Module K9 
Post-qualification (all methods): K10 
Rejection of All Bids: Module O1 
Module K1 
Formation of Evaluation committees 
Notifications for Intent to Award and 
for Award 
Standstill and Debriefs 
Protests and Appeals 
Negotiations and discussions 
Contract Award 
Contract Management 
Force Account 
Community Participation 
Procurement from UN Agencies 
Records Management 
NOITA: Module L1 
NoA: Module L2 
Module M1 
Module M2 
Negotiations (Consulting Services): Module N1 
Discussions (Goods, Works and Services): Module N2 
Module O2 and O3 
Module P 
Module F1 (Section 7) 
Module Q 
Module F1 (Section 9) 
Module B 
Table 4 - Mapping of Procurement Guidance in the Handbook 
2.7  Prior Review Documentation 
All prior review submissions shall be communicated and No Objections issued through NOTUS. The below 
are the No Objection requirements for all transactions listed in the LTB: 
2.7.1  Procurement Plan (PP) 
The SEPMU and CEP PIG shall ensure IFAD’s no Objection on each of the following: 
1.  The initial 18-months PP; 
2.  Annual PP’s, subsequently; and 
3.  Any upgrade to the PP. 
2.7.2  The General Procurement Notice(s) (GPN) 
The SEPMU and CEP PIG shall ensure IFAD’s no Objection on each of the GPN’s before publication. 
ICB/NCB (Goods, Works, Non-Consulting Services) 
2.7.3 
Submission through NOTUS for No Objection shall be for the following procurement files and documents: 
1.  Specific Procurement Notice (Announcement); 
2.  Prequalification documents (if applicable) as well as Announcement for Prequalification; 
3.  Prequalification report (if applicable); 
4.  Bidding documents inclusive of Technical Specifications (including cost estimates and, as 
applicable, drawings, Bills of quantities, and schedules of requirements); 
5.  Any amendments to the Bidding Documents; 
6.  Evaluation Reports (including Bid Opening Reports) inclusive of all clarifications; in case of two-
envelope procedure, separate opening and evaluation reports for the Technical envelopes and 
the Financial Envelopes in addition to a Combined report combining both; 
7.  Draft Contract duly filled; 
8.  Signed contract (for information and record); 
9.  Cumulative Contract amendments3 exceeding 10% of the original contract value (Module P2, 
article 2 (v)); and 
10. Cumulative Contract extensions exceeding 25% of the original contract duration (Module P2, 
article 2 (v)). 
2.7.4  Shopping (Goods, Works, Non-Consulting Services) 
Submission through NOTUS for No Objection shall be for the following procurement files and documents: 
1.  Request for Quotations inclusive of Technical Specifications4 (including cost estimates and, as 
applicable, drawings, Bills of quantities, and schedules of requirements; 
2.  Any amendments to the RFQ; 
3.  Evaluation Reports inclusive of all clarifications; in case of two-envelope procedure 
(exceptionally used), separate opening and evaluation reports for the Technical envelopes and 
the Financial Envelopes; 
4.  Draft Contract or Purchase Order duly filled; 
5.  Signed contract or PO (for information and record); 
6.  Cumulative Contract/PO amendments exceeding 10% of the original contract/PO value (Module 
P2, article 2 (v)); and 
7.  Cumulative Contract/PO extensions exceeding 25% of the original contract/PO duration (Module 
P2, article 2 (v)). 
2.7.5  Consulting Services: QCBS, QBS, FBS, and LCS 
Submission through NOTUS for No Objection shall be for the following procurement files and documents: 
1.  Request for Expression of Interest (REOI) (if applicable), the Terms of Reference, and the 
detailed cost estimates; 
2.  Shortlist Report (if applicable); 
3.  Prior list (if applicable) including the rationale for selecting the firms; 
4.  Request for Proposals (RFP);  
5.  Any amendments to the RFP; 
6.  Technical Evaluation Report (inclusive of Proposal Opening Report) and any clarifications; 
7.  Combined Evaluation Report (inclusive of Financial Proposal Opening Report); 
8.  Draft Contract duly filled; 
3 Amendments to existing goods, works and non-consulting services contracts involving items of similar nature shall 
be made using DC up to a maximum of 10% of the original contract value (reference IFAD Handbook Module F1 
article 6); amendments to existing contracts for additional quantities (of the same items) may exceed 10% subject 
to the N.O. of IFAD with no need to use DC (reference IFAD Handbook Module P2 article 2). In case of Consulting 
Services, SSS may be approved in cases of services that are deemed a natural continuation of previously delivered 
services  for  concluded  contracts  (reference  IFAD  Handbook  Module  F2  article  6);  if  the  contract  is  ongoing, 
amendments are possible. Amendments increasing the contract price by more than 10% requires IFAD N.O. with no 
need for SSS (reference IFAD Handbook Module P2 article 2); 
4 As of the date of issuance of this PIM, NOTUS does not allow the submission of the RFQ for No Objection. The 
workflow starts at the level of evaluation report. In this case, the RFQ shall be submitted for N.O. through email 
and the email/N.O. shall be later uploaded in the system at the evaluation stage. 
9.  Minutes of Negotiations (inclusive of unsuccessful negotiations and intention to cancel or invite 
second ranked consultant); 
10. Signed contract (for information and record); 
11. Cumulative Contract/MoU amendments exceeding 10% of the original contract value; and 
12. Cumulative Contract/MoU extensions exceeding 25% of the original contract duration. 
2.7.6  Consulting Services: CQS and ICS 
Submission through NOTUS for No Objection shall be for the following procurement files and documents: 
1.  Mandatory Request for Expression of Interest (REOI) and Terms of Reference (including cost 
estimates); 
2.  Mandatory Shortlist Report; 
3.  Request for Proposals (RFP);  
4.  Any amendments to the RFP; 
5.  Evaluation Report (inclusive of any clarifications); 
6.  Draft Contract duly filled; 
7.  Minutes of Negotiations (inclusive of unsuccessful negotiations and intention to cancel or invite 
second ranked consultant); 
8.  Signed contract (for information and record); 
9.  Cumulative Contract amendments exceeding 10% of the original contract value; and 
10. Cumulative Contract extensions exceeding 25% of the original contract duration. 
2.7.7  Direct Contracting and Single Source Selection 
Submission through NOTUS for No Objection shall be for the following procurement files and documents: 
1.  Justification for Single Sourcing (including below the DC/SSS thresholds set above in Table 1) and 
rationale for selecting the particular firm/individual; 
2.  Technical Specifications or Terms of Reference; 
3.  Simplified Bidding Document or Request for Proposals; 
4.  Negotiation Report (inclusive of evaluation of submitted bid/proposal and its full negotiation); 
5.  Draft Contract duly filled; 
6.  Signed contract (for information and record); 
7.  Cumulative Contract amendments exceeding 10% of the original contract value; and 
8.  Cumulative Contract extensions exceeding 25% of the original contract duration. 
2.7.8  Other specific Prior Review requirements  
The SEPMU and CEP PIG shall additionally secure IFAD’s No Objection for the following: 
1.  The recruitment of the Procurement staff; 
2.  The templates of bidding documents and requests for proposals for all procurement methods 
(whether for post review or prior review) in case different from IFAD SPDs;  
3.  Recommendation to reject all bids or proposals or to cancel a procurement process; 
4.  Recommendations to terminate negotiations with a consulting firm/individual and proceed with 
negotiations with the next-ranked consulting firm/individual; 
5.  Recommendations to proceed to award the next ranked bidder in case the selected bidder failed 
to sign a contract; 
6.  Justifications for proceeding with opening of bids/proposals that are less than three; 
7.  Use of a performance guarantee other than in the form of an unconditional and irrevocable on-
demand bank guarantee; 
8.  Decisions concerning Abnormally Low Bids; 
9.  Establishing a shortlist composed of less than three entities; and 
10. Intention to terminate any contract. 
2.8  Other procurement-related coordination with IFAD 
The SEPMU and CEP PIG shall coordinate in advance with IFAD on the following matters and issues: 
1.  Any changes to the PIM; 
2.  Any changes to the staffing of the SEPMU and CEP PIG; 
3.  Composition of Evaluation committees; 
4.  Summaries of Debriefing requests and copies of Protests for all prior review procurement activities 
before a decision is issued (optional for post review procurement activities); 
5.  The  SEPMU  and  CEP  PIG  shall  inform  IFAD  of  any  related  Appeal  filed  to  competent  national 
authorities (if applicable) immediately upon becoming aware of such an appeal; 
6.  Procurement progress reports as well as special reports on critical issues; 
7.  Details of defaulting or corrupt vendors; 
8.  Debarment of a vendor who appears to be debarred by another MDB for validation by IFAD if cross-
debarment should apply (for prior and post review); and 
9.  Any other matter specifically requested by IFAD. 
In  addition  to  the  above,  the  Project  will  provide  full  assistance  to  IFAD  implementation  support, 
supervision, MTR, and project closing missions. The Project will avail all necessary staff and provide all 
required documents, records and files. The same applies for any IFAD audit or investigation.  
3  Critical Procurement Issues 
3.1  Cost and Schedule Estimate 
The detailed cost and schedule estimates of each procurement activity will be accurately estimated during 
the elaboration of the requirements (specifications or TOR’s) at the latest.  These detailed estimates shall 
be submitted along with the requirements for prior review activities. Should the cost estimate exceed the 
allocated budget in the AWP&B and the PP, one of the following will be done: 
1-  Update the AWP&B and PP by reallocating the required funds; if the increase in originally 
approved budget exceeds 10%, the upgraded PP should be submitted to IFAD No Objection (as 
per the Handbook Module C, article 3); 
2-  Redesign the procurement activity to fit within the limits of available budget; 
3-  A mix of the two above options.   
When packaging procurement activities, due consideration shall be given to pooling of needs and activities 
into  packages  that  may  be  launched  under  one  procedure  split  into  several  lots  in  order  to  achieve 
economies of scale, promote competition, facilitate access to small and medium enterprises, and reduce 
the transaction cost associated with procurement activities. When the procurement activity is split into 
lots,  the  total  cost  estimate  of  all  lots  will  be  used  for  identifying  the  correct  procurement  method. 
Artificially splitting procurement activities into smaller packages launched separately in order to escape 
the  application  of  more  open  and  competitive  procurement  methods  is  a  breach  of  the  procurement 
principles. 
The schedule estimates for implementing contracts shall also be accurately estimated to ensure that the 
timeframe specified in solicitation documents are realistic and do not deter competition.  
3.2  Publication of Notices 
The GPN and all ICB procurement notices (SPN) shall be published on the following fora: 
IFAD Website;  
The United Nations Development Business Website; 
The designated Borrower/Recipient website: www.investcom.tj; www.rural.tj; 
- 
- 
- 
-  A local newspaper of wide circulation; and 
-  Other media as appropriate. 
NCB procurement notices (SPN) shall be published on the following fora: 
The designated Borrower/Recipient website: www.investcom.tj; www.rural.tj; 
- 
-  A local newspaper of wide circulation; and 
-  Other media as appropriate. 
Notice  of  Award  (NoA)  for  all  contracts  and  purchase  orders  as  well  as  results  of  shortlisting  and 
prequalification and the decision to cancel a procurement activity and reject all bids/proposals shall be 
published on the following fora: 
IFAD Website;  
The United Nations Development Business Website (for ICB only); 
The designated Borrower/Recipient website: www.investcom.tj; www.rural.tj; 
- 
- 
- 
-  A local newspaper of wide circulation; and 
-  Other media as appropriate. 
3.3  Award of Grants/Loans 
Grants: Award of grants (whether monetary or in-kind) is as provisioned in the Project Design. Grants may 
be  executed  (i.e.  disbursed  in  case  of  monetary  grants  or  procured  and  distributed  in  case  of  in-kind 
grants) by the SEPMU and CEP PIG solely or in partnership with an Implementing Partner based on the 
provisions of the design. The selection of Implementing Partners for this purpose will be based on the 
following provisions under section 3.4.1.  
Loans: In the case of micro-credits and loans (inclusive of refinancing), the SEPMU and CEP PIG will rely 
on  Partner  Financial  Institutions  (PFI)  either  as  nominated  in  the  project  design,  or  as  competitively 
selected based on the provisions of the Financing Agreement and National Law. 
3.3.1  Selection of Grant or Refinancing Partners 
Grants: In some cases, the SEPMU and CEP PIG may not be the direct entity responsible for disbursing 
grants.  Disbursement  of  monetary  grants  is  sometimes  conducted  through  intermediaries,  such  as 
Implementing Partners (I.P.). The engagement with such I.P.’s can be made through a proper procurement 
process resulting in an agreement with each partner. This means that such first level agreements shall be 
duly registered separately in the PP with the proper selection method of the I.P. When the I.P. is stated in 
the Financing Agreement, the selection process will be SSS. Otherwise, it would be through a competitive 
process.  The  value,  where  applicable,  of  such  agreements  may  be  composed  of  several  components 
depending on the case: (i) the fees that such I.P.’s charge for the services entrusted to them; and (ii) the 
other fees and expenses that the I.P. may be required to spend in providing support to beneficiaries (e.g. 
training, events, coaching, etc.). In very rare cases, if provisioned in the design, the grant funds may also 
be included in the agreement with the I.P. In any case, the I.P. agreement should be processed in NOTUS 
and recorded in the CMT. 
Whenever the grant funds to be disbursed to beneficiaries are included in the I.P. agreement, the I.P. will 
be  responsible  for  the  selection  of  those  beneficiaries  through  a  Call  for  Proposals  (CfP)  issued  and 
managed by the I.P. In this case, the selection process is entered in the PP of the I.P. (and in NOTUS if 
subject to prior review) and the resulting grant contracts are entered in the CMT. In the other case, where 
the grant funds are to be disbursed by the SEPMU and CEP PIG to beneficiaries, the CfP shall be issued 
and managed by the SEPMU and CEP PIG. In this case, the CfP is entered in NOTUS (if subject to prior 
review) and the resulting grant contracts are entered in the CMT. For both cases, details of issuing the CfP 
and awarding the grants are found in section 3.4.2 below.  
Loans: PFI’s must meet eligibility criteria set in Government Decisions and following national legislation. 
Where Ministry of Finance RT has a role in the selection of such partners, such agencies may be a signatory 
to  such  Agreements.  The  draft  agreement  shall  be  subject  to  the  prior  review  by  IFAD;  each  such 
agreement  shall  be  planned  in  the  PP  and  registered  in  the  CMT.  However,  credit  and  refinancing 
agreements  (second-level  agreements  such  as  micro-credits)  with  third  parties  are  neither  entered  in 
NOTUS nor in the CMT, but should be maintained in a separate CR.  
The table below summarizes the various types of agreements/contracts normally associated with grants 
and loans and specifies whether use of NOTUS and CMT are required: 
Type of Agreement/activity 
Grant  Call  for  proposals  launched  by  SEPMU  and  CEP  PIG  and 
subsequent Grant contracts signed between SEPMU and CEP PIG 
and beneficiaries (first-level agreements) 
Entered in NOTUS  Entered in CMT 
Yes+ 
Yes 
Yes+ 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes+ 
Agreement  between  SEPMU  and  CEP  PIG  and  I.P.  for  the 
disbursement of monetary grants (first-level agreement) 
Agreement  between  SEPMU  and  CEP  PIG  and  I.P.  for  the 
procurement of in-kind grants (first-level agreement) 
Agreement  between  SEPMU  and  CEP  PIG  and  PFI  for  the 
refinancing of micro-credits (first-level agreement) 
Grant Call for proposals launched by I.P. and subsequent grant 
contracts  signed  between  I.P.  and  beneficiaries  (second-level 
agreements) for either monetary or in-kind grants 
Procurement  of  grant  assets  by  SEPMU  and  CEP  PIG  (in-kind 
grants) 
Procurement of grant assets by I.P. (in-kind grants)  
Loan contracts signed between PFI and borrowers (second-level 
agreements) 
+ if above the prior review threshold as per the LtB. 
* even though not entered in the CMT, those contracts are entered in a dedicated and separate CR specific to the I.P./PFI. 
Yes+ 
No 
Yes 
No* 
Yes+ 
Yes+ 
Yes+ 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Table 5 - Guidance on whether NOTUS and CMT apply for some types of contracts or agreements 
3.3.2  Grant Beneficiary Selection  
As mentioned under section 3.3.1 above, Grants provisioned in the Financing Agreement shall be openly 
advertised by the SEPMU and CEP PIG and/or an Implementing Partner (I.P.) as the case may be. In either 
case, the process shall follow the following steps: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Planning the call(s) for proposals in the respective PP(s) (SEPMU’s and CEP PIG’s PP or the I.P.’s 
PP as the case may be); the total value of grants provisioned under the CfP and the method used 
shall be the basis for the determination of the review procedure (prior or post). Grants  award 
processes can be done through one of the services’ methods; 
Preparation of the Request for Proposals (by SEPMU and CEP PIG or I.P.) using the appropriate 
selection method and the detailed Terms of Reference elaborating the requirements, selection 
criteria, evaluation criteria, etc. for award of grants in multiple contracts; since the ceiling of the 
grant is usually fixed, selection should ideally follow the Fixed Budget selection. The template to 
be used shall be reviewed by IFAD in advance and N.O. issued for adoption of the template; 
The  use  of  REOI  facilitates  shortlisting  of  qualified  applicants  who  later  submit  proposals  in 
response to the RFP; all applicants meeting the eligibility criteria can be shortlisted for the next 
stage of the application. However, REOI is not mandatory as the CfP for grants may be launched 
directly subject to N.O. without threshold limitation;  
The grant proposals are evaluated based on the pre-disclosed  criteria, and an evaluation report 
is prepared recommending award of grants in the requisite numbers within the  grant cap and 
total ceilings set; evaluation shall include scoring of applications based on the evaluation criteria 
of the RFP to (i) identify those who pass from those who don’t and (ii) enable selection of the 
passing applicants that will be awarded grants in case the total number of eligible and passing 
applications  exceeds  the  financial  resources  available.  In  the  latter  case,  the  selection  will  be 
starting from the top ranked applicant downwards; 
-  When  an  I.P.  launches  the  Call  for  Proposals,  the  I.P.  will  submit  to  SEPMU  and  CEP  PIG  the 
evaluation  of  the  applications  as  well  as  the  applications  received  for  SEPMU  and  CEP  PIG 
- 
verification;  SEPMU  and  CEP  PIG  will  prepare  a  verification  report  approving/amending  the 
evaluation process as is necessary;  
The  resulting evaluation  and  selection  reports  shall be  uploaded on  NOTUS.  In  case  the CfP  is 
managed by the I.P., the SEPMU and CEP PIG will handle NOTUS submissions. If applicable, IFAD’s 
review will ensure consistency with the Financing Agreement, PIM, and CfP. Once N.O. is issued 
by IFAD, the grant contracting process with the selected beneficiaries may start by signature of 
Agreements by the SEPMU and CEP PIG or the I.P. as the case may be;  
-  All monetary grant agreements disbursed directly by the SEPMU and CEP PIG will be entered in 
the CMT. Monetary grants disbursed by an I.P. will also be recorded in the CMT;  
-  All In-kind grant agreements where the distributed assets are procured by the SEPMU and CEP 
PIG will be entered in the CMT with a monetary value set to zero. The purpose is to avoid double 
accounting  for  the  grant  amount  since  the  value  of  the  grant  will  appear  in  the  procurement 
contract through which the SEPMU and CEP PIG will procure the subject of the grants (assets). 
Similarly, in-kind grant agreements where the assets are procured by an I.P. are registered in the 
CMT with a value of zero as the Partner will be procuring those assets through a separate contract.  
The flowcharts below summarize the basic steps in the selection process of grant beneficiaries: 
Figure 1 - Grants through Implementing Partners 
Partnering Agreements signed by PMU and I.P.Selection of I.P. by PMU: based on Design; or competitively Selected; or mandated by lawIFAD N.O. on Partners and Agreements if prior reviewRecording I.P. in  CMT by PMU Calls for Proposals Prepared by I.P.Check if CfP is in PP; if not, PP upgrade by I.P.IFAD N.O. on each CfP through NOTUSAnnouncements by I.P.Screening and Evaluation of Applications by I.P.Evaluation Report(s) & Applications verified by PMUIFAD N.O. on each Eval. Report through NOTUSGrant Contracts Signed by I.P.Disbursement/Transfer by I.P.Grants through Implementing Partners Recording in CMTCash/EscrowYESI.P. PP upgrade with ICB/NCBNOProcurement Process Continues (N.O. through NOTUS handled by PMU)ICB/NCB Prepared by I.P. 
Figure 2 - Grants through PMU 
3.4  Procurement Principles and Ethics 
The SEPMU and CEP PIG will strictly adhere to the provisions of Section II of the IFAD Project 
Procurement Guidelines (2019) covering the key Procurement Principles: 
Ethics; 
- 
-  Accountability; 
-  Competition; 
- 
Fairness; 
- 
Transparency;  
- 
Efficiency, Effectiveness and Economy; and 
-  Best Value for Money. 
Furthermore, the SEPMU and CEP PIG will strictly adhere to the provisions of IFAD’s Policy on 
Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities and Operations available at 
www.ifad.org/en/document-detail/asset/40738506. The Project shall ensure that this policy is clearly 
stated in all procurement documents (solicitation documents and contracts) and that all vendors comply 
with this policy. All such documents shall clearly include also IFAD’s Anti-corruption Hotline: 
Office of Audit and Oversight (AUO) 
Investigation Section (IS) 
Via Paolo di Dono 44 
00142 Rome, Italy 
Email: anticorruption@ifad.org 
Grants through PMU Calls for Proposals Prepared by PMUPMU PP upgrade with Calls for ProposalsIFAD N.O. on each CfP through NOTUSAnnouncements by PMUScreening and Evaluation of Applications by PMUEvaluation Report(s) prepared by PMUIFAD N.O. on each Eval. Report through NOTUSGrant Contracts Signed by PMU & BeneficiariesContracts are registered in CMT by PMUPMU PP upgrade with ICB/NCBCash/EscrowNODisbursement/Transfer by PMUYESICB/NCB Prepared by PMUProcurement Process Continues through NOTUS 
Phone: +39 0654592888 
Fax: +39 0654597888 
3.5  Combatting Corruption and Sexual Harassment 
The SEPMU and CEP PIG will strictly adhere to the provisions of IFAD’s Policy to Preventing and 
Responding to Sexual Harassment, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse available at 
www.ifad.org/anticorruption_policy. The Project shall ensure that this policy is clearly stated in all 
procurement documents (solicitation documents and contracts) and that all vendors comply with this 
policy. All such documents shall clearly include also IFAD’s Ethics Hotline: 
Ethics Office (ETH) 
Via Paolo di Dono 44 
00142 Rome, Italy 
Email: ethicsoffice@ifad.org  
Phone: +39 06 5459 2525  
https://www.ifad.org/en/ethics  
3.6  Anti-Money Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism 
The  SEPMU  and  CEP  PIG  will  strictly  adhere  to  the  provisions  of  IFAD’s  Anti-Money  Laundering  and 
Countering 
the  Financing  of  Terrorism  Policy  available  at  www.ifad.org/en/document-
detail/asset/41942012.  
3.7  Record Keeping 
As per the  provisions of Module B of the Handbook, the  SEPMU and CEP PIG will retain procurement 
records and files for 10 years in an easily accessible and easily retrievable manner that facilitates review 
and audit even when conducted remotely. The table of records as extracted from the Handbook for ease 
of  reference  is  available  in  Annex  2.  To  facilitate  review,  supervision  and  audit,  all  procurement  and 
contract management records shall be archived under the responsibility of the procurement staff. Should 
other departments or teams or entities be entrusted with archiving some of the procurement documents, 
a  copy  should  be  retained  by  the  procurement  staff.  Records  shall  also  include  all  documentation 
associated with grants/loans to beneficiaries of the project. 
Where implementation is delegated to pre-approved third parties, the SEPMU and CEP PIG shall maintain 
a full record of all documentation electronically while the full original set of documents are maintained by 
the implementing partner for 10 years also. 
4  Procurement Transactions – Institutional Setup and RACI 
4.1  Accounting for Procurement by Local Entities and Partners 
Whenever  procurement  responsibilities  (including  grants)  are  entrusted  to  Local  Entities  (L.E.)  or 
Implementing Partners (I.P.), the following provisions shall apply: 
- 
- 
- 
The  procurement  plans  prepared  by  L.E./I.P.  will  follow  IFAD’s  PP  template  and  will  be 
consolidated with the SEPMU and CEP PIG PP; to avoid double counting of financial figures, the 
agreements with such L.E./I.P.’s shall be recorded in the CMT showing only (where applicable) the 
fees payable to such partners to render the services entrusted to them;  
The  PP  prepared  by  the  SEPMU  and  CEP  PIG  will  include  also  the  procurement  activities  of 
engaging with L.E.’s or I.P.’s (MoU/Agreement) and will show the value of fees (if any) entrusted 
to L.E.’s or I.P.’s; whenever procurement authority is delegated to an L.E./I.P.,  the latter will spend 
this allocated budget by conducting procurement activities that will be planned and executed as 
per this Manual and the LtB (see LtB article 235);  
The PP by a L.E./I.P. will be subject to prior review by IFAD; procurement activities managed by 
an L.E./I.P. will be subject to prior/post review by IFAD as the case may be; 
-  All contracts concluded by a L.E./I.P. must be entered in the CMT by the  Project Management 
- 
Unit or the partner; 
The SEPMU and CEP PIG will supervise the procurement activities conducted by each L.E. or I.P. 
based on detailed provisions included in the MoU/Agreement which is subject to the prior review 
by IFAD as applicable; 
-  Where a procurement activity by a L.E./I.P. is subject to prior review by IFAD, the SEPMU and CEP 
PIG will handle the reporting trough NOTUS (except for loans  and micro-credits  which are  not 
entered in NOTUS); 
-  All  first  level  MoU/Agreements  signed  between  SEPMU  and  CEP  PIG  and  any  L.E./I.P.  will  be 
- 
entered in the CMT as explained in Section 3.3.1 above; and 
The L.E./I.P. is bound to the record keeping requirements of this Manual; SEPMU and CEP PIG 
shall  ensure  availability  of  and  accessibility  to  all  records  and  documentation  for  review 
operations. 
4.2  Institutional Setup, Roles and Responsibilities 
The  subsections  below  elaborate  on  the  operational  procedures  for  Evaluation  Committees,  on  the 
mechanism for staff recruitment and on the responsibilities of key stakeholders and staff. 
4.2.1  Evaluation Committees 
Since  the  project  applies  IFAD’s  Project  Procurement  Guidelines,  the  following  procedures  concerning 
Evaluation Committees shall apply for all evaluation committees under the project: 
5 “All the above-outlined procurement terms and conditions shall also apply to project implementing partners and implementing agents 
approved by IFAD.” 
- 
- 
- 
Each  procurement  activity  (including  grants  and  staff  recruitment)  shall  have  its  officially 
appointed Opening and Evaluation Committee; 
The committee may be one for both Opening and Evaluation proceedings as long as each member 
is free from any conflict of interest and assures that his/her engagement in evaluation will not be 
biased  based  on  preparatory  work  such  as  drafting  specifications  or  terms  of  reference  and 
conducting market studies; 
The following conditions will be respected for all committees: 
o  The committee is formally appointed by the competent authority; 
o  The  committee  members  are  well  acquainted  with  the  REOI,  Pre-qualification 
Documents, Bidding Documents or Request for Proposals; they dedicate sufficient time 
to  fully  understand  the  document  and  process  and  allocate  full  time  to  complete  the 
evaluation promptly; 
o  All  members  of  the  committee  sign  a  Declaration  of  Impartiality  and  Confidentiality 
(following IFAD standard template) immediately after knowing the names of the bidders 
and any of their partners, staff, experts, subcontractors, etc. Immediately upon realizing 
presence of conflict of interest (potential or actual), the concerned committee member 
should report the same to the Chairperson who shall coordinate immediate replacement; 
o  The committee includes technical specialists in the subject-matter of the procurement, 
procurement specialists, and other specialists as is necessary for the particular activity 
(e.g. finance, legal, etc.); 
o  The  committee  may  include  end-user  representatives  as  well;  end-users  are  engaged 
when the procurement activity is dedicated to the benefit of a group or community that 
is legally established; 
o  Should the  staff of the SEPMU and CEP PIG  (and of  end-users  if applicable) lack  some 
qualifications, skills or expertise in the subject matter of the procurement, the  SEPMU 
and CEP PIG may include in the committee an external member (consultant or staff of 
another  public  entity)  as  long  as  this member  is  free  from  any conflict  of  interest  and 
abides by the rules outlined in this Manual and Handbook; 
o  The  number  of  committee  members  is  odd  with  a  minimum  of  three  with  the  size 
depending on the value and complexity of the assignment; 
o  The committee operates autonomously and does not include managers who ultimately 
approve the outcome of the evaluation; there should be also no hierarchical authority 
between committee members to ensure that no such a hierarchy exerts undue pressure 
on members; 
o  The  evaluation  is  done  individually  by  each  committee  member  especially  when 
evaluation involves scoring; in this case, the individual scores are subsequently discussed 
and may be adjusted accordingly as long as original scores and adjusted scores are both 
included in the report with reasoning behind the adjustments; combined scores will be 
on average basis (average of adjusted individual scores); 
In all aspects of evaluation that are on a pass/fail basis (no scoring), the committee should 
take its decision unanimously, failing which decision should be based on majority vote 
o 
with  due  recording  of  dissenting  opinion.  In  case  the  disagreement  is  major  with 
irreversible impact on the outcome, the Chairperson will decide; 
o  Committee  members  are  anticipated  to  evaluate  the  full  set  of  EOI’s/qualification 
applications/bids/proposals/quotations received for the full steps of evaluation; splitting 
of  evaluation  vertically  (splitting  bids  among  members  for  evaluation)  or  horizontally 
(some  members  conducting  preliminary  examination  while  others  handling  technical 
evaluation) are both not allowed;  
o  Despite  the  above,  each  member  of  the  committee  will  exert  their  expertise  and 
o 
qualifications without unduly influencing the opinions of other members;  
In  addition  to  fulfilling  the  evaluation  role  just  as  other  committee  members,  the 
procurement specialist in the committee is responsible for ensuring the full respect of the 
procurement  rules  in  place;  the  procurement  specialist  shall  be  responsible  for 
communicating any clarifications (based on committee agreement) with bidders and for 
drawing up the evaluation report. Furthermore, the procurement specialist will assume 
the role of committee Facilitator as provisioned in IFAD Handbook Module K1 including 
ensuring compliance with the procurement rules in place as per this Manual; 
o  Each committee shall be presided by a Chairperson responsible for coordinating technical 
discussions within the committee and will assume the roles as per the Handbook Module 
K1; 
o  All  evaluations  and  decisions  shall  be  made  based  on  criteria  and  requirements 
elaborated  in  the  Procurement  documents,  Bidding  Documents  or  Requests  for 
Proposals;  all  decisions  should  be  sufficiently  substantiated  with  elaboration  of 
deliberations, reservations, discussions, strengths and weaknesses, etc. in sufficient detail 
to ensure that due process has been applied; 
o  The  committee  completes  evaluation  promptly  and  in  any  case  within  the  period  of 
validity  of  bids/proposals;  in  exceptional  and  duly  substantiated  circumstances,  the 
committee may request extensions of bid validity. Such requests are addressed to bidders 
officially in writing before the expiry of the validity through the SEPMU/CEP PIG Director;  
- 
- 
The  same  evaluation  committee  should  ideally  proceed  into  pre-contract  discussions  or 
negotiations within the limitations for the same as specified in the Handbook and this Manual; 
The SEPMU, CEP PIG and Goskominvest RT is the appointing authority of evaluation committees; 
the  SEPMU,  CEP  PIG  and  Goskominvest  RT  is  also  the  approving  authority  of  the  evaluation 
outcomes. Consequently, the SEPMU, CEP PIG and Goskominvest RT will not be a member of chair 
of such committees; The SEPMU, CEP PIG and Goskominvest RT  shall appoint a committee for 
each  procurement  activity  (or  groups/categories  of  activities  as  long  as  the  competencies, 
experience and skills required are common and as long there is no overlap in terms of timing and 
workload); the committee is formed sufficiently in advance of the date and time of opening, and 
its constituents should  remain confidential until the public opening date and time;  
-  Any attempt by a prospective bidder or economic operator to influence any of the committee 
members or any of the SEPMU and CEP PIG or end-user staff or staff of concerned government 
agencies should not be tolerated; it should be recorded in the evaluation report and referred to 
competent authorities;  
The committee shall have the following authorities: 
- 
o 
Independently  evaluate  each  submission  based  on  its  own  merits  and  on  the  basis  of 
criteria included clearly in the solicitation documents; 
o  Decide  individually  (each  member)  on  the  outcome  of  evaluation  and  collectively 
(committee jointly) where consensus is needed, without the recourse to any person or 
authority external to the committee; 
o  Request the assistance of subject-matter experts to be appointed by the SEPMU, CEP PIG 
and Goskominvest RT; 
o  Decide on the deviations identified in each submission and classify each as minor or major 
based on the sole guidance of the Handbook, the content of the procurement documents 
while ensuring fairness, equal treatment, proportionality and transparency; 
o  Decide  on  the  need  for  and  content  of  clarifications  from  bidders  in  line  with  the 
provisions of the solicitation documents and the Handbook; 
o  Decide autonomously on the rejection of a submission with detailed justifications; 
o  Decide autonomously on the rejection of all submissions and cancellation of the process 
if one of the conditions of cancellation in the Handbook is present; 
o  Decide with due substantiation on the recommendations for award; 
o  Report any attempt to influence the committee in the conduct of its work; 
o  Refrain from disclosing any information related to its work to any person or entity until 
the proceedings of evaluation are completed; then, internal reporting as well as reporting 
to IFAD are required before the evaluation outcome can be made public; 
o  Provide detailed opinion and feedback for any complaint or debrief request; 
o  Where  negotiations  are  permitted,  manage  the  whole  negotiation  process  within  the 
limits allowed by the Request for Proposal and Handbook and within the validity period 
of proposals;  
- 
In addition to appointing the committee, the SEPMU, CEP PIG and Goskominvest RT reviews and 
approves the outcome of evaluation; the SEPMU, CEP PIG and Goskominvest RT has the following 
authorities: 
o  Replace a member of the committee for reasons of conflict of interest or other reasons 
and amend the committee formation decision accordingly; 
o 
Issue requests for bid validity extensions if duly substantiated by the committee; 
o  Approve the recommendations as submitted by the committee in the signed report; 
o  Upon receipt of the signed report, clarify from the committee aspects of the evaluation 
and request more elaboration and substantiation; 
o  Reject the recommendation of the committee based on detailed justifications; 
o  Approve the dissemination of the outcome of evaluation (e.g. NOITA, NOA, Cancellation 
notices, etc.) 
- 
The committees shall refer to IFAD Procurement Handbook for detailed guidance on evaluation 
(see section 2.6.2 above). 
IFAD-funded PMU staff selection 
4.2.2 
The procedure to recruit IFAD-funded staff to join the SEPMU and CEP PIG will be the Individual Consultant 
Selection procedure (ICS) described in IFAD Procurement Handbook. This does not apply to staff seconded 
by government. As stated under section 2.8 (bullet 2), selection of SEPMU and CEP PIG staff or changes 
to  staff  shall  be  coordinated  in  advance  with  IFAD.  If  the  selection  process  exceeds  the  prior  review 
threshold  for  individual  consultants,  the  selection  shall  be  also  subject  to  the  No  Objection  by  IFAD 
through NOTUS as per section 2.7.6 above. To identify whether the selection process is subject to N.O., 
the SEPMU and CEP PIG shall estimate the cost covering the remuneration for the full remaining duration 
of the project as per the Financing Agreement. Some IFAD-funded SEPMU and CEP PIG staff selections are 
subject to No Objection regardless of the value as per the LtB (including all procurement staff). All staff 
recruitment shall feature in the relevant Procurement Plan.  
The  selection  process  shall  follow  the  ICS  procedure  with  the  following  highlights  adapted  for  the 
particular case of selecting SEPMU and CEP PIG staff: 
- 
- 
- 
Preparation of TOR using IFAD SPD Template – TOR; 
Preparation of REOI using IFAD SPD Template – REOI Advertisement; 
If  interviews  with  the  shortlisted  applicants  are  foreseen  to  help  identify  the  most  qualified 
applicant,  
o 
the interview as well as the related criteria should be explicitly specified in the REOI and 
TOR;  this  means  that  the  interview  requirement  must  be  known  in  advance  and 
announced to the public as well; 
the  interview  competencies  required  should  be  assigned  a  weight  in  addition  to  the 
weights for other qualification criteria;  
o 
o  competency criteria should be formulated in a clear and objective manner;  
o 
interviews  should  be  based  on  the  same  set  of  competency  questions  used  with  all 
candidates; 
o  all applicants passing the minimum score (for CV evaluation) shall be invited for interview; 
o 
o 
o 
interviewees should be given sufficient time in advance; 
interviews should be held online in case of obstacles to physical meeting are present; 
In  addition  to  competency  questions,  SEPMU  and  CEP  PIG  may  test  interviewees  to 
validate  their  knowledge  and  experience  through  one  or  more  “technical  questions” 
which also shall be standardized and common to all interviewees;  
o  SEPMU and CEP PIG shall consult with IFAD in advance for setting up the competency-
based interview questions as well as the technical questions for each position; apart from 
such a consultation, the questions shall remain strictly confidential;  
the  interviews  shall  be  fully  documented  as  well  as  the  resulting  scoring  within  the 
evaluation report;  
o 
- 
- 
for the recruitment of long-term SEPMU and CEP PIG staff funded by IFAD, competency-based 
interviews are recommended; 
The flowchart below depicts the main steps in the ICS procedure. 
In exceptional and duly justified cases identified in the Handbook, Individual Consultants may be selected 
on a sole-source basis:  
- 
tasks that are a continuation of previous work that the consultant has done and for which the 
consultant was competitively selected;  
certain assignments expected to last less than three months;  
emergencies arising from natural disasters;  
- 
- 
-  when the individual is the only consultant qualified for the assignment; and 
-  when the individual consultant assignment budget is below the predefined low value threshold 
for SSS. 
In such cases, the SEPMU and CEP PIG will launch a SSS through NOTUS including detailed justifications. 
Recruitment  of  Civil  Servants  is  subject  to  IFAD’s  policies.  Whenever  Operational  Policy  and  Results 
Division (OPR) issues a new update, the PIM will need to be updated accordingly. 
Figure 3- Flowchart for ICS procedure for selecting IFAD-funded project staff 
TOR & Cost EstimateREOIPrior ReviewAdvertise REOI & TORReceive & Answer ClarificationsReceive & Evaluate CV’sShortlist Report & RFPPrior ReviewRFP to Top Qualified CandidateReceive & Answer ClarificationsReceive ProposalEvaluate Technical  ProposalInterviews?Hold Interviews & Finalize EvaluationYESNOPrior ReviewEvaluate Financial ProposalNegotiations  & Draft ContractPrior ReviewPrior ReviewSign contract 
4.2.3  Roles & Responsibilities 
The below two tables clarify the roles and responsibilities of all stakeholders especially those entrusted 
with  one  or more  functions  of the  procurement  cycle.  The  first  table  is  a  high  level  representation of 
organizational roles and responsibilities of high-level procurement functions among concerned entities 
while the second table (in Annex 1) is a detailed responsibility Assignment Matrix covering the majority of 
procurement functions and steps within the SEPMU and CEP PIG.  
Prepare Procurement Plan (PP) 
Finalize and Approve PP 
Manage PP updates and upgrades 
Prepare Technical Requirements 
Finalize and Approve Requirements 
Prepare Bidding Documents (B.D.) 
Finalize and Approve B.D.’s 
Publish Notices and Advertisements 
Evaluation committee Members 
Form Evaluation Committees 
Manage Bid/Proposal Opening  
Manage Bid/Proposal Evaluation 
Approve Evaluation Recommendations 
Manage Debriefs and Protests 
Prepare Draft Contract 
Sign Contract 
Technical Management of Contract 
Contract Management 
Acceptance committee members 
Form Acceptance Committee 
Review Payment Requests  
Check and approve payment requests  
Process Payments 
Archive all procurement-related files 
Correspond with IFAD for No Objection 
SEPMU 
CEP PIG 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Table 6 - Inter-agency Procurement Roles and Responsibilities 
Annex 1: Responsibility Assignment Matrix (RAM - RACI) Template 
This  RAM  clarifies  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  units  and  staff  in  each  phase/step  of  implementation  of  procurement  and  procurement-related 
activities  within  the  IFAD project.  It  assigns  for each  step  the  person who  is  Responsible,  Accountable,  Consulted,  or  Informed.  It  facilitates  internal 
workflow and inter-agency coordination, removes any ambiguity, and promotes accountability. In each cell against each activity, the letters “R”, “A”, “C”, 
or “I” are entered for the respective function as is applicable. The meaning of each is as explained in the Legend below: 
The SEPMU and CEP PIG 
Activity/Role 
Minister 
Project  
Director 
Project 
Coordinator 
Provincial 
Coordinator 
AWPB – elaborating activities 
AWPB - budgeting 
AWPB – other 
Procurement Plan – packaging (lots) 
Procurement Plan – scheduling (timing) 
Procurement Plan – procurement 
methods 
Procurement Plan – consolidation (final) 
Procurement Plan - update or upgrade 
All Requests for No Objections 
Initiation (request to start preparation) 
Market research 
Stakeholder consultation/coordination 
Cost and schedule estimation 
TOR/Technical Specifications 
Requisitioning (request to launch 
procurement) 
Qualification criteria 
Request for Expressions of Interest 
Pre-qualifications documents 
Bidding documents, Requests for 
Proposals, Requests for Quotations 
Invitation letters (for direct invitation) 
Publicity and dissemination 
A 
A 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
A 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
R 
R 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
R 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
I 
A 
A 
I 
I 
R 
R 
R 
C 
R 
C 
R 
R 
R 
R 
C 
R 
C 
R 
R 
R 
A 
C 
C 
A 
A 
C 
C 
C 
I 
I 
I 
C 
C 
I 
R 
C 
R 
C 
R 
R 
C 
I 
I 
C 
C 
C 
Project 
Proc. 
Staff 
R 
C 
C 
R 
R 
R 
Project 
Tech. 
Staff 
C 
I 
C 
C 
I 
I 
Project 
Financial 
Manager 
R 
R 
R 
C 
C 
I 
Provincial 
Tech. 
Staff 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
C 
R 
C 
C 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
C 
I 
I 
C 
R 
C 
R 
R 
I 
R 
C 
C 
C 
I 
I 
C 
C 
I 
I 
I 
C 
R 
I 
I 
I 
I 
C 
C 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
C 
I 
R 
I 
C 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Activity/Role 
Minister 
Project  
Director 
Project 
Coordinator 
Provincial 
Coordinator 
Formation of Committees 
Receipt and handling of clarifications 
Pre-bid conferences  
Receipt of bids 
Safekeeping of bids 
Receipt and management of appeals 
Approval of Evaluation Recommendations 
Approval of Negotiation findings 
Contract signature regardless of value 
Contract monitoring Form 
Commencement order 
Access to site 
Suspension of works/supply/services 
Granting Extension of Time by less than or 
equal to 25% of original duration 
Granting Extension of Time by more than 
25% of original duration 
Application of liquidated damages 
Changes in specifications/quality 
Changes in sequencing of activities 
Increasing quantities resulting in 
increasing contract value by less than or 
equal to 10% 
Increasing quantities resulting in 
increasing contract value by more than 
10% 
Adding new items not provisioned in the 
contract increasing contract value by less 
than or equal to 10% 
Adding new items not provisioned in the 
contract increasing contract value by 
more than 10% 
Payment validation 
Payment processing 
Review of submitted guarantees 
Forfeiture of a bank guarantee 
Safekeeping of bank guarantees  
Validation of Insurance Policies 
A 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
A 
A 
A 
I 
A 
I 
A 
A 
A 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
R 
I 
A 
I 
I 
A 
R 
R 
R 
A 
R 
A 
R 
R 
R 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
I 
I 
A 
I 
I 
R 
A 
R 
A 
A 
R 
R 
R 
C 
C 
R 
R 
C 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
A 
A 
R 
A 
A 
C 
I 
C 
I 
I 
C 
R 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
C 
C 
C 
I 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
R 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Project 
Proc. 
Staff 
C 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
I 
C 
R 
C 
C 
C 
R 
Project 
Tech. 
Staff 
I 
C 
R 
I 
I 
C 
C 
R 
I 
I 
I 
C 
I 
C 
Project 
Financial 
Manager 
I 
C 
C 
I 
R 
C 
R 
R 
C 
R 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Provincial 
Tech. 
Staff 
I 
I 
C 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
I 
R 
R 
I 
R 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
I 
I 
C 
C 
I 
R 
C 
R 
C 
C 
C 
C 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
C 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Activity/Role 
Minister 
Project  
Director 
Project 
Coordinator 
Provincial 
Coordinator 
Receipt and processing of contract 
correspondence – day-to-day - technical  
Receipt and processing of contract 
correspondence – day-to-day - 
contractual 
Changes in contract terms and conditions 
(other than mentioned above) 
Amicable settlement proceeding 
Approving deliverables and outputs 
Certification of readiness for acceptance 
Formation of acceptance committees 
Approval of acceptance findings 
Vendor Assessment Form6 
I 
I 
A 
I 
A 
I 
A 
A 
I 
I 
I 
R 
A 
R 
A 
R 
R 
A 
A 
A 
R 
R 
R 
R 
C 
R 
R 
I 
I 
C 
C 
R 
R 
C 
R 
C 
Project 
Proc. 
Staff 
I 
Project 
Tech. 
Staff 
R 
Project 
Financial 
Manager 
I 
Provincial 
Tech. 
Staff 
R 
R 
R 
C 
R 
R 
C 
R 
R 
R 
C 
C 
R 
R 
I 
R 
R 
I 
C 
C 
R 
C 
C 
R 
C 
R 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
R: Responsible: Executes or approves or clears; the person(s) who is (are) entrusted with a task or process. 
A: Accountable: Holds responsibility and is accountable; one person per RAM line; usually the senior authority of 
an organization or can be also middle management in case of empowerment and decentralized management. 
C: Consulted: participates by reviewing/commenting on documents, deliverables, activities or processes; reviews 
and comments are documented but may or may not be taken into account depending on final decision of 
Responsible person or Accountable person. 
I: Informed: copied on process/document “for information”. Whether action needs to be taken or not by the 
“Informed” person depends on the person’s role and organizational duties. 
6 See Annex 5 for the template of the Vendor Assessment Form. 
Annex 2: Procurement Records and Files 
Document 
(i) 
(ii) 
a copy of the published REOI advertisement or shortlist (if applicable) * 
a copy of the published pre-qualification and bidding documents and any amendments, extensions or clarifications 
requested and issued * 
a record of the tender opening, signed by all TEC members and the bidders present 
a full copy of each bid received and evaluated, plus clarifications requested and responses received 
a copy of the evaluation report * 
signed minutes of all meetings related to the procurement, including pre-bid and negotiation meetings, when held 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii)  a contract award notice * 
(viii)  any letter of tender acceptance to the supplier, contractor or consultant * 
(ix) 
(x) 
(xi) 
(xii)  post-contract documents related to the fulfilment of contract obligations, especially photocopies of bank guarantees or 
the signed contract document and contract acceptance * 
any contract amendments * 
all contractual correspondence between the procuring entity and a supplier, contractor or consultant 
Preferred Format 
Hard copy 
Hard copy 
Hard copy 
Hard copy 
Hard copy 
Hard or soft copy 
Hard copy 
Hard copy 
Hard copy 
Hard copy 
Hard or soft copy 
Hard copy 
payment guarantees 
(xiii)  signed minutes of any meetings related to contract management, including contract progress or review meetings 
(xiv)  signed delivery documents evidencing delivery of supplies, or signed completion certificates related to a contract for 
Hard copy 
Hard copy 
services or works under the contract, including any contract delivery records 
(xv)  a copy of all invoices for works, services or supplies, including working papers verifying the accuracy of payments 
Hard copy 
claimed and details of the actual payment authorized 
(xvi)  a copy of cumulative payment worksheets/records evidencing management of all payments made 
(xvii)  all decisions of the concerned borrower’s approval authority related to the procurement, including the approval of the 
bidding documents, the approval of the evaluation report(s), the contract award, the approval of contract documents 
and contract amendments and any decision to suspend or cancel procurement proceedings 
Soft copy 
Hard copy 
(xviii)  a copy of any claims made by the procuring entity with respect to any warranty, non-warranty, short supply, damage 
Hard or soft copy 
(xix) 
and other claims against the contracted vendor or the procuring entity 
in the case of IFAD prior review, all submissions and correspondence related to the seeking of IFAD’s no objection 
(NO) and a copy of the respective IFAD NO letter. 
Hard or soft copy 
(xx)  any other communications related to the procurement in question, including internal entity correspondence 
Hard or soft copy 
* Ideally, previous drafts (before the final version is issued) of these published documents and reports should also be retained for 
completeness and to provide a full picture of how the published document evolved. It is accepted, however, that in the case of space 
limitations, this is not always feasible in practice.  
Annex 3: Guidance on using the Procurement Plan 
For the QUICKCARDS, please refer to the First Sheet of the PP Template. 
Annex 4: Guidance on using the Contract Monitoring 
Tool 
For the QUICKCARDS, please refer to the “HELP” function in the Platform for the  
Contract Monitoring Tool. 
Annex 5: Guidance on using NOTUS 
For the QUICKCARDS, please refer to the “HELP” function in the NOTUS System. 
Annex 6: Vendor Assessment Form 
VENDOR ASSESSMENT FORM7 
FOR WORKS/SUPPLIES/SERVICES CONTRACTS 
Project Name: 
Contract Name:  
Location: 
Contract Reference:  
Name of Contractor: 
1 
PLANNED IMPLEMENTATION PERIOD  
From 
Planned commencement 
date of the contract  
To 
Completion Date: 
End of Warranty: 
2  ACTUAL IMPLEMENTATION PERIOD  
From 
Actual Commencement 
date of the contract  
To 
Completion Date: 
End of Warranty: 
3 
CONTRACT VALUE (Currency) 
Original 
Updated 
7 Adopted with modifications from https://ec.europa.eu/europeaid/prag/annexes  
Rating scheme 
Do not reengage 
1 
Failure to perform 
2 
Below expectations 
3 
4  Meet expectations 
5 
Exceed expectations 
3 
PERFORMANCE RATING OF VENDOR 
Factor 
Rating 
Comments 
Achievement of contract objectives  
(as per the technical specifications and 
drawings or terms of reference) 
Achievement of contract objectives  
(as per the required quantities) 
Achievement of contract objectives  
(as per the agreed time limits) 
Quality of work/supplies/services 
Good faith and cooperative attitude 
Risk management and mitigation 
measures 
Respect to contractual responsibilities 
and liabilities 
Litigation and claims-man-ship: the 
tendency to engage in claims and 
disputes 
Beneficiary feedback on the vendor 
(e.g. trainees in training, target groups 
in awareness, municipality benefiting 
from construction, etc.) 
Other criteria: … 
 TOTAL VENDOR SCORE (average)8 
8 The Total Score gives an overview of the overall performance of the Vendor; a score of 1, 2 or 3 should raise a red 
flag and should be justified with the measures taken by the Implementation Unit or Agency during or upon 
completion if applicable. 
4 
PERFORMANCE RATING OF KEY PERSONNEL 
Name9 
s
n
o
i
t
a
e
r
l
t
n
e
i
l
C
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
n
u
m
m
o
c
n
e
t
t
i
r
W
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
n
u
m
m
o
c
i
n
o
i
t
a
n
m
r
e
t
e
d
&
e
v
i
r
D
l
a
b
r
e
V
t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m
b
o
J
s
s
e
n
e
v
i
t
c
e
f
f
e
e
c
n
e
t
e
p
m
o
c
l
a
c
i
n
h
c
e
T
l
a
n
o
s
r
e
P
l
l
a
r
e
v
O
Rating scheme 
1  Do not reengage 
2  Failure to perform 
3  Below expectations 
4  Meet expectations 
5  Exceed expectations 
TOTAL 
SCORE (Average)10 
PERSONNEL 
5 
REPRESENTATIVES (Technical and Contractual) 11 
Name 
Signature 
Date 
Name 
Signature 
Date 
6  APPROVED BY:  
Name 
Signature 
Date 
9 The Key personnel include: Vendor representative or project director; key experts nominated in the contract; other 
experts  not  specified  in  the  contract,  but  were  involved  in  implementation;  and  (for  construction  works)  staff 
managing construction.  
10 The Total Personnel Score gives an overview of the performance of the vendor staff on the project; a score of 1,2 
or  3  should  raise  a  red  flag  and  should  be  appended  with  clarifications  on  what  measures  were  taken  during 
implementation or upon completion, if applicable. 
11 The staff supervising the contract during implementation and not the acceptance committee members. 
Annex 7: Debrief, Protest and Appeal Timeline 
Bidder A filesFor DebriefProcuring EntitySends NOITA to All BiddersNational AuthorityAnswers AppealP.E. may send NOA4 days to request DebriefIFAD No ObjectionOn Final Evaluation ReportEnd of first10 day Standstill4 days to issue Debrief2 days For Bidder A to ProtestBidder A filesFor ProtestProcuring EntityDebriefs BidderA10 days to Answer Protest (if justified, may be extended by 5 days)Procuring EntityAnswers ProtestOf Bidder A5 days for Bidder ATo AppealEnd of Extended Standstill Period6 days for ExtendedStandstill Period to endBidder A filesAppeal to National AuthorityExtension of StandstillALL DAYS ARE WORKING DAYS 
Tajikistan
Community-based Agricultural Support Project Plus (CASP+)
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Mission Dates:
01 April - 09 June 2021
Document Date:
16/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002204
5854-TJ
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 8:  Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Community Based Agriculture Support Programme “Plus”  
(CASP+) 
Project Design Report – Annex 8:   
CASP+ Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
Draft - August 2021 
1 
Contents 
Acronyms................................................................................................................................ 4 
1.  PROJECT DESCRIPTION .............................................................................................. 6 
1.1. 
Climate rationale .............................................................................................. 6 
1.2. 
1.3. 
1.4. 
1.5. 
Project description ........................................................................................... 7 
Project structure .............................................................................................. 9 
Implementation arrangements ........................................................................10 
Environment and Social category ....................................................................11 
2.  TARGETING AND SELECTION CRITERIA .....................................................................12 
2.1. 
Target Groups and Targeting ...........................................................................12 
2.2. 
2.3. 
Selection Criteria .............................................................................................12 
C. Selection of Villages ....................................................................................13 
2.4. 
Selection of Households ..................................................................................15 
ANNEX to Chapter 2: Wealth Ranking ...............................................................................16 
3.  IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ..........................................................................18 
3.1. 
Project governance ..........................................................................................18 
3.2. 
3.3. 
Implementing agencies ...................................................................................19 
Institutional synergies ....................................................................................21 
4.  COMPONENTS DESCRIPTION .....................................................................................23 
4.1. 
resilient management of natural resources ...................................................................24 
Component 1: Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-
4.1.1. 
Outputs ........................................................................................................24 
4.1.2. 
Description of activities ................................................................................26 
4.1.3. 
Sequencing of activities in Component 1 ......................................................36 
4.1.4. 
Definition of timing and responsibilities .......................................................41 
4.1.5. 
Component 1 performance indicators...........................................................46 
4.1.6. 
Activities’ results .........................................................................................48 
4.1.7. 
Implementation Arrangements needed ........................................................50 
Annex to Chapter 4.1 ........................................................................................................52 
Component 1 Terms of Reference and MoU ...................................................................52 
4.2. 
to climate change ..........................................................................................................70 
Component 2: Investments in community capacity for adaption and resilience 
4.2.1. 
Outputs ........................................................................................................77 
4.2.2. 
Description of activities ................................................................................78 
4.2.3. 
Sequencing of activities in Component 2 .................................................... 101 
4.2.4. 
Component 2 performance indicators......................................................... 105 
Annex to Chapter 4.2 ...................................................................................................... 107 
Component 2 Terms of Reference and MoU ................................................................. 107 
Draft - August 2021 
2 
4.3. 
market-based approaches ........................................................................................... 148 
Component 3: Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through 
4.3.1. 
Outputs ...................................................................................................... 148 
4.3.2. 
Description of activities .............................................................................. 149 
4.3.3. 
Activity sequencing and timing, and responsibilities .................................. 163 
4.3.4. 
Component 3 performance indicators......................................................... 167 
4.3.5. 
Activities’ results ....................................................................................... 168 
4.3.6. 
Implementation Arrangements needed ...................................................... 170 
Annex to Chapter 4.3 ...................................................................................................... 172 
Component 3 Terms of Reference and MoU ................................................................. 172 
5.  SOCIAL INCLUSION AND GENDER MAINSTREAMING IN PARTICIPATORY PLANNING 
PROCESS ........................................................................................................................ 183 
5.1. 
Participatory Planning Process ...................................................................... 183 
ANNEX to Chapter 5 – Terms of reference ................................................................... 185 
6.  Planning, M&E, Learning and KM ............................................................................. 189 
6.1. 
6.2. 
6.3. 
6.4. 
M&E Structure ............................................................................................... 189 
CASP+ Logframe ............................................................................................ 189 
M&E Responsibilities ..................................................................................... 189 
Monitoring System ......................................................................................... 190 
6.4.1. 
Types of Reports ........................................................................................ 190 
6.4.2. 
MIS System ................................................................................................ 190 
6.4.3. 
CSCAP Monitoring ...................................................................................... 191 
6.4.4. 
Survey Methods .......................................................................................... 191 
6.4.5. 
Interim and final evaluations ..................................................................... 191 
6.4.6. 
Quality control and quality assurance measures. ....................................... 192 
6.4.7. 
Beneficiary Feedback ................................................................................. 192 
6.5. 
Learning and knowledge management .......................................................... 192 
6.6. 
Communication .............................................................................................. 192 
Annex to Chapter 6 – M&E plan ................................................................................... 194 
7.  PROCUREMENT ........................................................................................................ 195 
7.1. 
CASP+ Procurement Rules and Guidance ....................................................... 195 
ANNEX to Chapter 7 – Awards of Grants  .................................................................... 198 
ANNEX to Chapter 7 – Terms of reference ................................................................... 201 
8.  FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ....................................................................................... 202 
ANNEX to Chapter 8 – Terms of reference ................................................................... 203 
Draft - August 2021 
3 
Acronyms 
4P 
ACTED 
ADB 
AE 
AI 
AWPB 
CASP 
CASP+ 
CCI 
CEP 
CES 
CI 
CIG 
CO2e  
COSOP 
COVID-19 
CsCAP 
DRM 
DRR 
EBRD 
ECTAP  
EE 
EU 
Ex-ACT 
FAO 
FFS 
FHH 
FP 
FSC 
GBAO 
GCF 
GDP  
GHG 
GII 
GIZ 
GLEAM-i 
GoT 
GTZ 
GWP 
HDI  
HH 
Hydromet 
IFAD 
IGA 
INDC 
IWRM  
JFM 
KLSP 
LPDP 
MoA 
MoEWR  
MIS 
MSMEs 
ND-GAIN  
NDA 
Public-private-producer partnerships 
Agency for Technical Cooperation and Development 
Asian Development Bank 
Accredited Entity 
Artificial insemination  
Annual Work plan and Budget  
Community-based Agricultural Support Project (phase I) 
Community-based Agricultural Support Project ‘Plus’ (phase II)  
Chamber of commerce and industry 
Committee on Environmental Protection  
Committee of Emergency situations and Civil defence  
Core indicator (GCF)  
Common Interest Group 
Carbon dioxide equivalent  
Country strategic opportunities programme 
Coronavirus disease of 2019 (official WHO name) 
Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans  
Design Review Meeting  
Disaster Risk Reduction 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
Enhanced Competitiveness of Tajik Agribusiness Project 
Executing Entity (implementing entity for GCF) 
European Union 
EX-Ante Carbon balance Tool 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
Farmers Field Schools  
Female Headed Households  
Funding Proposal (GCF) 
Food Security Committee of the Tajik Republic 
Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Region  
Green Climate Fund 
Gross Domestic Product 
Greenhouse Gas  
Gender Inequality Index  
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit 
Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model 
Government of Tajikistan  
Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (former GIZ name) 
Global Water Partnership  
Human Development Index 
Household 
National Agency for Hydrometeorology of Republic of Tajikistan 
International Fund for Agricultural Development   
Income generating activities  
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution  
Integrated Water Resources Management  
Joint Forest Management  
Khatlon Livelihoods Support Project 
Livestock and Pasture Development Project  
Ministry of Agriculture  
Ministry of Energy and Water Resources 
Management Information System 
Micro-small and medium enterprises  
Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative 
National Designated Authority (at GCF) 
Draft - August 2021 
4 
NIP 
NGO 
NRM 
OIE 
PBAS 
PCN 
PDR 
PIG 
PMF 
PMP 
PMU 
PPL 
PSC 
PWD 
PUU 
PUA 
RBA 
RBC 
REACT 
RRS 
QAG 
SDC 
SDG 
SEPMU 
SFA 
SI 
SMEs 
SO 
SPEI 
SSTC 
TAJSTAT  
TBD 
UN 
UNDP 
UNFCCC 
USD 
VO 
WB 
WFP 
WG 
WHH 
WHO 
WUA 
National Agricultural Investment Plan 2021-2030 
Non-governmental organization 
Natural Resources Management 
World Organization for Animal Health  
Performance-based allocation system 
Project concept note (IFAD) 
Project Document Report (IFAD) 
CEP Project Implementation Group  
Performance measurement framework (GCF)  
Pasture Management Plans  
Project Management Unit  
Public Procurement Law  
Project Steering Committee  
Persons with Disability  
Pasture Users Union 
Pasture Users Associations  
Rome-based Agencies (UN) 
River basin council 
Rapid Emergency Assessment and Coordination Team  
Rayons under Republican Subordination 
Quality Assurance Group  
Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation 
Sustainable Development Goal 
State Enterprise PMU Livestock and Pasture Development  
State Forest Agency  
Social Inclusion 
Small and Medium Enterprises 
Strategic Objective 
Standardized Precipitation-Evapotranspiration Index  
South-South and Triangular Cooperation 
Agency on statistics under the President of the Republic of Tajikistan 
To be determined 
United Nations 
UN Development Programme 
UN Framework Convention on Climate Change 
United States Dollar  
Village Organization 
World Bank 
World Food Programme 
Women group 
Women Head of Households 
World Health Organization 
Water Users Associations 
Draft - August 2021 
5 
1.  PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
The Community Based Agriculture Support Programme “Plus” (CASP+) is a response 
1. 
to the challenges faced by rural populations in Tajikistan to cope with increasing climate 
change impact exacerbating the underlying socio-economic vulnerabilities and lack of 
income opportunities. The project capitalises on the opportunity to use financing from IFAD, 
GCF and FAO. The investment options build on the priorities defined in the IFAD Country 
Strategy Opportunity Paper (COSOP) and on the specific request for climate sensitive 
investments addressed to both IFAD and FAO from the Committee on Environment 
Protection (CEP), the National Designated Authority (NDA) to the Green Climate Fund 
(GCF).  
A Concept Note was prepared on remote basis between September and December 
2. 
2020 in two separate formats for IFAD and GCF financing (the COVID-19 pandemic 
restricted travel and put in place social distancing procedures). The activities and 
investments were discussed and agreed upon with the Ministry of Agriculture, the 
Committee on Environment Protection and with a number of representatives from key 
Ministries, development partners, private sector agencies and representatives from the 
potential beneficiaries in rural areas of Tajikistan. After integration of formal comments from 
Tajik Ministries and Agencies (February 2021), CASP+ Concept Note passed the relevant 
quality enhancement reviews at FAO and IFAD and was internally approved by IFAD on 10 
March 2021 and submitted to GCF Secretariat on 29 April 2021. Feedback from the GCF 
Secretariat – received in June 2021 have been be incorporated into the full design 
documents.  
Further to the submission to GCF, a remote Design mission took place from 7 April to 
3. 
30 June 2021, supported in country by the State Enterprise “Project Management Unit” 
Livestock and Pasture Development – SEPMU and CEP in meeting government institutions, 
representatives of development partners, international financial institutions, non-
governmental organizations, private sector representatives, as well as rural populations in 
the targeted districts, as well as by FAO. A structured stakeholder engagement process has 
accompanied the preparation of the Concept Note and the Funding Proposal, including 
district consultations (April 5 to 16) and focus group discussions with rural population in the 
project intervention areas. Detailed discussions were held with staff members at the SEPMU, 
CEP, and FAO in view of the implementation of the project. The mission met and briefed the 
representatives of various institutions, including: the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of 
Agriculture, Ministry of Economic Development and Trade, State Committee on Investments 
and State Property Management, Tajik Agrarian University, Tajik Agrarian Academy of 
Science, State Enterprise for Breeding and Artificial Insemination, Tajik Veterinary 
Association, Food Security Committee, Pasture Meliorative Trust, under the Ministry of 
Agriculture, State Enterprise for Capacity Development, State Committee of Land 
Management and Geodesy, and the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) about the key 
findings.  
1.1.  Climate rationale 
Tajikistan is the most vulnerable country to climate risks in Central Asia. Temperatures 
4. 
are increasing across the country and there is a clear shift in precipitation patterns. These 
changes pose a threat to the agricultural cropping calendar as well as to rangeland 
productivity. Higher temperatures increase evapotranspiration, which consequently pushed 
up water demand for irrigation. Combined with more frequent heat extremes this results in 
reduced crop productivity and substantial risks for irrigated and rainfed agricultural systems. 
Draft - August 2021 
6 
Agricultural yields could drop by as much as 30 percent in some parts of Tajikistan by the 
end of the century. Livestock would also be impacted, through increased pressure on 
pastures already subject to overgrazing and degradation as well as by effects from higher 
temperatures on animals. The climate change vulnerability analyses suggest higher 
adaptation needs in rural mountainous area, with predominance of agroforestry and 
livestock related livelihoods. The country is also prone to frequent natural disasters 
including floods, mudflows, landslides and droughts. Climate projections predict a worsening 
of the trends and events, with significant impacts on ecosystems, livelihoods and the 
economy. The country’s geographic characteristics as well as its high levels of poverty and 
dependence on the agriculture sector present significant challenges for future adaptation. 
5. 
At the national level, the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan (GoT) has 
developed a National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy (NCCAS), which is a long-term 
statement of priorities with respect to climate change adaptation. GoT also has made 
commitments to confronting the challenges of climate change and to implementing the 
commitments made in its Nationally Determined Contribution. At the same time, the 
country’s institutional structure for climate change adaptation requires capacity building and 
technical support.  
Detailed information on climate scenario and country context is described in the 
6. 
SECAP (Annex 5 of the PDR).  
1.2.  Project description 
7.  Goal. The overall goal of the project is to contribute to the country’s shift 
towards low emission sustainable development pathways and climate-adaptive 
agricultural production practices  
8.  Objective. CASP+ development objective is to increase resilience of 
ecosystems and adaptation of livelihoods in rural areas affected by climate 
change. The project will achieve the objective by strengthening public sector capacity for 
transformative climate-resilient governance of natural resources, improving community 
planning and access to investment resources for ecosystem management and climate 
adaptation, supporting through market based approaches the diversification of livelihoods as 
element of climate resilience. 
9. 
Theory of change. The underlying theory of change of the project is that if 
investments are made in supportive policy and technical capacity at the national level, 
community institutions at the village level accompanied by investments in natural resource 
management plans, with grants and access to markets at the household level in close 
engagement with the private sector, then vulnerable communities and households will be 
able to transform their production practices and enhance their resilience to climate risks, 
increase carbon sequestration potential in rural ecosystems, and  thereby enhancing living 
standards. The most promising pathways for change would be investments at the: (i) 
national level in the public sector for enhanced policy and regulation and institutional 
strengthening; (ii) community level in climate-sensitive community action plans; and (iii) 
household level with greater access to markets through productive alliances between the 
smallholder and the private sector. The project components are designed in keeping with 
this three-pronged strategy  
10.  Outcomes and outreach. By promoting climate-sensitive investments at community 
level, coupled with improvement in the enabling environment and georeferenced knowledge 
for an effective ecosystem approach, the project will increase resilience of at least 80% of 
Draft - August 2021 
7 
the people in the 21 targeted districts or 650,000 individuals and contributing to the 
sequestration of an estimated 7.06 million tons of CO2e1 (from improved rangeland 
management, improved forest management, afforestation and improved herd 
management). The project will be Climate Focused and Youth Sensitive, while 
mainstreaming gender sensitiveness across all components. 
11.  Geographic targeting. The selection of the target districts was based on a Climate 
Vulnerability Index including social, environmental and climatic and infrastructure 
parameters (documented in the SECAP, Appendix 4).2 The project area includes 21 districts: 
16 in Khatlon region, 3 in RRS region and 2 in the Sughd region (map and list of districts 
are provided in Figure 1). The average vulnerability index of the project area is higher than 
the national average. The selection of districts has also considered: (i) overlaying with 
watershed/river basin boundaries; (ii) adjacency of selected districts to facilitate 
implementation; (iii) equal representation of the three agro-ecologic zones for inclusion of 
upstream and downstream communities highly affected by climate change. The project area 
represents a bit more than 15 percent of the total country area and includes 47 percent of 
the national population.3 Poverty rates in the area are much higher than the national 
average with a high degree of variation from eight percent in Gissor District to 43 percent in 
Mastchoh district.  
12.  The project area is situated in a high agricultural production zone with a bit less than 
50 percent of rainfed and irrigated crops. With more than 50 percent of the total livestock 
heads at national level, it has around 27 percent of the total pasture area, large part of 
which is degraded.4 Only 8 percent of the actual forest land is situated in the project area, 
however it includes more than 21 percent of the potential area for reforestation of the 
country.5 Most of the project area is also situated in the area where the average maximum 
temperature is the highest in the country (except high mountain areas). The area has 
suffered repeated droughts6 in recent years (excluding Farkhor and Danghara). The districts 
also experienced heavy precipitation events, specifically in Sh. Sholin, Khovaling, Baljuvon, 
Gissor and Shakrinav districts in Khatlon. Most of the project districts are also situated in 
the area where the average maximum temperature is the highest in the country (except 
high mountain areas).  
13.  Social targeting. The main target group consists of poor communities and those 
households whose livelihood is severely affected by climate change. Specifically, CASP+ will 
provide programme services for the following groups: (i) extremely poor men, women and 
youth living below the poverty line, who are either landless or are producing a minimum 
subsistence level on household plots (including people with disabilities and female headed 
households); (ii) subsistence and semi-subsistence men, women and youth with upside 
potential, in particular those willing to move to more commercial farming; and (iii) rural 
underemployed and self-employed youth (including returning migrants). Generally, these 
target groups are engaged in traditional livelihood systems based on: (i) pastoralism 
(livestock rearing: cattle, sheep and goats) or agro-pastoralism/mixed farming; and (ii) 
combining small to medium scale livestock production (including sheep and goats, milking 
cows and poultry) with agriculture activities (crop/horticultural and fruits). The selection of 
the target groups and activities proposed is in line with Country Strategic Note (2016) and 
1 Resulting from the carbon accounting tools developed by FAO: Ex-ACT, EX-Ante Carbon Balance Tool (overview: 
http://www.fao.org/in-action/epic/ex-act-tool/suite-of-tools/ex-act/en/; and tool: http://www.fao.org/in-action/epic/ex-act-
tool/suite-of-tools/registration/en/), and GLEAM-i, Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model-interactive (overview: 
http://www.fao.org/gleam/resources/en/; tool: https://gleami.apps.fao.org/).  
2 Climate vulnerability index of Tajikistan, IFAD 2021. 
3 Tajstat 2020 
4 CASP+ SECAP, Appendix 4.  
5 Based on the analysis of IFAD (2020) using dataset from Bastin et al. 2019 on potential reforestation in the world. 
6 Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration Index (SPEI) on 18 months. Climate vulnerability index of Tajikistan, IFAD 2021. 
Draft - August 2021 
8 
its strategic objective.7 Full description of the target groups is provided in the SECAP 
Appendix I.  
Figure 1. CASP+ geographic targeting 
Region 
District 
Khatlon 
Khatlon 
Khatlon 
Khatlon 
Khatlon 
Khatlon 
Khatlon 
Khatlon 
Khatlon 
Khatlon 
Khatlon 
Khatlon 
Khatlon 
Khatlon 
Khatlon 
Khatlon 
RRS 
RRS 
RRS 
Sugd 
Sugd 
A.Jomi 
Baljuvon 
Bokhtar/ Kushoniyon 
Dangara 
Farkhor 
Hamadoni 
J. Balkhi 
Khovaling 
Khuroson 
Kulob 
Panj 
Sh. Shohin 
Temurmalik 
Vakhsh 
Vose 
Yovon 
Gissor 
Rudaki 
Shakhrinav 
Mastchoh 
Zafarobod 
1.3.  Project structure 
14.  CASP+ will be implemented through four components (the draft budget, disaggregated 
by activity and executing entity is provided in Annex 2):  
(1)Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient 
management of natural resources (indicative cost USD2.37m);  
(2)Investments in community capacity for adaption and resilience to climate 
change (indicative cost USD53.55m);  
(3)Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market based 
approaches (indicative cost USD18.45m); and  
(4)Programme management (indicative cost USD3.71m).  
15.  CASP+ project duration will be 7 years with a total project cost for an amount of 
around USD 100.3 million comprising of approximately 96 percent investment costs and  4 
percent recurrent costs. The main categories of expenditures under investment costs are 
civil works, goods, equipment and services; grants; training and workshops; technical 
assistance; and travel while under recurrent costs, the main categories are salaries and 
allowances; and operating costs. 
16.  The total project cost is estimated to be USD 100.3 million. It will be financed by an 
IFAD loan of USD 6.75 million (6.7 percent of the total project costs), and grant of USD 6.75 
7 Document available at: https://www.ifad.org/en/-/document/country-strategy-no-3  
Draft - August 2021 
9 
million from IFAD 11 allocation. It is expected that: USD 25.0 million (24.9 percent of the 
total project costs) will be mobilized from IFAD 12 allocation; USD 30.0 million grant and 
USD 9.0 million loan would be mobilized from the Green Climate Fund (29.9 percent and 9.0 
percent of the total cost); and FAO financing for an amount of USD 0.16 million (0.2 
percent). Government contribution in the form of taxes for an amount of USD 15.3 million 
(15.3 percent); beneficiary contribution for an amount of USD 4.6 million (4.6 percent). 
Additional contributions include in-kind contributions from: Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) for 
an amount of USD 0.90 million (0.9 percent); Committee on Environment Protection (CEP) 
for an amount of USD 0.89 million (0.9 percent), and State Forest Agency (SFA) for an 
amount of USD 0.89 million (0.9 percent).  
1.4. 
Implementation arrangements 
17.  A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be constituted at the national level. The 
PSC will have the overall responsibility for providing strategic and policy guidance to ensure 
that the Project objectives are achieved. Its members will include: the Committee for 
Environmental Protection, the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), the Ministry of Energy and 
Water Resources (MoEWR), the Pasture Meliorative Trust (PMT), the Food Security 
Committee, the State Forest Agency (SFA), the Committee on Land Management and 
Geodesy (CLMG), the Tajik Academy of Agricultural Sciences (TAAS), the Agency for Land 
Reclamation and Irrigation (ALRI),  State Agency for Hydrometeorology, State Enterprise for 
Animal Breeding and Artificial Insemination, Committee on Civil Defence and Disaster Risk 
Reduction and representatives from Civil Society Organizations. Development partners 
committed to climate-adaptive strategies and mitigation will participate as observers. The 
PSC will also coordinate with the Coordinating Council on the Green Climate Fund to assess 
how to strengthen and build on the on-going GCF investments in the country. 
18.  Supervision functions. The International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD) is 
the Accredited Entity for the CASP+ project. It is also co-financing the project together with 
GCF and FAO.  IFAD will supervise the execution of CASP+ with regular supervision and 
implementation support missions. The Fund will ensure the quality of the project 
deliverables, undertake procurement reviews and ensure fiduciary risk management, assess 
project performance and undertake value for money analysis. IFAD will apply its 
georeferenced protocol to monitor investment progress and impact. 
19.  Execution functions. The project is going to be co-implemented by three 
implementing agencies (executing entities in GCF terminology). These comprise:  
20.  District Governments and Jamoats at the village level are expected to play an 
important role in coordination and helping to raise awareness about the project among key 
Draft - August 2021 
10 
stakeholders and helping to incorporate climate vulnerability assessments in local 
development planning based on district diagnostics.  
21.  The project will procure the services of local NGOs, service providers and partner 
agencies in the implementation of the project on the ground. The inclusion and engagement 
of the private sector will be encouraged to ensure that the project puts in place market 
based solutions and productive alliances that can ensure the sustainability of the project 
investments. 
22.  FAO, CEP and MoA will contribute to the project cost with a co-financing (relevant 
letter of commitment with indication of amounts committed will be sent to IFAD and then 
annexed to the Funding Proposal package).  
Figure 2. CASP+ Implementation arrangements and funds flow 
1.5.  Environment and Social category  
23.  The programme is considered to be Category B. Overall, the programme is not 
expected to have any significant adverse environmental or social implications. 
Environmental risks associated with activities such as construction of agricultural 
infrastructure or rehabilitation of rural roads will follow the environmental laws of Tajikistan 
or IFAD environmental and social policy, whichever is more stringent. Tajikistan has a well-
developed environmental legal and regulatory framework. Current environmental legislation 
in Tajikistan includes statutory acts and laws on the following topics: (i) protection of the 
environment; (ii) ecological audit and monitoring; (iii) protection of flora and fauna; (iv) 
environmental information and education; (v) soil, water and air quality; (vi) biological 
safety; (vii) human health and safety; and (viii) waste and chemicals management. These 
laws, along with the regulations approved by the Government of Tajikistan (GoT), create a 
favorable legal framework for environmental protection and for the use and protection of the 
country’s natural resources. The programme will have to comply with the procedures for 
environmental impact, under the Law on Environmental Impact Assessment (2017) detailed 
in Appendix 2 of the Annex 5 (SECAP) and on IFAD’s environmental and social policy – 
whichever is most stringent. 
Draft - August 2021 
11 
24.  Furthermore, the programme aims at increasing natural resource management and 
reduce overexploitation of land, pasture and resources. The proposed programme will 
enhance social cohesion due to the strengthening of the value chains and will contribute to 
environmental conservation and sustainability because of its emphasis on the rehabilitation 
of degraded land, reforestation, the introduction of new management and maintenance 
practices and technologies, and the reduction of anthropic pressure on grazing lands and 
pastures. The proposed programme will strictly follow the existing environmental laws and 
regulations applicable in the country and represents a NRM oriented approach to using 
natural capital available in Tajikistan. The programme is designed to enhance sustainable 
and resilient business opportunities of vulnerable rural households through climate-smart 
natural resource management, sustainable agriculture and agroecology, promoting the 
territory and its environmental integrity as main driver of local economy. 
2.  TARGETING AND SELECTION CRITERIA  
2.1.  Target Groups and Targeting 
25.  Target groups: The programme primarily provides support to poor vulnerable 
households affected by climate change, whose livelihood is at risk. In so doing the 
programme will provide programme services for the actually or potentially economically 
active among the following target population: (i) subsistence and semi-subsistence men and 
women farmers with upside potential, in particular those willing to move to more 
commercial farming; (ii) extremely poor men and women (focus on women head of 
households) living below the poverty line, who are either landless or are producing a 
minimum subsistence level on household plots; (iii) the rural underemployed and self-
employed youth.  
26.  The Project will use the following targeting approach:  
  Geographical  targeting  for  selection  of  the  districts  and  villages  with  potential  for 
adaptation and mitigation investments; initial selection of villages will be further fine-
tuned  in  response  to  community  willingness  to  participate  in  project  activities  and 
abide by the terms and conditions of the Project. 
  Household  targeting  for  identification  and  selection  of  households  which  meet  the 
poverty criteria using participatory approaches (wealth ranking); 
  Direct targeting for selection of women (and women head of households) for specific 
project  interventions  through  special  quotas  for  their  inclusion  to  access  project 
services and also decision making and representation.  
2.2.  Selection Criteria  
27.  Target areas: The Programme will be implemented in 21 selected districts in the 
regions of DRS (3) Sughd (2) and, Khatlon (16). They have been identified at design stage 
through a climate and socio-economic vulnerability mapping exercise, which includes 
environmental and socio-economic indicators to select areas: (i) experiencing 
highest/higher climate change negative effects8; and (ii) with high poverty percentage9. 
8 See SECAP, appendix 4 . 
9 indicators (I) EXPOSURE Rainfall trend significant summer, Daily heavy rains (n.; >10mm, 1981-2019), Drought-SPEI (18 
months) trend 1981-2019, Max temperature (trend) 1958-2019. (ii) SENSITIVITY Erosion RUSLE, Land degradation (rangelands 
and forests), Population rural total (<250 hab/km2), Poverty rate (%). Vulnerability associated to Poverty has been divided into 
three main categories (Very High, high and Medium/Low). The Highest value for poverty considered % of Poverty above 50% while 
for higher, the poverty levels consider range from 30 to 50%. 
Draft - August 2021 
12 
Average poverty levels of these districts is above 15%, spanning from the lowest relative 
poverty incidence in Rudaki (DRS) district (6,9%) and Mastchoh in Sughd as the highest, at 
34%. 
28.  Methodology for the geographic targeting: The design team in coordination with 
National Partners has undertaken a ranking exercise based on climate vulnerability 
(including rainfall trends, drought, erosion, land degradation) crossed checked with other 
socio-economic indicators (poverty percentage, rural population density). The vulnerability 
mapping helped to identify the broad geographical area and related number of districts 
encompassing degraded agro-ecological zones where the population is highly vulnerable to 
climate change and suffer from very high levels of poverty. Vulnerability to climate change 
and related hazards or other environmental shocks has been considered the entry point to 
demarcate the geographic location of intervention areas, described also in the programme’s 
“climate rationale” showing strong focus on climate change which is the core of CASP+ 
innovative elements.  
29.  District Targeting: The geographic targeting of districts is based on the climate 
vulnerability analysis presented in The SECAP Appendix: Climate change impacts, climate 
vulnerability analysis for geographic targeting and related recommendations by sector. The 
selection of districts has also considered: (i) overlaying with watershed/river basin 
boundaries; (ii) adjacency of selected districts to facilitate implementation; (iii) equal 
representation of the three agro-ecologic zones for inclusion of upstream and downstream 
communities highly affected by climate change. Additional criterion where applicable was 
the presence and proximity to peri-urban and urban areas, relevant to ensure market 
access for smallholder producers targeted by the programme, specifically for livelihoods 
diversification and enhanced agrifood value chain activities. Below is presented the final list 
including key socio-economic indicators such as percentage of poverty and percentage of 
WHHs. 
2.3.  C.  Selection of Villages 
30.  The CASP+ will target 400 Villages of 21 districts in the regions of Khatlon (16 
districts), Sughd (2 districts) and DRS (3 districts). Targeting at village level will be 
conducted at the beginning of the project in collaboration with relevant stakeholders and 
taking into account criteria encompassing environmental and climate related challenges, as 
well as socio-economic indicators, i.e.: population and number of households, also presence 
of pastures, and for forestry investment also the presence of forest areas. 
31.  Specific selection criteria have been developed:  
CsCAP Investment:  
i.  Necessary criteria for Village eligibility and ranking 
1.  Excluding villages with less than 50HH 
2.  Excluding villages with previous/ongoing meaningful 
intervention providing the community with similar community 
investments 
3.  Excluding villages with less than 1,000 Sheep Units (SU). 1 
sheep/goat = 1 Sheep Unit; 1 cow = 0.2 Sheep Unit)10 
4.  Excluding villages with less than 100ha pasture11 for their 
livelihoods  
ii.  Ranking criteria to select 400 villages:  
10 average was 2,990 under LPDP 2 and only 5 had less than 1,000 
11 Average was 450 under LPDP 2 and only 5 had less than 100 ha.  
Draft - August 2021 
13 
1.  Sub-catchments vulnerability, based on Climate Vulnerability 
Index for sub-catchments mapped at design stage. 
Specifically for forestry Investment:  
iii.  Necessary criteria for villages eligible for Forestry investment 
include: 
1.  a subset of the AI villages where at least 100 ha of JFM12 can 
be implemented over the lifetime of the project. 
2.  Villages with no previous/ongoing relevant intervention 
providing the community with reforestation investments similar 
to CASP+  
32.  Validation of selection of villages for AI and FI investments will occur during project 
implementation, to ensure that the selected villages meeting the necessary criteria above 
are also meeting qualitative criteria of social sustainability, commitment, gender equality in 
accessing information and decision etc. it is expected that at least 70% of the community 
members have been informed about project opportunity and they participate in the 
community consultation and that 50% are women (attendance list should be provided). It is 
expected that final agreement to participate in the project is provided by village 
representatives and 50% are women ( attendance list should be provided). Presence of 
youth in the process will be highly encouraged.  
33.  Community Ownership. final selection will be further refined depending upon 
community willingness to participate in Project activities and abide by its terms and 
conditions. The process to comply with qualitative criteria for community ownership is 
outlined above (for both AI and FI) and in order to be considered valid the four steps below, 
including targets for participation should be met:. They are described below:  
  Step 1:  Initial Community Consultation. The first task for field level activities 
will be to conduct an exploratory visit in the selected villages and work with 
community members and CBOs, (VOs, PUUs, others at local level) including village 
elders, local leaders, to inform them about the project activities, and fix a date for 
a meeting with a majority of the community members to inform them about the 
project activities and seek community concurrence about the relevance of the 
planned activities and ascertain their interest in participating in the different 
activities. During this initial phase it will be clarified that the community meeting 
shall include women, 50% and youth 40% and vulnerable social category such as 
women head of households (15%) as well. 
  Step 2: Inclusion of Women and Vulnerable Groups. Inclusion and 
interaction with special groups, such as women and women head of households, 
youth, including Persons with Disabilities (PWD, will also take place. The Gender 
and youth focal points among Community Facilitators will be directly responsible 
to facilitate inclusion of (or separate consultation if need be) with those groups 
and their consequent mobilization within the process. They will be mobilized to 
participate in the broad community meeting and express their view and interest 
about CASP+. 
  Step 3: Community meeting. A Community meeting will be organized in each 
village to inform community members about CASP+. In this occasion, Community 
Facilitators and representatives of the PMU/Local administrations, will be able to 
interact with communities and properly explain/clarify about the project 
opportunities, terms and conditions and other details. During the meeting, 
community members will be asked to express their interest in favor of the project. 
12 Based on 15 Leskhoz having the capacity to implement 500 ha annually for 5 years = 37,500. Divide over 400 villages = 93.75 
Ha 
Draft - August 2021 
14 
If the community will be in agreement, then another village meeting will take 
place to sign/formalize the terms of agreements through a MoU (or similar 
instrument TBC). In order to ensure transparency of the process, community 
facilitators will take records of each consultations held, including attendance list to 
demonstrate community participation and presence of women. It is expected that 
women will be 50% of the meeting participants and youth 40%.  
  Step 4:  Final Village meeting and Agreement on Terms of Partnership: At 
the general village meeting a group of community representatives (50% women) 
should be selected to serve as an entry point on behalf of the whole village for the 
Project to agree on the terms for the partnership (or MoU). At this stage, 
communities should be aware of the conditions to participate in the Project (i.e co-
financing from beneficiaries). Given that the village at this general meeting clearly 
demonstrates its concurrence with the Project conditions, it is deemed to be 
selected for participation in the Project. However, the final list of selected villages 
will be subject to approval by the PSC and the receipt of no-objection from IFAD.  
34.  The above 4 steps and related activities will be facilitated by Community Facilitators 
(see ToRs in Annex).  
2.4.  Selection of Households 
35.  After final village selection, a participatory wealth ranking exercise will be conducted 
at community level to identify the poorest and the better off, following the example of the 
LPDPII where such exercise was conducted by Aga Khan Foundation (AKF)13.  
36.  The programme will promote services in line with needs of all target groups. Some 
activities will be of interest for the community as a whole: i.e. Climate Sensitive Community 
Action Plan (CsCAPs) for productive infrastructures/adaptation and mitigation activities and 
therefore all members will be mobilised through Village Organisations (VOs), PUUs, and 
Women Groups (WG) where existing. Targeted activities will be designed for specific groups, 
especially the poorest and vulnerable ones. Poor and poorest households will be identified 
and selected through the wealth ranking exercise (which requires validation from the 
community to avoid elite capture and keep tracking of process transparency) and key 
criteria related to poverty and vulnerability set for their participation in Farmers Field 
Schools (FFS), Common Interests Groups (CIGs) and prioritisation for accessing grant 
financing for livelihood development.  
37.  Community Facilitators will be in charge to undertake the wealth ranking exercise and 
trained facilitators will be in charge to train others (ToT) on the application of the 
methodology. The overall supervision will be under the responsibility if the gender and social 
inclusion expert of PMU (see ToRs). Details for implementation are reported in annex I and 
they build on LPDP-II model. 
13 Consultation with AKF representative during the CN design mission on the validity of the proposed methodology and lesson 
learned.  
Draft - August 2021 
15 
ANNEX to Chapter 2: Wealth Ranking  
38.  The wealth ranking exercise enlists lot of participation, discussion and debate, and it 
also shows to CF staff members and community members that there is relative social and 
economic differentiation in the village, i.e. all households are not equal.  
39.  Once these formats have been prepared and presented to the village general meeting, 
all community participants are free to make suggestions and corrections. For example, a 
Wealth Ranking Group may have placed a particular household in group 2. In the village 
general meeting, other participants may point out that this household should be in group 3 
and then they will give reasons for this. This sort of participation should be encouraged.  
Methodology for Wealth Ranking: 
40.  The VO/PUU leaders prepare a list of all village households. Household is defined by 
the ‘cooking definition’, i.e. all individuals and families who live together in one building and 
share one kitchen. Then, each household’s name is written on a small card. The wealth 
ranking exercise is conducted after the sign of agreement between the village and the 
project.  
41.  The facilitator informs the WR group about the objectives of the exercise, i.e. to 
categorize the households and that the people themselves do it, its use for planning, for 
monitoring and for impact assessment. It should be clearly explained by the facilitator that 
WR is not for humanitarian purposes. It is for more general developmental purposes. The 
facilitator says that if there was sufficient time, the households could be divided into ten 
categories, and since time is short only three categories will be made:  
  Households with relatively above average (for the village) quality of life 
  Households with relatively average (for the village) quality of life 
  Households with relatively below average (for the village) quality of life 
42.  The facilitator adds that today there may be very little difference between households 
in the village, all have difficult lives. But, as five fingers of the hand are not equal, all 
households cannot equal. There is a difference between the households, however small it 
may be. WR exercise allows the community members to understand some of the reasons for 
the differences between households. 
43.  The cards with the names of the households are handed to the group leader (GL). GL 
takes out one card from the middle of the pack, reads aloud the name and places it on the 
table or the floor. GL then takes another card, reads aloud the name and asks the group to 
answer the question: Does this household have generally a better life than the first 
household or lower? If the answer is better this card is placed above the first card, if lower 
then it is placed below the first card. Then GL takes another card and reads aloud the name, 
and again asks the group: Does this household have generally a better life than the first and 
the second households? The card is placed above the first two cards or below the first two 
cards or between the two cards. This way three categories are made. The subsequent cards 
are read aloud and place in the first, second or the third category. When the cards are 
finished, the first part of WR exercise is completed. Each bunch of cards is counted and the 
number noted, e.g. category-1 20 households, category-2 40 households and category-3 60 
households. 
44.  The second part of the WR ranking exercise is to have three sub-categories for each 
category. For the first category of 20 households, GL picks a card and places it on the 
table/floor. Then the second card is picked up and read aloud and question asked: is this 
household better off than the first household or not? If better off, the card is place above 
the first and if not then it is place below the first card. The process is repeated for each of 
Draft - August 2021 
16 
the other households. When three sub-categories are made, the GL reads out the names of 
each household in the sub-category to get the final consensus. Then each household card is 
marked: 1.1 for the top sub-category, 1.2 for the middle sub-category and 1.3. for the 
lowest sub-category. If there are 5 households in the top sub-category, then all five will 
have 1.1. written on their cards. The process is followed for the second and third categories. 
45.  Once the sub-categories have been defined and a general agreement reached on the 
ranking, the names of the ranked households are written on the WR-1 format, with the first 
category at the top and the third category at the bottom. This format is then presented in 
the plenary session for wider discussion and consensus. Once the consensus is reached on 
the ranking, then the other columns in the format are filled. This allows for instant 
awareness raising, e.g. participants can see which categories are doing what. From which 
categories are the migrants? Who has accessed which activity from donors? How many are 
really the poorest? Where lie the female headed-households? Etc. After the completion of 
the wealth ranking exercise, a summary table is also produced. 
46.  The facilitator concludes by saying that this wealth ranking is not 100% perfect, but it 
is generally 85-90% good. And that the number of households in the third category should 
decrease in the future, and this will be a major sign of development taking place in the 
village. The facilitator adds that the community, the PUU, the PMU will have a list of this 
wealth-ranking list and will be used for monitoring and impact assessment of the Project 
activities as well as those of the community/PUU. Other organizations working with the 
community/PUU can also use wealth ranking information. 
Draft - August 2021 
17 
3.  IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 
47.  CASP+ will be executed by the Ministry of Agriculture as Lead Implementing Agency, 
with support in execution by three distinct entities and service providers. These include: the 
State Enterprise “Project Management Unit” Livestock and Pasture Development (SEPMU 
LPD); the Committee on Environment Protection (CEP); and the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the UN (FAO). IFAD will sign a Grant and Loan Agreement with the GCF and 
institution specific agreements will be signed between IFAD and CEP, IFAD and MoA, and 
IFAD and FAO. These will specify the role and responsibility of each and their contribution to 
the project. 
3.1.  Project governance  
48.  A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be constituted at the national level. The 
PSC will have the overall responsibility for providing strategic and policy guidance to ensure 
that the Project objectives are achieved. Its members will include: the Committee for 
Environmental Protection, the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), the Ministry of Energy and 
Water Resources (MoEWR), the Pasture Meliorative Trust (PMT), the Food Security 
Committee, the State Forest Agency (SFA), the Committee on Land Management and 
Geodesy (CLMG), the Tajik Academy of Agricultural Sciences (TAAS), the Agency for Land 
Reclamation and Irrigation (ALRI),  State Agency for Hydrometeorology, State Enterprise for 
Animal Breeding and Artificial Insemination, Committee on Civil Defence and Disaster Risk 
Reduction and representatives from Civil Society Organizations. Development partners 
committed to climate-adaptive strategies and mitigation will participate as observers. The 
PSC will also coordinate with the Coordinating Council on the Green Climate Fund to assess 
how to strengthen and build on the on-going GCF investments in the country. 
49.  Development Coordination Council (DCC): With an overall objective to strengthen 
aid effectiveness in Tajikistan, the Development Coordination Council (DCC) was established 
to facilitate information exchange and collaboration within the development community, as 
well as foster dialogue on shared priorities with the Government of Tajikistan. The Chair of 
the DCC serves as the spokesperson for development partners at formal meetings with the 
government and is the official point of contact on general coordination matters. The heads 
(or in their absence, deputies) of 30 bilateral, multilateral and UN agencies comprise the 
Council. The DCC functions as development partners’ coordination mechanism with the GoT 
in support of the National Development Strategy 2016-2030 and the Mid-term development 
Strategy 2021-2025. Where required IFAD will collaborate with them for enhancing and 
strengthening the DCC’s role in policy advocacy and reform.  
50.  Supervision functions. The International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD) is 
the Accredited Entity for the CASP+ project. It is also co-financing the project together with 
GCF and FAO.  IFAD will supervise the execution of CASP+ with regular supervision and 
implementation support missions. The Fund will ensure the quality of the project 
deliverables, undertake procurement reviews and ensure fiduciary risk management, assess 
project performance and undertake value for money analysis. IFAD will apply its 
georeferenced protocol to monitor investment progress and impact. 
IFAD will manage the funds from GCF, and will disburse the funds quarterly in advance 
51. 
against agreed work plans, to designated accounts. Regular progress reports will be 
provided by IFAD to GCF to keep it informed of project performance including the physical 
achievements and financial aspects.  
Draft - August 2021 
18 
IFAD will undertake regular supervision of the project and commission evaluation 
52. 
reports based on the plan indicated (see Annex to Chapter 6). IFAD will supervise the 
execution of CASP+ with regular supervision and implementation support missions. The 
Fund will ensure the quality of the project deliverables, adherence to environmental, climate 
and social safeguards, undertake procurement reviews and ensure fiduciary risk 
management, assess project performance and undertake value for money analysis. IFAD 
will apply its georeferenced protocol to monitor investment progress and impact. 
Figure 3. CASP+ Implementation arrangements and funds flow 
3.2. 
Implementing agencies 
53.  State Enterprise “Project Management Unit” Livestock and Pasture 
Development (SEPMU LPD). The Unit was established in 2012 within the Ministry of 
Agriculture to support the implementation of investment projects in the agriculture sector. 
The Unit has been managing IFAD-financed investment projects valued at USD 91.6 million. 
The SEPMU LPD has successfully implemented LPDP-I and KLSP, and is implementing LPDP-
II and CASP. It has solid experience in rural areas where the population face challenges 
similar to those of CASP+ target groups. It has a team of 33 specialists, covering a wide 
range of expertise in project management, financial, procurement functions as well as 
technical expertise in pasture, animal husbandry and health,  agriculture, climate change 
adaptation, community mobilization, gender and social inclusion. It has technical experts 
and civil engineers, business development, GIS and M&E specialists. Between its central 
office in Dushanbe and its regional office in Kulob, the SEPMU will manage the execution of 
CASP+ interventions in all selected districts. It will also establish a small office for the 
implementation of project activities in Sugd and the RSS. 
54.  Committee on Environmental Protection – Project Implementation Group 
(CEP-PIG) was established in 2008 and is responsible for control of the use of natural 
resources, protection of land, minerals, forests, water and other resources, and also 
coordinates activities on environmental protection among the government agencies. In 
Tajikistan, CEP is the National Designated Authority (NDA) for managing GCF related 
projects since 2014. As the NDA, it coordinates project implementation, engages potential 
and current Accredited Entities, provides strategic oversight for GCF supported projects to 
Draft - August 2021 
19 
ensure alignment with national polices, convenes various stakeholders (public, private, civil 
society, etc.). Through its central administration and permanent staff in each district as well 
as at the regional level, CEP will guide the national and decentralized dialogues to enhance 
climate-sensitivity of policy, regulatory and investment frameworks. CEP will also play a key 
coordinating role in providing technical assistance for climate vulnerability diagnostic 
analysis at the district level and in screening community action plans from the climate 
resilience perspective and direct the specific agencies reporting to it and the district level 
agencies to assist communities in implementing the plans.     
55.  The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) has long and extensive experience 
in the country. Cooperation between Tajikistan and FAO has been ongoing since the country 
joined the Organization in 1995. FAO assistance has evolved from providing emergency 
assistance to deal with locust attacks to a more comprehensive approach to build a 
sustainable and competitive agriculture sector, including improved food security and 
nutrition, and resilience to climate change. Currently FAO is engaged with CEP on the 
Readiness Programme, including the update of the NDC and other climate change focused 
projects. The FAO Regional Office for Central Asia is currently supervising and executing a 
large climate finance portfolio, including GCF-funded projects in Kyrgyzstan (“Carbon-
sequestration through climate investment in Forests and Rangelands - CS-FOR”, USD 
49.9m) and Armenia (“Forest resilience of Armenia, enhancing adaptation and rural green 
growth via mitigation”, USD 18.7m). FAO’s specific role in the project will be to provide 
assistance in policy refinement and in implementing Farmer Field schools (FFS) based on the 
methodology it has developed and implemented in a large number of countries.   
56.  District Governments and Jamoats at the village level are expected to play an 
important role in coordination and helping to raise awareness about the project among key 
stakeholders and helping to incorporate climate vulnerability assessments in local 
development planning based on district diagnostics. The project will procure the services of 
local NGOs, service providers and partner agencies in the implementation of the project on 
the ground. The inclusion and engagement of the private sector will be encouraged to 
ensure that the project puts in place market based solutions and productive alliances that 
can ensure the sustainability of the project investments. 
SEPMU 
•  Co-chair to PSC 
• 
• 
Secretariat to the PSC 
Facilitation and 
coordination of community 
investment (C2) and 
livelihoods diversification 
(C3), and for selected 
policy / TA in livestock 
sector (C1).  
•  Responsible to achieve 
agreed project results.  
For agreed activities under 
SEPMU execution:  
• 
• 
• 
Preparing own 
portion of AWP&B 
and M&E 
Procurement 
functions 
CEP-PIG 
•  Co-chair to PSC 
Facilitation and 
• 
coordination of activities 
related to Climate change, 
climate finance, policy and 
reg framework, knowledge 
and awareness (C1), CC 
district diagnostics (C2) 
and forestry investments 
(C2).  
•  Responsible to achieve 
agreed activities and sub-
activities’ results  
For agreed activities under 
CEP execution:  
• 
• 
• 
Submitting reports 
to SEPMU 
Preparing and 
submit to SEPMU 
relevant AWP&B 
• 
• 
FAO-TJ 
Participate in the PSC 
Facilitation and 
coordination of farmers 
fields school activities, 
training and support to 
private veterinaries (C3), 
and selected TA for 
climate finance (C1). 
•  Responsible to achieve 
agreed activities and sub-
activities’ results.  
For agreed activities under 
FAO-TJ  execution:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
Submitting reports 
to SEPMU 
Preparing and 
submit to SEPMU 
relevant AWP&B 
Procurement 
functions 
Draft - August 2021 
20 
• 
• 
Procurement 
functions 
Financial 
Management 
functions (including 
for Audit) 
•  Monitoring and 
• 
Evaluation functions 
Prepare and submit 
Monitoring / 
progress report 
• 
Financial 
Management 
functions (including 
for Audit) 
•  Monitoring and 
• 
Evaluation functions 
Prepare and submit 
Monitoring / 
progress report 
• 
• 
Financial 
Management 
functions 
Prepare and submit 
Monitoring / 
progress report 
• 
For the overall project:  
•  Consolidate and 
submit AWP&B with 
inputs from each 
Executing Entity  
Approvals & 
Validation 
• 
•  Consolidate and 
submit overall 
project M&E reports 
Audit 
Evaluations & Third 
Party Surveys 
• 
• 
- 
Each Executing Entity (EE) will prepare a AWP&B and M&E progress reports 
according to the agreed activities under its responsibility.  
-  Reports and AWP&B will be structured by activity, allowing full accountability to the EEs.  
- 
SEPMU will be responsible to gather the inputs from the various executing entities 
3.3. 
Institutional synergies  
57.  There are several agencies at the national level which are also expected to play a 
supportive role in coordinating project activities and enhancing project impact.  The 
Hydrometeorological Agency of Tajikistan (Hydromet) reports to CEP and is the lead 
agency for climate change. It is responsible for leading the preparation of national 
communications to the UNFCCC in coordination with key ministries and agencies as well as 
the preparation of GHG inventories. In addition, Hydromet is the government agency 
providing climate and weather information and forecasting to the general public in 
Tajikistan. The Climate Change Center (CCC) is situated within Hydromet and is 
responsible for managing climate-related re-search and reporting related to adaptation and 
mitigation. The CCC is expected to support the district level climate vulnerability analysis 
and support district governments in incorporating climate vulnerabilities and risks in local 
level development planning and resource allocation for enhanced adaptation and mitigation. 
The National Biodiversity and Biosafety Centre (NBBC) in Tajikistan is responsible for 
biological diversity in the country and it will be a key stakeholder in helping to protect 
threatened species in the pastures and forests. 
58.  The Ministry of Economic Development and Trade (MEDT) plays an important 
role in climate-related governance and is responsible for state investment plans and 
coordination of the National Development Strategy. MEDT is responsible for overseeing the 
effective implementation of socioeconomic development priorities and has a role in 
developing sustainable strategies and coordinates planning activities at the subnational 
levels. It is also the co-executive body for the National Action Plan for Climate Change 
Mitigation and Adaptation. MEDT will be involved in the project in policy dialogues and 
identifying entry points for national and subnational planning processes for climate change 
adaptation and introducing elements for the development of green economy investments. 
The Committee on Emergency Situations and Civil Defense (COES) is also relevant to 
climate change adaptation planning and is engaged in early warning, disaster prevention, 
Draft - August 2021 
21 
and recovery. COES is directly authorized and responsible for management of emergency 
situations due to natural disasters. Its role in the project will be to help identify investments 
at the district level which can lead to disaster risk reduction caused as a result of climate 
risks. The Committee on Land Use, Geodesy and Cartography (COLUGC) is 
responsible for the formulation and implementation of policy in the area of state land 
management, land cadaster, land surveying, mapping, state registration of immovable 
property, and state control over land use and conservation. COLUGC has local units at the 
district level which coordinate spatial planning in Tajikistan, making this agency among the 
most powerful and influential at the local level, as they distribute/lease land for all purposes 
(e.g. construction, agriculture). COLUGC is expected to play a key role at subnational levels 
in incorporating climate change adaptation considerations into land management and spatial 
planning at the district and village level.  
59.  Civil society organizations and community-based organizations will play a key role in 
the mobilization of the communities through the well tested Village organization approach 
and through them identify climate sensitive community action plans. The NGO will mobilise 
communities into Village Organizations, Pasture User Unions, Pasture User Associations, 
Joint Forest Management Groups or Common Interest Groups as required for implementing 
local plans. Other relevant public institutions will be engaged as service providers and at the 
same time as beneficiaries of CASP+ capacity strengthening activities. Private sector players 
who are engaged in the value chains identified for investments will be invited in policy 
dialogues and specific platforms for their feedback.  
Draft - August 2021 
22 
4.  COMPONENTS DESCRIPTION  
60.  The project is designed to have three components which will be implemented at 
various tiers in the country; at the national level with the public sector institutions, at the 
community level to build community resilience with respect to common property resources 
and at the group and household level to strengthen and diversify livelihoods and access 
markets. The three components include: (1) Strengthening public sector capacity for 
transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources; (2) Investments in 
community capacity for adaption and resilience to climate change; and (3) Strengthening 
livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market based approaches.  
Draft - August 2021 
23 
4.1.  Component 1: Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative 
climate-resilient management of natural resources 
61.  Tajikistan has achieved important progress in developing a strategic vision for some of 
its development priorities such as water and disaster management. However, the integration 
of a climate change perspective in the agriculture sector and in the management of natural 
resources particularly pastures, forests, livestock is not very strong. There is limited 
technical capacity and lack of tools for evidence-based planning, management and 
evaluation of natural resources and the impact of climate change.  This leads to fragmented 
governance of natural resources and limits the opportunities and potential for sustainable 
development for rural livelihoods. This component is designed to address some of these 
issues and includes two specific outputs focused on capacity development and improving the 
policy environment. 
4.1.1. 
Outputs  
Output 1.1: Capacities of relevant national institutions for climate-
resilient natural resource management strengthened.   
62.  National capacities to plan, manage and monitor the natural resource base at central 
and at lower administrative tiers will be strengthened with a focus on forests and pastures. 
The capacity of the State Forestry Agency (SFA) will be strengthened.  A forestry 
curriculum recently developed for Tajikistan with the assistance of GIZ will be rolled out to 
the 14 project Leskhozi14. The Pasture Meliorative Trust (PMT) and a range of 
community-based institutions dealing with pasture management such as the Pasture User 
Unions (PUUs), Pasture User Associations (PUAs) and Pasture Committees (PCs), 
which entails among others formulating, updating and monitoring of Pasture Management 
Plans. Operational capacities of both PMT headquarters and its decentralized office in 
Khatlon region will be enhanced.  
63.  Mapping and monitoring of natural resources is currently only partially 
undertaken and needs to be strengthened to allow proper decision making on ecosystem 
services management. It is therefore important to introduce a system that combines remote 
and participatory natural resources monitoring and management.   In addition, the project 
will pilot test an innovative approach to pasture monitoring. This will entail procuring an 
experienced international service provider (SP) that will install hives on a pilot area of 3.500 
ha and undertake scientific analysis of the pollen collected by the bees, which can be utilized 
as bio-indicators. This analysis enables the recording of precise qualitative and quantitative 
data on the type and quantity of plant species present in the area, will lead to a clear 
identification of the impacts and effects of the measures applied by the initiative and allow a 
more diversified utilization of the pastures. Local beekeepers trained on the monitoring 
techniques by the SP will be responsible for the maintenance of the hives throughout the 
initiative. Geobotany experts will contribute to ground-truthing of the data elaborated.  In 
addition to the pilot area, the Geobotany experts will assist with ground truthing of Earth 
Observation data. The project will build strong linkages between the Agency for Land 
Management, Geodesy and Cartography and with other agencies responsible for preventing 
further land degradation to establish a flow of information on land degradation, both in map 
14 Out of the 21 target districts 12 have Leskhoz. And 2 of the districts have 2 Leskhoz each thus a total of 4 Leskho.. 
Draft - August 2021 
24 
and national summary form, updated annually. This will be distributed as a map service 
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_Map_Service), in a national mapping portal. By 
introducing participatory monitoring techniques in combination with low-cost remote 
sensing, the project will put in place the basis of a system by which annual reporting can be 
institutionalized. 
64.  Given the importance of the livestock sector in the country, it is critical to enhance the 
technical capacities of national livestock institutions to ensure efficient provision of public 
animal health and production services to smallholder farmers through partnership between 
public and private institutions. This is a critical condition for the achievement of a gradual 
transformation of production systems and reduction of herd size, providing pastoralists with 
enhanced confidence that their livestock capital will not be eroded by preventable mortality 
and that increased productivity will more than compensate for a smaller herd. The National 
Veterinary Authority (NVA) will be provided technical assistance and equipment to enhance 
its capacity for outreach to small holder farmers and the State Enterprise for Animal 
Breeding and Artificial Insemination (SEABAI) will be strengthened to provide AI services to 
smallholders for increasing animal productivity and reducing animal morbidity and mortality. 
65.  The project will build the capacity of research and academic institutions through 
integrating climate change in the curricula. With a view to build the future capacity of 
decision-makers and technical specialists on understanding and planning for climate risks. 
The Tajik Agrarian University, Tajik Academy of Agricultural Science and the Public 
Administration Academy will be assisted in developing education curricula and in the review 
of existing curricula of technical specialists for training of climate change specialists as well 
as for civil servants who are expected to be in key decision-making and planning positions 
in the Government. Both young men and women from the project area will be encouraged 
to enrol for a Master’s degree in a climate related specialization through scholarships 
provided by CASP+ at one of the selected Universities. To encourage the generation of 
knowledge and the practical application of innovations, the project will encourage research 
institutions to produce evidence on effective approaches to NRM through a call for 
proposals. The private sector will also be invited to present proposals for the production of 
technical innovations that can help in climate adaptation which can then be disseminated 
through the market and facilitate the adoption of climate adaptation technologies and 
practices. 
Output 1.2: Enabling environment for climate adaptive, inclusive and 
integrated management of pasture, forestry and livestock 
resources is enhanced  
66.  CEP has the mandate for enhancing the enabling environment for addressing climate 
risks and is already engaged with the preparatory work for the National Adaptation Plan 
(NAP) readiness. To facilitate coordination among the main stakeholders, the project will 
organize regular workshops to facilitate interaction and enhance the mainstreaming of 
climate adaptive natural resource management practices. Support will be provided to 
existing thematic platforms such as the Pasture Working Group and the National River Basin 
Organization to better understand the changing trends and prepare to deal with growing 
risks.  These activities are expected to enhance coordination among sector agencies and 
encourage synergies between the various investments and approaches.  
67.  CASP+ has chosen high pay off areas for policy engagement from the climate 
perspective and will focus on specific policy aspects related to animal husbandry and animal 
health, pasture management, implications of promoting the Green Economy on the existing 
system of incentives and regulation and any lessons derived from the experience of joint 
Draft - August 2021 
25 
forestry management and monitoring of pastures. The current breeding strategy (2018-
2022) requires review in particular to address issues related to conservation of indigenous 
genetic resources, and introduction of exotic breeds, that need to be navigated in the 
context of climate change and provide clear guidelines to ensure that crossbreeding of local 
cattle with exotic breeds do not lead to maladaptation, and that exotic breeds introduced in 
smallholder systems show climate change resilience traits. While the 2019 version of the 
pasture law addresses most of the gaps of the previous version (2013) related to rights of 
PUUs in the scope of the secondary user’s lease agreements, it does not address aspects 
related to control of livestock inventories. One of the possible entry point to address this 
issue from a policy and regulatory point of view would be to include in the law, provisions to 
enable PUUs to establish systems (grazing permits, quotas) that ensure that carrying 
capacities are observed and that stock accumulation is penalized. If these types of 
measures were framed in the Pasture Law and applied by all PUUs, the impact on animal 
inventories would be expected to be substantial. The project will therefore support the 
revision of the Pasture Law to ensure that such measures are incorporated in a revised 
version, as envisaged under the National Agriculture Investment Plan (NAIP). 
68.  Given the importance of the livestock sector for rural livelihoods and the concerns 
regarding its contribution to CO2, this sector has been selected for special focus by the 
project. CASP+ will improve the regulatory frameworks for livestock through technical 
assistance by the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE) and by a review of the 
breeding strategy to assess the various options of conserving indigenous genetic resources, 
introduction of exotic breeds and cross-breeding  in the context of climate change15. The 
project will provide technical assistance by helping decision-makers understand how farming 
practices and production systems contribute to emissions at the farm level and along the 
production value chain and how to enhance climate resilience through climate-smart 
agriculture and biodiversity preservation. The project will provide assistance in the use of 
measuring and analysis tools such as the EX-Ante Carbon Balance Tool (EX-ACT) for the 
Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU) sector, the Biodiversity Integrated 
Assessment and Computational Tool (B-Intact) which increase accuracy of measuring 
the ecological value and biodiversity sensitivity of project sites and the Global Livestock 
Environmental Assessment Model (GLEAM). 
69.  The Ministry for Economic Development and Trade (MEDT) and Ministry of Finance 
(MoF) are  especially committed to ensuring that the pathways that they encourage are 
based on sustainable principles that encourage the growth of low-emissions pathways 
incorporating the principles of a “Green Economy.  However, there is limited understanding 
of how to operationalize the concept of a Green Economy adapted and well suited to 
Tajikistan’s socio-economic context and history, its unique geographic attributes and asset 
base. The MEDT and MoF have therefore asked for assistance in undertaking a 
comprehensive analyses of the  country from this perspective and draft a concept note for 
Tajikistan that identifies a road map for implementing and propagating this approach for 
national development planning and green growth and providing assisting in management of 
public projects promoting paradigm shifts.   
4.1.2. 
Description of activities 
15 This policy review work will build on lessons from the field, since the project also plans in parallel to support breed improvement 
through the introduction of exotic hardy breeds that will improve both milk and beef productivity, without affecting resilience to 
climate shocks and mobility. 
Draft - August 2021 
26 
Activity 1.1.1: Capacity Development of public institutions on climate 
resilient ecosystem management 
70.  Under this activity the project will support capacities of public institutions in charge of 
Natural Resource Management (forest, pasture) to streamline climate sensitive, 
participatory and gender inclusive ecosystem management approaches such as landscape 
approach, integrated watershed management, joint forest management, community-based 
pasture management.  
Sub activity 1.1.1.1. Strengthen capacities of Pasture Meliorative Trust to roll out Pasture 
Law at community level and provide technical assistance to PUUs, PUAs and PCs:  
71.  The Pasture Meliorative Trust is the institution in charge of coordinating the 
implementation of the Pasture Law and the “Pasture Development programme for 
Tajikistan”. This mandate includes in particular the roll out of community-based Pasture 
Governance mechanisms (PUUs, PUAs, and PCs), and the training and technical 
backstopping to these institutions. Key aspects of the technical support provided by PMT to 
PUUs include the formulation, the updating and the monitoring of Pasture Management 
Plans. However, the PMT is currently not in position to fulfil this role and the main source of 
support for PUUs, PUAs and PCs are so far projects. It is of foremost importance, to ensure 
the sustainability of the system, that this role is entirely handed over to PMT (Therefore, 
under component 2, monitoring of PUUs will be entirely delegated to PMT, which was not the 
case under previous IFAD funded projects where this was done by the PMU) 
72.  The support will comprise both technical and logistical assistance in order to enable 
PMT to deliver services as per its mandate reach out beneficiary communities in the project 
area. It will aim ate reinforcing the operational capacities of both PMT headquarters, and its 
decentralized office in Khatlon region. 
73.  Technical assistance will include secondment of staff (recruitment and secondment of 
two pasture specialist during 5 years – 1 based at PMT headquarters, one in the Kulob 
Regional Office). 
74.  Logistical support will include the refurbishment and equipment of the Kulob regional 
office, and the provision of 2 vehicles for field missions. 
75.  The focus on the Kulob (Khatlon) regional office is justified by the project 
concentration of activities in Khatlon (16 out of 21 Districts), as well as by the high 
concentration of livestock (5.5 M Sheep Units representing 74 % of the total ruminants’ 
population in the project area) and presence of large pasture areas. 
Sub activity 1.1.1.2. Update the technical skills of the Forestry Department (CEP) 
76.  A forestry curriculum (of 280 teaching hours) recently developed for Tajikistan with 
the assistance of GIZ will be further rolled out to the 14 project Leskhozi. The course 
structure presents an equilibrated mix of theoretical and practical work and represents a 
strong platform for Youth interested to working in sustainable land management and forest 
restoration. An outline of the modules is provided in the Annex. 
Draft - August 2021 
27 
Activity 1.1.2:  Introduce combined remote and participatory Natural 
Resources monitoring and management 
77.  Mapping and monitoring of natural resources including forests, pasture and protected 
areas is currently only partially ensured and needs to be strengthened to allow proper 
decision making on ecosystem services management. The project will in this regard support 
the completion of the mapping of natural resources, above all the finalization of the pasture 
land mapping, and the establishment of a combined remote and participatory monitoring 
system. 
78.  The activities will build strong linkages between the Agency for Land Management, 
Geodesy and Cartography of the Republic of Tajikistan and those who are responsible for 
preventing further land degradation (Committee on Environmental Protection), and establish 
a flow of information through regular updates. The relevant state agencies have the 
mandate to report on the status of the environment for national and international purposes 
(e.g. SDG,s, LDN targets). By introducing participatory monitoring techniques (e.g. PRAGA 
from IUCN, PICSA from University of Reading) in combination with low cost Remote Sensing 
the project will establish, via Memorandum of Understanding, the method by which annual 
reporting may be institutionalized.  
Sub-activity 1.1.2.1. Training on remote and participatory NRM 
79.  Two international experts will carry out simultaneously and in synergy training and 
ToTs to all governmental agencies of competence. One expert is concentrating on GIS tools 
and the other on participatory assessment and analysis of remote sensing data. The trainers 
will elaborate in collaboration with each other a manual to follow for NRM and build up the 
data portal to be utilized in 1.1.2.2. This data portal will be based on open-source software 
and free international datasets – for reducing operational costs and ensure sustainability 
and will be linked to certain tools which have been applied in similar context for climate 
sensitive monitoring and decision making e.g. Earth Map, Collect Earth. 
Sub-activity 1.1.2.2. Field testing of NRM approaches  
80.  Within the activity CEP will create a NRM unit, led by a National GIS specialist (trained 
by the experts of 1.1.2.1). The unit will represent the point of reference for everything 
related to Remote Sensing within the CASP+ project, enhance activities for data retrieval 
from the local community and will become the national source and reference point on land 
degradation, both in map and national summary form. At the core of the unit is the Data 
portal created by the International GIS specialist in 1.1.2.1 and updated and maintained by 
the National GIS Specialist. Distribution of the information to stakeholders will take place 
through Web Map Service. 
81.  The participatory mechanisms for NRM monitoring will be linked to the evidence-based 
district level climate and natural resources diagnostic and monitoring in component 2 and 
will involve pasture users and Leshkhoz. To increase precision, satellite images will be 
purchased.  
In addition, the project will pilot test an innovative approach to pasture monitoring. 
82. 
This will entail using hives on a pilot area of 3.500 ha and undertaking scientific analysis of 
the pollen collected by the bees, which can be utilized as bioindicators. This analysis enables 
the recording of precise qualitative and quantitative data on the type and number of plant 
species present in the area. The analysis enables the project to clearly identify the impacts 
Draft - August 2021 
28 
and effects of the measures applied. Geobotany experts will contribute to ground-truthing of 
the data elaborated and of the aforementioned data portal at the NRM unit. 
Activity 1.1.3: Enhance technical capacities of national livestock 
institutions to ensure efficient provision of public animal 
health and production services to smallholder farmers 
through efficient partnership between public and private 
institutions. 
83.  Provision of animal health and breeding services is an important aspect of the Theory 
of Change of the Project to support transformation of livestock production systems and 
reduction of animal inventories. The public institutions in charge of delivering these public 
good services will be capacitated to enable them to fulfill their mandate and reach out small 
holder farmers who are often left out. 
Sub-activity 1.1.3.1. Step up veterinary public health services of the National Veterinary 
Authority through provision of technical assistance and equipment:  
84.  Given the importance of the livestock sector in the country, it is critical to enhance the 
technical capacities of national livestock institutions to ensure efficient provision of 
veterinary public health and production services to smallholder farmers through a 
partnership between public and private institutions. The main activities under this sub-
activity are improving the organizational structure of the state veterinary management 
under the OIE recommendations, strengthening the veterinary surveillance system, 
technical assistance in the establishment of the veterinary public health system.  
85.  CASP+ will provide support to the Food Security committee (FSC) which has been 
designated by the Government as a National Veterinary Authority, to enable them to provide 
veterinary public health services and other its duties. To increase the capacity of the FSC, it 
is planned to recruit two international experts, one on state veterinary management (Y2) 
and the other one on veterinary surveillance (Y2; Y4). Technical assistance will also include 
the secondment of a national specialist on Epidemiology and One Health approach for the 
FSC national office for 7 years. The CASP+ technical assistance combined with the provision 
of a mini truck-refrigerator (for the transportation of vaccines to maintain the “Cold Chain”) 
and a disinfection machine (for disinfection activities) as well as with the participation of 
FSC’s staff in training, exchange visits organized by OIE, FAO, and other relevant 
international organizations. For instance, participation in the IHR-PVS National Bridging 
Workshops (NBW) will be a preferable option. An NBW is a three-day event that enables the 
animal health and the human health sectors in countries to explore overlapping areas and 
develop, where relevant, appropriate bridges to facilitate coordination.  
Sub-activity 1.1.3.2. Improve the outreach of breeding services provided by State 
Enterprise for Animal Breeding and Artificial Insemination to areas and communities 
targeted by the Project: 
86.  The State Enterprise for Animal Breeding and Artificial Insemination is the national 
institution mandated to provide breeding services throughout the country, including through 
Artificial Insemination and distribution of improved breeding stock. However, considering its 
limited resources, these services are so far mostly benefitting to dekhan farmers and 
agricultural enterprises, but hardly reach the household farmers located in remote areas.  
Draft - August 2021 
29 
87.  The project will support the Kulob regional Center through provision of additional 
equipment (laboratory equipment for semen production, AI kits for AI techs, liquid nitrogen 
production machine), in order to enable the State Enterprise to implement the large-scale 
insemination campaign envisaged under Component 3. The focus on Khatlon region is 
justified by the fact that 41% of the total adult cows are concentrated in this region, by the 
lower outreach of AI services in this region compared to Sughd and RRS, and by the 
inadequate operationality of the Kulob center (no operational laboratory, no liquid nitrogen 
production facility, all the liquid nitrogen needed in the region having to be transported from 
Dushanbe). 
88.  The SEABAI is also in charge of developing the strategic framework for breeding and 
AI and will be supported in updating the breeding strategy under activity 1.2.2. 
Activity 1.1.4: Build capacities of research and academia institutions 
on climate resilient ecosystem management. 
89.  Under this activity, the project will support National and Research Institutions and 
academia to streamline Climate Change and Ecosystem management approaches in their 
training curricula and research programmes: 
Sub-activity 1.1.4.1. Integrate climate change issues in university and training institutions 
curricula:  
90.  Training of pasture and livestock specialists is currently based on conventional 
curricula that do not provide any specific knowledge and skills on climate change related 
issues. However, having technical specialists trained on these aspects appears as a 
necessary condition to enable the country to address climate related challenges at policy 
level, but also at grassroots level in extension for instance. The main Climate change issues 
related to livestock include control of climate sensitive diseases, climate resilient fodder and 
feed production, resistance of various species and breeds to climate hazards, and of course 
carbon emissions and sequestration.  
91.  As per request of the Government, the project will provide technical assistance to Tajik 
Agrarian University, Tajik Academy of Agricultural Science to review of existing post 
graduate curricula for pasture specialist, zootechnicians and veterinarians, to streamline 
ecosystem management and climate change aspects in the tuition programs. 
92.  On pasture specifically, the project will support TAU to support the development of 
new master’s curriculum that the University intends to initiate, to complement the existing 
Bachelor’s programme on Pasture Management developed with the support of IFAD/LPDP. 
The project will provide technical expertise for the development of the master’s curriculum, 
but also financial support to cover the costs related to the international accreditation.  
93. 
In order to ensure that Climate change related issues are also addressed in training 
curricula of livestock technicians (diploma level), training of trainers providing teaching in 
these institutions will also be organized, based on the developed training module on CC. 
94.  This training will be organized by the project, and trainers will be provided by TAU. 15 
to 20 participants will be selected among livestock specialist providing technical teaching in 
diploma level technical training institutions at National level or in one of the three regions 
covered by the project.  
Draft - August 2021 
30 
Sub-activity 1.1.4.2. Promote enrollment of male and female youth in training curricula on 
climate-resilient natural resources management 
95.  The project will support the enrollment of youth (including 50% females) originating 
from the project area, in the newly developed curriculum on climate change (supported 
under 1.2.1.1.). Scholarship will be provided to cover both the tuition fees, as well as 
accommodation and food costs, will be paid by the project. The scholarships will be 
introduced starting from year 3 for students from the project area. 
Sub-activity 1.1.4.3. Enable research institutes and the private sector to produce evidence 
on NRM and Climate Change for policy dialogue and climate sensitive technical innovations 
96.  The purpose of this sub activity will be to provide financial support to targeted 
research institutions active in the domain of agriculture and natural research management, 
namely Tajik Agrarian University and Tajik Academy of Agricultural Science to (i) develop 
climate sensitive technical innovations in the domain of livestock and pasture management, 
that will then be disseminated at community level in the scope of extension activities 
(demonstration plots and FFS under component 3), and to (ii) generate evidence and 
lessons learnt on climate smart practices for policy dialogue. 
97.  On technical innovations, the focus will be on adaptation, testing and comparison in 
Tajik conditions of (i) existing climate smart technologies such as climate resistant fodder 
crops (including fodder trees) species and varieties, (ii) climate resilient livestock species 
and breeds, (iii) testing of water saving technologies, (iv) alternative feed sources ( 
including industrial and crop by products), (v) carbon emission reduction and carbon 
sequestration technologies (biogas, alternative feed), (vi) innovative agricultural practices 
for fodder production integrated with other crops: intercropping, catch crops, agroforestry.  
In order to implement this sub-activity in a simple manner, the project will launch bi-
98. 
yearly calls for proposals and research projects that are in line with the project strategy 
(criteria to be developed in the PIM). Every two years, 2 research projects will be supported 
(6 in total) and their implementation should not exceed 3 years. 
99.  The maximum grant amount per research project will be USD 50,000 (40,000 USD in 
average). The grant will cover the cost of goods (inputs, equipment) and services, while the 
cost of scientific and technical follow up, evaluation, and documentation will be the 
contribution of the Research Institution. 
100.  A selection committee composed of (i) one representative of MoA (ii) one 
representative of CEP (ii) and three representatives of SEPMU (Project Coordinator, 
Livestock specialist, Pasture specialist) will assess the research proposals based on the 
following criteria: 
  Potential contribution of expected research outputs to provision of evidence for policy 
dialogue in the domains of pasture management, animal husbandry, NRM 
  Potential contribution of expected research outputs to provision of practical technical 
solutions  to  be  disseminated  top  farmers  through  demos  and  FFS,  and  that  will 
contribute  to  increase  climate  resilience  and  productivity  of  livestock  production 
systems 
  Value for money (cost per output)  
  Existing technologies, that have been successfully tested in other contexts, and that 
require only tests regarding their adaptation to the Tajik context 
101.  The research institutions will be encouraged to involve students in these research 
work. 
Draft - August 2021 
31 
102.  The research institutions will also be encouraged to strengthen the partnerships and 
linkages with extension (in particular the State Enterprise for Capacity development), 
through the activity 3.2.3. (Support adoption of climate resilient innovative technologies) 
that will support dissemination of technical innovations from research to grassroots level, 
through demonstration and extension. This is currently one major weak link of the research-
extension model in the Country. 
Output  1.2:  Enabling  environment  for  climate  adaptive,  inclusive  and  integrated 
management of pasture, forestry and livestock resources is enhanced 
103.  Relevant upgrades in evidence-based policy and regulatory framework improvements 
for a climate resilient planning will be introduced, in particular related to animal husbandry 
and health and green economy. Inclusive policy dialogue will accompany the process, and 
will complement with a specific angel on agriculture adaptation to climate change the 
ongoing efforts such as GCF-funded Readiness and NAP.  
Activity 1.2.1: Promote an inclusive and integrated policy dialogue 
104.  This activity provides support to existing thematic Platforms (e.g. Pasture Working 
Group, National River Basin Organization, National Platform for climate change adaptation, 
Donor Coordination Council), ensures a continuous update of all institutional stakeholders 
through e.g. policy briefs and newsletters, and also provides advocacy and lobbying 
opportunities for the adoption and enforcement of integrated policy measures. The dialogue 
is supported by International Experts needed for stocktaking and for the integration of 
policy aspects of complementary initiatives. Further international experts will be mobilized 
to provide technical assistance facilitating the use of decision making/policy tools on climate 
change and livestock (e.g. EXACT, B-INTACT, GLEAM, LSPIT)  
Sub-activity 1.2.1.1. Stock taking of policy development and mainstreaming of Climate 
Adaptive agricultural practices among institutions 
105.  Two international experts are responsible for the stock-taking process: One for Gender 
and climate mainstreaming in background studies and another International expert is 
responsible for stock taking and for the integration of the policy context in the project, in 
particular from the NDC enhancement process, the GCF Readiness projects and the NAP 
process. In the process will be also integrated the lessons learned and recommendations 
from component 2 and 3 of the CASP+ and hence the experience related to local 
Community actions plans and private sector involvement.  
Sub-activity 1.2.1.2. Training on in the utilization of policy support tools 
106.  International experts will carry out trainings on the following 4 tools tools that could 
play a significant role in decision making and in guiding policies related to Natural resource 
management, pasture management and livestock: 
-  GLEAM-i  is  an  open,  user-friendly  and  livestock  specific  tool  designed  to  support 
governments, project planners, producers, industry and civil society organizations to 
calculate  carbon  emissions  using  Tier  2  methods.  GLEAM-i  can  be  used  in  the 
Draft - August 2021 
32 
preparation  of  national  inventories  and  in  ex-ante  project  evaluation  for  the 
assessment  of  technical  improvements  in  animal  husbandry,  feed  and  manure 
management.  GLEAM-i allows the direct  comparison between Baseline and Scenario 
conditions. GLEAM-i has been run at design stage (ex-ante) and should be run again 
at  inception  stage  when  targeted  villages  (including  animal  population  and  pasture 
size) will be known precisely to fine tune the baseline situation. It should be run again 
at mid-term and completion stage based on the outcome assessment outputs. Beyond 
the project scope, it would be of great interest for the Government to assess carbon 
emissions at national level in order to monitor the country achievement of NDCs and 
the potential impact of livestock and pasture policy measures on NDCs. 
-  LSIPT (Livestock Sector Investment Policy Toolkit): LSIPT is aimed at assisting 
government  and  development  partners  to:  (i)  evaluate  and  estimate  actual  and 
potential  contributions  of  livestock  to  economic  growth,  poverty  reduction,  food 
security  and  nutrition,  and  the  reduction  of  GHG  emissions;(ii)  conduct  prospective 
analysis to optimize synergies and manage trade-offs between these areas; and (iii) 
improve  policy  setting  and  investment  decisions.  LSIPT  can  be  used  to  develop 
Livestock  Master  Plans  or  more  simply  to  cost  and  evaluate  the  impact  of  policy 
measures. 
-  Ex-Ante Carbon-balance Tool | EX-ACT  is a free open source accounting tool for 
the impact on Climate Change/GHG emissions of agricultural, forestry, and other land-
use (AFOLU) investments and policies  
-  Biodiversity Integrated Assessment and Computation Tool | B-INTACT makes 
use  of  various  geo-referenced  maps  and  tools  to  increase  accuracy  and  account  for 
the ecological value and biodiversity sensitivity of project sites. 
107.  To achieve capacity development in this sub-activity, the project will recruit one 
consultant for livestock related tools (GLEAM-I and LSIPT) and one consultant for the 
trainings on EX-ACT and B-INTACT. 
108.  The Expert on livestock related tools provides training of selected staff of CEP, PMT, 
TAU, TAAS, and PMU on the utilization of the revised version (online) of the Livestock sector 
and Policy Toolkit. Two 10 days training sessions will be organized by CEP and PMU during 
Year 2 and year 4, with the same participants. The first 10 days training session will aim at 
enabling the participants to acquire the required skills to utilize LSIPT. Participants will be 
provided with some concrete examples of utilization of LSIPT, outputs and relevance for 
decision making (based on Ethiopia, Rwanda, India cases). They will then be taken through 
the different modules to understand the overall logic of the tool, the linkages between 
modules, and the functioning of each module. Practical simulation exercises based on 
existing data set will then be undertaken. During the period between the two training 
sessions, participants will collect the necessary data required to run the model at national 
level. The consultant will provide technical support to this remotely. During the second 
session, the participants will collectively run the LSIPT to model the National Livestock 
sector. This will be facilitated and technically supported by the consultant. At the end of the 
session, a stakeholder workshop with relevant decision makers will be organized to present 
the output of the model, including the investment scenarios that have emerged from the 
analysis. 
Sub-activity 1.2.1.3. Implementation of workshops for institutional networking 
Draft - August 2021 
33 
109.  Regular workshops involving all stakeholders will be held aiming at enhancing the 
mainstreaming of climate adaptive management practices of natural resources in all national 
institutions and in all thematic working groups. After each workshop 1 policy brief and 1 
newsletter will be developed and disseminated among stakeholders. In Y2 and Y4 the 
experts of 1.2.1.1. will participate and give technical presentations.  
Activity 1.2.2: Improve livestock related regulatory frameworks 
110.  Review and update pasture law and of animal health and breeding regulatory and 
strategic framework to ensure compliance with international guidelines and ensure 
streamlining of measures supporting climate resilience and environmental protection. 
Sub-activity 1.2.2.1. Improvement of the Pasture Law 
111.  A pasture policy and legislation expert (local or regional, with experience in both 
pasture management and legal aspects) will be contracted by the project in order to provide 
analysis of the current pasture Law and related regulatory texts, facilitate discussion 
between stakeholders, and propose improvements. 
112.  The 2019 version of pasture law addresses most of the gaps of the previous version 
(2013) related to rights of PUUs in the scope of the secondary users lease agreements. 
However, it does not address the sensitive and critical aspects related to control of livestock 
inventories. The main entry point to address this issue from a policy and regulatory point of 
view would be to include in the law, provisions to enable PUUs to establish systems (grazing 
permits, quotas) that ensure that carrying capacities are observed and that stock 
accumulation is penalized. If these types of measures were framed in the Pasture Law and 
applied by all PUUs, the impact on animal inventories would be expected to be substantial.  
113.  Two workshops on pasture policy and regulatory frameworks will be organized during 
the project duration. These workshops will gather both members of the existing Pasture 
Working Group, representatives of pasture users (selected among executives of the most 
active existing PUAs), and representatives of Local Governments (selected among District 
executives involved in existing and the most active PCs). 
114.  The workshops will be facilitated by the pasture expert. During the workshops, the 
lessons learned on pasture management and governance from LPDP I and II, CASP+ and 
other projects involved in the domain will be shared and analyzed. The shortcomings of the 
existing legal framework will be identified in a participatory manner, and institutional and 
legal solutions will be proposed. For those the proposed provisions and improvements to the 
current legal framework that are the subject of a consensus, the pasture & legal expert will 
be tasked to formulate draft legal texts that will be proposed for adoption. 
115.  It is expected that, by the end of the projects, legal provisions aimed at controlling 
livestock inventories and overgrazing, to be implemented at PUU level, could be integrated 
in the Law. 
Sub-activity 1.2.2.2. Technical assistance of the OIE:  
116.  To improve the veterinary legislation of the Republic of Tajikistan, it is recommended 
to use proven mechanisms and approaches. There is a special program to support national 
veterinary legislation, developed by the OIE, which has been successfully implemented in 
more than 60 countries around the world. The implementation of the program allows to 
Draft - August 2021 
34 
identify gaps, improve and maintain national legislation under chapter 3.4.OIE Terrestrial 
Animal Health Code. 
117.  The program consists of two stages. The first stage is the OIE mission to identify 
veterinary legislation. It aims to get a detailed picture of the current state of veterinary 
legislation in the country. During this mission, the OIE’s experts also assess the sufficiency 
of political will, the human and financial resources for undertaking the second stage aimed 
at supporting the country in correcting its deficiencies in veterinary legislation. 
118.  The project will support the organization of the OIE Veterinary Legislation 
Identification Mission (VLIM). OIE missions are usually organized at the official request of 
the delegate of the OIE member country. If the inviting country pays the OIE's membership 
fees, then all mission expenses are covered by the OIE, except for expenses related to 
travel and organization of meetings, round tables in the country. For these purposes, funds 
have been identified ($ 35 000). These funds can be used to pay membership fees if 
needed.  
Sub-activity 1.2.2.3. Improvement of veterinary legislation:  
119.  The project will take over and build on FAO work on policy formulation. The support 
will focus on the privatization of veterinary services, which is still incomplete and hampers 
the last-mile delivery of animal health services for smallholders. The improvement of the 
legislation will ensure that emerging global issues specified in the One Health approach 
(importance of Brucellosis, Echinococcosis, and rabies for public health), management of 
antimicrobial resistance, management of climate-sensitive diseases and animal welfare are 
well addressed in the primary as well as in the secondary legislation. 
120.  After organizing an OIE visit on veterinary legislation and identifying the main gaps in 
the national legislation, an international consultant's service will be a need to develop 
secondary legislation and assisting in the development of specific documents as a Code of 
Professional Conduct, a charter of the Veterinary Statutory Body and others. To this end, the 
project will hire an international consultant on veterinary legislation (Y2 and Y3), 15 days in 
each. The project will support the organization and holding of round tables, conferences to 
discuss the problems of veterinary legislation at the local and republican levels. A total of 21 
events are planned to be organized during the implementation of the project. 
Sub-activity 1.2.2.4. Review of the breeding strategy: 
121.  Under this output and activity, the only sub-activity that is directly related to animal 
husbandry is the support to the review of the breeding strategy. The current breeding 
strategy (2018-2022) will soon require to be updated and reviewed and requires review in 
particular to address issues related conservation of indigenous genetic resources, and 
introduction of exotic breeds, that need to be navigated in the context of climate change, in 
order not to affect negatively the resilience of animals to climate shocks. Given that the 
project will support crossbreeding and introduction of exotic breeds, it is of foremost 
importance to frame this intervention and provide clear guidelines to mitigate the risks 
associated with this transformation. 
122.  FAO has been involved in supporting the formulation of breeding strategies in various 
countries and has a clear comparative advantage on this topic. It will thus provide the 
required technical expertise. The project will also facilitate the organization of national 
consultations (2 consultations and 1 validation workshops) to ensure the inclusivity of the 
process. 
Draft - August 2021 
35 
Activity 1.2.3: Launch the basis for a Green Economy  
123.  The National Development Strategy 2030 highlighted the need to enhance the Green 
Economy Sector in Tajikistan for achieving long-term development goals of the country, 
especially in the agricultural sector, for ensuring food security, raising living standards and 
reducing poverty.  
Sub-activity 1.2.3.1. Develop the draft concept Green Economy 
124.  In collaboration with the Ministry for Economic Development and Trade (MEDT), the 
activity foresees the comprehensive analyses of the industry related (in particular 
community based agro-industry activities in line with the CASP+ approach), including 
legislation and international and national best practices in this area by international and 
national experts. A consultation workshop will support the finding process and the experts 
will present their analysis and recommendations in the form of a draft concept for the 
enhancement of the Green Economy at a validation workshop to all stakeholders.  
Sub-activity 1.2.3.2. Capacity Development of MEDT staff 
125.  Furthermore, it is foreseen to carry out capacity development events on Green 
Economy for national and sub-national civil servants and to organize a study tour to a 
partner country to promote and exchange of know-how and experiences in the sector.  
Sub-activity 1.2.3.3. Capacity Development of Ministry of Finance staff 
126.  The project will implement a Management Information System in order for the Ministry 
to be able to better monitor and analyse Green Investments. The procurement of the 
programming services includes also the installation on all relevant networks of the ministry 
and training on utilization among all stakeholders.  
4.1.3. 
Sequencing of activities in Component 1 
127.  In line with the roles and responsibilities and mandates, PMU, CEP and FAO will act as 
Executing Entities (EE). The implementation of the project will be carried out through 
service providers and when defining the implementation agreements PMU and CEP will be 
required chross-check and to provide inputs on the corresponding Terms of References.  
128.  Although the activities are sometimes linked to each other, they can all be carried out 
independently. The sequencing of the activities is described in the following steps (with an 
indication of timeframe of implementation in Table 1 and of the Responsibilities in Table 2).  
ToR and/or descriptions of the duties of the different experts are included in the Annex to 
Chapter 4.1. 
129.  Sub-activity 1.1.1.1. Strengthen capacities of Pasture Meliorative Trust to roll out 
Pasture Law at community level and provide technical assistance to PUUs, PUAs and PCs:  
Executing Entity: PMU 
Draft - August 2021 
36 
  PMU  will  recruit  one  national  pasture  specialist,  and  one  regional  pasture 
specialist for the Khatlon regional office during 5 years and will refurbish within 
the  first  year  the  Kulob  regional  office,  procure  necessary  equipment  and 
provide of 2 vehicles for field missions. 
130.  Sub-activity 1.1.1.2. Update the technical skills of the Forestry Department: 
Executing Entity: CEP  
  CEP will collect nominations of potential participants from forest user groups, 
the 14 Lehskhoz and by the NGO community facilitator (from component 2); 
  Participants should be Youth with a proposed maximum age of 25 years, have 
at  least  finished  a  Vocational  School  or  high  school  education  and  have  an 
interest in natural resource management/conservation; 
  CEP  will  choose  70  participants  (5  per  Leshkhoz)  and  choose  4  of  the  target 
areas Leshkoz as centers for hosting the theoretical and practical training;  
  A  Service  Provider  procured  by  CEP  will  organize  the  courses  and  involve 
technical specialists to hold the training lasting approximately 280 hours in each 
of  the  4  different  centers  (2  courses  in  Y1  and  2  courses  in  Y2).  20-25 
participants from 3-4 Leshkhoz will participate at each training;     
  After  the  end  of  the  courses,  the  Leshkoz  will  provide  work  opportunities  or 
supervision of field investments within the CASP+ and/or other projects for all 
graduates that have successfully completed all modules.  
131.  Sub-activity 1.1.2.1. Training on remote and participatory NRM 
CEP is the executing entity and organizes the following: 
Year 1: 
  A training on remote and participatory NRM. This will include: 
o  Provision of a space to hold the training; 
o  Recruit  the  consultancies  of  the  GIS  expert  and  of  the  Participatory 
expert to hold the training. The technical experts are also  required to 
provide the basis of the data portal,  the technical specifications for the 
equipment to be purchased for the NRM unit in 1.1.2.2. and a manual 
for participatory and remote NRM; 
Invite  20  representatives  of  state  agencies  to  participate  in  the 
trainings. 
o 
Year 3 
  Refresher  course  with  the  same  aforementioned  duties  to  be  repeated.  The 
experts  are  required  to  evaluate  the  functioning  of  the  data  portal  and 
recommend adjustments if needed.  
132.  Sub-activity 1.1.2.2. Field testing of NRM approaches 
CEP is the executing entity and organizes the following: 
Year 1:  
  Provide office space for the NRM Monitoring Unit; 
  Based on the recommendations of the international experts of 1.1.2.1, equip 
the Monitoring Unit with computers, plotters and a server for storing data;  
Draft - August 2021 
37 
  Recruit a National GIS experts in charge of maintaining the data portal for the 
whole duration of the project; 
  Recruit  a  national  botany  expert  to  carry  out  field  monitoring  and  ground 
trothing in Y1, Y3 and Y7. 
Year 3 
 
Identify together with the International and national experts the pilot area to 
be monitored; 
  Based on the recommendations of the international experts of 1.1.2.1 purchase 
satellite images for the pilot areas; 
  Procure Service provider to carry out field monitoring for Y3, Y5, Y7.  
Year 5 
  Coordinate  the  collaboration  between  the  SP  and  the  National  Botany  expert 
and the National GIS Specialist. 
Year 7 
  Coordinate  the  collaboration  between  the  SP  and  the  National  Botany  expert 
and the National GIS Specialist. 
133.  Sub-activity 1.1.3.1. Step up veterinary public health services of the National 
Veterinary Authority through provision of technical assistance and equipment 
PMU is the Executing Entity and organizes the following: 
 
 
International Expert on State Veterinary Management (Y2); 
International Expert on veterinary surveillance and public veterinary health 
service (Y2, Y4); 
  National Expert on Epidemiology and One Health approach (for all Years of the 
 
 
project); 
In all years of the project training, workshops, round tables for State Veterinary 
staff (in total 40); 
In all years of the project facilitate the participation at international 
events/workshops of State Veterinary staff (in total 10 participations);  
  Mini Truck-refrigerator and a disinfection machine (Y1). 
134.  Sub-activity 1.1.3.2. Improve the outreach of breeding services provided by State 
Enterprise for Animal Breeding and Artificial Insemination to areas and communities 
targeted by the Project 
PMU is the Executing Entity and organizes the following: 
  Needs assessment (feasibility study) for upgrading AI laboratory in Kulob; 
  Procurement of equipment for Kulob AI Regional center; 
  Rehabilitation of AI laboratory in Kulob. 
135.  Sub-activity 1.1.4.1.  Integrate climate change issues in university and training 
institutions curricula 
CEP is the executing entity and is responsible for the following:  
 
support TAU in the development of a new master’s curriculum complementing the 
existing Bachelor’s programme on Pasture Management developed with the 
support of IFAD/LPDP and cover the costs related to the international 
accreditation;  
Draft - August 2021 
38 
  Develop gender modules to be integrated into the CC curricula developed by the 
project for schools and specialized universities; 
  Ensure the inclusion of Climate change in the curricula of agronomists, 
agricultural engineers, foresters, zootechnicians and veterinarians, and public 
administrators; 
  Development of a training curricula of livestock technicians (diploma level) and 
training on its implementation to diploma level trainers. 
136.  Sub-activity 1.1.4.2. Promote enrollment of male and female youth in training 
curricula on climate-resilient natural resources management 
CEP is the E.E and provides the following: 
  Coordinate with TAU the dissemination of the possibility to achieve scholarships 
(e.g. through websites of TAU and CEP, national and local newspapers, TV spots, 
through the community facilitator in component 2); 
  Evaluate applications and select students from target area receiving scholarships; 
  From Y3 onwards until end of the project provide each year scholarships to Youth 
(including 50% females) originating from the project area, in the newly 
developed curriculum on climate change. 
137.  Sub-activity 1.1.4.3. Enable research institutes and the private sector to produce 
evidence on NRM and Climate Change for policy dialogue and climate sensitive technical 
innovations 
PMU is the E.E and will provide the following: 
  Coordinate the dissemination of the possibility to achieve grants (e.g. through 
websites of Universities, research centers, chambers of commerce, CEP, national 
and local newspapers, TV spots, through the community facilitator in component 
2); 
  Launch bi-yearly calls for proposals and research projects that are in line with the 
project strategy. Every two years, 2 research projects will be supported (6 in 
total) and their implementation should not exceed 3 years. 
138.  Sub-activity 1.2.1.1. Stock taking of policy development and mainstreaming of gender 
sensitive climate-adaptive agricultural practices 
CEP is the E.E. and procures the following (Y2, Y4): 
International policy expert;  
International Gender expert;  
 
 
  The missions aforementioned missions will be organized in order for the experts to 
be able to participate in the workshops of Y2 and Y4, where they will give technical 
presentations  related  to  their  topics.  The  experts  shall  also  provide  a  structural 
proposal  for  the  same  workshops  to  be  followed  from  Y3  onwards  (topics  to  be 
treated, data to be analyzed etc.).  
139.  Sub-activity 1.2.1.2. Training on the utilization of policy support tools  
CEP is the E.E. and procures the following experts (Y2, Y4): 
  Recruitment of International Specialists on Carbon accounting Tools; 
Draft - August 2021 
39 
  Recruitment  of  International  Specialists  on  Livestock  Planning  Related  Tools 
(GLEAM-I and LSIPT) 
  The aforementioned missions will be organized in order for the experts to be able 
to  participate  in  the  workshops  of  Y2  and  Y4,  where  they  will  give  technical 
presentations  related  to  their  topics;  The  experts  shall  also  provide  a  structural 
proposal  for  the  same  workshops  to  be  followed  from  Y3  onwards  (topics  to  be 
treated data to be analyzed etc.).  
140.  Sub-activity 1.2.1.3. Implementation of workshops for institutional networking 
CEP is the E.E. and organizes the following; 
  Policy dialogue workshops involving all competent state agencies and international 
 
partners;   
In conjunction with the policy dialogue workshops conduct thematic workshops on 
gender  and  climate  change  at  national  level  for  policy  makers  (through 
dissemination of findings from gender study, diagnostic, assessment) to ensure CC 
and  NRM  policies/  legal  frameworks  consider  gender-specific  recommendations 
(each Year); 
  Purchase and printing of communication materials (each Year); 
  Gender and Climate Change in Tajikistan (based on CASP+ experience) (last Year).  
PMU is responsible for providing the translation services for the workshops. 
141.  Sub-activity 1.2.2.2. Technical assistance of the OIE 
PMU is the E.E and will organize the following: 
  Coordinate with the competent state agencies the missions; 
  Organize the OIE mission on veterinary legislation.  
142.  Sub-activity 1.2.2.3. Improvement of veterinary legislation 
PMU is the E.E and organizes the following: 
  Workshops, round tables from Y 1 to Y6 to discuss and disseminate the proposed 
improvement (in total 21); 
  Missions of a Veterinary Legislation Expert in Y2 and Y 3; 
143.  Sub-activity 1.2.2.4. Review of the national breeding strategy 
PMU is the E.E and organizes the following: 
  Organization of workshops (2 consultations and 1 validation); 
  Provision of technical assistance on the formulation of breeding strategies. 
144.  Sub-activity 1.2.3.1. Develop the draft of the Green Economy strategy 
CEP is the E.E. and organizes the following in Y2: 
  Recruitment of an international green economy expert, leading the review of the 
related regulatory framework and elaboration of the sectoral strategy concept; 
  Recruitment of national green economy expert; 
Draft - August 2021 
40 
  1 consultation workshop inviting all the state agencies of competence and starting 
up the works for the elaboration of the concept; 
  1 validation workshop in which the outcomes will be presented and that will serve 
for fine tuning the concept. 
145.  Sub-activity 1.2.3.2. Capacity Development of MEDT staff 
CEP is the E.E. and organizes the following in Y2: 
  Organize  a  training  of  the  trainers  course  to  10  staff  of  the  MEDT,  utilizing  the 
national  and  international  experts  of  1.2.3.1.  The  staff  can  then  train  the  sub-
national staff at district level; 
  1 study tour involving 10 representatives of the public administrations to a partner 
country to learn from good/best practices. 
146.  Sub-activity 1.2.3.3. Capacity Development of Ministry of Finance staff 
PMU is the E.E. and organizes the following: 
  Purchase of a software for Monitoring and Analysis of Public Investment Projects 
(including advisory and installment). Year 1; 
  10 participants of Government agencies (Min Fin and others) participate in study 
tours on key project topics. Year 3. 
4.1.4. 
Definition of timing and responsibilities 
Table 1. Timeframe and sequencing of Component 1 
Sub-Activities 
Y1 
Y2 
Y3 
Y4 
Y5 
Y6 
Y7 
1.1.1.1. Strengthen capacities of Pasture Meliorative Trust to roll out Pasture Law at community level and 
provide technical assistance to PUUs, PUAs and PCs 
Recruitment of seconded pasture specialists 
Drafting MoU with PMT 
Secondment of pasture specialists 
Procurement of vehicles and equipment for PMT 
Procurement of contractor for Refurbishment of 
PMT Regional office in Kulob 
Refurbishment of PMT Regional office in Kulob 
1.1.1.2. Update the technical skills of the Forestry Department 
Select 4 Leskhoz as Centers for the training and 70 
participants 
Procurement of a Service Provider for the courses 
Implementation of 4 trainings for foresters 
Involvement of the graduates in CASP+ activities 
1.1.2.1. Training on remote and participatory NRM 
Recruitment of international GIS expert 
Mission of international GIS expert 
Recruitment of international Participatory NRM 
expert 
Mission of international Participatory NRM expert 
Draft - August 2021 
41 
Sub-Activities 
Y1 
Y2 
Y3 
Y4 
Y5 
Y6 
Y7 
Organization of training spaces and invitation of 
participants 
Implementation of Training on participatory and 
remote NRM 
1.1.2.2. Field testing of NRM approaches 
Provide and equip office space for the NRM 
Monitoring Unit  
Recruit National GIS expert 
Identification of Pilot monitoring area 
Purchase of satellite images 
Recruit national botany expert 
Procure service provider for pilot area  monitoring 
Monitor Pilot areas 
1.1.3.1. Step up veterinary public health services of the National Veterinary Authority through provision of 
technical assistance and equipment 
Recruit Expert on State Veterinary Management  
Mission Expert on State Veterinary Management 
Recruit International Expert on veterinary 
surveillance and public veterinary health service 
Mission International Expert on veterinary 
surveillance and public veterinary health service 
National Expert on Epidemiology and One Health 
approach 
Organize training, workshops, round tables for 
State Veterinary staff 
Facilitate the participation at international 
events/workshops of State Veterinary staff 
Mini Truck-refrigerator and a disinfection machine 
 1.1.3.2. Improve the outreach of breeding services provided by State Enterprise for Animal Breeding and 
Artificial Insemination to areas and communities targeted by the Project 
Needs assessment (feasibility study) for upgrading 
AI laboratory in Kulob 
Procurement of equipment for Kulob AI Regional 
center 
Rehabilitation of AI laboratory in Kulob 
1.1.4.1. Integrate climate change issues in university and training institutions curricula 
Recruitment of international expert 
Mission of international expert 
Formulation of new master’s curriculum on pasture 
by TAU staff 
Accreditation of curricula 
Roll out of curriculum 
Training of diploma level trainers in livestock 
technical institutes on CC  
1.1.4.2. Promote enrollment of male and female youth in training curricula on climate-resilient natural resources 
management 
Publish possibilities for scholarships 
Selection of Students receiving scholarships 
Draft - August 2021 
42 
Sub-Activities 
Y1 
Y2 
Y3 
Y4 
Y5 
Y6 
Y7 
1.1.4.3. Enable research institutes and the private sector to produce evidence on NRM and Climate Change for 
policy dialogue and climate sensitive technical innovations. 
Formulation of guidelines for Call for proposals 
Call for proposals and selection of projects 
Implementation of research projects 
1.2.1.1. Stock taking of policy development and mainstreaming of gender sensitive climate adaptive agricultural 
practices 
Recruitment of policy expert 
Missions of the policy expert 
Recruitment of gender expert 
Mission of gender expert 
1.2.1.2. Support on policy tools 
Selection of GLEAM expert 
Organization of training on GLEAM 
Selection of LSIPT expert 
Organization of training on LSIPT 
Selection of EX-ACT expert 
Organization of training on EX-ACT 
Selection of B-INTACT expert 
Organization of training on B-INTACT 
1.2.1.3. Implementation of workshops for institutional networking 
Organization of policy dialogue workshops  
Organization of thematic workshops on gender and 
climate change 
Purchase and printing of communication material 
1.2.2.1. Improvement of the Pasture Law 
Recruitment of pasture policy expert 
Missions of the pasture policy expert 
Formulation of draft regulations on pasture 
management 
1.2.2.2. Technical assistance of the OIE 
Recruit the mission of the OIE 
Organize and implement mission of OIE 
1.2.2.3. Improvement of veterinary legislation 
Recruit Veterinary Legislations Expert 
Mission Veterinary Legislations Expert  
Organize Workshops, round table  
1.2.2.4. Review of the breeding strategy 
Selection of breeding strategy expert 
Organization of consultation workshops 
Formulation of draft strategy 
1.2.3.1. Develop the draft of the Green Economy strategy 
Recruitment International Expert 
Mission International Expert 
Recruitment National Experts 
Organization Consultation and Validation Workshop 
1.2.3.2. Capacity Development of MEDT staff 
Draft - August 2021 
43 
Sub-Activities 
Y1 
Y2 
Y3 
Y4 
Y5 
Y6 
Y7 
Organize Training of the Trainer Course 
Organize 1 study tour 
1.2.3.3. Capacity Development of Ministry of Finance staff 
Procurement of SP for software for Monitoring and 
Analysis of Public Investment Projects  
Installation and training of Software 
Study tour 
Table 2. Responsibilities for the implementation of activities of Component 1 
Sub-Activities 
Executing Entity 
Implementation 
Partner16 
1.1.1.1. Strengthen capacities of Pasture Meliorative Trust to roll out Pasture Law at community level and provide 
technical assistance to PUUs, PUAs and PCs 
Recruitment of seconded pasture specialists 
Drafting MoU with PMT 
Secondment of pasture specialists 
PMU (procurement officer and 
pasture specialist) 
PMU (pasture specialist) 
PMU 
MoU with PMT for implementation 
Procurement of vehicles and equipment for PMT 
PMU (procurement officer) 
Procurement of contractor for Refurbishment of PMT 
Regional office in Kulob 
PMU (procurement officer) 
Refurbishment of PMT Regional office in Kulob 
PMU (procurement officer) 
PMT 
1.1.1.2. Update the technical skills of the Forestry Department 
Select 4 Leskhoz as Centers for the training and 70 
participants 
Procurement of a Service Provider for the courses 
Implementation of 4 trainings for foresters 
Involvement of the graduates in CASP+ activities 
1.1.2.1. Training on remote and participatory NRM 
Recruitment of international GIS expert 
Mission of international GIS expert 
Recruitment of international Participatory NRM expert 
Mission of international Participatory NRM expert 
Organization of training spaces and invitation of 
participants 
Implementation of Training on participatory and 
remote NRM 
1.1.2.2. Field testing of NRM approaches 
Provide and equip office space for the NRM Monitoring 
Unit  
Recruit National GIS expert 
Identification of Pilot monitoring area 
Purchase of satellite images 
Recruit national botany expert 
Procure service provider for pilot are  monitoring 
CEP 
CEP 
CEP  
CEP 
CEP 
CEP 
CEP 
CEP 
CEP 
CEP  
CEP 
CEP 
CEP  
CEP 
CEP 
CEP 
16 The Implementation Partner is essential for the succesfull implementation of the sub-activity. Implementation arrangements will 
be agreed upon through Memorandum of Understanding between the Executing Entity and the Implementation Partner 
Draft - August 2021 
44 
Sub-Activities 
Executing Entity 
Implementation 
Partner16 
1.1.3.1. Step up veterinary public health services of the National Veterinary Authority through provision of 
technical assistance and equipment 
Recruit Expert on State Veterinary Management  
Mission Expert on State Veterinary Management 
Recruit International Expert on veterinary surveillance 
and public veterinary health service 
Mission International Expert on veterinary 
surveillance and public veterinary health service 
National Expert on Epidemiology and One Health 
approach 
Organize training, workshops, round tables for State 
Veterinary staff 
Facilitate the participation at international 
events/workshops of State Veterinary staff 
PMU  
PMU 
PMU 
PMU 
PMU 
PMU  
PMU 
Mini Truck-refrigerator and a disinfection machine 
PMU 
FSC – FAO  
FSC – FAO 
FSC – FAO 
FSC – FAO 
FSC – FAO 
FSC – FAO 
FSC – FAO 
FSC 
 1.1.3.2. Improve the outreach of breeding services provided by State Enterprise for Animal Breeding and 
Artificial Insemination to areas and communities targeted by the Project 
Needs assessment (feasibility study) for upgrading AI 
laboratory in Kulob 
PMU 
SEABAI 
Procurement of equipment for Kulob AI Regional 
center 
PMU (procurement officer) 
Rehabilitation of AI laboratory in Kulob 
PMU 
SEABAI 
1.1.4.1. Integrate climate change issues in university and training institutions curricula 
Recruitment of international expert 
CEP (procurement officer) 
Mission of international expert 
Formulation of new master’s curriculum on pasture by 
TAU staff 
Accreditation of curricula 
Roll out of curriculum 
Training of diploma level trainers in livestock technical 
institutes on CC  
CEP 
CEP 
CEP 
CEP 
CEP 
Expert - TAU 
TAU 
TAU 
TAU 
1.1.4.2. Promote enrollment of male and female youth in training curricula on climate-resilient natural resources 
management 
Publish possibilities for scholarships 
Selection of Students receiving scholarships 
CEP 
CEP 
TAU 
TAU 
1.1.4.3. Enable research institutes and the private sector to produce evidence on NRM and 
Climate Change for policy dialogue and climate sensitive technical innovations 
Formulation of guidelines for Call for proposals 
Call for proposals and selection of projects 
Implementation of research projects 
PMU 
PMU 
PMU 
1.2.1.1. Stock taking of policy development and mainstreaming of gender sensitive climate adaptive agricultural 
practices 
Recruitment of policy expert 
Missions of the policy expert 
Recruitment of gender expert 
Mission of gender expert 
1.2.1.2. Support on policy tools 
Selection of GLEAM expert 
Organization of training on GLEAM 
Selection of LSIPT expert 
Draft - August 2021 
CEP 
CEP 
CEP 
CEP 
CEP 
CEP 
CEP 
FAO 
FAO 
FAO 
45 
Sub-Activities 
Executing Entity 
Organization of training on LSIPT 
Recruitment of International Specialists on Carbon 
accounting Tools 
CEP 
CEP  
Organization of training on Carbon accounting Tools 
CEP 
1.2.1.3. Implementation of workshops for institutional networking 
Organization of policy dialogue workshops  
Organization of thematic workshops on gender and 
climate change 
CEP 
CEP 
Purchase and printing of communication material 
CEP 
1.2.2.1. Improvement of the Pasture Law 
Recruitment of pasture policy expert 
PMU (procurement and Pasture 
specialist) 
Missions of the pasture policy expert 
PMU (pasture specialist) - expert 
Implementation 
Partner16 
FAO 
FAO 
FAO 
Formulation of draft regulations on pasture 
management 
1.2.2.2. Technical assistance of the OIE 
Recruit the mission of the OIE 
Organize and implement mission of OIE 
1.2.2.3. Improvement of veterinary legislation 
Recruit Veterinary Legislation Expert 
Mission Veterinary Legislation Expert  
Organize Workshops, round table  
1.2.2.4. Review of the breeding strategy 
Selection of breeding strategy expert 
Organization of consultation workshops 
Formulation of draft strategy 
PMU (pasture specialist) - expert 
PMU  
PMU  
PMU  
PMU  
PMU 
PMU 
PMU 
PMU 
1.2.3.1. Develop the draft of the Green Economy strategy 
Recruitment International Expert 
Mission International Expert 
Recruitment National Experts 
Organization Consultation and Validation Workshop 
1.2.3.2. Capacity Development of MEDT staff 
Organize Training of the Trainer Course 
Organize 1 study tour 
CEP 
CEP 
CEP 
CEP 
CEP 
CEP 
1.2.3.2. Capacity Development of Ministry of Finance staff 
Procurement SP for software installation and training 
Organize 1 Training 
PMU 
PMU 
4.1.5. 
Component 1 performance indicators 
FSC 
FSC 
FSC 
FSC  
FSC  
MEDT 
MEDT 
MEDT 
MEDT 
MEDT 
MEDT 
MinFin 
MinFin 
Expected 
Results 
Indicator 
Output 1.1: 
Capacities of 
relevant 
national 
institutions for 
Number of staff 
capacitated in 
climate change 
management   
planning 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Attendances 
sheets of 
training 
activities and 
records of PIU. 
Baseline 
Target 
Mid-term 
Final 
0 
50 
At least    
100 
Assumptions 
Agencies are 
willing to 
participate in 
training and make 
staff available for 
46 
Draft - August 2021 
Expected 
Results 
climate-resilient 
natural 
resources 
management 
are 
strengthened. 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Mid-term 
Final 
No. of participants 
of the course for 
foresters.   
Attendances 
sheets of 
training 
activities and 
records of PIU 
and the 
Leskhozi and 
the Adult 
Education 
Center.  
No of hectares of 
pastures 
monitored with 
the use of the 
integrated, holistic 
and participatory 
management 
approach 
Technical 
reports by the 
project 
Photographic 
and remote 
sensing 
documentation 
0 
35 
At least 70 
0 
1,400 
3,500 
No of Agencies 
collaborating for 
an active 
exchange of data 
and information 
related to remote 
and participatory 
NRM 
No of  Academic 
and training 
institutions 
integrate climate 
change in 
curricula 
No of youth from 
the project 
districts and 
number of public 
servants attending 
the climate 
courses.   
No of climate 
adaptive research 
and innovative 
proposals financed 
by the project. 
MoUs signed. 
Data made 
available by 
the different 
institutions to 
the project 
Review of 
course 
curricula and 
promotional 
material 
publicizing the 
course content 
in publications 
and websites 
by the 
selected 
institutions.  
Records of 
participating 
institutions.  
0 
2 
6 
0 
2 
4 
0 
150 
280 
Record of PIU 
0 
6  
12 
Draft - August 2021 
Assumptions 
capacity training 
activities. 
There is sufficient 
interest and 
demand for the 
training. 
Competent 
Agencies 
collaborate on 
exchanging 
information and 
making it available 
to the project; 
Local communities 
are interested in 
the project and in 
sharing 
information 
MoU signed 
between Agency 
for Land 
Management and 
CEP in the first 
year of the project. 
Further competent 
institutions (e.g. 
MoA) are willing to  
join data exchange 
platforms 
Universities have 
the capacity to 
modify the course 
content and are 
interested in 
offering the 
courses and 
students interested 
in participation. 
Research Institutes 
and private sector 
are interested and 
have the capacity 
to prepare and 
undertake the 
47 
Expected 
Results 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Mid-term 
Final 
Output 1.2: 
Enabling 
environment for 
climate 
adaptive, 
inclusive and 
integrated 
management of 
pasture, 
forestry and 
livestock 
resources is 
enhanced 
No state agencies   
influenced 
by CASP+ 
insights 
and 
knowledge 
products  
Interviews 
with key 
stakeholders 
from  
participating 
agencies 
0 
3 
9 
No of sectoral 
regulatory 
frameworks 
reviewed  
The existence of a 
concept paper and 
action plan on the 
Green Economy 
and trained staff.  
The revised 
frameworks 
and policy 
pronouncemen
ts. 
0 
1 
 MEDT and 
PIU records. 
0 
1 
4 
1 
Assumptions 
research and 
innovation.  
No rapid turn-over 
of personnel in the 
participating 
agencies. 
Strong 
commitment for 
reform. 
Strong MEDT 
commitment to 
prepare the 
concept note and 
action plan.  
4.1.6. 
Activities’ results 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
Activity 1.1.1: 
Capacity 
Development of 
public institutions 
on climate resilient 
ecosystem 
management 
Develop capacities of public 
institutions to streamline 
climate sensitive, 
participatory and gender 
inclusive ecosystem 
management approaches 
such as landscape approach, 
integrated watershed 
management, joint forest 
management, community-
based pasture management 
Sub activity 1.1.1.1. 
Strengthen capacities of 
Pasture Meliorative Trust to 
roll out Pasture Law at 
community level and provide 
technical assistance to PUUs, 
PUAs and PCs 
Sub activity 1.1.1.2. Upgrade 
the technical skills of the 
Forestry Department 
Sub-activity 1.1.2.1. Training 
on remote and participatory 
NRM 
Activity 1.1.2:  
Introduce combined 
remote and 
participatory 
Natural Resources 
monitoring and 
management 
Establish remote and 
participatory management of 
natural resources as the basis 
for climate adaptive 
development and enable 
exchange of information 
between the different 
competent state agencies and 
communities 
Sub-activity 1.1.2.2. Field 
testing of NRM approaches 
Draft - August 2021 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Regional PMT Office in 
Kulob refurbished and 
equipped. 
2 Pasture specialists 
seconded to PMT. 
2 vehicles for field 
missions delivered to 
PMT 
1 curricula for foresters 
carried out in each of 
the 11 project leshkhoz  
20 representatives of 
governmental agencies 
trained on NRM in the 
frame of 2 trainings  
1 manual for remote 
and participatory NRM 
developed 
1 unit for participatory 
and remote NRM 
created at CEP 
1 MoU established 
between CEP and FAZO 
(maybe other 
agencies? To be 
verified with CEP) for 
exchange of data 
Completion of pastures 
map 
-  Detailed monitoring of 
3.500 hectares of pilot 
48 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables 
Activity 1.1.3. 
Enhance technical 
capacities of 
national livestock 
institutions to 
ensure efficient 
provision of public 
animal health and 
production services 
to smallholder 
farmers through 
efficient partnership 
between public and 
private institutions. 
Strengthen capacities of 
public agencies under the 
MoA and FSC in charge of 
animal health and breeding 
services to improve the 
outreach of their activities 
through provision of logistical 
support and technical 
assistance 
 Activity 1.1.4: 
Build capacities of 
research and 
academia 
institutions on 
climate resilient 
ecosystem 
management.  
Streamline Climate Change 
and Ecosystem management 
approaches in the training 
curricula and research 
programmes of National and 
Research Institutions and 
academia  
Activity 1.2.1: 
Promote an 
inclusive and 
integrated policy 
dialogue 
Enhance the mainstreaming 
of climate adaptive 
management practices of 
natural resources in all 
national institutions and 
verification of the 
effectiveness of policies on 
the ground 
Draft - August 2021 
Sub-activity 1.1.3.1. Step up 
veterinary public health 
services of the National 
Veterinary Authority through 
provision of technical 
assistance and equipment.  
Sub-activity 1.1.3.2. Improve 
the outreach of breeding 
services provided by State 
Enterprise for Animal Breeding 
and Artificial Insemination to 
areas and communities 
targeted by the Project 
Sub-activity 1.1.4.1.  
Integrate climate change 
issues in university and 
training institutions curricula: 
Sub-activity 1.1.4.2. Promote 
enrollment of male and female 
youth in training curricula on 
climate-resilient natural 
resources management 
Sub-activity 1.1.4.3.Enable 
research institutes and the 
private sector to produce 
evidence on NRM and Climate 
Change for policy dialogue and 
climate sensitive technical 
innovations 
Sub-activity 1.2.1.1. Stock 
taking of policy development 
and mainstreaming of gender 
sensitive climate adaptive 
agricultural practices. 
Sub-activity 1.2.1.2. Training 
on the utilization of policy 
support tools e.g.  SIPT, 
GLEAM, EXACT, B-INTACT. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
plots enhanced withing 
CASP+ 
The 
organizational 
structure  of  the  state 
veterinary 
management  has  been 
developed  in  line  with 
OIE’s recommendations 
Veterinary  surveillance 
system  based  on  One 
Health  approach  has 
been established 
A mini truck-
refrigerator as well as 
a disinfection machine 
delivered to FSC 
Kulob regional Center 
for AI and breeding 
refurbished and 
equipped (semen 
processing equipment, 
liquid nitrogen 
machine). 
1 new curriculum on 
CC developed and 
rolled out at TAU and 
TAAS 
1 CC module developed 
& include in curricula of 
agronomists, 
agricultural engineers, 
foresters, 
zootechnicians and 
veterinarians of TAU 
and TAAS, as well as in 
the training curriculum 
of public administrators 
at PAA 
Training of diploma 
level trainers on CC 
10 students from 
project area enrolled 
per year in newly 
developed curriculum 
on CC 
2 research projects on 
climate sensitive 
innovations supported 
every 2 years (6 in 
total) 
7 policy briefs 
elaborated and 
disseminated among 
institutional 
stakeholders (1 per 
year) 
45 representatives of 
governmental agencies 
trained on policy tools 
49 
Activity 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Activity 1.2.2: 
Technical 
assistance for 
review of livestock 
related regulatory 
frameworks. 
Review and update of animal 
health and breeding 
regulatory and strategic 
framework to ensure 
compliance with international 
guidelines and ensure 
streamlining of measures 
supporting climate resilience 
and environmental protection 
Activity 1.2.3. 
Launching the basis 
for a green 
economy 
Review of the legislation and 
regulatory framework related 
to Geen Economy and 
elaboration of the draft 
strategy and capacity 
development to strengthen 
the sector 
Sub-activity 1.2.1.3. 
Implementation of workshops 
for institutional networking 
Sub-activity 1.2.2.1. 
Improvement of the pasture 
law 
Sub-activity 1.2.2.2. Technical 
assistance of the OIE 
Sub-activity 1.2.2.3. 
Improvement of veterinary 
legislation 
Sub-activity 1.2.2.4. Review 
of the national breeding 
strategy 
Sub-activity 1.2.3.1. Develop 
the draft of the Green 
Economy strategy 
Sub-activity 1.2.3.2. Capacity 
Development of MEDT staff. 
Deliverables 
in the frame of 3 
trainings 
- 
- 
7 Workshops 
promoting policy 
dialogue implemented 
(1 each year) 
Pasture law revised by 
Y4 
-  OIE Mission on 
veterinary legislation 
has been conducted 
An analysis of the 
legislation was carried 
out, gaps were 
identified  
Veterinary legislation 
improved in line with 
OIE recommendations 
Breeding strategy 
revised and adopted by 
Year 5 
1 draft of the sectoral 
strategy elaborated 
1 consultation 
workshop 
1 validation workshop 
1 training for MEDT 
staff 
1 Training of Trainer 
module developed for 
training MEDT staff at 
subnational level 
1 study tour (TBD) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
4.1.7. 
Implementation Arrangements needed 
Sub-Activities 
Implementation arrangement required 
1.1.1.1. Strengthen capacities of Pasture Meliorative Trust 
to roll out Pasture Law at community level and provide 
technical assistance to PUUs, PUAs and PCs 
Executing Entity: PMU 
MoU between PMU and PMT 
ToRs of seconded pasture specialists 
1.1.1.2. Update the technical skills of the Forestry 
Department 
Executing Entity: CEP 
ToRs Service Provider Training 
1.1.2.1. Training on remote and participatory NRM 
1.1.2.2. Field testing of NRM approaches 
1.1.3.1. Step up veterinary public health services of the 
National Veterinary Authority through provision of technical 
assistance and equipment 
Executing Entity: CEP 
ToRs International GIS expert 
ToRs International Participatory NRM Expert 
Executing Entity: CEP 
ToRs National Geobotany Expert 
ToRs Service Provider monitoring with bees 
Executing Entity: PMU 
MoU with FSC 
ToRs Expert on State Veterinary Management 
ToRs International Expert on veterinary surveillance 
and public veterinary health service 
Draft - August 2021 
50 
Sub-Activities 
Implementation arrangement required 
ToRs National Expert on Epidemiology and One Health 
approach 
1.1.3.2. Improve the outreach of breeding services provided 
by State Enterprise for Animal Breeding and Artificial 
Insemination to areas and communities targeted by the 
Project 
Executing Entity: PMU 
MoU between PMU and SEABAI 
1.1.4.1. Integrate climate change issues in university and 
training institutions curricula 
Executing Entity: CEP 
MoU with TAU 
1.1.4.2. Promote enrollment of male and female youth in 
training curricula on climate-resilient natural resources 
management 
1.1.4.3. Enable research institutes and the private sector to 
produce evidence on NRM and Climate Change for policy 
dialogue and climate sensitive technical innovations 
Executing Entity: CEP 
MoU with TAU 
Executing Entity: PMU 
Guidelines and selection criteria for Call for Proposal 
1.2.1.1. Stock taking of policy development and 
mainstreaming of gender sensitive climate adaptive 
agricultural practices 
Executing Entity: CEP 
ToRs of pasture specialist 
ToRs gender expert 
1.2.1.2. Support on policy tools 
1.2.2.1. Improvement of the pasture law 
1.2.2.2. Technical assistance of the OIE 
1.2.2.3. Improvement of veterinary legislation 
1.2.2.4. Review of the breeding strategy 
1.2.3.1. Develop the draft of the Green Economy strategy 
1.2.3.2. Capacity Development of MEDT staff 
Executing Entity: CEP 
Executing Entity for Implementation of workshops for 
institutional networking: PMU  
MoU with FAO 
ToRs of GLEAM-I trainer 
ToRs of LSIPT trainer 
ToRs of EX-ACT trainer 
Tors of B-INTACT trainer 
Executing Entity: PMU 
ToRs Pasture policy expert 
Executing Entity: PMU 
MoU with FAO  
MoU with FSC 
Executing Entity: PMU 
MoU with FAO 
MoU with FSC 
ToRs Veterinary Legislations Expert 
Executing Entity: PMU 
MoU with FAO 
ToRs of FAO breeding expert 
Executing Entity: CEP 
MoU with MEDT 
ToRs International Expert 
ToRs National Expert 
Executing Entity: CEP 
MoU with MEDT 
Draft - August 2021 
51 
Annex to Chapter 4.1 
Component 1 Terms of Reference and MoU 
1.  Type and duration of contract: consultancy contract – 60 days (45 days in country - 15 days home 
International GIS Expert 
-based) 
2.  Location: the position will be based in Dushanbe – CEP with in-country missions as required  
3.  Scope of work, Responsibilities and expected deliverables: 
Year 1 
In close cooperation and in synergy with the International Participatory NRM expert the duties are: 
  Develop  and  hand  over  to  the  CEP  a  data  portal  consisting  of  open  source  GIS  tools  and  freely 
available datasets for the collection of NRM data to be utilized by the NRM unit of CASP+; 
  Curate the parts related to Remote Sensing of the manual “Participatory and Remote Sensing Natural 
Resource Management applied to CASP+” that should also give clear information on how to use the 
aforementioned data portal; 
  Train the National GIS expert on the utilization of the data portal; 
  Develop  the  mechanism  of  dissemination  of  the  data  through  Web  Map  Service  according  to  the 
protocols of the Open Geospatial Consortium; 
  Provide the protocols for the collection, analysis and monitoring of NRM data, including the finalization 
of the pasture mapping and the institutionalization  of national reporting related to SDGs and LDN 
and others indicators; 
  Propose enhancement of the flow of remote sensing information between the different state agencies 
and local experts; 
  Verify with the National Geobotany expert the robustness of the remote sensing data with regards to 
quantity  and  quality  of  vegetation  indicated.  Identify  which  kind  of  vegetation  essential  for 
agricultural and forestry activities are difficult to be identified/distinguished through remote sensing 
and how data collection/sensing can be improved; 
  Define  and  hold  the  lessons  on  remote  sensing  of  the  “Participatory  and  Remote  Sensing  Natural 
Resource  Management”.  The  Training  will  last  for  5  days  (50%  on  remote  sensing  and  50%  on 
participatory approaches) and will be held to 15-20 representatives of Tajik state agencies.    
Year 3 
  Update as required and repeat lessons on remote sensing of the “Participatory and Remote Sensing 
Natural Resource Management”. The Training will last for 5 days (50% on remote sensing and 50% 
on participatory approaches) and will be held to 15-20 representatives of Tajik state agencies.    
  In cooperation with the participatory NRM expert and the geobotany expert verify the implementation 
of the data portal and suggest recommendations for improvement and identify a pilot area of 3.500 
in the beneficiary region that is suitable for the scientific bee-monitoring of the CASP+ measures.   
Year 5 
  Update as required and repeat lessons on remote sensing of the “Participatory and Remote Sensing 
Natural Resource Management”. The Training will last for 5 days (only the parts related to remote 
sensing will be taught) and will be held to 15-20 representatives of Tajik state agencies;    
  In cooperation with the geobotany expert verify the implementation of the data portal and suggest 
recommendations for improvement and verify the results of the scientific monitoring with bees of the 
pilot area of 3.500 in the beneficiary region.   
4.  Supervision and reporting 
The incumbent will be under the supervision of the CEP Project Coordinator to whom he/she will report 
directly. 
5.  Required qualifications and experience 
  Advanced degree in Remote Sensing, Natural Sciences or equivalent 
  7 years of experience in the field of Remote Sensing with focus on Natural Resource Management 
  Prior Experience in training of Remote Sensing for Natural Resource Management 
Draft - August 2021 
52 
  Prior experience in Central Asia would be an added advantage 
  Languages: English (compulsory). Russian (added advantage)  
International Expert on Participatory NRM 
1.  Type and duration of contract: consultancy – 40 days (30 days in country - 10 days home -based) 
2.  Location:  the position will be based in Dushanbe – CEP with field mission to the project locations 
as required 
3.  Scope of work, Responsibilities and expected deliverables: 
Year 1 
In close cooperation and in synergy with the Remote sensing NRM expert the duties are:  
  Provide  methodology  for  a  participatory  assessment  and  monitoring  system  of  natural  resources 
within the CASP+ project; 
  Define the indicators required for a reliable, cost-effective assessment and define flow of information 
necessary at national and sub-national between the different stakeholders; 
  Provide inputs and recommendations to the definition of the data portal created by the International 
GIS Expert; 
  Curate  the  parts  related  to  Participatory  NRM  of  the  manual  “Participatory  and  Remote  Sensing 
Natural Resource Management applied to CASP+” 
  Define and hold the lessons on participatory NRM of the “Participatory and Remote Sensing Natural 
Resource  Management”.  The  Training  will  last  for  5  days  (50%  on  remote  sensing  and  50%  on 
participatory approaches) and will be held to 15-20 representatives of Tajik state agencies.    
Year 3 
  Update as required and repeat lessons on participatory NRM of the “Participatory and Remote 
Sensing Natural Resource Management”. The Training will last for 5 days (50% on remote sensing 
and 50% on participatory approaches) and will be held to 15-20 representatives of Tajik state 
agencies.    
  In cooperation with the international GIS expert and the national geobotany expert verify the 
implementation of the data portal and suggest recommendations for improvement and identify a 
pilot area of 3.500 in the beneficiary region that is suitable for the scientific bee-monitoring of the 
CASP+ measures 
4.  Supervision and reporting 
The incumbent will be under the supervision of the CEP Project Coordinator to whom he/she will report 
directly. 
5.  Required qualifications and experience 
  Advanced degree in Social Sciences, Political Sciences, Economy, Natural Sciences or equivalent; 
  7 years of experience in the field of Participatory Natural Resource Management; 
  Prior Experience in training of Participatory Natural Resource Management; 
  Prior experience in Central Asia would be an added advantage; 
  Languages: English (compulsory). Russian (added advantage); 
National GIS expert 
1.  Type and duration of contract: full time position for entire project duration 
2.  Location:  the position will be based in Dushanbe – CEP with field mission to the project locations 
as required 
3.  Scope of work, Responsibilities and expected deliverables: 
  Collect all freely available GIS information related to natural Resource management in Tajikistan (in 
particular related to pasture, forestry); 
  Coordinate  with  the  International  GIS  expert  and  the  participatory  NRM  management  expert  to 
prepare the trainings for state agencies; 
  Review the manual on participatory and remote  NRM  and verify its feasibility to be implemented 
 
within the context of Tajikistan; 
Provide  guidance  for  correct  data  collection  and  sharing  to  all  involved  partners  (e.g.  PUU,  PUA, 
PMT, Leshkhoz); 
  Maintain  the  data  portal  for  CASP+  and  coordinate  the  data  collection  and  analysis  of  the  whole 
 
project;  
Produce  updated  natural  resources  maps  (pasture,  forestry)  to  be  shared  with  the  CASP+ 
beneficiaries and through Web Map Service to the institutional stakeholders; 
Draft - August 2021 
53 
 
Every other duty related to remote and participated resources management indicated by the Project 
Manager.  
4.  Supervision and reporting 
The incumbent will be under the supervision of the CEP Project Coordinator to whom he/she will report 
directly. 
5.  Required qualifications and experience 
  Degree in GIS, Natural Sciences or equivalent 
  5 years of experience in the field of Remote Sensing in Tajikistan or in the region 
 
Prior experience in rural development projects implemented by GoRT or NGOs, or with development 
agencies will be an added advantage 
Languages: English, Tajik. Good knowledge of Russian will be an added advantage 
 
National Geobotany Expert 
1.  Type and duration of contract: consultancy contract – 60 days 
2.  Location:  the position will be based in Dushanbe – CEP, with field mission to the project locations 
as required 
3.  Scope of work, Responsibilities and expected deliverables: 
  Assess quantitative and qualitative vegetation data on the ground in the project areas; 
  Verify with the International and National GIS expert the robustness of the remote sensing data with 
regards to quantity and quality of vegetation indicated. Identify which kind of vegetation essential 
for  agricultural  and  forestry  activities  are  difficult  to  be  identified/distinguished  through  remote 
sensing and how data collection/sensing can be improved and adjusted; 
  Coordinate with the team of experts to identify pilot areas of 3.500 ha to be monitored via beehives  
  Verify the robustness of the data collected by the SP provider and the possibility to extrapolate the 
data to other project areas not assessed by bee monitoring. 
Year 3 
  In cooperation with the participatory NRM expert and the geobotany expert verify the implementation 
of the data portal and suggest recommendations for improvement and identify a pilot area of 3.500 
in the beneficiary region that is suitable for the scientific monitoring with bees; 
  Analyze  the  quantity  and  quality  of  the  vegetation  of  aforementioned  pilot  area  of  3.500  ha  as  a 
baseline and reference value for the scientific bee-monitoring of the CASP+ measures.  
Year 5 
  In cooperation with the International GIS expert expert verify the implementation of the data portal 
and  suggest  recommendations  for  improvement  and  verify  the  results  of  the  scientific  monitoring 
with bees of the pilot area of 3.500 in the beneficiary region.   
4.  Supervision and reporting 
The incumbent will be under the supervision of the CEP Project Coordinator to whom he/she will report 
directly. 
5.  Required qualifications and experience 
  Advanced degree in Botany, Biology or equivalent; 
  7 years of experience in the field of geobotany in Tajikistan or in the region; 
  Prior experience in rural development projects implemented by GoRT or NGOs, or with development 
agencies will be an added advantage; 
  Languages: English, Tajik. Good knowledge of Russian will be an added advantage. 
1.  Type and duration of contract: consultancy contract – 60 days (40 days in country – 20 days home 
International Climate Change Policy Expert 
based) 
2.  Location:  the position will be based in Dushanbe – CEP, with field mission to the project locations 
as required 
3.  Scope of work, Responsibilities and expected deliverables: 
  Facilitate participatory assessment of the current regulatory framework concerning climate adaptive 
agriculture implementation and gaps; 
  Identify measure to overcome barriers for a climate resilient agricultural sector; 
Draft - August 2021 
54 
  Identify  synergies  on  policy  issues  with  current  initiatives  and  the  implementation  strategy  of 
International Partners; 
  Raise awareness of decision makers on the relevance of climate adaptive agricultural practices on 
the basis of the evaluation of the CASP+ implementation process; 
  Prepare succinct visual material for technical consultations at workshops. 
4.  Supervision and reporting 
The incumbent will be under the supervision of the CEP Project Coordinator to whom he/she will report 
directly. 
5.  Required qualifications and experience 
  Advanced degree in Economy, Political Science or equivalent; 
  7 years of experience in the field of Climate Change Policy support; 
  Prior  experience  in  Stock  taking  of  policy  development  among  institutions  in  the  field  of  Climate 
Change 
  Prior experience in Tajikistan, or the Central Asia region, would be an added advantage; 
  Languages: English (compulsory). Russian (added advantage). 
International Specialist on Carbon accounting Tools 
1.  Type and duration of contract: consultancy - 40 days (24 days in country – 16 days home-based) 
2.  Location:  the position will be based in Dushanbe - CEP 
3.  Scope of work, Responsibilities and expected deliverables: 
The Expert is requested to carry out a training of selected staff of governmental agencies and universities 
on the utilization of the tools Ex-Act and B-INTACT. Two 5 days training sessions will be organized by 
CEP  and  PMU  during  Year  2  and  year  4  (in  total  4  training  sessions),  with  up  to  10  participants  per 
session. The topics covered for each session will be the following. Practical simulation exercises based 
on  existing  data  set  will  then  be  undertaken.  The  consultant  will  provide  technical  support  to  this 
remotely.  At  the  end  of  each  mission,  a  stakeholder  workshop  with  relevant  decision  makers  will  be 
organized to present the output of the models, including the investment scenarios that have emerged 
from the analysis. 
The topics to be covered in the sessions are the following: 
  Functionality of Ex-ACT and B-Intact and its potentials and limitations; 
  Provide accurate and transparent estimates of GHGs emissions reductions using project-specific data 
  Apply carbon accounting to real situations and potential projects in Tajikistan; 
  Quantify  the  biodiversity  impact  of  various  investments  at  project  and  policy-level  using  globally 
recognized environmental assessment methodologies; 
  Provide  practical  examples  on  policy  indicators  to  help  make  informed  decisions  on  possible 
biodiversity risks, biodiversity loss and management practices; 
  Give  an  overview  on  the  possibilities  to  access  funds  from  international  financial  institutions  and 
mechanisms to finance projects, programmes and policies. 
4.  Supervision and reporting 
The incumbent will be under the supervision of the CEP Project Coordinator to whom he/she will report 
directly. 
5.  Required qualifications and experience 
  Advanced  degree  in  Natural  Sciences,  Environmental  Sciences,  Economy,  Political  Sciences  or 
equivalent; 
  5 years of experience in the field of carbon accounting tools; 
  Prior experience in training of carbon accounting tools required; 
  Languages: English. Good knowledge of Russian will be an added advantage. 
International Green Economy Expert 
1.  Type and duration of contract: consultancy 40 days (30 days in country – 10 home based) 
2.  Location:  the position will be based in Dushanbe – CEP with in country missions as required 
3.  Scope of work, Responsibilities and expected deliverables: 
  Review current legislation and regulatory framework in support of a green economy, identify gaps 
and opportunities for the development of the sector;  
  Map key national and sub-national institutions and relevant stakeholders; 
  Based on the assessment, identification of specific needs, challenges and priorities of development 
pathways; 
Draft - August 2021 
55 
  Prepare succinct visual material for technical consultations in the country at consultation and for the 
final validation workshop; 
  Lead the preparation of the green economy concept that addresses all findings in particular related 
to community based agro-industry activities in line with the CASP+ approach, with a focus at enabling 
policy/ regulatory framework environment, required policy dialogue and subsequent opportunities for 
investment; 
  Prepare and hold brief 1 day ToT Seminar for staff of the MEDT on the topic applied to the context in 
Tajikistan.  
4.  Supervision and reporting 
The incumbent will be under the supervision of the CEP Project Coordinator to whom he/she will report 
directly. 
5.  Required qualifications and experience 
  Advanced degree in Economy or equivalent; 
  10 years of experience in the field of Green Economy; 
  Experience in the Central Asian Region will be an added value; 
  Prior experience in the elaboration of policy papers on Green Economy required; 
  Languages: English. Good knowledge of Russian will be an added advantage. 
National Green Economy Expert 
1.  Type and duration of contract: consultancy 60 days  
2.  Location:  the position will be based in Dushanbe - CEP 
3.  Scope of work, Responsibilities and expected deliverables: 
  Support  the  International  Expert  in  the  analysis  and  provide  the  basis  for  the  data  research,  in 
particular also analytical and synthetic translation of essential documents that are not available in 
English language;  
  Ensure coordination with national counterparts and stakeholders, to develop common direction; 
  Contribute to the development of the Green Economy concept that addresses all findings in particular 
related to community based agro-industry activities in line with the CASP+ approach, with a focus at 
enabling  policy/  regulatory  framework  environment,  required  policy  dialogue  and  subsequent 
opportunities for investment; 
  In coordination with the International Green Economy Expert and with CEP, define the program study 
tours for the capacity development in the sector and of the consultation and validation workshop for 
the concept of the Green Economy strategy paper. 
4.  Supervision and reporting 
The incumbent will be under the supervision of the CEP Project Coordinator to whom he/she will report 
directly. 
5.  Required qualifications and experience 
  Advanced degree in Economics or equivalent; 
  7 years of experience in the field of green economy in Tajikistan or in the region; 
  Prior  experience  in  green  economy  projects  implemented  by  GoRt  or  NGOs,  or  with  development 
agencies will be an added advantage; 
  Prior experience in the elaboration of policy papers on topics related to Green Economy will be an 
added advantage; 
  Languages: English, Tajik. Good knowledge of Russian will be an added advantage. 
MoU between CEP and TAU 
1.  Type of agreement:  Memorandum of understanding 
2.  Duration: 7 years 
3.  Objective 
The purpose of this MoU is to define the modalities of collaboration between the CASP+ project, 
represented by CEP, and the Tajik Agrarian University, for the integrate of climate change issues in 
university curricula. 
4.  Contributions and responsibilities from CASP+ 
The contributions by CASP+ project to the partnership will be as follows: 
Draft - August 2021 
56 
  Recruitment of an International Expert for the development of a new master’s curriculum (Year 1-3) 
complementing  the  existing  Bachelor’s  programme  on  Pasture  Management  developed  with  the 
support of IFAD/LPDP and cover the costs related to the international accreditation;  
  Recruitment of a Gender expert for the creation of modules on gender aspects to be integrated into 
the CC curricula developed by the project (Year 1-3); 
  Recruitment  of  an  expert  for  the  inclusion  of  Climate  change  in  the  curricula  of  agronomists; 
agricultural engineers, foresters, zootechnicians and veterinarians, and public administrators (Year 
1-3); 
  From Year 3 onwards provide scholarships for 10 students per year for a duration of 3 Years until the 
end of the project. The students are Youth from the CASP+ beneficiary regions and will be at least 
50% women. 
5.  Contributions and responsibilities from TAU 
The TAU will be responsible for the following activities under the project: 
  Facilitate mission of international expert and grant access to existing curriculum material and contacts 
to the competent academic staff (Year 2-3); 
  Formulate  New  Climate  Change  Master  program  with  the  support  of  the  Experts  provided  by  the 
CASP+ project (Year 2-3); 
  Implement process for accreditation of the curriculum (Year 3); 
  Roll out new Climate Change master programme (Year 3-7); 
  Facilitate participation of the students with  scholarship financed by the CASP+ project at the new 
master programs (Year 3-7). 
MoU between PMU and PMT 
1.  Type of agreement:  Memorandum of understanding 
2.  Duration: 7 years 
3.  Object 
The purpose of this MoU is to define the modalities of collaboration between the CASP+ 
project, represented by the PMU, and the Pasture Management Trust, for the implementation 
of activities by PMT in the filed of pasture management and monitoring, in the scope of CASP+ 
project. 
4.  Contributions and responsibilities from CASP+ 
The contributions by CASP+ project to the partnership will be as follows: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Secondment of two pasture specialist: one based at national level in PMT headquarters, 
one based at Kulob regional office, during 5 years 
Refurbishment and equipment of the Kulob regional office, in the limits of the budget 
defined in the project documents 
Provision of 2 vehicles for field missions, , in the limits of the budget defined in the project 
documents 
Contribution to the costs of monitoring of PUUs and PMPs in 400 villages. This contribution 
will be degressive to ensure transfer of responsibilities and sustainability of the activity.  
Technical assistance to the revision of the Pasture Law, including through the recruitment 
of a pasture policy expert, and financial support to the organization of two consultation 
workshops 
5.  Contributions and responsibilities from PMT 
The PMT will be responsible for the following activities under the project: 
- 
- 
Lead the revision of the Pasture Law, in particular to mainstream regulatory measures 
aimed at controlling the increase of livestock inventories and overgrazing of pasture 
Collaborate with Land and Geodesy Department for the development of a national pasture 
monitoring system 
Draft - August 2021 
57 
- 
- 
Provide technical support to PUUs and PUGs for the development of PMPs, in collaboration 
with the Community Facilitator 
Provide capacity building to PUU and PUG members on pasture management and 
monitoring, in collaboration with the Community Facilitator 
-  Monitor the implementation of PMPs by VOs/PUGs and PUUs, and report back to PMU 
- 
- 
Support the creation of PAUs and PCs, in collaboration with PUUs and District Authorities 
Provide support to PUAs for the definition of cross village pasture investments 
Further details on the content and modalities of activities allocated to PMT in the scope of the 
CASP+ project are provided in the project PIM. 
ToRs of PMT seconded national pasture specialist 
1.  Title of position: PMT national pasture specialist (seconded)  
2.  Type and duration of contract: full time contract - secondment 
3.  Location:  The position will be based in Dushanbe – PMT headquarters 
4.  Scope of work, Responsibilities and expected deliverables: 
The two seconded pasture specialists will provide technical support to PMT  
The livestock specialist will be responsible for coordinating, monitoring and providing 
implementation support to activities related to pasture management undertaken under 
component 2, including: 
 
 
Provide technical support to regional teams and service providers including the community 
facilitators recruited for facilitation of CsCAPs under component 2 
Provide technical support to the Community Facilitator for the creation of PUUs, PUAs, and 
PCs, in close collaboration with PMT staff 
Provide technical support to PUUs for the formulation of Pasture Management Plans 
 
  Coordinate the assessment of PMPs, including investment plans, before validation and 
financing 
Provide technical support to PUUs for monitoring of PMPs, in close collaboration with PMT 
 
  Coordinate and supervise the support provided by PMT to PUUs for implementation and 
monitoring of PMPs 
  Contribute to recruitment and ensure supervision of consultants recruited to provide services 
in the pasture management domain 
5.  Supervision and reporting 
The incumbent will be under the joint supervision of the PMU Project Coordinator to whom 
he/she will report directly, and of the PMT Chairman. 
6.  Required qualifications and experience 
o  Advanced degree in agronomy or pasture management 
o  7 years of experience in the field of pasture management in Tajikistan or in the region 
o  Prior experience in rural development projects implemented by GoT or NGOs, will be 
an added advantage 
Languages: Tajik, Russian. Good knowledge of English will be and added advantage 
o 
ToRs of PMT seconded regional pasture specialist 
1.  Title of position: PMT regional pasture specialist (seconded)  
Draft - August 2021 
58 
2.  Type and duration of contract: full time contract - secondment 
3.  Location:  The position will be based in PMT Khatlon Regional Office in Kulob 
4.  Scope of work, Responsibilities and expected deliverables: 
The regaional seconded pasture specialists will provide technical support to PMT in the 
following domains: 
  Assess capacity gaps and organize trainings for regional PMT staff  
  Raise awareness of District and Local Authorities on benefits of establishing PUUs, PUAs and 
PCs 
  Oversee and coordinate activities implemented by PMT in Khatlon region the scope of CASP + 
in particular: 
o  Support to creation and registration of PUUs 
o  Support of PMT to formulation of PMPs 
o  Monitoring of PMP 
o  Monitoring of pasture productivity and quality 
o  Support to establishment of PUAs and PCs at district level 
  Report on activities implemented by PMT in the scope of CASP+ in Khatlon 
5.  Supervision and reporting 
The incumbent will be under the joint supervision of the PMU Project Coordinator to whom 
he/she will report directly, and of the head of the PMT Regional Office. 
6.  Required qualifications and experience 
o  Advanced degree in agronomy or pasture management 
o  5 years of experience in the field of pasture management in Tajikistan or in the region 
o 
Languages: Tajik, Russian. Good knowledge of English will be and added advantage 
MoU between PMU and SEABAI 
1.  Type of agreement:  Memorandum of understanding 
2.  Duration: 7 years 
3.  Object 
The purpose of this MoU is to define the modalities of collaboration between the CASP+ 
project, represented by the PMU, and the State Enterprise for Animal Breeding and Artificial 
Insemination (SEABAI) , for the implementation of activities by SEABAI in the field of cattle 
breeding, in the scope of CASP+ project. 
4.  Contributions and responsibilities from CASP+ 
The contributions by CASP+ project to the partnership will be as follows: 
- 
Support the revision of the breeding strategy, including by providing international 
technical assistance and financing the organization of two stakeholder workshops 
-  Upgrade the Kulob AI laboratory of the regional branch of SEABAI, in the limits of the 
budget defined in the project detailed budget 
Procure and supply a liquid nitrogen production machine 
Procure and supply 50 AI kits for SAEBAI technicians, plus 50 kits for the newly trained 
young technicians 
Procure and supply semen and synchronization hormones for the projected 100,000 AI 
Facilitate the administration of the 100,000 AI by SEABAI through the payment of a 
service fee 
Purchase the 300 bulls required to establish the mating stations 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Draft - August 2021 
59 
- 
Provide budget for the organization of the training session for 50 Ai techncians 
5.  Contributions and responsibilities from SEABAI 
The SEABAI will be responsible for the following activities under the project: 
- 
- 
- 
Implement a massive Artificial Campaign for smallholder farmers in the 400 villages 
targeted by the project: the detailed modalities of the AI campaign are described in the 
project PIM. The campaign will be implemented as per the plan jointly agreed between 
PMU and SEABAI. AI will be performed either by SEABAI staff or by contracted private 
service providers. 
Establish 300 off farm mating stations in selected villages as per the plan jointly agreed 
between PMU and SEABAI 
Train 50 youths in Artificial Insemination. The trainees will be selected from the CASP+ 
beneficiary communities by the PMU. SEABAI will organize 2 Training sessions of 10 days 
(5 days theoretical, 5 days practical) in Year 1 and year 2. All graduated technicians will 
be equipped with an AI kit (Liquid Nitrogen portable container, AI catheter and 
consumables such as gloves and tubes). 
Further details on the content and modalities of activities allocated to PMT in the scope of the 
CASP+ project are provided in the project PIM. 
6.  Reporting and supervision 
For activities implemented in the scope of this MoU, SEBAI will report to the PMU Coordinator. 
Financial and technical reports, based on a mutually agreed format, will be submitted every 
semester by SEABAI. The technical focal point within the PMU will be the Livestock Officer.  
ToRs of pasture policy expert 
1.  Title of position: Pasture Policy expert 
2.  Type and duration of contract: consultancy contract – 60 days (40 days in country – 20 
days home-based) 
3.  Location:  3 missions in the Country  
4.  Scope of work, Responsibilities and expected deliverables: 
The consultant will provide technical and methodological support to the PMT for the review of 
the Pasture Law. 
The 2019 version of pasture law addresses most of the gaps of the previous version (2013) 
related to rights of PUUs in the scope of the secondary users lease agreements. However, it 
does not address the sensitive and critical aspects related to control of livestock inventories. 
One of the possible entry points to address this problem from a policy and regulatory point of 
view would be to include in the law, provisions to enable PUUs to establish systems (grazing 
permits, quotas) that ensure that carrying capacities are observed and that stock 
accumulation is penalized. If these types of measures were framed in the Pasture Law and 
applied by all PUUs, the impact on animal inventories would be expected to be substantial.  
In order to enable the review of the pasture Law that takes into account the critical issue of 
regulation of livestock inventories and control of overgrazing, the consultant will be expected 
to deliver the following services: 
- 
Facilitate participatory assessment of the current Pasture Law implementation and gaps, in 
particular regarding control of animal populations and overgrazing 
Draft - August 2021 
60 
- 
Identify regulatory measures that could be framed in a revised version of PL and 
implemented by PUUs, local and National authorities 
Facilitate workshops for stakeholder consultation focusing on the two above topics 
- 
-  Draft amendments to the Pasture Law, or to other regulatory frameworks 
- 
- 
Raise awareness of decision makers on the relevance of adoption of proposed regulations 
Facilitate workshops for validation of the draft regulations 
5.  Supervision and reporting 
The expert will be under the supervision of the PMU Pasture specialist to whom he/she will 
report directly. 
6.  Required qualifications and experience 
o  Advanced degree in agronomy, ecology, natural resources management or pasture 
management 
o  15 years of experience in the field of pasture and rangelands management 
o  Prior experience in the Central Asia region 
o  Prior experience in Tajikistan would be an added advantage 
o  Prior experience on legal aspects related to pasture management 
o 
Languages: English (compulsory). Russian (added advantage)  
ToRs of GLEAM-I trainer 
1.  Title of position: GLEAM-I trainer 
2.  Type and duration of contract: consultancy contract – 20 days (8 days in country – 12 
days home-based) 
3.  Location:  1 mission in the Country  
4.  Scope of work, Responsibilities and expected deliverables: 
The consultant will provide training of selected staff of CEP, PMT, TAU, TAAS, and PMU on the 
utilization of the online GLEAM I livestock carbon accounting tool. 
A five days training session will be organized by CEP and PMU during Year 2. 
The first part of the training session will aim at enabling the participants to understand the 
contribution of Livestock to GHG emissions and climate change, and of the concrete actions 
that can be undertaken to minimize it. 
The second part of the training session will be focused on the utilization of the GLEAM i tool. 
The participants will be taken through the model in order to understand its functionalities, data 
requirements and outputs. Some practical exercises will then be undertaken based on 
concrete examples in the Country, including using the project investment scenario. 
Since GLEAM-i will have been run at design to create a baseline and figure out possible 
scenario, it is expected that participants to the training will be able to run it again on their 
own, with distant backstopping from the expert, at midterm and at project completion. 
5.  Supervision and reporting 
The expert will be under the supervision of the CEP to whom he/she will report directly. 
6.  Required qualifications and experience 
o  Advanced degree in agronomy, ecology, natural resources management or animal 
husbandry 
o  15 years of experience in the field of Livestock Development 
o  5 years’ experience in utilization of GLEAM-i 
o  Prior experience in training of GLEAM-I users 
Draft - August 2021 
61 
o  Prior experience in the Central Asia region 
o  Prior experience in Tajikistan would be an added advantage 
o 
Languages: English (compulsory). Russian (added advantage)  
ToRs of LSIPT trainer 
1.  Title of position: LSIPT trainer 
2.  Type and duration of contract: consultancy contract – 40 days (24 days in country – 16 
days home-based) 
3.  Location:  2 missions in the Country  
4.  Scope of work, Responsibilities and expected deliverables: 
The consultant will provide training of selected staff of CEP, PMT, TAU, TAAS, and PMU on the 
utilization of the revised version (online) of the Livestock sector and Policy Toolkit. 
Two 10 days training sessions will be organized by CEP and PMU during Year 2 and year 4, 
with the same participants. 
The first 10 days training session will aim at enabling the participants to acquire the required 
skills to utilize LSIPT. Participants will be provided with some concrete examples of utilization 
of LSIPT, outputs and relevance for decision making (based on Ethiopia, Rwanda, India cases). 
They will then be taken through the different modules to understand the overall logic of the 
tool, the linkages between modules, and the functioning of each module. Practical simulation 
exercises based on existing data set will then be undertaken. 
During the period between the two training sessions, participants will collect the necessary 
data required to run the model at national level. The consultant will provide technical support 
to this remotely. 
During the second session, the participants will collectively run the LSIPT to model the 
National Livestock sector. This will be facilitated and technically supported by the consultant. 
At the end of the session, a stakeholder workshop with relevant decision makers will be 
organized to present the output of the model, including the investment scenarios that have 
emerged from the analysis. 
5.  Supervision and reporting 
The expert will be under the supervision of the CEP to whom he/she will report directly. 
6.  Required qualifications and experience 
o  Advanced degree in agronomy, animal husbandry, veterinary medicine 
o  Alternatively, advanced degree in economy with prior work experience in livestock 
development 
o  15 years of experience in the field of Livestock Development 
o  The consultant should have undertaken a training of trainers on GLEAM (organized by 
FAO, CIRAD or ILRI) 
o  3 years’ experience in utilization of LSIPT 
o  Prior experience in training of LSIPT users 
o  Prior experience in the Central Asia region would be an added advantage 
o 
Languages: English (compulsory). Russian (added advantage)  
ToRs of breeding expert 
1.  Title of position: animal breeding expert 
2.  Type and duration of contract: consultancy contract – 20 days (12 days in country – 8 
days home-based) 
3.  Location:  2 missions in the Country (Year 1 and Year 2) 
4.  Scope of work, Responsibilities and expected deliverables: 
The breeding expert will be responsible for the following: 
- 
Facilitating participatory stock taking on the current outdated breeding strategy 
Draft - August 2021 
62 
- 
Facilitate a participatory assessment of the context, challenges, capacity and investment 
gaps related to breeding in the Country 
Provide his/her own technical opinion on the two above points 
- 
-  Highlight and explain challenges related to conservation of indigenous breeds and 
- 
- 
- 
introduction of exotic breeds, in the context of climate change 
Support the formulation of a revised breeding strategy, that takes into account the 
outputs from the above tasks 
The above tasks will be undertaken in the scope of a first 8 days mission, during which 
filed visits and interviews with stakeholders will be organized, and two stakeholder 
workshops (one for stock taking, one for formulation of draft strategy) will be organized. 
After the first mission, the consultant will formulate a draft breeding strategy with an 
action plan and budget 
-  During the second mission (Y2), the draft strategy will be discussed, amended if needed, 
and adopted by stakeholders; a workshop will be organized for this purpose, which will be 
facilitated by the consultant. 
The final breeding strategy will be developed after this second mission, and submitted for 
adoption. 
- 
5.  Supervision and reporting 
The expert will be under the supervision of the MPU (Livestock expert) to whom he/she will 
report directly. 
6.  Required qualifications and experience 
o  Advanced degree in agronomy, animal husbandry, or veterinary medicine 
o  20 years of experience in the field of Livestock Development 
o  10 years of experience in the field of animal breeding 
o  Prior experience in supporting the formulation of national breeding strategy (3 prior 
similar assignments minimum) 
o  Prior experience in the Central Asia region would be an added advantage 
o 
Languages: English (compulsory). Russian (added advantage)  
MoU between PMU and FSC  
Type of agreement:  Memorandum of understanding 
Duration: 7 years 
Object 
The purpose of this MoU is to define the modalities of collaboration between the CASP+ 
project, represented by the PMU, and the Food Security Committee, for the implementation of 
activities by FSC in the field of veterinary public health and veterinary legislation, in the scope 
of CASP+ project. 
Contributions and responsibilities from CASP+ 
The contributions by CASP+ project to the partnership will be as follows: 
- 
Secondment of a specialist on Epidemiology and One Health approach based in Dushanbe, 
in the FSC office for 7 years 
Provision of a mini truck-refrigerator for the transportation of vaccines to maintain the 
“Cold Chain” and a disinfection machine 
Contribution to the costs for the organization of the visits, in the limits of the budget 
defined in the project documents: 
o  The OIE Veterinary Legislation Identification Mission (VLIM)  
o 
o 
o 
International expert on state veterinary management (Y2) 
International expert on veterinary surveillance (Y2; Y4) 
International expert on veterinary legislation (Y2 and Y3) 
Contribution to the costs for organizing internal trainings, workshops, round tables and 
other events for discussing and dissemination of the issues identified by international 
experts 
- 
- 
- 
Draft - August 2021 
63 
- 
 Contribution to the costs of the participation of FSC’s staff in training, workshops, 
organized by OIE, FAO, IPPC and other relevant international organizations, in the limits of 
the budget defined in the project documents. 
Contributions and responsibilities from FSC 
The FSC will be responsible for all animal and veterinary public health activities, including an 
improvement of veterinary legislation under the CASP+: 
- 
Prepare and implementation of the comprehensive documents proposing strategies, action 
plans, short and long-term recommendations on the design of an appropriate response to 
strengthen veterinary public health systems to better address potential outbreaks of 
zoonotic diseases through: 
o  Organization of visits of the international experts in veterinary management and 
veterinary surveillance 
o  Establishment of a sustainable relationship between the veterinary service and the 
human health sector to clarify roles and responsibilities, and to strengthen an 
effective intersectoral coordination mechanism 
o  Participation in the selection and recruitment of a specialist on Epidemiology and 
One Health approach as well as guide and monitor his work 
Lead the revision and improvement of veterinary legislation, to include a legal framework 
for the development of private veterinary services and the separation of powers between 
public and private veterinary sectors, delegating certain state powers to private 
veterinarians, defining the concepts of a private veterinarian, para veterinarian, their 
rights and obligations through: 
o  Organization of OIE Veterinary Legislation Identification Mission 
o  Organization of Veterinary Legislation Expert’s visits  
o  Organizing trainings, workshops, round tables, meetings to discuss and 
dissemination of the issues identified by international veterinary legislation experts 
o  Facilitation and organizing of the participation of FSC’s staff in training, workshops, 
organized by OIE, FAO, IPPC and other relevant international organizations 
Reorganization of the organizational structure of the head office of the FSC to improve 
veterinary management and compliance with the OIE requirements, through: 
Implementation of the recommendations of international experts 
Implementation of the recommendations of the OIE PVS Missions into practice  
o 
o 
o  Close cooperation with TVA 
- 
- 
- 
Improvement of the veterinary surveillance system based on risk assessment and 
management 
Creation of acceptable conditions for licensing of private veterinarians 
- 
-  Drawing up a technical specification for the purchase of a mini truck-refrigerator and a 
disinfection machine 
Further details on the content and modalities of activities allocated to FSC in the scope of the 
CASP+ project are provided in the project PIM. 
Implementation modalities of Sub-activity 1.1.4.2. Scholarships  
Sub-activity 1.1.4.2. Promote enrollment of male and female youth in training curricula on climate-
resilient natural resources management 
Under sub-activity 1.1.4.1.  (Integrate climate change issues in university and training institutions 
curricula), the project will support the Tajik Agrarian University for the development and roll out of: 
-  A new curriculum for climate change specialists (bachelor’s degree level) 
-  A new master’s degree curriculum on pasture management, to complement the already existing 
bachelor curriculum developed with the support of LPDP 
The project will also support the roll out of these two new curricula that will build capacities required 
for the achievement of project outcomes. During three years (year 3, 4 and 5), 10 scholarships will be 
Draft - August 2021 
64 
allocated, for a duration of 3 years, to students originating from the project area, to attend these two 
curricula. 
The maximum amount of the scholarship will be USD 6,000 per year and per student (USD 18,000 per 
student for the entire curricula). The scholarship will cover the tuition fees, and part of the 
accommodation costs on the University campus, transport cost from the project area to Dushanbe, 
and food costs. 
The modalities of this support will be articulated into the MoU entered into between the project (CEP) 
and TAU, and are described in details below: 
Disbursement modalities: 
The amount of all scholarships for a year will be paid by the project to TAU at the beginning of each 
academic year. TAU will retain the tuition fees and pay the contribution to accommodation, transport 
and food costs directly to the student. 
Payment of the scholarship to TAU for the subsequent year will be subject to the submission of a 
financial report. 
Selection of beneficiaries: 
The selection of the 30 beneficiaries will be under the responsibility of TAU. 
During the three years preceding enrolment (Y2, Y3 and Y4), TAU will inform the potential 
beneficiaries through the following channel of the scholarship opportunities and conditions of 
eligibility: 
-  For the master’s on pasture management, the students already enrolled in the bachelor’s 
curriculum being the only eligible candidates, they will be informed directly by University 
management 
-  For the Bachelor on Climate Change, the scholarship opportunity will be published on the 
University website and shared with all public high schools providing scientific high school 
diploma teaching. 
The compulsory criteria for eligibility will be: 
-  For the master’s on pasture management, having successfully completed the bachelor’s 
curriculum provided by TAU 
-  For the Bachelor on Climate Change, having successfully completed a scientific high school 
diploma level curriculum. 
-  For all, the candidates should have followed primary education in in one of the 21 Districts 
covered by the project, and one parent should still reside there. 
The additional criteria assessed by CEP-PIG that will be used to rank and select the beneficiaries will 
be: 
-  Gender: 50% of beneficiaries should be female 
-  Family social and professional background: candidacies of students from households involved in 
agriculture from economically fragile / poor families (e.g., beneficiaries of social safety nets 
transfers due to economic, health or other reasons) will be considered on a priority basis.  
-  Professional perspectives: candidates willing to be involved in government and development 
agencies will get priority (as clearly articulated in the candidate application letter). 
-  Academic performance (grades), especially in scientific topics 
The selection will involve: 
-  Desk pre-selection, based on resumes, application letter and academic records 
- 
- 
Interviews with pre-selected candidates 
The list of candidates selected by TAU will have to be approved by CEP 
Research work:  
All the students sponsored by the project will get priority to undertake their final research in the scope 
of the project, and in the project area, either as project interns, or interns of partnering institutions 
(Pasture Meliorative Trust, State Enterprise for Capacity Development, Private sector partners involved 
in Productive Alliances, PUAs or Pasture Commissions, partnering NGOs, etc.). 
Draft - August 2021 
65 
Implementation modalities of Sub-activity 1.1.4.3. Research Grants 
Detailed implementation modalities of Sub-activity 1.1.4.3. Enable research institutes and the private 
sector  to  produce  evidence  on  NRM  and  Climate  Change  for  policy  dialogue  and  climate  sensitive 
technical innovations. 
Rationale and strategic approach: 
This sub-activity will provide financial support (herewith in “Research Grants”) to relevant academic 
institutions active in the domain of agriculture, livestock, forestry and environmental management (the 
“Recipients”) to:  
(i) 
(ii) 
develop  climate  sensitive  technical  innovations  in  the  domain  of  livestock  and  pasture 
management, that will then be disseminated at community level in the scope of extension 
activities (demonstration plots and FFS under component 3), and to  
generate evidence and lessons learnt on climate resilient practices for policy dialogue. 
The  result  of  the  Research  Grants  will  be  innovative  locally  tested  and  approved  technologies 
(“Innovative  Climate  Adaptive  Technologies”).  These  will  represent  a  public  good  and  wil  be 
disseminated  by  the  Recipients  with  own  resources,  and  by  CASP+  through  (i)  demonstrations  plots 
implemented  (Sub-activity  3.1.3.1:  promotion  of  technical  climate  smart  innovations  through 
demonstrations and exchange visits) and possibly (ii) Roll out of Farmers’ Field Schools (Sub-activity 
3.1.3.3). The dissemination flowchart is depicted below.  
Flowchart of dissemination of CASP+ supported Innovative Climate Adaptive Technologies 
Selected 
existing 
technical 
innovations
• Already developped
• Already tested and validated  in other 
contexts
•Identified through litterature review, 
exchange visits and networking 
This 
activity 
y 
Locally tested 
and approved 
technical 
innovations
•Tested through research grants in 
research station conditions
•Validated by reaserch institutes
• Documented
Demo 
plots 
Technical 
innovations 
showcased in 
demo plots
• In 21 demo plots at 
District level
• Field days organized & 
attended by farmers
Field 
days 
Technical 
innovations 
tested in FFS
Innovations 
adopted by 
farmers
Technical domains: 
On technical innovations, the focus will be on climate change adaptation for the agriculture sector, 
responding  to  country-specific  climate  stressors  affecting  remote  mountainous  areas  of  Tajikistan 
Draft - August 2021 
66 
(relevant to CASP+ intervention areas). They might comprise fully innovative climate smart technologies 
or tailoring to Tajik conditions existing technologies. They can comprise (non-exhaustive list): (i) climate 
resilient fodder crops (including fodder trees) species and varieties, (ii) climate resilient livestock species 
and breeds, (iii) water saving technologies, (iv) alternative feed sources (including industrial and crop 
by products), (v) reduced carbon emission and/or carbon sequestration technologies (alternative feed), 
(vi) innovative agricultural practices for fodder production integrated with other crops (intercropping, 
catch crops, agroforestry). A more detailed but non exhaustive list of possible research topics is provided 
at the end of this annex. 
Selection process: 
In order to implement this sub-activity in a simple manner, the project will launch two calls for proposals 
for research projects that are in line with the project. CASP+ will support 6 research grants, preferably 
two research projects every year for the first three years of project implementation. 
The  call  for  proposal  will  be  shared  with  relevant  academic  institutions  active  in  the  domain  of 
agriculture,  livestock,  forestry  and  environmental  management  (Recipients).  These  will  include  in 
particular  the  Tajik  Agrarian  University  and  the  Tajik  Academy  of  Agricultural  Science,  but  could  be 
extended to other interested national and local public or private universities and research centers, and 
to international research centers present and active in the country (in particular CGIAR centers). 
The projects submitted by eligible institutions will have to fulfill the following criteria: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Implementation  of  the  research  project  should  preferably  be  of  2  years  duration  (from 
disbursement of grant to the delivery of technically approved of result), in order to allow proper 
dissemination through demo plots, filed days and FFS, and adoption. The research shall in any 
case not exceed 3 years; 
Technologies tested should be pre-existing (in other countries), and should have been previously 
developed, tested and validated in other similar agro-ecological and socio-economic contexts 
The  innovation  should  contribute  to  strengthen  the  resilience  of  farming  systems  to  climate 
change following identified climate stressors in mountainous areas / ecosystems 
The innovation should pertain to one or several of the following technical domains:  
o  Ecosystem  services  /  management:  carbon  sequestration,  erosion  and  soil 
degradation management, water and fertility management, waste management, water 
management including water harvesting 
o  Climate-resilient agriculture / agrifood value chain technologies/practices: low 
emission  value  chains  management,  crop-fodder  integration  (intercropping,  catch 
fodder crops, rotation), soil and fertility preservation 
o  Climate  adaptive  livestock  husbandry  technologies/  practices:  animal  health, 
pasture  management,  breeds  and  species,  reproductive  management,  fodder 
production,  fodder  conservation,  alternative  feeding  (crop  or  agro-industrial  by 
products), manure management, digital innovations for livestock management, pasture 
management, market access  
The  innovation  should  be  suited  to  smallholder  farmers  systems  (innovations  that  are  only 
applicable to large scale commercial systems will not be eligible) 
The innovation should not have a potential or proven adverse environmental impact (e.g. risk 
of introduction of invasive species) and shall follow the Environmental and Social Management 
Framework of CASP+. 
Innovations  that  contribute  to  alleviate  the  work  burden  for  women  will  be  considered  on  a 
priority basis.  
Financing: The maximum grant amount per research project will be USD 50,000 (it is expected that 
the average amount per project will be 40,000 USD) – until exhaustion of available resources. The grant 
will cover the cost of equipment and goods and external services required to undertake the research: 
seeds, farming equipment and inputs, animals, casual labor. 
The cost of scientific and technical follow up, evaluation, and documentation will not be covered by the 
grant and will be the contribution of the Research Institution. 
Draft - August 2021 
67 
The land on which the trial will be conducted will be provided by the research institution, a community, 
a partner institution or a local government on a transparent and signed agreement. 
The call for proposal will be developed by the project coordination and shared with not more than 10 
potentially interested pre-identified institutions. The Call for Proposal (CFP) will reflect the criteria and 
conditions depicted above. After receiving the CFP, the research institutions will have 10 days to confirm 
if they wish to participate to the CFP, and 45 days to develop their research proposal. 
The research proposal will have to follow the below template: 
  Detailed description of the innovation proposed for testing 
 
Previous research and testing undertaken (institution, location, context) and results (quantified) 
including references to publications 
Expected benefits for project targeted communities (in terms of climate resilience, productivity, 
livelihoods, environment, gender equity) 
Proposed  implementation  plan:  activities  and  tasks,  stakeholders  involved  and  respective 
responsibilities, inputs and equipment required 
Proposed budget (each budget line should provide details on unit costs and quantities) 
Proposed financing plan detailing grant contribution, beneficiary contribution and other partner 
contribution if any 
 
 
 
 
A selection committee composed of (i) one representative of MoA (ii) at least one representative of CEP 
(ii)  and  three  representatives  of  SEPMU  will  assess  the  research  proposals  based  on  the  following 
criteria: 
 
Potential contribution of expected research outputs to provision of evidence for policy dialogue 
in the domains of pasture management, animal husbandry, NRM 
Potential contribution of expected research outputs to provision of practical technical solutions 
to  be  disseminated  top  farmers  through  demos  and  FFS,  and  that  will  contribute  to increase 
climate resilience and productivity of livestock production systems 
 
  Value for money (cost per output)  
The  selection  committee will  select  not  more  than  2  projects  for  each  CFP  (expect  if  no  or  only  one 
project  was  selected  during  the  previous  CFP,  in  this  case  the  quota  will  be  carried  forward  to  the 
subsequent  CFP).  The  committee  may  accept  the  project  as  it  is  or  suggest  some  amendments  and 
improvements. The final decision should be announced not more than 2 months after the deadline for 
submission of the projects. 
Implementation: 
The  selected  research  projects  will  be  financed  in  the  scope  of  an  MoU  signed  between  the  project 
coordination and the research institution. 
The  MoU  will  define  the  respective  responsibilities  of  project  and  research  institutions,  in  terms  of 
research implementation, financing, and result dissemination.  
The procurement of goods, inputs and services necessary for the implementation of the research will be 
procured directly by the project, in line with specifications provided by the reach institution. 
The beneficiary contribution will be provided in kind by the research institution. 
The selection committee will visit the research site every year to monitor implementation. The project 
staff will be allowed to visit the site as often as requested. 
The research institutions will be encouraged to involve students in these research work. 
The  research  institutions  will  also  be  encouraged  to  strengthen  the  partnerships  and  linkages  with 
extension  (in  particular  the  State  Enterprise  for  Capacity  development),  through  the  activity  3.2.3 
(Support  adoption  of  climate  resilient  innovative  technologies)  that  will  support  dissemination  of 
technical innovations from research to grassroots level, through demonstration and extension.  
Reporting: 
The research institution will report on implementation on a six-month basis. 
Draft - August 2021 
68 
Research results will be compiled, analyzed and shared with the project at least once at the end of the 
project. Intermediary results could also be reported on. 
The  final report should provide factual data on the  technology outcomes, but also an analysis on its 
potential benefits for smallholder farmers. 
Research institutions will be encouraged to publish the reach results in scientific publications. 
Intellectual property: 
The  intellectual  property  of  the  research  results  will  be  shared  by  the  project  and  the  implementing 
research institutions. Both institutions will be allowed to publish and share research results, but should 
always  mention  that  the  research  has  been  implemented  in  partnership.  All  publications  should  be 
authored by both project and research institutions designated staff. 
List (not exhaustive) of potential research subjects: 
Climate adaptive livestock husbandry technologies/ practices:  
- 
- 
Feeding: digital ration balancing software, utilization of alternative feed sources (crop by 
products, industry by products, fish, poultry manure, blood, etc…) 
Fodder: drought or salt resistant fodder species, small scale fodder conservation techniques, 
fodder  cultivation  techniques,  including  in  association  with  other  crops  (catch  cropping, 
intercropping, rotation) 
-  Animal  health:  comparison  of  drug  efficiency  (e.g.  for  control  of  external  parasites, 
vaccination), cost benefit analysis of animal health interventions 
-  Manure  management:  comparison  of  manure  management  techniques  and  respective 
contribution to GHG emissions, fertility 
-  Reproduction:  digital  reproduction  management  software,  reproductive  technologies  (AI 
techniques, heat synchronization protocols, embryo transfer) 
-  Breeding:  testing  of  alternative  breeds  or  species,  digital  performance  management  and 
selection tools 
Climate-resilient agrifood value chain technologies/practices:   
- 
- 
- 
Lower emission value chains (with focus on market access): innovative agrifood logistics 
hubs, energy efficient small scale dairy processing technologies, digital value chain management 
tools (esp. for dairy), assessment of milk quality and safety…   
crop-fodder integration (intercropping, catch fodder crops, rotation)  
soil and fertility preservation 
Ecosystem services / management:  
Energy: utilization of renewable energy for production or processing (solar cooling or heating) 
- 
-  Pasture  management:  comparison  of  pasture  management  techniques,  testing  and 
comparison  of  pasture  restoration  techniques  (reseeding,  overseeding,  shrub  and  tree 
plantation, self-restoration through protection) 
Draft - August 2021 
69 
4.2.  Component 2: Investments in community capacity for adaption and 
resilience to climate change 
147.  This component represents the most significant share of the financial outlay of the 
project and will enhance the climate resilience of vulnerable communities in the selected 
districts through the development and implementation of Climate Sensitive Community 
Action Plans (CsCAPs). These plans will be based on District level Climate Resilience 
Diagnostic (DCRD), defining climate related challenges and investment needs for adaption 
and disaster risk reduction to enhance the resilience of the target communities, relating in 
particular to the following impacts:  
 
 
intensification of storms and higher frequency of heavy rainfall events 
affecting pasture land, increasing erosion, loss of soils, water runoff and 
occurrence of natural disasters  
increased risk of droughts and water scarcity during summer months due to 
increasing temperature and decreasing rainfall in some areas.  
148.  Each CsCAP will be developed based on the district level diagnostic to avoid 
maladaptation from design. The activities will be pre-selected in line with the climate change 
impacts in the area as measures to adapt to it and increase the resilience of the ecosystem 
and the population. Furthermore, as a second mechanism to avoid maladaptation, ESMPs 
and ESIAs will be developed at the level of the CsCAP to ensure the adequacy of the 
activities and to include risk mitigation measures where needed. Finally, to mitigate the risk 
of maladaptation at implementation, an International expert will train district officers on the 
elaboration, implementation and monitoring of ESMPs and ESIAs that will safeguard the 
foreseen investments.  
149.  This component will be implemented in 400 villages in the selected districts. The 
villages have been selected based on their vulnerability to climate change and their limited 
adaptive capacity. The project will encourage a collaborative and a participatory diagnostic 
and implementation process. The process will be led by the district Government and 
facilitated by a competitively recruited NGO facilitator and implemented by both public and 
private sector agencies with participation of communities. The CsCAPs will include 
ecosystem improvement and agricultural resilience investments, composed of pasture 
management; afforestation and forest rehabilitation; climate resilient infrastructure; and 
agricultural equipment which can be used for greater efficiency in the use of land and water 
resources which promotes conservation and reduces soil erosion. Given that the process is 
participatory the exact scope of the plans and the nature of investments will be identified 
during the CsCAP design, informed by the DCRD. For budgeting purposes, indicative costs 
and quantities were identified based on previous IFAD experience under its on-going CASP 
project. 
150.  Overall pasture situation: The pasture management systems that had been setup 
by the USSR regime has not been replaced by any formal pasture governance systems, and 
the maintenance of pasture infrastructures (in particular those in summer pasture) is not 
ensured anymore. In the meantime, livestock inventories have increased significantly and 
consistently. The combination of these two-phenomenon resulted in an increased pressure 
on pasture located around settlements, but at the same time in lower utilization of distant 
and summer pasture. 
Draft - August 2021 
70 
151.  The problem has now taken the shape of a vicious circle: increased inventories lead to 
more degradation, that affects the productivity of pasture and livestock, compensated by 
further stock accumulation, and further degradation.  
152.  The total pasture area stands at around 3,8 M hectares. 72% of them are registered 
as summer pasture, the rest as winter pasture. Out of the 3.8 M ha of total pasture, 
2,818,000 or 72% are considered as agricultural land (Tajstat, 2019), 28% 1,090,000 as 
forests (Land and Geodesy Dept, 2019), less than 1 % or 20,000 ha (Committee for 
Environmental Protection, 2019) as protected areas. 
153.  In terms of regional distribution, Khatlon is by far the region with the largest pasture 
domain, with around 30% of national total, followed by RRS (28%) and Sughd (19%); the 
remaining 23% is in GBAO. 
154.  Pasture degradation: All information sources concur that pasture degradation is at 
an advanced stage: 85% of pastureland are subject to erosion (ADB 2004), and 4% of 
pastureland are destroyed (UNDP 2010) and cannot be rehabilitated. This of course mostly 
caused by overgrazing since 89% of summer pasture and 97% of winter pasture can be 
considered as overgrazed (UNEP 2011). However, in the recent years, around 100,000 ha of 
pasture have been improved (through pasture rotation or infrastructures). 
155.  Out of the 2,8 M ha of pasture classified as agricultural land, 37% are allocated to 
dekhan farmers. The rest is shared by agricultural enterprises (32%), state farms (16%), 
individual farms (3%) and other users (12%). The Household farms do not enjoy any 
primary usage rights on pasture. 
156.  Overstocking and overgrazing is occurring mostly in collective pasture used by 
household farms. Accumulation of livestock by large farmers doesn’t appear to be the root 
cause of pasture degradation as often pointed, since the more than 90% of animals are 
owned by small household farms. Because household farms are also the main provider of 
migrant workers, the linkage between remittances and accumulation of animals is likely, as 
it is often the case in central Asia. 
157.  Summer pasture and mobility: During the soviet era, an elaborate had been 
established to manage summer pasture, including by constructing roads, shepherd shelters, 
water infrastructures, and organizing transfer of animals by trucks on long distances. This 
system does not exist anymore, infrastructures are not maintained properly, and access to 
summer pasture has thus become difficult, especially for smaller herds. PUUs have little 
control of summer pasture, and the livestock mobility, which is an efficient risk reduction 
and resilience mechanism, has decreased, and is now limited to larger herds and flocks. 
158.  Pasture Users associations (PUUs): PUUs are the core of the mechanism 
established in the Country in the last decade to delegate management of pasture to local 
communities and break the vicious circle of pasture degradation. PUUs were officially 
established by the 2013 PL. The PUU system is a mechanism of community-based 
governance of pasture, where the pasture users, organized in groups, become collectively 
responsible of the management of pasture. There are around 430 active PUUs in the country 
(out of around 3,000 villages in total). Most of them (383) were established by LPDP 1 and 
2 in Khatlon. 
159.  Pasture Users Unions (PUAs): PUA’s role as per the law is to establish the list of 
pasture users, participate in pasture commission, submit requests for allocation of 
pastureland, provide assistance to PUAs, and participate in the management of pasture that 
spread over several PUUs areas. Existing PUAs are mostly located in Khatlon, but their 
concrete role not very clear in reality and would need to be clarified. 
Draft - August 2021 
71 
160.  Pasture commissions (PCs): PCs are placed under the leadership of District local 
Governments. Their membership is composed of local authorities, PUUs and PUAs 
representatives, and pasture specialists from regional PMT branches. Their role is crucial 
and consists in (i) delineating pasture (ii) regulating pasture management, including solving 
problems & conflicts related to pasture (iii) calculating pasture capacity and preparation of 
PMP (iv) and monitoring of pasture. 
161.  In reality, the existing PCs are confronted to a lack of means and are mostly active on 
conflicts resolution and approval of PMPs. 
162.  Pasture Management Plans (PMPs): the PMP, together with the PUU, is a key 
feature of the PL, and according to the law, it is mandatory for each PUU to have a PMP. A 
PMP normally comprises of the followings: (i) a pasture map, (ii) a carrying capacity and 
stocking rate calculation, (iii) a plan for rehabilitation of infrastructures, and (iv) a pasture 
rotation plan. A PMP normally has a 5-year duration.  
163.  Pastureland tenure : All types of pasture are the public property of the Government 
of Tajikistan. Pasture are defined as farming land as per the 2004 Land Code. PUUs can 
apply to obtain either a land certificate (as primary user) or a lease (as secondary user) on 
pastureland. Obtaining a land certificate is possible for a PUU only if the land has not been 
allocated yet to a dekhan farmer, which is usually not the case. Obtaining a lease from the 
dekhan farmer who detains la land certificate is thus often the only solution for the PUU to 
get formal usage rights on pastureland, but this has to be negotiated case by case, depends 
on the willingness of the dekhan, and does not provide a long-term guarantee for the PUU. 
For pastureland classified as forests and managed by the forest Agency, the only possible 
arrangement is for the PUU to obtain a lease agreement from the Agency.  
164.  Lessons Learned from Livestock and Pasture Development Project (LPDP) I 
and II: these two projects were/are financed by IFAD and implemented by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. LPDP I was completed in 2018 and LPDP II is still ongoing; both were 
implemented in Khatlon. LPDP I was the first project to implement the concept of PUU, that 
had been institutionally introduced through the first version of the pasture Law (2013). 
165.  The main lessons generated under LPDP I and II regarding pasture management and 
in particular roll out of PUUs and PMPs are as follows:   
  The creation of PUUs has been very well accepted by communities, probably 
because it was addressing an acute problem (pasture overutilization), but also 
because of the very concrete incentives associated with PUUs (grants for 
equipment and infrastructures); 
  All PUAs have been able to develop PMP, and PMPs are implemented and 
enforced, including in particular the pasture rotation plans, and some pasture 
protections; 
  Implementation of PMP have a real impact on pasture productivity (+15 % in 
average) and degradation; 
  Sustainability of PUAs is a delicate issue that requires attention and exit 
preparation. 
166.  Strategic approach on pasture management. Interventions related to pasture 
management will aim primarily at reducing the intensity of the degradation process, 
considering that reversing it and restoring the full pasture potential will only be feasible in 
specific contexts. 
167.  The project approach will consist in promoting sustainable pasture management 
practices, in particular pasture rotation and observation of carrying capacities and resting 
Draft - August 2021 
72 
periods, through the development and implementation of pasture management plans (PMP). 
IFAD experience on development and implementation of PMP is extensive (10 years in 
Tajikistan, and similar in neighboring countries) and successful. 
168.  Considering that the level of degradation of pasture is higher for those located in the 
vicinity of settlements, and that distant pasture, in particular high altitude summer pasture, 
are often underutilized, the project will also aim at re-balancing their utilization through 
strategic investments.  
169.  PUUs will be the cornerstone of this approach, given the positive results they have 
generated in Khatlon under LPDP. Specifically, the pasture management plan is the 
instrument with proven capacity to ensure respecting carrying capacity and resting periods.  
170.  Role of PMT in supporting to PUUs: Under LPDP I and II, most of the support provided 
to PUUs was channeled through the PMU. This has raised questions on the continuity of this 
support, considering that PUU may require a lighter institutional support after 4 to 5 years 
of project duration. In order to address this issue from the very beginning, the project will 
channel his support to PUUs through regional branches of the PMT.  
171.  Climate rationale of proposed interventions. In terms of mitigation, it is expected 
that support to pasture management under this component will contribute to the following: 
  Roll out of PMPs limiting pasture stocking rates to the actual carrying capacity 
will be a first level of disincentive to livestock accumulation; 
  Intensification of production systems, and in particular the reduction of 
proportion of unproductive animals, will lead to a reduction of the CO2e per 
ton of protein produced; 
  Reduction of pasture degradation, pasture protection and restauration, will 
also increase their carbon sequestration potential. Based on LPDP experience, 
the average increase in pasture productivity caused by the implementation of 
PMPs stands at about + 15%. It is expected that the carbon sequestration 
potential of these pasture will increase by a similar factor. 
172.  It is therefore expected that the moderate increase in CO2 equivalent from animals 
generated by intensification will be offset by the CO2e stored in the improved grasslands. In 
terms of adaptation, the main outcomes that are expected will be as follows: 
  Utilization of fodder shrubs and trees as pasture restoration techniques will 
contribute to protect soils against erosion, but also to provide fodder during 
dry season. 
  The implementation of PMPs through PUUs will assist in establishing standing 
fodder stock, that will help in withstanding drought episodes 
  The promotion of hay production and conservation from selected pasture, for 
utilization during the stall-feeding period, but also in summer during drought, 
will also reinforce the capacity to undergo drought episodes. 
  Investments in distant summer pasture such as access tracks, bridges, water 
point, animal shelters and shepherd housing will help in restoring 
transhumance practices, that have been almost abandoned during the last 
decades. Vertical transhumance (from plains to mountains) will enable herds 
and flocks to use pasture resource that are underused, and that are less 
subject to the negative effects of climate change, drought in particular. 
173.  Forestry context. While current estimates place the percent of forest cover as less 
than 3% past records testify that in the early 20th century forests covered approximately 
Draft - August 2021 
73 
25% of Tajikistan17. Following independence from the collapsed Soviet Union, supplies of 
energy from the Russian Federation dropped very sharply. As a result fuelwood became the 
primary source of energy for many, especially for rural areas. Livestock numbers have risen, 
leading to overgrazing, which has inhibited forest regeneration. In addition, a shift from 
small livestock (sheep, goats) to larger domesticated animals (cattle, horses) kept closer to 
settlements, has increased grazing pressure on pastures and surrounding forests, further 
degrading forests. Finally, uncontrolled logging added to the ongoing exploitation of the 
forest. While the situation has improved for some countries in the region, fuelwood removal 
continues to drive forest degradation in Tajikistan. 
174.  Estimates of growing stock per hectare vary widely between 5 m3ha-1 and 12.5m3ha-1. 
There are no plantations for wood production, although in the 1970s and 1980s, a quarter 
of forests were classified as nutbearing forests. Non-Wood Forest Products (NWFPs) play an 
important role in the standard of living and livelihood of rural communities and as a source 
of income for Leskhoz. Products include game and fur animals, seeds, nuts, berries, 
mushrooms, oils, foliage, medicinal plants, peat, honey and seedlings. 
175.  The largest source of revenues for Leskhoz is actually their pastures, with about 1 
million ha of the total 1.85 million ha in the State Forest Fund assigned to agricultural 
enterprises for their long-term use as pastures. Moreover, these areas have the richest 
vegetation, which for decades have traditionally been used for transhumance. Here there is 
overgrazing and depletion of grass, trees and shrubs and little by way of conservation or 
restoration of these rich plant communities. Pasture rotation is not used, livestock numbers 
are not limited and grass or shrubs to enrich the flora are not planted. 
176.  Official records state that annual reforestation activity is at about 2,100 hectares 
annually and the seedling survival rate is between 60 and 70 percent and attempts at 
natural regeneration appear to have been abandoned18. Juniper, pistachio, riparian forests in 
the mountains and saxaul forests all need intensive forest landscape restoration. Juniper 
forests require less active restoration, with protection from firewood gathering and heavy 
grazing pressure sufficing to allow recovery. Planting saxaul will help prevent erosion and 
desertification. There is considerable potential for forest restoration on abandoned mining 
sites and saxaul areas, where limited competition from other land use would create a good 
environment for forest landscape restoration19.  
177.  Typically, seed is sourced on an ad-hoc basis and seedlings are supplied by a mixture 
of private nurseries, the 5 main Forestry Agency nurseries and most Leskhoz have a small 
nursery of approximately 2 ha. In JFM projects ‘backyard’ nurseries of the size of a few 
hundred square metres have been established specifically to support the requirements of 
planned JFM investments in a specific locality. Some Leskhoz nurseries are said to operate 
at a high level (Vahdat, Quibodiyan) but in general the technical level and capacity is very 
mixed.  
178.  Joint Forest Management. The JFM approach was implemented in GBAO from 2006 
to 2012 and since 2013, this approach has been implemented in Gorno-Badakhshan by the 
Public Foundation CAMP Tabiat and the State Forestry Agency under the project ”Sustainable 
management of natural resources in Gorno-Badakhshan". The Forest Code adopted in 2011 
specifically provides for the participation of local people in JFM and with the assistance of 
this project, since 2018 the required subsidiary regulations and by-laws are now also in 
place. The State Forest Enterprises are now obliged to support JFM and report on its 
implementation. The forest agency, forest enterprises, NGO’s and forest users in the 
previous project areas have gained a comprehensive understanding of JFM and are now able 
to share this approach more widely within and beyond the target areas, paving the way for 
17 2010 GTZ Forest Sector analysis 
18 2017 Third Environmental Performance Review UNECE 
19 Climate Change Adaptation FLR_CCA_challenges___opportunities_081018-ENG-edited.pdf 
Draft - August 2021 
74 
full national rollout. The approach is now widely supported, with the Agriculture Reform 
Programme of Tajikistan 2012-2020 stating that scaling-up successful practices in Joint 
Pasture and Forest Management focusing on rehabilitation, conservation and rotational use 
is crucial to success in the sector. A new project funded by KfW – Climate Adaptation 
through Sustainable Forestry – Phase II is under consideration, will also support JFM and if 
approved will run from 2021-26. A further new project with the working title of Tajikistan 
Resilient Landscape and Livelihoods Project (TRELLIS) and funded by World Bank is under 
preparation and if approved will work with JFM from 2022. 
179.  Typically, JFM contracts are established where at least 30% tree canopy cover already 
exists so that participants may begin benefitting from some harvest immediately. Where 
tree cover is lower than this, Leskhoz undertake ‘direct afforestation’ using local labour. 
These may be remote from villages so that they are less exposed to degradation pressures. 
Protected Areas are split into core and buffer zones, the latter allowing a certain amount of 
activity that can absorb some of the pressures on the conservation objectives of the core 
zone. The buffers contain communities and natural resources that nevertheless need 
support and JFM will be introduced to the buffer zone of Dashtijum Nature Reserve, the only 
Protected Area within the areas covered by the 14 project Leskhoz. 
180.  Lessons Learned in implementing forestry and JFM activities in particular: 
  Ownership is created among beneficiaries to take responsibility for the 
interventions and maintain their livelihoods in sustainable ways through 
Community driven planning and decision-making. Although these were 
effective in ensuring transparency and prioritizing local needs, significant 
facilitation support and capacity building was required. Future Community 
driven interventions should allocate sufficient time and resources in that 
regard. 
  Mechanisms for engaging district-level decision makers (such as Jamoat 
Committees) are critical for buy-in and help elevate sustainable land 
management and climate resilience issues to the district level. They facilitate 
integration of interventions on environmental protection and SLM as part of 
the overall local development agenda.  
  Local technical consultants have an important role as interlocutors for 
maintaining dialogue between the implementation group and project 
beneficiaries and building ownership at the local level.  
  Future projects should consider improving productive assets and protecting 
and restoring the underlying natural resource base upon which people depend 
and these or similar measures, in tandem with a robust M&E system based on 
guiding principles of resilience operations, will support evidence-based 
evaluation and learning. 
  JFM has been successfully introduced and adapted to the needs of 
communities with different forest types. Local communities and forest 
enterprises rate JFM as an effective and helpful approach. 
  Measures to strengthen the capacities of forest authorities and forest users 
and to settle land use conflicts leads to the rehabilitation of degraded forest 
areas, greater availability of fuelwood and increased earnings from forest 
activities. The forest agency, forest enterprises and forest users have gained a 
comprehensive understanding of JFM and are now able to share this approach 
more widely within and beyond the target areas. With the development of 
local bylaws, the legal basis for JFM is now fully in place and documented so 
that it can be rolled out in additional areas. 
Draft - August 2021 
75 
  The JFM approach upscaled and tested in different climatic zones in Tajikistan 
has proven its advantage as a forest management tool. Comparing the cost 
per hectare to establish a plot, the costs for JFM are significantly lower than 
for SFE direct afforestation. The JFM plots are well protected and maintained 
by JFM users. 
  JFM users can make better and more efficient use of the given resources on 
their plots and improve their livelihoods significantly. JFM users also address 
risks, e.g. erosion, by applying countermeasures on their own. 
  There is a high transactional cost associated with JFM contracts between 
individuals and the Leskhoz. A trend toward contracts between individuals 
who represent Forest User Groups and Leskhoz could improve the efficiency of 
the process, be more community-driven and give more flexibility for collective 
labour efforts. 
  The JFM approach is not suited for large-scale afforestation due to the 
workload required in a short period of time. The SFE direct afforestation can 
bridge this gap. A combination of SFE direct afforestation and later transfer of 
the plantations into JFM plots will ensure long-term maintenance. With this 
kind of JFM approach, the resource sharing mechanism needs to be re-
addressed. 
  Insistence on using native species – has posed difficulties with sourcing of 
seedlings and community acceptance but has a strong case when climate 
adaptation and local nursery capacity is considered. Additional climate 
resilient tree planting plans could be successful, e.g. using Poplar cultivars in 
certain scenarios. 
  Small scale local ‘backyard’ nurseries have worked well and are a useful 
source of local, indigenous planting materials. 
181.  Climate rationale of proposed interventions. Forest cover is low and sparse and 
degradation is continuing, leading to increased vulnerability to soil erosion, slope instability, 
flooding and impaired soil water regulation and whole catchments are affected. Rural 
communities are highly reliant on their natural resources and lack of food security is a real 
threat. This risk is heightened by increases in returned migrants, falling remittances and 
reduced capacity for control caused by COVID-19. Usage of natural resources is 
unsustainable and pastures management needs improvement inside the State Forest Fund 
as well as outside. To date, coordination has been poor across all land users. While many 
donor projects usefully operate at a catchment-by-catchment basis no one coordinated 
approach has yet been adopted by the authorities. Anticipation of the effects of climate 
change and training in Ecosystem based Adaptations; a focus on food security; and enlisting 
the power of local knowledge in a participatory manner are aspects that have been largely 
absent in investment planning. 
182.  Enabling investments are needed to clarify inconsistencies in legislation to ensure 
there is a firm foundation for participatory planning and monitoring and that communities, 
staff and governance bodies will be fully receptive to the approach and associated field 
investments. Training in climate change effects, Ecosystem Based Adaptation methods and 
participatory planning and monitoring is required. Root cause issues such as lack of 
alternatives to wood energy and poor documentation of land tenure also need to be 
addressed. Robust, climate resilient investments are needed to create a tangible impact and 
crystallize the benefits of participatory planning and climate change adaptation. 
Draft - August 2021 
76 
4.2.1. 
Outputs  
Output 2.1. By year 3, 400 Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans 
(CsCAP) based on 21 District level Climate Resilience 
Diagnostics are developed 
183.  Based on communities demand, the CsCAPs participatory planning will summarize and 
prioritize investments needs expressed by the communities and priorities addressing the 
climate vulnerabilities identified during the district-specific District Climate Resilience 
diagnostic (DCRD). Cross-cutting issues between forestry and pasture management such as 
grazing or fuelwood collection taking place on planned JFM sites will be addressed to find 
alternative grazing either inside or outside Leskhoz lands and needs coordination using the 
CsCAP forum and plan. Responsibility for the respective elements of the plan will be 
allocated between SEPMU and CEP as follows: 
  Under SEPMU implementation: 
Pasture Restoration Investment  
Cross-village Pasture Management Investments  
(a). 
(b). 
(c). Climate Resilient infrastructure investments  
(d). 
Community Agricultural equipment for productivity improvement  
  Under CEP implementation:  
Joint Forest Management Investments  
(d). 
(e). 
Direct Leskhoz Forestry Investments  
(f). Joint Forest Management in Protected Area buffer zones  
184.  The indicative budget sub-allocations between SEPMU implemented and CEP 
implemented investments are pre-defined according to project objectives and targets and 
respective cost estimates (see annex 0). 
185.  In the development of the CsCAPs all relevant local communities and their institutions 
(Village organizations, Pasture Users Unions, Water Users Associations) as well as the 
decentralized institutions mandated to plan, monitor and invest in natural resources (Forest 
Enterprises, River Basins Councils, Local Administration, Environmental Protection offices, 
Emergency Committees) will be consulted. Technically qualified specialists will design each 
of the elements of the Pasture Management and JFM plans as well as recruit technical 
specialists for the design of the infrastructure schemes. The NGO facilitator will confirm that 
each CsCAP meets PMU budget and acceptance criteria and the PMU will forward them to 
the PMU Steering Group for approval. The process of annual review and compilation of 
Annual Operational Plans for the continued adaptation and implementation of the CsCAP will 
also be coordinated by the facilitator. The CsCAP format is provided in annex 0. 
186.  Local institutions such as VO’s, PUU’s, Forest User Groups will be established as 
required in each village. Funding for member and management board training, ICT 
equipment and land registration certificates (for PUU’s) will be provided. Initial appointment 
of boards (applying gender targets) where institutions are being newly established and 
training (of new and existing boards) will be required before moving to the planning stage. 
For forestry investments, Forest User Groups will be formed as a support network for 
individual householders who sign Joint Forest Management contracts. A similar concept will 
apply to the formation of other types of beneficiary groupings referred to as Common 
Interest Groups. These will be self-selecting groups of between 10 to 20 households per 
village20 organised into two themes (i) climate resilient food or fodder production and (ii) 
20 The CIG for window 1 will be on average consist of 10 households while those for window 2 grants are expected to have on 
average 20 households.  
Draft - August 2021 
77 
processing and storage which will be financed through a matching grant (see component 3). 
The climate-smart production and processing techniques on offer to CIGs will offer viable 
adaptation opportunities to diversify to more sustainable livelihoods.  
187.  The project will build on past experience shows that using this collaborative approach 
can lead to improved adaptation to climate change and the conservation of biodiversity and 
living conditions. The project will use the Joint forest management (JFM) approach, 
supported by the 2011 Forest Code of GoRT, which essentially involves leasing forest land to 
local people over the long term. Leskhoz staff; well informed by up-to-date vocational 
training delivered under Component 1 dealing comprehensively with sustainable, close-to-
nature and climate resilient forest management; together with forest users trained in the 
planting and aftercare of trees, will jointly draw up 5-year management plans for the areas 
under JFM. Building on the success of previous projects,21 the project will prove the 
applicability and impact of joint forest management in additional districts, Leskhoz and 
forest ecosystems. Protected Areas (PA) in the country are managed using the concept of a 
buffer and core zone. JFM will be applied in the Dashti-Jum protected area buffer zone to 
support the PA objectives, support local communities and restore tree cover. While it will 
facilitate JFM planning, the project will not update the forest Cadastre or undertake a 
detailed forest management plan for each area. In addition to training on tree care, JFM 
participants will be trained on sustainable management of fuelwood use, including 
controlling moisture content of fuelwood, sustainable harvest yield and efficient burning 
methods. 
188.  Inclusion of Women and Youth.  The project will ensure that at least 30% of the 
community facilitators are women. The facilitators will encourage the participation of women 
in the identification and planning of the investments and raise awareness regarding the 
importance of ensuring that women’s priorities are reflected in the choices made. The 
component activities will promote women self-awareness and leadership trainings. It will 
foster women’s participation on equal basis (50%) in developing the Climate-sensitive 
Community Action Plans, and will ensure a minimum representation (30%) in newly created 
PUU and other boards. The component will also support youth mobilisation and participation 
in key strategic planning processes (CsCAPs) including leadership trainings, climate change 
awareness and resilience building. Youth and excess local labour capacity (caused by 
reduced outward migration due to COVID-19) will be used in the creation of productive 
assets such as agroforestry. A specific target of 15% youth inclusion will be set for JFM 
contracts. 
Output 2.2. By year 7, 400 Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans 
(CsCAP) implemented in 21 districts benefitting at least 
100,000 rural households 
189.  This output will see the implementation of the plans compiled under output 2.1. 
Having compiled the first multi-annual CsCAP and JFM contracts and JFM plans during the 
first year of project implementation activity will flow on an annual cycle of operational plans, 
monitoring and review. Detailed descriptions of these activities are provided below. 
4.2.2. 
Description of activities 
21 GIZ. 2018. 
Draft - August 2021 
78 
Activity 2.1.1: District Climate Resilience Diagnostic (CEP+SEPMU) 
190.  A diagnostic analysis of community needs will be mapped using an advanced desktop 
geospatial analysis of climate risk and vulnerability. A map-based profile of each district will 
be created to indicate the geographic areas where the effects of climate change pose the 
greatest threat to the safety and livelihood of inhabitants, built assets, agriculture and 
natural resources. The activities will be grouped as ‘Highly recommended’, ‘Recommended’, 
‘Least recommended’. Given the importance of water control, conservation and topography 
in disaster risk reduction and climate change resilience, each district will be divided into 
planning units based on sub-catchments. This will allow a landscape management approach, 
linking activity in the upper parts of a given catchment to ‘passive’ beneficiaries in the lower 
parts of the same catchment and managing the interrelationships between various types of 
land use (see annex 0 for an outline structure for each DCRD).  
191.  The district diagnostic will be regarded as a discrete ‘information product’ output of 
the project and an information campaign will explain the basis of the diagnostic to jamoats 
in the selected 21 districts; outline the climate-related changes that can be expected and 
the best strategies to cope with them. The entire population22 of each district will benefit 
through improved planning with respect to climate resilient investments, whether in the 
frame of the current or future projects. The diagnostic approach will form the basis of 
outreach activities including short videos/animations (to be hosted on slmtj.net) and special 
education activities for schools. This material will also highlight the way in which climate 
risks will have a disproportionate impact on women and how the voices of women can be 
included in action planning to ensure success. Third level education opportunities linked to 
climate resilience promoted by the project will also be communicated as part of this content 
which can be used by the local level agencies as curriculum content and awareness 
purposes. 
Sub-activity 2.1.1.1. Design a District Climate Resilience Diagnostic (DCRD) in each target 
District (CEP) 
192.  District Climate Resilience Diagnostic (DCRD) will be compiled for each of the 21 
beneficiary districts. Given the importance of water control, conservation and of the 
topography in disaster risk reduction and climate change resilience, each district will be 
divided into planning units based on sub-catchments. This will allow a landscape 
management approach, linking activity in the upper parts of a given catchment to ‘passive’ 
beneficiaries in the lower parts of the same catchment and managing the interrelationships 
between land use. The process will be based on geospatial analysis of climate change 
vulnerability, key threats and potential adaptation solutions. The findings will be validated 
and disseminated with stakeholders at national and district level workshops. Consultations 
will take place on draft DCRD and with finalised documents per district with PMU, relevant 
Hukumat, Hydromet, The Climate Change Center (CCC), Ministry of Agriculture, Leskhoz, 
State Forest Agency, The Agency for Land Reclamation and Irrigation, The Committee on 
Emergency Situations and Civil Defence (CES), Committee on Land Use, Geodesy and 
Cartography (COLUGC). 
193.  The DCRDs, based on the risks and opportunities emerging in each district, will 
provide the basis for the subsequent Community Planning in 400 CASP+ target villages. 
Ultimately it will be the basis to define the CsCAPs and the potential Adaptation Investment 
for (a) pasture improvement/ restoration (pasture management plans), (b) climate-resilient 
infrastructures strengthening / rehabilitation, (c) procurement of agricultural machineries 
and (d) forestry investments.  
22 It is conservatively estimated that 100,000 households in the 400 villages will receive some tangible benefits from the project. 
Draft - August 2021 
79 
194.  A service provider will be appointed to compile the DCRDs and will benefit from a 
series of GIS data and associated maps, elaborated by IFAD during CASP+ design that will 
be used to compile a complete map atlas together with other available information and data 
sources. Geospatial information, in particular related to pasture and forestry shall be 
verified by a local expert in geobotany interpreting the data and giving information about 
the characteristics and types of plants present in the target areas.  
195.  The service provider will analyze the following information for the sub-catchments in 
the beneficiary districts, exposing the geographic areas where the effects of climate change 
pose the greatest threat to the safety and livelihood of inhabitants, built assets, agriculture 
and natural resources and considering socioeconomic data on projected pathways of 
development: 
a.  past and present climate trends; 
b.  past and present sensitivity to known climate change hazards (including both 
extreme events and incremental change); 
c.  future exposure to Climate Hazards; 
d.  future sensitivity to Climate Change; 
e.  adaptive capacity of the local population;  
f.  presence of vulnerability hotspots;  
g.  potential investments for climate change adaptation and resilience. 
196.  It will be important to bear in mind that the DCRD will apply to the whole of each 
District, not just the areas being supported by the project and thus should not rely on the 
collection of village specific information, for example, that would require collection of local 
data, consultations, pre-existing local plans, etc.. Before finalising the first draft DCRD it will 
be circulated for review and feedback by selected members of the target audiences so that 
the template and approach will be fit for purpose.  
Sub-activity 2.1.1.2. Dissemination of diagnostic and Village selection (SEPMU) 
197.  Succinct and accessible visually engaging material for technical and community 
consultations will be compiled and a communications expertise will be vital on the team. 
District Climate Resilience diagnostics (DCRD) for each of the 21 districts will be 
prepared, on the outline of which is contained in Annex 0. Numerous additional forms 
covering CsCAP appraisal and approval are covered in annexes Error! Reference source 
not found. to Error! Reference source not found.. CEP will organize workshops for the 
dissemination and validation of the DCRD at district level for each district. After the 
workshops the service provider will fine tune and circulate the final documentation. 
198.  A village selection process (qualitative elements) will a) filter the long-list to create a 
400 village target and b) communication of results through Jamoat committees (as part of 
their regular meetings). Village eligibility criteria: 
  Excluding villages with less than 50HH 
  Excluding villages with previous/ongoing meaningful intervention providing 
the community with similar community investments 
  Excluding villages with less than 1,000 Sheep Units (SU). 1 sheep/goat = 1 
Sheep Unit; 1 cow = 0.2 Sheep Unit)23 
  Excluding villages with less than 100ha pasture24 for their livelihoods  
23 average was 2,990 under LPDP 2 and only 5 had less than 1,000 
24 Average was 450 under LPDP 2 and only 5 had less than 100 ha.  
Draft - August 2021 
80 
199.  The DCRD diagnostic process will inform the process of village selection by adding a 
ranking of the degree of climate vulnerability of each sub-catchment based on a summary of 
population numbers (based on the villages located therein), district poverty ranking and 
Earth Observation indicators (erosion potential, vegetation indices, etc) although it will not 
cover all criteria such as the interest level and physical capacity in each village to undertake 
the required work.  
200.  For these aspects, a review will also be conducted during project implementation of 
institutional capacity to establish the presence, resources and capacity of pre-existing 
bodies such as in the Village Organisation structure at village, jamoat and district level; the 
presence of Pasture Users Unions, Pasture User Groups and the associated bodies of Pasture 
Commission and Pasture User Association; the presence of JFM contract holders/Forest User 
Groups; the human and physical resources of Leskhoz, openness of villagers to the 
responsibility of a JFM contract, Leskhoz land availability (and accessibility), labour 
availability and the soil, topography and site eco-physical characteristics. Villages forming 
coherent catchments or sub-catchments will be chosen en bloc, underpinning the 
importance of an holistic approach to linking upstream activity to downstream effects (while 
also improving the efficiency of project logistics). 
201.  12 out of the 21 CASP+ project districts contain the necessary Leskhoz land and 
organisation to support JFM and Direct forest activities. A subset (of 200) of the villages 
selected above will be specifically targeted for forestry investments, with additional 
eligibility criteria to include: 
  at least 100 ha of JFM25 can be implemented over the lifetime of the project. 
  villages with no previous/ongoing relevant intervention providing the 
community with reforestation investments similar to CASP+  
Activity 2.1.2: Establishing relevant local institutions (CEP+SEPMU) 
202.  Institutional and community capacity in target villages and districts will be assessed 
and where gaps are identified, the project will establish institutions and strengthen their 
capacities with support from a community facilitator (recruited NGO). Initial appointment of 
boards (applying gender targets) where institutions are being newly established and training 
(of new and existing boards) will be required before moving to the planning stage. Funding 
for member and management board training, ICT equipment and land registration 
certificates (for PUU’s and Leskhoz’ JFM contracts) will be provided. 
Sub-Activity 2.1.2.1. Establishment and strengthening of Village Organizations (VO) 
(SEPMU) 
203.  The project will assist in establishing a Village Organisation (VO) in each community 
where it is absent. The VOs are governed by a general meeting of members and the elected 
VO Council. The VO management consists of an elected manager and accountant, with 
support provided by members’ committees including a women’s group and a monitoring 
committee. In addition to electing the VO officers, the general meeting determines the 
priorities for community development based on attendance of at least 80% of HH members. 
In these ways, an effective VO structure will be put in place based on a community decision-
making process and with accountability to its members. Women are intended to be active 
participants in the process of mobilisation of VOs and the prioritization of sub-projects. It is 
25 Based on 15 Leskhoz having the capacity to implement 500 ha annually for 5 years = 37,500. Divide over 400 villages = 93.75 
Ha 
Draft - August 2021 
81 
expected that in many cases the existing Village Head (raisi mahalla/deha) would be also a 
Chairman of VO Council.  
204.  Aided by the National Law26 on VOs, the Village Organization model consists of the 
following three steps: (i) first, VOs are mobilised, strengthened to attain visionary 
leadership, realise participatory, transparent, gender sensitive and accountable governance 
processes in their operations; become resilient and autonomous in financially sustaining 
their functions; (ii) second, once the cohesiveness is achieved they are assisted in the 
elaboration of Climate sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAPs) to define their own 
medium and long-term priorities - including identifying agricultural and non-agricultural 
needs which shape the project's provision of training activities around priority topics as well 
as to facilitate service provision and investments; and (iii) with this prioritization and taking 
advantage of the Village budget allocation VOs are facilitated to design sub-projects for 
public goods and services for community development including physical infrastructures, 
agricultural machineries and equipment among the most popular investments, in addition to 
private goods such as mechanization services where there is a market failure. VOs then 
foster transformation of traditional structures, overcoming the initial distrust of local farmers 
and enabling them to maximize the benefits of acting together. Further, the project supports 
Common Interest Groups (CIG) which are self-initiated to access project resources within 
the framework of CsCAPs  or those created around commodities (for example crops, fruit, 
vegetable, milk, nuts, fruits, medicinal herbs etc.) or common natural resources (such as 
irrigation water). Forest User Groups are also organised under VOs where JFM is used in the 
community. 
205.  Where communities already have a Village Development Plan this would be reviewed 
and revised as appropriate, with particular reference to the DCRD. The project will finance 
capacity building for the members of the targeted villages to enable them to: (i) understand 
the project objectives and strategy; (ii) formulate and implement a CsCAP, or update their 
existing plans if relevant, and identify and prepare priority sub-projects; (iii) mobilise 
internal and external resources; and (iv) manage the implementation and M&E of the 
infrastructure investments financed. The project would promote equal opportunities for 
women and men, greater awareness of marketing concepts, access to institutional credit 
among members of the existing farmer associations and other interest groups and support 
the formation of new groups or associations by providing guidance in appropriate 
institutional structures.  
206.  Training and technical assistance will be an integral part of the activity, both for 
promoting the success and sustainability of sub-projects, and for supporting community 
economic development more broadly. Technical support will allow the community to take 
advantage of its physical and human resources. There will be two types of training: 
mandatory and on a request basis. The mandatory training will cover the following topics: 
CsCAP formulation; sub-project identification and formulation; mobilisation of human and 
financial resources; quality control; procurement and accounting; monitoring and 
evaluation; and operation and maintenance. The project would also support activities aimed 
at informing and educating farmers, especially women, about their rights under the 
changing land legislation and means to protect these rights. The training on a request basis 
will be provided to ensure that it is demand driven. Communities will be given a list of 
training areas from which they can choose, or to which they can add, what is of interest to 
their members. The proposed topics will likely cover: new agricultural technologies; access 
to institutional credit; farm management; preparation of business plans and investment 
proposals; accounting and financial management; and business management procedures. 
26 Republic of Tajikistan, Law №347 On public self-initiative bodies, January 5, 2008. 
Draft - August 2021 
82 
207.  A Community Facilitator would be contracted by the project to undertake the social 
mobilisation work, to form the VOs/CIG(s), to provide training and capacity building support 
to VOs/CIG(s), and to assist VOs/CIG(s) in demand driven participatory planning to develop 
CsCAP and sub-project proposals to be eventually funded by the project. Community 
Facilitator’s work would be supported by agricultural extension staff at district/jamoat level 
as well as the project staff, local consultants/firms or other specialists contracted by the 
project. 
208.  The VO Councils will decide upon the objectives, approaches and specific activities for 
developing the communities’ economic base. They will set their own rules and regulations 
for managing, implementing, monitoring sub-projects and especially the operation and 
maintenance of physical infrastructures for which the community itself will have direct 
responsibility. The PMU will sign a Community Grant Agreement (CGA) with each VO Council 
to reflect (i) ; requirements for community contributions; (ii) responsibilities; (iii) 
monitoring; and (iv) post-project ownership and maintenance. The VO Councils will prepare 
the formal CsCAPs in a format established in the PIM (see Annex 0).  
209.  Mobilisation and VOs’ skills development and coaching would be undertaken by 
Community Facilitators (CFs) with Master Trainers recruited from existing NGOs to 
train/upgrade local CFs in the new villages. For specialised services such as preparation of 
sub-projects, CFs will work closely with Hukumat (district)/Jamoat (municipality) technical 
staff (agronomists, engineers, foresters etc.). These sub-project proposals will also provide 
the demand base for entry points for activities under Component 3. 
Sub-Activity 2.1.2.2. Establishment and strengthening of PUU or PUG (SEPMU) 
210.  PUU (Pasture Users Unions) are the backbone of the improved community-based 
pasture management governance framework that the Governments intends to roll out at 
Country level, and the project will support these efforts at the level of its intervention area. 
As per the Pasture Law, PUUs should be established at village/community level, and be 
officially registered; they can then apply to the local authority to be allocated some public 
pasture (e.g. those managed by the State Forestry Agency or under the State Land Reserve 
– managed by Districts) or negotiate with Dekhan Farmers to obtain a lease for pasture that 
were already allocated to private owners. Each PUU will, in a democratic manner, elect its 
Board (PUUB) representing and acting on behalf of the union. Pasture Law does not regulate 
composition of the Board, but small livestock holders should form majority of the PUUB with 
at least half of them being women. The Board members should represent different user 
groups and would elect a chairperson. PUU Board will be elected at a general village 
meeting with attendance of a minimum 80% of the village population. 
211.  In villages where there is no need for a formal PUU, for instance when there are no 
opportunities for leasing land from the Government or dekhan farmers, PUGs (Pasture Union 
Groups) established under Village Organizations can fit the purpose and be in charge, under 
the umbrella of the VO, to develop and manage the PMP. PUUs have then the obligation, as 
per the law, to develop a Pasture Management Plan and to submit it to the District Authority 
for approval. Each PUU will be comprised of members consisting of all farm households 
having livestock or those who have no livestock but would like to join group. Each member 
will be represented with one vote per household. 
212.  The project will support the creation of PUUs or Pasture Union Groups (under Village 
Organizations) in all the 400 targeted communities. In communities where a PUU is pre-
existing (established with the support of LPDP I or II, by PMT or by another project), the 
project will strengthen the existing PUU. It is expected that formal PUUs will be established 
Draft - August 2021 
83 
in around 200 villages, and that PUGs under VO will be established in the remaining 200 
villages. For newly established PUUs/ PUGs, the support will consist of: 
  Mobilizing the pasture users and raising awareness about the need to 
community-based governance system, and rights of obligations of a PUU/PUG 
  Support to the creation of the PUU/PUG, including designation of executives 
and establishment of internal regulations. 
  Legal support for the registration of the PUU/PUG and allocation of 
pastureland users’ rights. This will consist in assisting the PUUs to obtain land 
lease certificates. The PUU will cover the cost of administrative procedures to 
obtain this certificate, as beneficiary contribution, and the CF will guide the 
PUU through the administrative process. 
213.  These steps will be facilitated by the Community facilitator (local NGO) contracted by 
the project, together with the Pasture Management Trust (including regional staff of PMT). 
214.  PUU Project Activities: PUUs will be Project’s focal points and will be used for the 
introduction of the Project and participatory identification of the target beneficiaries 
according to established criteria for each Project component. 
Sub-Activity 2.1.2.3. Establishment and strengthening of PUAs (SEPMU) 
215.  PUAs (Pasture Users Associations) are ‘associations’ of PUUs and should be established 
at District level as per the provisions of the Pasture Law. Their primary role is to address 
pasture related issues pertaining to a higher geographical level than the community/village, 
for instance for movement of animals across communities, including management of transit 
herds/flocks, and pasture infrastructures that benefit to several communities. Another 
important function of PUAs is to represent PUUs and advocate for their rights at District 
level, regions and central level, and represent them in Pasture Commissions. The creation of 
PUAs has been supported by LPDP I and II in their areas of intervention. This process only 
implies marginal efforts and costs but generates substantial benefits as it enables 
addressing issues that cannot be addressed at community level only but require a larger 
scope of intervention.  
216.  The project will support the establishment of PUAs in the 21 targeted Districts. This 
process will be facilitated by the Community facilitator (local NGOs) also supporting PUUs, in 
partnership with the PMT. Support will consist of: 
  Raising awareness of PUUs on role and added value of PUAs; 
  Mobilization and selection of PUU members to be involved in PUAs; 
  Support to the creation of the PUA, including designation of executives and 
establishment of internal regulations; 
  Legal support for the registration of the PUA. 
Sub-Activity 2.1.2.4. Establishment and strengthening of PC (SEPMU) 
217.  Commission for Regulating Pasture Use (‘Pasture Commission’) or PCs are relatively 
new bodies formed at the district (Hukumat) level to facilitate pasture use rights allocation 
and pasture management. These Commissions are mandatory as per the Pasture Law and 
should be established at District Level by the decision of local councils (Majlis) and should 
include representatives of district government body, Jamoats, Land Committee and pasture 
users. However, only a few Districts currently have PC, including in particular those covered 
Draft - August 2021 
84 
by LPDP I and II. The role of PC is key as it provides advice to District authorities for two 
important steps of the establishment of the pasture management mechanism:  
  The approval of pasture Management Plan; 
  The approval of pasture allocation requests submitted by PUUs and pasture 
granting; 
  Management of pasture use disputes. 
218.  The Commissions are entitled by Pasture Law with functions to demarcate pasture 
borders, to mitigate conflicts related to allocation and use of pastures, control over effective 
use of pastures, prepare mid-term pasture management and use plans, conduct monitoring 
of pasture use. The Commission also has a right to establish a fee rate for pasture lease, 
which according to Pasture Law can’t be less than pasture tax multiplied by two. Lack of 
leadership at the national level in advancing pasture reforms, vagueness in legislation on 
functions, rules and procedures of these commissions, as well as no funding allocated for 
their work inhibit establishment of these most crucial bodies for pasture management. PC is 
important to ensure participation of communities in higher level decision making. Pasture 
Users are represented in PCs by the PUUs and/or the PUA.  
219.  The Project needs to facilitate establishment of such commissions in target district and 
support Government in further elaboration of their legal foundation, functions and 
procedures. Supporting their creation involves marginal costs and mostly implies awareness 
raising and intermediation. This support will be provided by the same Community Facilitator 
as above, in collaboration with the PMT and District Authorities. 
Sub-Activity 2.1.2.5. Promotion of JFM and establishment of Forest User Groups (CEP) 
220.  The project will include in the village plans scope for the inclusion of agroforestry, 
afforestation and forestry investment via Joint Forest Management. Leskhoz manage 
significant pasture lands and an integrated approach will be adopted with PUU pastures and 
forest lands to ensure sustainable management across all land types, managing for 
example, the displacement of grazing from JFM lands and the location of transhumance 
routes. The concept of long term leases of grazing lands to PUUs (rather than the 
establishment of PUUs under Leskhozi) will also be considered. The set of investments 
includes riparian forest for fuelwood and wood for construction, planting of orchards, 
pistachio forests, Juniper forests, Natural regeneration of Juniper for fuelwood, Saxaul for 
fodder and erosion control and poplar planting / agroforestry – fuelwood/construction and 
fodder. Outside of JFM, forestry staff will also work to rehabilitate sites and forests in each 
Leskhoz, concentrating on natural regeneration techniques, and the promotion of diversity, 
climate resilience and native species in afforestation with the eventual formation of JFM 
plots on these lands also being considered.  
221.  Equipment and vehicles that are vital for planting, irrigation, site and soil preparation, 
fencing, supervision and transport of materials will also be provided. JFM beneficiaries will 
also be given training in tree planting and aftercare. Detailed plans for these activities will 
be drawn up by the Leskhoz and forestry specialists, including the allocation of lands to 
specific households under Joint Forest Management. The selection of JFM participants will 
involve filling a questionnaire and interview by the external NGO facilitator and will be 
capacity oriented, with larger plots only being assigned to participants who have the 
capacity to perform the required work. The NGO facilitator will acquire in-depth knowledge 
of the community and profile of households to prevent extended families dominating the 
selection process. The project will also identify JFM investments in the buffer zones of 
protected areas where feasible with around 179 hectares of forests planned to be 
Draft - August 2021 
85 
established in this way. Investments in small nurseries and Leskhoz nursery rehabilitation 
and direct afforestation works will also be included where appropriate. Below are the steps 
followed in planning JFM interventions in villages where this has not been used previously. 
222.  The steps in mobilizing a community for JFM and supporting it throughout the process 
are described in the TORs for Forestry Community Facilitator. The steps are summarized 
below: 
223.  Field Visit. The first field visit serves the purpose of evaluating the overall feasibility 
of implementing JFM in the given district. Staff of the Leskhoz and community 
representatives are involved in all steps as they can offer valuable information about the 
history and current use of the forest. To prepare a field visit, satellite images and maps of 
the Leskhoz can be used to get a first overview of the site. Information Seminar 
224.  Information seminar. If JFM seems to be feasible for a certain forest area, an 
information seminar is conducted no more than three or four weeks after the field trip. The 
Forestry Community Facilitator agrees with the village representatives and the Leskhoz staff 
upon the time and place for the information seminar. The use of a projector (for showing 
Google Earth images and maps of the forest areas) has proven to be an efficient tool to 
support the decision-making process of the people. For some areas, Google Earth provides 
an opportunity to compare satellite images shot in different years. Standardized information 
material and power point presentations are available from CAFT project in Russian and Tajik.  
225.  In order to create maximum interest among staff of the Leskhoz they should be 
involved from the very beginning in the introductory process. This way the staff will feel 
themselves responsible for the introduction of JFM. The role of the Forestry Community 
Facilitator has to be made clear from the very beginning to villagers and Leskhoz staff. 
NGOs should spark the interest, to assure a transparent implementation and the use of 
possibilities and rights as provided by the forest legislation. The process of JFM 
implementation should then be driven by the Leskhoz and the forest users. 
226.  Community agreement. As the introduction of JFM has implications not only for the 
JFM contract holders but for all villagers, e.g., restricted access to firewood and grazing 
areas, the informed consent of the community as a whole is crucial. Forestry Community 
Facilitator should make sure that all villagers (including non-participants of the information 
seminar) are informed about the suggested changes in forest management, and that 
everybody has the opportunity to apply for a forest plot. Otherwise hidden conflicts within 
the community might lead to the exclusion of some households or groups of households 
from the allocation of forest plots. In order to avoid a misunderstanding, villagers can be 
requested to sign in a list that they have been informed about the date and time of the 
community meeting. 
227.  Before the contracts between the Leskhoz and the forest users are concluded, an 
agreement between the community and the Leskhoz is signed. The community agreement 
states that the community is willing to support JFM, and it defines the responsibilities of the 
Leskhoz. Where community based organizations (CBO), like Village Organizations, are in 
place, they should be contacted for the agreement. 
228.  Definition and demarcation of JFM plots. The community, i.e., the village 
assembly, together with Leskhoz staff and strong support of the Forestry Community 
Facilitator, decides how to divide the forest area.  
229.  It is important that external Forestry Community Facilitator moderates the discussion 
in order to ensure that everybody’s voice in the community is heard. The discussion on 
distribution should be based on a map of the whole forest area. It is necessary to define 
“practical” boundaries, meaning that natural borders like rivers, mountain ridges, etc., serve 
Draft - August 2021 
86 
as given borders. The use of Google Earth images and the delineation of boundaries with 
GIS have proven to serve as efficient tools in this context. 
230.  The exact demarcation of the plots in the field is then done by a representative of the 
Leskhoz in the presence of the affected forest users. The Leskhoz staff and the forest user 
must clearly mark the boundaries of the forest plot in the field in order to avoid later 
quarrels. The boundaries of the individual forest plot are recorded using GPS, and the size of 
the plot is measured.   
231.  Selection of forest users. Villagers both willing and able to perform the tasks 
necessary to rehabilitate and manage a forest plot are selected to become forest users. 
After internal discussions in the village assembly and signing of the community agreement, 
the community representatives provide to the Forestry Community Facilitator a list of 
households interested/or not interested in becoming JFM forest users. The number of JFM 
forest users is based on the potential number of the demarcated forest plots and the 
number of willing and capable forest users.  
232.  In case a whole community is applying for a JFM contract, the above listed criteria 
should be met by at least one third of the community and a strong leader should be 
present. The actual selection of the forest users then follows two steps: 
233.  Interviews with potential forest users. Based on the above-mentioned criteria, a 
questionnaire is used to interview the potential forest users included in the list provided by 
the community (see Annex 0). In order to make the selection procedure transparent and 
acceptable to all affected households, it is recommended that the interviews be conducted 
by external Forestry Community Facilitator. 
234.  Selection of forest users. The selection committee is made up of a Leskhoz 
representative, a community representative, and an external facilitator. The committee 
evaluates the answers documented in the questionnaires and selects the forest users. Each 
questionnaire is signed by all members of the selection committee. If a candidate is not 
selected, the reason is documented on the questionnaire. 
235.  In some cases, several people from the same household or close relatives apply to be 
forest users under JFM only to gain a bigger forest plot all together. Therefore, the external 
Forestry Community Facilitator should have close contacts with the village leaders to identify 
these details and prevent the capture of big plots by single families. When plots of different 
sizes are to be distributed, it is a capacity oriented approach should be used. For example, 
larger plots may be allocated to those forest users who have more time for working in the 
forest, or more experience with forestry techniques, than others. 
236.  Contract preparation and signing. After the division of the forest area into 
individual plots and their allocation to forest users, the JFM contract is signed by the 
Leskhoz and the forest user. The Leskhoz staff (in the field and in the office) and the forest 
users can only effectively cooperate in the framework of JFM if both sides fully understand 
the content of the contract.  
237.  It is very important that the forest users clearly understand their rights and 
responsibilities as JFM forest users before signing the contract. Enough time should be 
invested to assure this.  Where the harvest sharing percentages have to be newly 
negotiated between the Leskhoz and the forest users, the negotiation should already be 
initiated at the stage of contract explanation so that all details have been clarified at the 
points of formal contract signature. The Forestry Community Facilitators are strongly 
advised not to determine the shares, or to support one party of the contract only. The full 
process of negotiation of shares should be steered by the Leskhoz and forest users 
themselves. Forestry Community Facilitators should be prepared to provide calculations of 
Draft - August 2021 
87 
potential income and the annual (in kind) investment of both sides, demonstrating the costs 
and efforts that need to be made to rehabilitate the forest and to generate the income. 
238.  Management plan and annual plan. The five-year management plan and the 
annual plan serve as tools for forest management planning and for the monitoring of 
activities and results. They are developed jointly by Leskhoz staff and the respective forest 
user for each individual plot (See Annex 0 for templates). Ideally, planning would be based 
on data from a forest inventory in order to assess the biomass growth and the Annual 
Allowable Cut (AAC) of fuelwood/timber and the harvest potential of non-wood forest 
products. 
239.  Establishment of Forest User Groups In many regions of Tajikistan, community-
based organizations like Mahalla Committees or Village Organizations (VOs) or similar 
structures have been implemented to enhance and structure community development. 
Different councils (subgroups) can be formed by community members to address given 
issues in community development and natural resource management specifically. Examples 
are subgroups for women, for agriculture, and for pasture.  
240.  The idea is to support the establishment of Forest User Groups (FUGs) in every 
community where JFM is in place. Where possible they should be formally integrated into 
the existing structures of VOs. Members of FUGs can jointly organize work to improve forest 
and irrigation infrastructure, mutually monitor the fulfilment of annual plans, and establish a 
community fine system for illegal grazing and cutting. Additionally, they disseminate 
information about JFM within the village and solve conflicts between forest users.  
241.  In many villages, all forest users use the same forest infrastructure for the 
management of their individual plots, or could manage them more effectively if they 
cooperated. For example, they could 
  Jointly work on constructing and maintaining the irrigation systems or develop 
grazing schemes and patrols, 
  Save much time and work if they built a common good quality fence along the 
forest area, 
  Benefit from the collective marketing of forest products, especially in remote 
areas where access to markets is limited and public institutions can be 
attracted as customers. 
242.  Furthermore, the leader of a forest user group acts as an intermediary between 
Leskhoz staff and the individual forest user. Local foresters communicate information only to 
the leader of the forest user group who then disseminates it among its members. 
243.  Some forest user groups function very well, while others do not function at all. Groups 
which function well have a strong and accepted leadership, and the group members 
recognise the advantages of cooperating in a group.  A very good example of a functioning 
FUG is in the village of Langar (Ishkashim). In general the willingness of villagers to be part 
of formal forest user groups as, e.g., subgroups of Village Organisations, varies greatly 
among communities. 
Sub-Activity 2.1.3.6. Establishment of Common Interest Groups (CIGs) (SEPMU) 
244.  Common Interest Groups (CIGs), either existing or formed by the Project, are self-
initiated bodies based either on existing Mаhallas or around commodities (for example 
crops, fruit, vegetable, milk etc.) or common natural resources (such as irrigation water). In 
the case of this project these will be self-selecting groups of 10 -20 households per village 
organised into two themes 1) climate resilient food or fodder production and 2) processing 
Draft - August 2021 
88 
and storage. The poorest and those that have limited land access will be targeted with the 
capacity of each CIG improved through training on climate adapted production practices, 
entrepreneurship, linking to markets, and farming as a business provided through Activity 
3.3.1 in Component 3. These investments will be funded through the Matching Grant 
Program outlined in Component 3, with CIG investments limited to a maximum of USD 400 
per household and a maximum of USD 6,000 per CIG. 
245.  The Project will provide support to CIGs if they meet minimum requirements: i) it 
consists of minimum 10 members; and ii) a sub-project proposal is within CsCAPs’ priorities 
and follows all the Project modalities for sub-project financing (for example, the key ones 
are that the proposals initiated by VOs/CIGs for income-generating sub-projects should 
clearly show that at least 30% of the community would benefit and that at least 10% of the 
sub-project costs should be covered by CIG). The CsCAPs will identify the priority 
investments, then the VOs/CIGs will prepare sub-project proposals in line with the CsCAP 
and with the assistance of the Community Facilitator. Sub-project proposals will be approved 
by a referendum to be held by at least 80% of representatives of village households. More 
than 50% positive votes would be required for submission of sub-project proposals to the 
PMU and Jamoat Council. Sub-project proposals will be prepared in accordance with a 
format described in Annex Error! Reference source not found.. The VOs/CIGs will also be 
responsible for mobilising the community’s financial contributions, procurement (if 
relevant), supervising contractors, operation and maintenance of the completed 
infrastructure and/or renting of facilities to CIGs or other rural enterprises, as well as for 
monitoring and evaluation of sub-projects. CIGs and other rural enterprises will operate 
rented facilities in accordance with an appropriate signed lease. The CF, with the assistance 
of other service providers where needed, will assist with the planning process and 
implementation of the priority investments and for monitoring their implementation. 
Sub-Activity 2.1.3.7. Organize leadership training for women representatives in PUUs/VOs 
(SEPMU) 
246.  The limited capacity of women to assume leadership roles is often associated to 
cultural constrains and determining factors which include:  
  Low status due to persistent gender discrimination and gender stereotyping, 
where women are generally viewed to be unfit for leadership, and subsequent 
lack of support for women’s entry to leadership structures;  
  Limited opportunity to engage full time in activities outside the home due to 
unequal burden of care work that falls upon them;  
  Low self-esteem and inadequate leadership skills and experience as a result of 
the above factors. 
247.  In light of the above constrains, the project intends to support women’s and women’s 
leaders to increase their awareness about their rights, including right to be involved in the 
decision making processes of community based organisations and express their opinions 
and have their voice heard. Specifically the project will set quotas to ensure a minimum 
representation of women in decision making and representation positions. In order to 
succeed with the objectives above, a leadership training for women, has been planned as 
part of CASP+. 
248.  The main objective of the training is to support women from targeted communities 
with leadership skills that will enable them to strategically use their strengths and abilities – 
their competitive edge while participating in key decision-making bodied ( i.e. VOs, PUU, 
FUG) for the use and governance of NRM as well as planning processes for prioritization of 
Draft - August 2021 
89 
investments (Adaptation and Forestry). The project set quotas for participation of women in 
key decision making process and the leadership training is key to ensure that women are 
capacitated to undertake the role in pro-active manner. 
249.  Trainings for women leaders, targeting 6 women per village, for a total of 2,400 
women across the 400 targeted villages. The objective is preparing women members of 
community organizations to be leaders and change agents in their organizations. They will 
be provided with sensitization on topics including gender relations, self-awareness, 
leadership and accountability, negotiation and conflict management, effective 
communication. The training will specifically include modules about: effective and gender-
responsive leadership and communication; group management; coping with 
challenges/conflict resolution strategy; and personal development. The trainings (1 or 2 
days training) will take place at district level (21). It will consider about 5 trainings per 
districts (considering about 20 participants each training).  
Activity 2.1.3: CsCAP planning and design (SEPMU) 
250.  The CsCAPs will include ecosystem resilience and adaptation investments, 
spanning the categories of pasture restoration investments; resilient infrastructure; 
community mechanization; and forestry in the 400 targeted communities. In order to 
ensure that an ecosystem management approach is followed, taking into account all the 
aspects of the natural resource base under the same territory are addressed in holistic 
manner, the Pasture Management Plan will be considered as an integrated component of the 
CsCAP, together with the Forestry Management Plan; all informed by the DCRD. 
Sub-Activity 2.1.3.1. CsCAP planning and design  
251.  Climate-sensitive Community Action Plan (CsCAP) will be developed in each of the 400 
selected communities. A sub-set of activities identified in each CsCAP will be chosen as sub-
projects for implementation under the CASP+ project. The details of sub-project proposals 
will include the description/design of the proposed interventions and expected 
outputs/benefits, the implementation arrangements, the organisational and institutional 
support needed, and a financing and procurement plan consistent with project rules for cost 
sharing. The project will support community interventions in Climate Resilience that 
complement those already implemented or being implemented, filling in gaps in the 
productive infrastructure and income-generating activities as well as strengthen institutional 
capabilities and community, Leskhoz and Protected Area pastures and natural resources. 
Communities will include details of all inputs provided, applied for, or expected from other 
projects or programmes when submitting their CsCAPs.  
252.  Potential areas for cross-village collaboration and investment in pasture management 
involving more than one village (whether new or already highlighted in Village Development 
Plans or at District level) will be logged during CsCAP Planning and referred to as Pasture 
Management Investments. These will be championed by Pasture Commissions at the District 
level and will require the endorsement of Pasture Councils, River-Basin Organisations and 
Jamoat Councils. 
253.  CsCAP plans will involve the capture, in digital form, of the lands associated with each 
village or cluster of villages classified by land cover type such as pastures (summer/winter), 
forests, mountains, etc.. The appointed NGO facilitators will help combine the diagnostic 
analysis, current plans as may exist (such as Village Development Plans), and a 
participatory approach to devise plans that meet their key challenges, within the budget 
allocations assigned per village. A foundation of the CsCAP process will be communities’ 
Draft - August 2021 
90 
understanding of the climate risks; methods of maximising their environmental, social and 
economic resilience and how their choice of CsCAP investments should be informed by this 
knowledge. The climate-smart production and processing techniques on offer to CIGs will be 
clear examples of viable adaptation options in moving away from unsustainable livestock 
production. Further elaboration on the digital data layers will include data for Pasture 
Management Plans, mapping of forest investments, Leskhoz pastures, etc.. Specific 
attention will be paid to the mapping of transhumance routes to ensure CsCAPs reflect the 
need to minimise conflicts in these areas.  
254.  Pasture Restoration investments identified through the forum of PUU (where VO’s 
don’t exist) or PUG (where VO’s exist). Pasture investments will aim at improving the overall 
productivity of pasture and limit their degradation, but also at reducing the fodder deficit in 
summer, amplified by Climate Change, by creating standing fodder stocks through fencing 
and rotation, and increasing access to summer pasture that are less subject to drought. The 
pasture investment plans could include pasture restoration, rotation pasture protection 
through fencing, reseeding, fertilization, plantation of forage shrubs and trees. These will 
serve to support the restoration of the ecosystems.  
255.  The formulation of the PMPs by the PUU or the PUG will be facilitated by the 
community facilitator with the technical support from the PMT regional. The following step 
will be the development of the Pasture Management Plan (in line with the provisions of the 
Pasture Law) including: 
  Training of PUU (or PUG) executives on formulation of PMP, and monitoring of 
pasture 
  Demarcation of pastureland and infrastructures 
  Calculation of carrying capacity. 
  Development of pasture map and pasture rotation plan 
  Planning/budgeting of pasture improvement and restoration investments 
(including demonstrations) 
  Planning of pasture monitoring 
256.  A list of eligible investments and criteria for eligibility under the PMP is provided below. 
An important criterion for eligibility will be the contribution to the reduction of climate 
vulnerability. The preliminary list of investments that could be eligible for financing and 
implementation under the PMPs is as follows: 
  Pasture restoration: pasture protection through fencing (permanent or mobile 
fences), reseeding and overseeding, fertilization, plantation of forage shrubs 
and trees; 
  Access to water for livestock: creation of water points in underutilized areas 
including remote and summer pasture (subject to impact studies in order to 
ensure that the creation of water point will not result in pasture degradation), 
improvement of existing water points to reduce pasture degradation and 
reduce sanitary risks, installation of water harvesting systems; 
  Pasture rotation (involving fencing or not); 
  Creation and management of hay making areas; 
  Pasture access: for pasture underutilized because of their remoteness and 
limited accessibility, access tracks and bridges may be rehabilitated or 
constructed; 
Draft - August 2021 
91 
  Summer pasture infrastructures: in areas where mountain summer pasture 
are used for transhumance, if the risk of degradation is controlled (utilization 
of summer pasture should be envisaged only in the scope of PMP and carrying 
capacities should be observed strictly), some infrastructures aimed at 
facilitating access and living conditions of herds and people could be 
constructed or rehabilitated: shepherd cabins, night fences and shelters for 
animals, cattle crushes for treatments, water points. 
257.  The total amount of pasture investments under the PMP should be at least 20% of the 
total amount of Adaptive Investments (AI) under the CsCAP. The amount allocated to each 
village to finance investments under the PMP will be calculated by PMU based on two 
criteria: 
  Village Population (coefficient: 0.5) 
  Pasture in terms of ha (coefficient 0.5) 
258.  The average amount per village will be USD 50,000, but may vary significantly 
depending on the circumstances of each village. A standard template for  formulation, 
planning and budgeting of PMPs (including the template for the Pasture Rotation Plan and 
guidelines to calculate carrying capacities) will be developed (based on existing tools 
developed by LPDP) and availed to PUUs/PUGs to facilitate and standardize the process. 
After being developed by the Pasture Users, the PMP will be submitted for approval to the 
Pasture Commission and District Authorities, and to PMU. See Annex 0 for more information 
on budget allocation. 
259.  Climate adaptive infrastructures. The livelihoods of the rural poor depend on 
functioning road networks particularly in large parts of the project area that are relatively 
isolated and beyond the reach of the main road network. The project will ensure that 
infrastructure is adapted to the increased risks caused by more frequent torrential 
precipitation events. The project will climate proof existing and new roads with the objective 
to i) ensure the sustainability of the track allowing the continuity of the economic and social 
life of its beneficiaries; and ii) protect the natural environment (including agricultural land) 
from gullying and bank failure due to heavy rain. It will do this by reinforcing specific 
sections of roads depending on the slope angle and severity of the risk, stabilising the 
slopes of sections of road against water erosion through the collection and disposal of runoff 
water that would otherwise damage the surrounding natural environment. This will be 
achieved through design improvements such as for roads: wider and reinforced ford 
crossings; concrete-lined drainage channels; increased capacity of culverts; road surfacing 
with adapted material (e.g. tuff) and reinforcement of the surrounding earth road structure 
with gabions to prevent bank failure. 
260.  The proposed structures will be defined in detailed technical studies conducted by the 
project and based on which construction firms will implement. This will ensure the quality of 
construction and their long-term sustainability. Whenever possible, these measures will be 
carried out with the use of adapted technology that allows energy saving and easy 
maintenance and replication (i.e. the thermo-isolation of shelters and stabling structures 
using straw was successfully tested in previous projects). 
261.  Extended periods of drought are expected to become more frequent, interrupted by 
fewer, but more intense torrential precipitations: fewer rainy days, but an increase in the 
number and intensity of storm events. In the parts of the project area that do not have 
access to a secure water supply for household needs, basic homestead production and 
animals, farmers need to travel hours for the collection of household water (this task usually 
falls on the women). 
Draft - August 2021 
92 
262.  The combination of all these stressors points to a serious adaptation deficit that calls 
for increased efforts in:  
  Seasonal rainwater reservoirs (household or community level) constructed to 
alleviate burden on women and increase water availability throughout the 
year, to support diversification activities (backyard garden, fruticulture, small 
animals husbandry) and to meet basic livelihood requirements in isolated 
areas. 
  Small measures to prevent soil erosion, mudslides and floods In addition of 
the plantation of bushes and trees –small hydrological works that slow down 
torrential water flows in the seasonal high-water levels, such as storm basins 
and small dams, could be financed in key areas (e.g. where high degradation 
of soil due to erosion, where potential for water table recharge) to reduce 
impacts of storms on soils (erosion) and to enhance infiltration and efficient 
use of water.  
263.  Multipurpose community equipment and machinery to boost fodder production. 
CsCAPs will include the procurement of agricultural equipment such as tractors, bailers, etc., 
that will be shared, maintained and owned by the community. The focus will be on fodder 
harvesting and conservation material, in order to help farmers to cope with feed shortages 
in summer and winter, that are exacerbated by climate change. In addition, other category 
of mechanization equipment that could be considered are those that can be used both for 
hay/fodder and other crops such as: Tractors, tillage equipment (plough, harrows, cultivator 
, etc), trailers, Planters, Fertilizer spreaders (used with good agricultural practices). 
Equipment that are only for non-fodder crops (e.g. combine harvester) will need to be 
justified in the CsCAPs according to specific climate vulnerability upfront and shall ensure 
they benefit smallholders. At least 30% of the community households must benefit from 
these investment to be eligible for funding. 
264.  The list of equipment eligible will be: 
  Mowers 
  Hay rakes  
  Baler 
  Forager / Silage machine 
  Silage/haylage wrapper 
  Manure spreader (not only for fodder but contributes to improve soil fertility) 
  Hay trailers (flatbed) 
265.  In addition, the other category of mechanization equipment that could be considered 
are those that can be used both for hay/fodder and other crops such as: 
  Tractors 
  All tillage equipment (plough, harrows, cultivator , etc… ) 
  Other trailers  
  Planters 
  Fertilizer spreaders 
266.  Forestry investment, operated in collaboration with leskhoz (Forest enterprises 
depending on the State Forest Agency), and with the participation of forest users groups, 
will aim to complement the restoration of ecosystems and the protection of areas vulnerable 
Draft - August 2021 
93 
to climate hazards (disaster risk reduction), at the same time providing additional sources of 
income to rural communities. Forest investment will include: (i) Joint Forest Management 
(JFM): where a contract is created between JFM household and Leskhoz for the 
management (initially for 20 years) of a plot of land where the yield from the plot is split 
between each party to the contract; (ii) Direct Leskhoz Forestry: where forest is re-
established on Leskhoz land using community labour. All materials and labour are paid for 
by the project. These sites are usually more remote from villages and include more typical 
forest species; and (iii) Forestry investments in buffer zones of protected areas: JFM will be 
applied through Leskhoz in the buffer zone of Protected Area (in the project area this is 
limited to Sh. Shohin district). 
267.  Typically in JFM a large plot is created and fenced with the sub-divisions inside being 
assigned to different contracts and a lot of emphasis is put on fruit and nut species that will 
quickly yield benefits for the participants. All materials and labour are paid for by the project 
except labour for planting, which will be expected as in-kind contribution by beneficiaries. 
The project will pilot the concept of direct leskhoz forestry works being planned with a view 
toward eventual transition into JFM contracts once established. 
268.  The types of investment (implemented via Joint Forest Management, directly by 
Leskhoz or as part of Village Development Plans for common good e.g. protection of river 
banks): 
  Activity 1: Riparian forest –fuelwood and construction wood 
  Activity 2: Fruit and nut – mostly fruit trees/orchards 
  Activity 3: Pistachio forest –nut production 
  Activity 4: Juniper forest – fuelwood 
  Activity 5: Open and guarded land 
  Activity 6: Natural regeneration of Juniper – fuelwood 
  Activity 7: Saxaul – fodder/erosion control 
  Activity 8: Poplar planting / agroforestry – fuelwood/construction and fodder 
269.  Detailed plans for these activities will be drawn up by the participants and Leskhoz 
with the support of the Forestry Community Facilitator (see TORs in section Error! 
Reference source not found.), including the allocation of lands to specific households 
under Joint Forest Management. Needed back-yard nurseries, Leskhoz nursery rehabilitation 
and direct afforestation works will also be specified. Leskhoz have management of 
significant pasture lands and an integrated approach will be adopted with PUU pastures and 
forest lands to ensure sustainable management across all land types, managing for 
example, the displacement of grazing and fuelwood collection from JFM lands. The concept 
of long term leases of grazing lands to PUUs (rather than the establishment of PUUs under 
Leskhozi) will be utilised as part of this activity. 
270.  Site preparation, irrigation, seedling distribution, supervision and other works are only 
possible through mechanisation and a package of equipment will be supplied to Leskhoz to 
be applied across all project sites. 
271.  Joint Forest management: where a contract is created between JFM household and 
Leskhoz for the management (initially for 20 years) of a plot of land where the yield from 
the plot is split between each party to the contract. All materials and labour are paid for by 
the project although labour may be cheaper if provided as part of in-kind contribution by 
beneficiaries. Typically a large plot is created and fenced with the sub-divisions inside being 
Draft - August 2021 
94 
assigned to different contracts and a lot of emphasis is put on fruit and nut species that will 
quickly yield benefits for the participants. 
Activity 2.1.4: Strengthening local institutions capacity to monitor 
and evaluate CsCAPs (SEPMU) 
272.  Component 1 is championing the transparency and coordination of land degradation 
monitoring across all relevant agencies; Component 2 will build on this to engage with local 
communities to strengthen local institutions capacity to monitor and evaluate progress of 
the CsCAPs and strengthen the linkage between local reporting and national analysis. 
Sub-Activity 2.1.4.1. Strengthening local institutions capacity to monitor and evaluate 
CsCAPs (400 villages) 
273.  The monitoring and evaluation of the CsCAPs will be an intrinsic part of the approach 
under this component. All investments will be georeferenced. This will allow Communities 
(village organizations, PUUs) and institutions (Leskhoz) to better monitor all CsCAP 
investments using digital submission of simple geolocated smartphone reports (with 
integrated photos). SEPMU will recruit a national monitoring consultant and will use ‘Open 
Source’ smartphone tools for project planning, monitoring and control to minimise 
supervision costs and improve the speed and frequency of supervision reports. Under this 
activity innovative methods will be employed to engage and incentivise stakeholders, 
including youth, to use these methods for field reporting and ground truthing of remote 
sensing. A bridge will be established between the diagnostic output and citizen reporting to 
provide a means of tracking the realisation of predictions made, and the effects of CsCAP 
implementation. These will also appear as geotagged report points on the mapping portal 
produced under Component 1, alongside the layers that report on the status of NRM. 
274.  The monitoring of PMPs will be undertaken primarily by the PUU, with the support of 
the PMT and the PMU. The PUU will report to the PMU and PMT on implementation of the 
PMP on a bi-yearly basis. The monitoring of the PMP will include in particular the monitoring 
of pasture productivity and condition (including share of palatable species and vegetal 
biodiversity). PUUs will be capacitated by PMT to undertake this task: training, provision of 
methodological guidelines and tools (GPS, decameter, flora, registration forms). The pasture 
monitoring will be undertaken twice a year at fixed dates (once in spring, once in autumn). 
275.  The data generated will be forwarded to the PMU and PMT and consolidated with 
remote sensing data through the remote sensing monitoring system developed under 
activity 1.1.4. Digital tools for pasture monitoring developed under this activity will be rolled 
out at PUU level and will progressively replace paper-based tools. This will facilitate data 
entry but also bottom-up submission of information, and top-down feedback. The 
consolidation of field gathered and remote sensing data pertaining to each PUU will then be 
sent back to PUUs to enable them to use them for community awareness and decision 
making. Paper based recording templates that will be used before roll out of digital 
technologies will be developed by PMU and PMT, based on existing LPDP models. 
276.  A specific budget line will also be allocated for monitoring of cross villages pasture 
investments. The monitoring of these investments will be a joint responsibility of PMU and 
PMT. During implementation of physical infrastructure investments, the Engineer recruited 
by the PMU and technical works Supervisor will be responsible for supervision and will 
support the local communities with monitoring their plans. All such investments will also be 
georeferenced. 
Draft - August 2021 
95 
277.  Forestry activity will be tracked in a similar way, with the annual reporting requirement 
under JFM supplemented and gradually replaced by digital means.  
Activity 2.2.1: Implement Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans 
(SEPMU) 
278.  Implementation of the ecosystem resilience and adaptation investments of the CsCAP 
in the selected villages, comprising the multiple dimensions of improved pasture 
management (including cross-village when required), Forestry investments of the CsCAP in 
the selected villages (in the proximity of leskhoz), climate resilient infrastructures, 
agricultural productivity improvement. NB: Each executive entity will involve relevant 
agencies as required by the nature of the interventions.  
Implementation of CsCAPs 
a.  PMU implements CsCAPs (except forestry investments) 
i.  The procurement and execution for the CscAPs (e.g., Pasture; 
infrastructures; community agricultural equipment) will be under 
SEPMU responsibility. 
ii.  If needed, PMU will involve relevant agencies as required by the nature 
of the interventions 
iii.  PMT and PMU will provide regular technical backstopping to 
implementation of PMP (including pasture monitoring and adjustments 
on pasture rotation plan when needed) 
b.  CEP implements Forestry Investments  
i.  The procurement and execution for the Mitigation Investment (d), 
Joint Forest Management and (e) direct leskhoz Forestry will be under 
CEP responsibility. 
ii.  As required CEP will involve Leskhoz  
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.1. Implement Pasture Restoration Investment (SEPMU) 
279.  Once approved by the PC, the District and IFAD, the implementation of PMPs will start. 
It is expected that implementation will start in Year 3 for the most advanced communities 
(in particular those that already had a PUU and a PMP before), and in Year 5 for the last 
ones. 
280.  Village level investments: The implementation of the PMP follows the same 
approach as for the implementation of the CsCAP of which it will constitute a component. 
The infrastructures and equipment approved under the PMP will be procured and disbursed 
directly by the PMU, as per the PMP implementation plan. 
281.  The management of the PMP will be the responsibility of the PUU or the PUG. They will 
coordinate the implementation and planning of the various investments included in the plan. 
PMT and PMU will provide regular technical backstopping to implementation of PMP 
(including pasture monitoring) and adjustments on pasture rotation plan when needed. 
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.2. Implement cross-village Pasture Management Investments (SEPMU) 
282.  Cross villages investments: these will also be supported under this activity, 
although they will not be included in the investment plans of PMPs, that are village specific. 
Draft - August 2021 
96 
Each District will be allocated an amount for cross village pasture investments. This 
envelope will be based on the total area of pasture in the District and will amount to USD 
25,000 on average. The amount available for one specific district will thus be equal to: 
25,000 * 21 * (pasture area in the District / Total pasture area in 21 District) 
283.  The allocation and management of this financing will be the responsibility of the 
District Pasture commission. In the limit of the allocated budget, the PC will submit a project 
proposal to the PMU, based on consultations held with the PUUs and VOs in the District. The 
proposal should be based on a standardized template provided for by the project. These 
investments will not be part of the village PMPs and will follow a simplified procedure to be 
designed, screened and financed. The eligible investments under this financing window will 
be as follows, considering that one preliminary compulsory criteria will be that Investments 
should benefit to at least two villages: 
  Roads, animal tracks and bridges that improve transit of animals between 
villages 
  Roads, animal tracks and bridges that improve transit of animals between 
villages and summer pasture, and benefit to several villages 
  Water points for livestock, that benefit to several villages 
  Demarcation and waymarking of transhumance routes, even if these routes 
are not used by beneficiary communities, but if transit herds affect 
communities, since the formalization of transhumance routes sill benefit to the 
communities, by preserving their pasture resources. These transhumance 
routes should be approved by PMT, which has the mandate for defining their 
itineraries. 
  Establishment of resting halts for transit herds on transhumance routes, as 
above, even if these routes are not used by beneficiary communities, but if 
transit herds affect communities, and for the same reasons. Resting 
transhumance halts should also be located in accordance with PMT plans. 
284.  The investment proposal will be screened and reviewed by PMU and PMT (especially 
when they are related to transhumance routes, since this aspect is under its responsibility), 
and forwarded to the Steering Committee for approval. As for village investments, the 
infrastructure or equipment will be procured directly by the PMU based on the PCs proposal. 
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.3: Implement Joint Forest Management Investments (CEP) 
285.  Nursery activities will see the upgrade of 14 Leskhoz nurseries (one per Leskhoz) and 
the establishment of ‘backyard nurseries’ at the rate of approximately 1 nursery per 30 
hectares of planned JFM planting. The JFM Management Plans and JFM Annual Operational 
Plans will be drawn up bearing in mind the 1-2 year time lag before seedlings will become 
available. In the meanwhile equipment acquired by the project for each Leskhoz will be used 
to assist preparing the soil on each site. In addition, all sites must be fully secured by 
fencing (installed or ‘live’ fencing) before planting commences and so this too should 
commence before seedlings are transplanted from the nursery to the site. Willow and other 
species where cuttings can be used will also allow progress to be made while nurseries 
come into production. Particular care will be needed to prevent seedlings root systems 
drying out before planting. Extensive use will be made of simple Smartphone ‘open source’ 
apps for recording progress and annual monitoring. Irrigation trucks are a deliberate part of 
the mechanisation packages proposed for Leskhoz; their use should be carefully scheduled 
(and operating expenses funded) to ensure this works well in safeguarding the investment. 
Draft - August 2021 
97 
286.  The categories of activity will include Riparian forest including willow and poplar 
plantation, as well as mixed forests from these species (50:50 ratio), creation of a fence 
(full or partial), an irrigation system in all areas, only in Rasht is it possible to have a mixed 
forest with the addition of sea buckthorn and in Dangar, Temurmalik, Vose plantations. 
Usually riparian forests are allocated to many forest users and plot size is quite small. 
Typically, the plots have a size of 0.5ha to 3ha. From a silvo-cultural perspective, the 
management is based on natural regeneration potential of the typically fast growing tree 
species. The management objectives are usually to regulate the grazing activities and 
produce firewood. 
287.  Fruit and nut planting often forms the largest portion of JFM. Creation of plantations 
of Greek walnut, rose hips, cherry plum, bitter almonds, and other fruit species, as well as 
displaced forests from these species in all areas, fences (in places where the risk of cattle 
damage is high), an irrigation system. In fruit and nut forests, plot sizes managed under 
JFM range from 10ha to 30ha. Degradation by unsustainable grazing is not so much a 
problem as in other areas. Rather, maintaining the rich natural biodiversity is the main 
priority and should therefore be the focus of management activities. 
288.  Creation of a Pistachio plantation, as well as a mixed forest with the addition of 
bitter almonds or crimson almonds, fencing (in places) and organizing seasonal watering. 
289.  Juniper Forests involve promotion of natural renewal, through partial loosening of 
the soil, sowing seeds, partial planting of seedlings, organizing livestock protection, 
restricting access of the population. Juniper Forests are usually allocated to entire 
communities. Size can vary between 500ha up to 2500ha. Usually the leased plots comprise 
not only forests, but also open forest land, hay making areas in between, and pasture land. 
The low increment rates and the vulnerability of the ecosystem limit the use of fuelwood 
resources. Incentives for a regulated use by communities can be the harvest of NTFP, the 
establishment of productive woodlots with irrigation facilities, and the allocation of grazing 
grounds. Therefore, in the JFM contract, activities on non-forested areas, afforestation, 
sustainable grazing and production of non- timber forest products need to be carefully 
defined. The allocation of productive woodlots for fuelwood or (bitter) almond production is 
often combined with allocation of large areas of juniperus forests to gain additional work 
force for protection of those forests. 
290.  Monitoring of annual plans Leskhoz staff records whether and in what quality the 
forest user performed the tasks defined in the annual plan. The final annual monitoring and 
the development of the annual plan for the following year are usually done in autumn 
(October – December). For this, Leskhoz staff and the forest user jointly complete a form to 
compare the actual achievements with the annual plan. 
291.  According to the contract, non-fulfilment of the annual plan or the violation of the JFM 
contract can result in its cancellation. The severity of a breach of the annual plan and an 
impending cancellation of the contract should be transparent to the affected forest user, and 
arbitrary decisions should be avoided. In accordance with the By-Laws on JFM, two warnings 
have to be issued by the head of the State Forest Enterprise before cancelling the contract. 
292.  It has proven useful to enter the aggregated monitoring data into a simple excel 
database. This helps Leskhoz staff to report demanded figures, e.g., on afforestation 
activities to higher levels and at the same time serves as a reporting tool for the assisting 
NGO. 
293.  Technical consultation Many JFM forest users have no prior forestry experience; 
thus, supporting them with technical consultation is a precondition for effective 
management of their forest plots. This is first of all the task of the local foresters or the 
forest engineer of the Leskhoz. The Forestry Community Facilitators may help the Leskhoz 
Draft - August 2021 
98 
to organize training events for the JFM users. In case the Leskhoz doesn’t have the 
necessary knowledge itself, external trainers can be engaged and both Leskhoz staff and 
forest users participate in the training.  
294.  It is of course crucial to increase the knowledge of the local foresters in the medium 
and long term. For this purpose, Leskhoz can be advised and supported to let their foresters 
participate in a vocational education training course. Such courses are now available and 
can be offered by either the Adult Training Centre or specialised organizations like 
Tajiklesservice Ltd. 
295.  In this context it is very important to support the Leskhoz in its change from a control 
entity to a management entity supporting and supervising forest users. Only continuous 
support enables them to develop a new understanding of their roles and responsibilities and 
the technical capacities as the basis of sustainable forest management in the context of JFM 
and beyond. Technical training for forest users and Leskhoz staff may include: 
  Training on silvo-cultural techniques: Leskhoz and Forestry Community 
Facilitator support the forest users with training on planting, fencing, pruning, 
felling of trees and harvesting of non-timber forest products like dog rose and 
sea buckthorn. Such training units can be open to all villagers, who usually 
grow trees in their private gardens, in order to make the whole community 
benefit from JFM.  
  Training on nursery management: The establishment of back yard nurseries is 
a possibility to ensure the future availability of necessary planting material. A 
specific training on private small nurseries can be beneficial for the JFM forest 
users as well as other interested villagers beyond the context of JFM. 
Especially fruit tree seedlings can provide income possibilities. However, the 
common demand of forest users to enrich their plots with cultivated fruit tree 
species should be taken with care, as planting fruit trees on forest land 
dissolves the distinction of forestry and horticulture. Experienced trainers for 
nursery management come from the nursery of Vakhdat. 
  Training on rights and responsibilities of Leskhoz staff: In many cases staff of 
Leskhoz have no formal background in forestry education. They do not have 
sufficient knowledge on the rights and responsibilities that are part of their 
duties. Training in this field gives local foresters security in communication 
with forest users. Qualified trainers can be recruited from the NGOs or 
Tajiklesservice. 
  Training on biodiversity conservation and management of rare fruit tree 
species: Qualified trainings in this field can be conducted, e.g., by the 
department for Horticulture at the academy of Science in Dushanbe or 
Tajiklesservice. 
296.  Numerous training materials are already available: A handbook on forestry techniques 
relevant in riparian forests has been compiled and distributed to many forest users. 
Additionally, a guide on important tree species in the nut and fruit tree forests of Khovaling 
and a pocket guide on all tree and shrub species have been developed. For the specific 
management of pistachio forests, a short manual has been designed which points out the 
main management techniques for cultivation, planting, and harvesting of pistachio. 
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.4: Implement Direct Leskhoz Forestry Investments (CEP) 
297.  This activity will support the restoration by Leskhoz of forest cover using hired labour 
where the forest land currently has less than 30% tree cover. Site choice will be important, 
Draft - August 2021 
99 
with a strong preference for areas that could be handed over for JFM in time, once there is 
some potential for yield. In all cases, keen attention will be paid to the long term protection 
of these lands, particularly where natural regeneration is being used as the means to 
restore forest cover. If protection cannot be assured these plots will need to be far from 
villages, greatly reducing their positive impact for communities. The sites need to be 
accessible by road, and preferably not near any transhumance paths. These areas can also 
be important in responding to climate risks identified in the DCRD and form part of the 
‘green infrastructure’ to control erosion. Community lands can also be established with trees 
e.g. as part of a Village Development Plan where these will improve the climate resilience of 
village communities. A direct Afforestation Manual was developed and approved by the 
Forestry Agency and applied in all afforestation activities of the CAFT project in a way that 
supported biodiversity and adaptation to the effects of climate change. This document 
should be used in the CASP+ forestry interventions and in planning nursery production. 
298.  Plantation maintenance. Plantation maintenance for the first three years should be 
included in the afforestation contract between CEP and the Leskhoz and should be carried 
out according to the guidelines given in the Direct Afforestation Manual. 
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.5: Implement JFM in Protected Area Buffer zone (CEP) 
299.  This will mirror JFM as practiced in normal circumstances except that it is taking place 
in the buffer zone of the Dashti Jum Protected Area. The forestry plans here will need to 
align with the objectives and any constraints that are in place to protect the objectives of 
the Protected Area. 
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.6. Implement Climate Resilient infrastructure investments (SEPMU) 
300.  Climate Resilient infrastructure investments. The project will invest in various types of 
infrastructure, addressing water stresses and the need to adapt to increasing risks of 
climate-related hazards. Water related investments. Extended periods of drought are 
expected to become more frequent, interrupted by fewer, but more intense torrential 
precipitations: fewer rainy days, but an increase in the number and intensity of storm 
events. In the parts of the project area that do not have access to a secure water supply for 
household needs, basic homestead production and animals, farmers need to travel hours for 
the collection of household water (this task usually falls on the women). To help families 
better adapt to the increased water stress, water infrastructure will be supported to alleviate 
the burden on women and increase water availability throughout the year that can also  
support diversification activities (backyard garden, fruticulture, small animal husbandry) and 
to meet basic livelihood requirements in isolated areas. Soil and water conservation 
structures to prevent soil erosion, mudslides and floods will be considered where 
appropriate, according to the methodology described above to avoid maladaptation. These 
could include the plantation of bushes and trees, small hydrological works that slow down 
torrential water flows, where there is potential for aquifer recharge and enhance infiltration, 
reduce impacts of storms and reduce soil erosion.such as roads, protective works and 
erosion reduction, water points and irrigation schemes, etc. (this relates also to the 
multipurpose community equipment for improved agriculture productivity, provided based 
on a criteria and ensuring climate adaptation needs such as for fodder production and other 
key crops). Disaster prevention infrastructures: Rural households depend on functioning 
road networks particularly in large parts of the project area that are relatively isolated and 
beyond the reach of the main road network. The project will ensure that infrastructure is 
adapted to the increased risks caused by more frequent torrential precipitation events. 
Draft - August 2021 
100 
301.  To avoid maladaptation, the project will support specific infrastructure to respond to 
specific climate change impacts in the area based on the district diagnostics and on the 
ESMPs. Furthermore, the project will make sure that the infrastructure is resilient to 
extreme climatic events to ensure sustainability in time. As an example, the project will 
climate proof existing and new roads with the objective to i) ensure the sustainability of the 
track allowing the continuity of the economic and social benefits and ii) protect the natural 
environment (including agricultural land) from gullying and bank failure due to heavy rain. 
It will do this by reinforcing specific sections of roads depending on the slope angle and 
severity of the risk, stabilising the slopes of sections of road against water erosion through 
the collection and disposal of runoff water that would otherwise damage the surrounding 
natural environment. This will be achieved through design improvements such as wider and 
reinforced ford crossings; concrete-lined drainage channels; increased capacity of culverts; 
road surfacing with adapted material (e.g. tuff) and reinforcement of the surrounding earth 
road structure with gabions to prevent bank failure. The proposed structures will be defined 
in detailed technical studies conducted by specialist design firms based on which 
construction firms will implement. Wherever possible, these measures will be carried out 
with the use of adapted technology that allows energy saving and easy maintenance and 
replication (i.e. the thermo-isolation of shelters and stabling structures using straw which 
was successfully tested in previous projects).   
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.7. Community Agricultural equipment for productivity improvement 
(SEPMU) 
302.  Community agriculture equipment for productivity improvement: CsCAPs will include 
the procurement of agricultural equipment such as tractors, bailers, etc., that will be shared, 
maintained and owned by the community. The focus will be on fodder harvesting and 
conservation material, in order to help farmers to cope with feed shortages in summer and 
winter, that are exacerbated by climate change. The list of community equipment eligible 
under this window would include:  Mowers, Hay rakes, Balers, Forager / Silage machine, 
Silage/haylage wrappers, Manure spreader (not only for fodder but contributes to improve 
soil fertility), Hay trailers (flatbed). In addition, other category of mechanization equipment 
that could be considered are those that can be used both for hay/fodder and other crops 
such as: Tractors, tillage equipment (plough, harrows, cultivator , etc), trailers, Planters, 
Fertilizer spreaders (used with good agricultural practices). Equipment that are only for non-
fodder crops (e.g. combine harvester) will need to be justified in the CsCAPs according to 
specific climate vulnerability upfront and shall ensure they benefit smallholders.  
303.  Funding will be targeted toward a 20% minimum for fodder related mechanization 
equipment (Mowers, Hay rakes, Balers, Forager / Silage machines, Silage/haylage wrapper, 
Manure , Hay trailers - flatbed), 15% maximum for non-fodder crops mechanization 
(combine harvester, 3 wheel tractor for cotton), and up to 80% for mechanization 
equipment that can be used both for hay/fodder and other crops (Tractors, Tillage 
equipment: plough, harrows, cultivator , etc…, Other trailers, Planters, Fertilizer spreaders). 
4.2.3. 
Sequencing of activities in Component 2 
304.  Component 2 execution will require defining clear roles and responsibilities between 
SEPMU and CEP, and a clear sequencing of activities described in the following steps, 
summarized in Table 3 (with an indication of timeframe of implementation in Table 4).  
Draft - August 2021 
101 
Table 3. Timeframe and sequencing of Component 2  
Activity/Sub-activity 
Output 2.1. By year 3, 400 Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAP) based on 21 District 
level Climate Resilience Diagnostics are developed 
Y4 
Y1 
Y3 
Y5 
Y6 
Y2 
Y7 
Activity 2.1.1:   District Climate Resilience Diagnostic (CEP+SEPMU) 
Sub-Activity 2.1.1.1: Diagnostic - create a District 
Climate Resilience Diagnostic (DCRD) for each District 
(CEP) 
Continued Project Communications 
Compile District diagnostic 
Create videos, animations, communications material 
Sub-Activity 2.1.1.2: Dissemination of diagnostic 
(SEPMU)  
Sub-Activity 2.1.1.3: Village selection (SEPMU) 
Activity 2.1.2:   Establishing relevant local institutions (CEP+SEPMU) 
Sub-Activity 2.1.2.1: Establishment  and strengthening 
VO's (SEPMU) 
Community facilitator to establish VO  
National Pasture Specialist Support 
Training of VO executives by community facilitator 
Sub-Activity 2.1.2.2: Establishment and strengthening 
PUU or PUG (SEPMU) 
Sub-Activity 2.1.2.3: Establishment and strengthening 
of PUA's (SEPMU) 
Sub-Activity 2.1.2.4: Establishment and strengthening 
of Pasture Commissions (SEPMU) 
Sub-Activity 2.1.2.5: Promotion of JFM and 
establishment of Forest User Groups (CEP) 
Community facilitator to establish - Forest User Groups 
JFM mobilization and ongoing support.  
Sub-Activity 2.1.2.6: Establishment of CIGs (SEPMU) 
Community facilitator to establish - Common Interest 
Groups (2.5 per village, 10 HH each) 
Training of CIGs by community facilitator 
Sub-Activity 2.1.2.7. Organize leadership training for 
women representatives in PUUs/VOs (SEPMU) 
Activity 2.1.3:   CsCAP planning and design (SEPMU) 
Sub-Activity 2.1.3.1: CsCAP planning and design 
(SEPMU) 
Development of CsCAPs, including forestry 
Environmental and social impact assessments (ESIA) 
Activity 2.1.4:   Strengthening local institutions capacity to monitor and evaluate CsCAPs (CEP+SEPMU) 
Sub-Activity 2.1.4.1: Strengthening local institutions 
capacity to monitor and evaluate CsCAPs (SEPMU) 
16 PMU District officers 
Agronomist 
Community development specialist  
Engineers 
Gender and Youth policy specialist 
Operating costs for vehicles 
Draft - August 2021 
102 
Activity/Sub-activity 
Y1 
Y2 
Y3 
Y4 
Y5 
Y6 
Y7 
Organization of training of 16 PMU and 5 CEP Project 
forestry specialists on compliance with GCF requirements 
(e.g.ESIA)  
Training in monitoring & evaluation, use of Smartphone 
reporting tools 
Sub-Activity 2.1.4.2: Planning and Supporting 
Community Forest Investments (CEP) 
Output 2.2. By year 7, 400 Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAP) implemented in 21 
districts benefitting at least 100,000 rural households 
Activity 2.2.1:   Implement Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CEP+SEPMU) 
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.1. Implement Pasture Restoration 
Investment (SEPMU) 
Implement Pasture Management Plan 
PMP monitoring (by PMT). Two visits per year per PUU by 
PMT officers 
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.2. Implement cross-village Pasture 
Management Investments (SEPMU) 
Cross-village PMP monitoring (by PIU or appointed 
consultants) 
Implement cross-village Pasture Management Plan 
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.3: Implement Joint Forest 
Management Investments (CEP) 
Equipment package for forest establishment 
Field training for JFM beneficiaries on planting and aftercare 
of trees 
JFM Investment: Forest & Pasture Management Plans  
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.4: Implement Direct Leskhoz 
Forestry Investments (CEP) 
Equipment package for forest works 
Leskhoz Investment Plans  
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.5: Implementation JFM in Protected 
Area buffer zones (CEP) 
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.6. Implement Climate Resilient 
infrastructure investments (SEPMU) 
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.7. Community Agricultural equipment 
for productivity improvement (SEPMU) 
305. 
All activities related to pasture management will be implemented under PMU, 
since they relate to the mandate of MoA, under which PMU is institutionally placed. 
In addition, PMU has acquired a lot of knowledge and experience related to pasture 
management under LPDP I and II, that were under its responsibility. More specifically 
agronomist/pasture specialist of the PMU will be the technical lead and coordinator 
for all pasture related activities. MoUs will be established with these implementing 
partners during the inception phase of the project. 
306. 
Activities related to forestry will be the remit of CEP. Direct afforestation 
works will be planned and undertaken by Leskhozes with CEP implementation group 
supervision. JFM will be mobilized by a dedicated Community Forestry Facilitator NGO 
who will support the JFM activity throughout the duration of the project. CEP project 
forestry specialists will monitor Leskhoz works and performance of JFM, as well as 
providing support to JFM beneficiaries. 
The detailed responsibilities per activity, sub activity and task is provided in the table below: 
Draft - August 2021 
103 
Table 4. Implementation responsibilities in Component 2 
Activity/Sub-activity 
Sub-Activity 2.1.1.1: Diagnostic - create a District Climate 
Resilience Diagnostic (DCRD) for each District (CEP) 
Ongoing Project Communications 
Compile District diagnostic 
Create videos, animations, communications material 
Sub-Activity 2.1.1.2: Dissemination of diagnostic (SEPMU)  
Sub-Activity 2.1.2.1: Establishment  and strengthening VO's 
(SEPMU) 
Community facilitator to establish VO  
Training of VO executives by community facilitator 
Sub-Activity 2.1.2.2: Establishment and strengthening PUU or PUG 
(SEPMU) 
Mobilization and awareness raising of pasture users   
Creation of PUU/PUG, including designation of executives and 
establishment of internal regulations. 
Legal support for the registration of the PUU/PUG 
Sub-Activity 2.1.2.3: Establishment and strengthening of PUA's 
(SEPMU) 
Responsible 
PMU National Communications 
Specialist 
Service Provider 
National Communications Specialist 
PMU National Communications 
Specialist 
PMU, Community Facilitator (NGO) 
Community Facilitator (NGO) 
Community Facilitator (NGO) 
Community Facilitator (NGO) 
Community Facilitator (NGO) 
Community Facilitator (NGO), 
Districts 
Mobilization and awareness raising of PUUs in support of PUA   
Community Facilitator (NGO) 
Creation of PUA, including designation of executives and establishment of 
internal regulations. 
Community Facilitator (NGO) 
Operations (meetings) of PUAs 
Sub-Activity 2.1.2.4: Establishment and strengthening of PCs 
(SEPMU) 
PUA 
Mobilization and awareness raising of PUUs, PUAs, District Authorities  
Community Facilitator (NGO) 
Creation of PCs, including designation of executives and establishment of 
internal regulations. 
Community Facilitator (NGO) 
Operations (meetings) of PCs 
Sub-Activity 2.1.2.5: Promotion of JFM and establishment of 
Forest User Groups (CEP) 
JFM mobilization and ongoing support.  
Establish Forest User Groups 
Operations (meetings) of FUGs 
Sub-Activity 2.1.2.6: Establishment of CIGs (SEPMU) 
Community facilitator to establish - Common Interest Groups (2.5 per 
village, 10 HH each) 
Training of CIGs by community facilitator 
Sub-Activity 2.1.2.7. Organize leadership training for women 
representatives in PUUs/VOs (SEPMU) 
Sub-Activity 2.1.3.1: CsCAP planning and design (SEPMU) 
Training of PUU (or PUG)  
Formulation of PMP 
Selection of cross villages pasture investments 
Formulation of proposals for cross villages pasture investments 
PC 
Community Forestry Facilitator 
(NGO) 
Community Forestry Facilitator 
(NGO) 
FUG 
Community Facilitator (NGO) 
Community Facilitator (NGO) 
Community Facilitator (NGO) 
Community Facilitator (NGO) 
Community Facilitator (NGO), PMU, 
PMT 
PCs, PMT, PMU 
PCs, PMT, PMU 
Draft - August 2021 
104 
Activity/Sub-activity 
Sub-Activity 2.1.4.1: Strengthening local institutions capacity to 
monitor and evaluate CsCAPs (SEPMU) 
Organization of training of 16 PMU and 5 CEP Project forestry specialists 
on compliance with GCF requirements (e.g.ESIA)  
Training in monitoring & evaluation, use of Smartphone reporting tools 
Sub-Activity 2.1.4.2: Planning and Supporting Community Forest 
Investments (CEP) 
Responsible 
PMU, CEP Project forestry 
specialists 
CEP Project forestry specialists 
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.1. Implement Pasture Restoration Investment 
(SEPMU) 
Approval of PMPs 
Procurement of PMP investments 
Implementation of PMPs 
Monitoring of PMPs 
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.2. Implement cross-village Pasture 
Management Investments (SEPMU) 
Cross-village PMP monitoring (by PIU or appointed consultants) 
Implement cross-village Pasture Management Plan 
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.3: Implement Joint Forest Management 
Investments (CEP) 
Field training for JFM beneficiaries on planting and aftercare of trees 
JFM Investment: Plans  
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.4: Implement Direct Leskhoz Forestry 
Investments (CEP) 
Equipment package for forest works 
Direct afforestation plans  
Ongoing maintenance and irrigation works 
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.5: Implementation JFM in Protected Area buffer 
zones (CEP) 
JFM Mobilization 
JFM Management Plan and Annual Operational Plans 
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.6. Implement Climate Resilient infrastructure 
investments (SEPMU) 
Sub-Activity 2.2.1.7. Community Agricultural equipment for 
productivity improvement (SEPMU) 
4.2.4. 
Component 2 performance indicators 
PMU 
PMU 
PUU 
PMT, PMU 
PC, PMU 
PC, PMU 
Forestry Community Facilitator 
(NGO), CEP Project forestry 
specialists 
Forestry Community Facilitator 
(NGO) 
CEP 
Leskhoz 
Leskhoz 
Forestry Community Facilitator 
(NGO) 
Leskhoz, Forestry Community 
Facilitator (NGO) 
Community Facilitator (NGO), PMU 
Community Facilitator (NGO), PMU 
Expected Results 
Indicator 
Output 2.1: By the 
end of year 3, 400 
Climate-sensitive 
Community Action 
Plans (CsCAP) based 
on 21 district level 
Plans 
influenced by 
District Climate 
Resilience 
Diagnostic 
(DCRD)  
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Mid-
Term 
Final 
Surveys among 
attendees of 
workshop 
0 
21 
21 
Draft - August 2021 
Assumptions 
The diagnostic 
is able to 
present good 
analysis of 
climate trends 
and risks and 
105 
climate diagnostics 
are developed 
Women 
representatives 
trained in 
leadership skills 
Interviews with 
women 
representatives 
30% 
80% 
adaptation 
measures. 
Women are 
interested in 
participation in 
these forums. 
TBD 
400 
400 
Jamoat support 
Report from 
community 
facilitator 
based on 
municipal 
records 
Report from 
community 
facilitator. 
Reports from 
PMT 
Report from 
community 
facilitator. 
Report from 
community 
facilitator. 
Report from 
community 
facilitator. 
Reports from 
PMU 
Reports from 
PMU 
Reports from 
PMU 
Number of VO’s 
established 
Number of 
operational 
PUU or PUG in 
the project 
area 
Number of PUA 
in the project 
area 
Number of 
Forest User 
Groups in the 
project area 
Number of 
Common 
Interest Groups 
in the project 
area 
Number of 
CsCAPs 
approved  
Number of PUA 
in the project 
area 
Area of pasture 
under Pasture 
Management 
Plan 
Number of 
hectares of 
land under JFM 
contracts 
Number of 
hectares of 
land reforested 
directly (in 
Leskhoz or 
other lands) 
Number of 
hectares 
reforested in 
buffer zones  
Output 2.2: By the 
end of year 7, 400 
Climate-sensitive 
Community Action 
Plans (CsCAP) 
implemented in 21 
districts with benefits 
for 100,000 rural 
households. 
TBD 
400 
400 
TBD 
15 
21 
0 
0 
0 
200 
200 
400 
800 
400 
400 
TBD 
15 
21 
100,000  180,000 
0 
1794 
5801 
Community 
facilitators 
recruited in Y1 
PUU willing to 
establish PUAs 
JFM 
participants 
willing to form 
FUG 
Demand for 
two CIGs per 
village 
Approval 
process does 
not suffer 
delays 
PUU willing to 
establish PUAs 
PUUs are able 
to secure 
pasture usage 
rights 
Willingness of 
householders 
to participate 
Ability to 
register lands 
Availability of 
labour 
Willingness of 
householders 
to participate 
Ability to 
register lands 
Reports from 
PMU 
0 
405 
1350 
Reports from 
PMU 
0 
50 
179 
Draft - August 2021 
106 
Annex to Chapter 4.2   
Component 2 Terms of Reference and MoU 
Terms of References for the Environmental and Social Management Plan and 
the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
pls click on the icon of the file here: 
District Climate Resilience diagnostic (DCRD) in the frame of the CASP+ 
project 
1.  Introduction/background:  
The Service Provider (SP) supports the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) in the frame of 
the IFAD/GCF funded project CASP+ in the elaboration of District Climate Resilience Diagnostic (DCRD) 
for each of the 21 beneficiary districts. Given the importance of water control, conservation and of the 
topography  in  disaster  risk  reduction  and  climate  change  resilience,  each  district  will  be  divided  into 
planning  units  based  on  sub-catchments.  This  will  allow  a  landscape  management  approach,  linking 
activity in the upper parts of a given catchment to ‘passive’ beneficiaries in the lower parts of the same 
catchment  and  managing  the  interrelationships  between  land  use.  The  process  will  be  based  on 
geospatial analysis of climate change vulnerability, key threats and potential adaptation solutions. The 
findings will be validated and disseminated with stakeholders at district level workshops. 
The DCRDs, based on the risks and opportunities emerging in each district, will provide the basis for the 
subsequent Community Planning in 400 CASP+ target villages. Ultimately it will be the basis to define 
the  CsCAPs  and  the  potential  Adaptation  Investment  for  (a)  pasture  improvement/  restoration 
(pasture  management  plans),  (b)  climate-resilient  infrastructures  strengthening  /  rehabilitation,  (c) 
procurement of agricultural machineries and Forestry Investment for (d) Joint Forest Management, 
and (e) Direct leskhoz forestry.  
2.  Key Tasks 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Consult with CEP and other project partners on the scope of the activity. The project will hand 
over a series of GIS data and associated maps, elaborated by IFAD during CASP+ design (see 
Appendix 1) that can be utilized by the SP. Furthermore, the list of the 400 beneficiary villages 
that will be selected upfront of the diagnostic will also be handed over to the SP to allow a more 
precise geographic focus of the analysis and a more efficient use of resources.  
Evaluate  the  geospatial  information  indicated  in  i)  and  complete  it  with  the  review  of  other 
available information and data sources. Geospatial information, in particular related to pasture 
and forestry shall be verified by a local expert in  geobotany interpreting the data and  giving 
information about the characteristics and types of plants present in the target areas.  
Collection  of  pre-existing  Natural  Resource  Management  and/or  Development  Plans  (e.g. 
pasture management plans), requested through the district administrations, and integration of 
the information in the analysis. 
Analyze the following information for the sub-catchments in the beneficiary districts, exposing 
the geographic areas where the effects of climate change pose the greatest threat to the safety 
Draft - August 2021 
107 
CASP+_ESIA_PIM_180621.docx 
and  livelihood  of  inhabitants,  built  assets,  agriculture  and  natural  resources  and  considering 
socioeconomic data on projected pathways of development: 
o  past and present climate trends; 
o  past and present sensitivity to known climate change hazards (including both extreme 
events and incremental change); 
o 
future exposure to Climate Hazards; 
o 
future sensitivity to Climate Change; 
o  adaptive capacity of the local population;  
o  presence of vulnerability hotspots;  
o  potential investments for climate change adaptation and resilience. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
Prepare sub-catchment maps identifying village boundaries, pasture areas, forest areas, water 
courses, built assets and visualizing the analysis indicated in point iv)   
Support the preparation of succinct visual material for technical consultations and validation of 
the analysis;  
Prepare  District  Climate  Resilience  diagnostics  (DCRD)  for  each  of  the  21  districts.  For 
information on the outline of the DCRDs refer to 0;  
Support CEP in organizing Workshops for the dissemination and validation of the DCRD at district 
level  for  each  district  of  the  21  districts.  After  the  workshops  the  SP  will  fine  tune  the 
documentation. 
3.  Deliverables and timeline 
The SP will hand over all reports, studies and associated GIS maps in digital form to CEP at the end of 
the agreement, which will have a duration of 12 months.  
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
months 
detailed 
Deliverable 
Consultation 
and 
work plan  
Analysis 
Preparation  of 
first  draft  of 
DCRDs   
Validation 
Workshops 
Delivery 
Final DCRDs 
of 
4.  Professional Experience and Qualifications of the Personnel 
The TORs of International Climate Change Adaptation Consultant, National Geobotany Expert, National 
GIS Expert, Expert on Socio-Economic analysis and Community Facilitator are described under 
Component 1. 
Appendix 1 – Available GIS data/analysis 
CEP will hand over to the SP at the beginning of the agreement the following GIS data elaborated by 
IFAD during CASP+ design.  
iv.  Village population  
v.  Climate vulnerability index (including socio-economic vulnerability), elaborated 
by  IFAD  during  CASP+  design.  The  index  is  composed  of  the  following 
dimensions:  
 
Exposure 
-  Rainfall significant trend 1981-2019 
-  Daily heavy rains total 1981-2019 
-  Drought-SPEI (18 months) average 1981-2019 
-  Max temperature (trend) 1958-2019 
  Sensitivity 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Erosion RUSLE 
Land degradation (forest and pasture)  
Population rural total  
Poverty rate (%) 
Draft - August 2021 
108 
  Adaptive capacity 
- 
- 
- 
Proximity to main roads 
Irrigated areas (land use) 
Labour force (youth n.) 
vi.  Draft Sub-catchment maps (as prepared by design team) and relevant climate 
vulnerability index.  
Draft - August 2021 
109 
ToRs of Community facilitator (CF) 
Main responsibilities and tasks of the CF will be: 
1.  Selection of CF 
The CF will be recruited to a national Call for proposals. The CfP will be divided in 4 lots, 2 for Khatlon, 
one for Sughd, and one for DRS. 
Only national NGOs will be eligible to submit a proposal 
NGOs working as CF under LPDP and CASP project will be invited to submit a proposal 
A proposal could be submitted by the same applicant for one or two lots  
2.  Duration of contract 
The contract with the CF will be for an initial duration of 3 years, with possible subsequent extensions 
of one year. 
3.  Staffing: 
The CF will have to form an LPDP team of experts and support staff at the national and district levels. 
It should appoint Project Manager and other relevant staff.  
4.  Task and responsibilities 
The CF will have to select/appoint village facilitators and train them on Project objectives, tasks and 
processes.  
The responsibilities of the CF will be as follows: 
a.  Community awareness and mobilization and planning: 
The CF will be responsible for the mobilization of the target villages for its allocated lots.  
The CF will undertake awareness programme to inform communities and key stakeholders on the 
Project, its activities and processes at the district, jamoat and village levels.  
The CF will conduct participatory awareness programs on community development and participation; 
on formation and functions of the VOs, PUUs, PUGs, CIG(s). 
The CF will develop information materials and/or use materials developed by the PMU and other 
partners and ensure their communication to the community. 
The CF will help the community to form VOs, PUUs, PUGs, CIGs in line with the PIM procedures and 
modalities, if required. The CF should ensure open, fair and inclusive election process and selection 
should be conducted in accordance with developed and agreed Social Mobilization Programme and 
Targeting and Inclusion Strategy.   
b.  Planning: CsCAP development 
The CF will facilitate the preparation of the respective Climate-Sensitive Community Action Plans 
(CsCAPs), for Adaptation Investments and Forestry Investment.  
The decision process on the CsCAPs will be based on consultations with all relevant stakeholders in the 
village (including specifically vulnerable people, women, FHHs, youth). The CsCAPs will follow the 
recommendations for investment emerging from the diagnostic work undertaken at national and 
District level but should highly site specific and sensitive to the development plans already in place.  
The CsCAPs will include indicative sub-allocations for Adaptation Investments: (a) pasture 
improvement/ restoration (pasture management plans), (b) climate-resilient infrastructures 
strengthening / rehabilitation, (c) procurement of mechanization equipment / services, and Forestry 
Investments: (d) Joint Forest Management, and (e) direct Leskhoz Forestry, in line with project PIM 
specifications. 
The CF will facilitate approval process of CsCAPs by jamoat, hukumat administrations, CEP, and IFAD. 
The CF will undertake technical, financial, and overall feasibility appraisal of all micro projects 
proposed under the CLPMP and approves them.  
Draft - August 2021 
110 
c. 
Implementation of CsCAPs 
The CF will facilitate community procurement process and provide technical support to the 
implementation of CsCAPs.  It will help VOs/PUUs/PUGs/CIGs follow timely and proper procedures, 
review all forms for completion and compliance with Project regulations, and review local bidding 
process for opening tenders for contractors/supplier. 
The CF will provide technical, managerial and other needed assistance to Project community groups in 
the course of Project implementation. 
The CF will conduct capacity building programme based on needs assessment to VOs, PUUs, PUGs, 
CIGs as well as to Jamoat and Hukumat administrations according to the PIM. 
The CF will conduct capacity building programme based on needs assessment to to VOs PUUs, PUGs, 
CIGs as well as to Jamoat and Hukumat administrations according to the PIM: 
o  Training of VOs 
o  Training of PUUs and PUGs on pasture management and monitoring (in partnership with PMT) 
o  Training of CIGs on technical matters related to their respective projects, as well as on 
business management and marketing 
d.  Monitoring of CsCAPs 
The CF will implement M&E Programme developed and approved by the Project and IFAD. It will also 
coordinate with the Project and provide support and information for overall Project baseline and 
impact assessment surveys. 
The CF will conduct monitoring of Project activities and associated impacts in line with M&E 
programme developed and approved by the Project and IFAD, and assist villages and jamoat/hukumat 
in conducting participatory monitoring according to approved M&E Programme.  
The CF will conduct periodic focus group discussions with the beneficiaries of the different activities 
under CASP+ and provide feedback to the Project in specially designed formats. 
The CF will track the participants and prepare case studies to identify how they have utilised the 
assets, training opportunities, investments and technical knowledge provided by the Project. 
5.  Supervision and reporting  
The CF will work under supervision of the Project Implementing Agency and in close collaboration with 
international and national consultants and technical experts in implementing its activities. The CF will 
keep also the jamoat/khukumat administrations informed of schedule of activities and any 
adjustments. 
The CF will establish and maintain close cooperation with the Project staff and partners working in the 
Project target areas to ensure synergy.  
During the course of this assignment, the CF will directly report to the CASP+  Project Coordinator. 
The CF is required to provide brief monthly progress reports defining the status of ongoing and 
indicating planned activities as well as problems encountered with the proposed solutions. Other 
report requirements would be agreed during contract negotiations. 
ToRs of PMU pasture specialist 
1.  Title of position: PMU pasture specialist  
2.  Type and duration of contract: full time contract 
3.  Location:  the position will be based in Dushanbe - PMU  
Draft - August 2021 
111 
4.  Scope of work, Responsibilities and expected deliverables: 
The regional seconded pasture specialists will provide technical support to PMT in the following 
domains: 
  Assess capacity gaps and organize trainings for PMT staff  
  Support institutional reforms to improve performance of PMT 
 
  Oversee and coordinate activities implemented by PMT in the scope of CASP + in particular: 
Provide technical support for the revision and update of the Pasture law 
o  Support to creation and registration of PUUs 
o  Support of PMT to formulation of PMPs 
o  Monitoring of PMP 
o  Monitoring of pasture productivity and quality 
o  Support to establishment of PUAs and PCs at district level 
  Report on activities implemented by PMT in the scope of CASP+ 
  Support the development and maintenance of a national database on pasture and PUUs 
  Support the establishment of a national pasture monitoring system, in collaboration with State 
Committee for Land and Geodesy 
5.  Supervision and reporting 
The incumbent will be under the supervision of the PMU Project Coordinator to whom he/she 
will report directly. 
6.  Required qualifications and experience 
o  Advanced degree in agronomy or pasture management 
o  10 years of experience in the filed of pasture management in Tajikistan or in the 
region 
o  Prior experience in rural development projects implemented by Got or NGOs, or with 
development agencies will be an added advantage 
Languages: Tajik, Russian. Good knowledge of English will be and added advantage 
o 
Forestry Community Facilitator (FCF) 
Selection of FCF 
Experience has shown that for introduction of JFM the support by external facilitators is indispensable. 
Below are guidelines for the hiring and TORs for such supports. 
1. 
The FCF will be recruited to a national Call for Proposals, divided into lots during project 
implementation on the basis of one or more Districts. 
Only national NGOs will be eligible to submit a proposal 
A proposal may be submitted by the same applicant for one or two lots  
2. 
The contract with the CF will be for an initial duration of 5 years, with possible subsequent extensions 
of one year. 
3. 
The FCF will have to form a team of experts and support staff at the national and district levels. It 
should appoint Project Manager and other relevant staff.  
4. 
The CF will have to select/appoint village facilitators and train them on Project objectives, tasks and 
processes. The CEP Forestry Project Officers will assist the FCF in certain respects. 
Task and responsibilities 
Duration of contract 
Staffing: 
The responsibilities of the FCF will be as follows: 
Item 
Field Visit 
Draft - August 2021 
Output 
Information collected is 
documented and enables a decision 
to be made on the introduction of 
JFM in the respective village 
Primary 
Responsibility 
FCF 
112 
Decision on inclusion of village 
Information Seminar 
JFM Plot demarcation 
Selection of forest users 
Secure JFM Contract 
JFM Planning 
Liaison with CsCAP planning 
Deliver Training 
Organize training 
Establishment of Forest User Groups 
Ongoing work (years 2 to 7) 
Annual monitoring 
Support to Annual monitoring 
Technical consultation 
Support to ancillary investments 
Harvest and sales of forest products 
Managing upcoming cases of conflict 
1.  Field Visit 
Selection decision 
Community agreement 
JFM Plot maps 
JFM Plots assigned to users 
Contracts signed 
Management plan and annual plan 
Agreement on forest plan 
Trained beneficiaries 
Training schedule 
FUGs set up 
FCF to support but gradually 
withdraw 
Monitoring complete 
FCF to support but gradually 
withdraw 
FCF to support but gradually 
withdraw 
FCF to support but gradually 
withdraw 
FCF to support but gradually 
withdraw 
FCF to support but gradually 
withdraw 
CEP 
FCF 
FCF 
FCF 
FCF 
Leskhoz 
FCF 
Leskhoz 
FCF 
FCF 
Leskhoz 
CEP 
FCF 
FCF 
FCF 
FCF 
FCF 
Current condition of the forest: As harvesting is a key incentive for the forest user and the 
Condition of the forest in the past: The condition of the forest before and during Soviet time 
Current use of the forests: It is important to know who uses the forest, for which purpose it is 
The first field visit serves the purpose of evaluating the overall feasibility of implementing JFM in the 
given district. Staff of the Leskhoz and community representatives are involved in all steps as they can 
offer valuable information about the history and current use of the forest. To prepare a field visit, 
satellite images and maps of the Leskhoz can be used to get a first overview of the site.  
During the field visits the following information is collected: 
• 
may show which tree species grow well in the respective area. This information can be used when 
rehabilitating the forest. Sources of information are the maps and books of the last forest inventory 
and management planning (lesoustroistvo) which every Leskhoz still has. In most cases experts of the 
National Forestry Agency in Dushanbe, the Forest Institute, or Tajiklesservice Ltd., can provide 
support and information. 
• 
Leskhoz to participate in JFM, the forest should have enough biomass or harvest potential of nuts or 
fruits to ensure that some firewood and non-timber forest products can be harvested after one year. 
In case revenues are delayed into the future, the provision of incentives is highly important. 
• 
used (for firewood, as pasture, etc.), and whether there are any formal or informal rules concerning 
forest use. Under certain conditions, pre-existing lease contracts can be a good basis for the 
introduction of JFM. However, they can also have a negative effect, e.g., if the reallocation of illicitly 
acquired plots is resisted. In most regions, Leskhoz issues individual and seasonal permits for forest 
use. These might be the permits to harvest walnuts or pistachio or seasonal use of forests as 
pastures. 
• 
villagers physically capable of carrying out the work in the forest; whether the villagers have enough 
disposable time to work on the forest plots; attention should be paid to whether, due to labour 
migration, the work load for women is increased without a respective increase of income and the 
opportunity to decide on the use of this income; whether the benefits potentially gained from JFM (not 
only financial income or subsistence firewood for the household, but also ecological or spiritual 
benefits for the village) can be expected to sufficiently motivate villagers to rehabilitate and manage 
the forest; 
• 
Location of the forest plot: Experience has shown that it is easier for forest users to work on a 
nearby forest area. It is recommended that a given forest area close to a village is brought completely 
under JFM in order to avoid overuse of forests that the remain under open access. 
Socio-economic situation of the village. This analysis should indicate whether there are enough 
Draft - August 2021 
113 
Availability of reliable and interested partners: The successful introduction of JFM depends on 
Water supply: It is important to clarify whether the forest or the forest regeneration depends 
• 
on irrigation and how this irrigation can be improved or established (rehabilitation of old or 
construction of new channel, establishment of water reservoirs). 
• 
Leadership in the community: The successful introduction of JFM greatly depends on the 
proper information and promotion activities at the community level. Therefore, it is important to 
identify formal and informal leaders in the community who can support the introduction process and 
mitigate potential conflicts among the villagers. 
• 
partners in the village (local Leskhoz staff, village representatives, potential forest users) who 
understand, welcome and support the approach. If the community is split and unable to find 
compromises, this will hinder the effective implementation of JFM. 
• 
as pasture. In this situation, introducing JFM may provoke dissatisfaction and disagreement among 
villagers. Therefore, it is important to define the current extent of informal pasture use within the 
given community and assess whether there are sufficient alternative grazing areas. 
At the end of the field trip, the Reflecting on the (better) conditions of the forest in the past (in 
comparison with present) can greatly help to promote the JFM concept among both the villagers and 
foresters. 
Informal pasture and animal grazing: It is a usual case that forest plots are (informally) used 
2.  Information Seminar 
Explanation of access rights. Whereas forest users receive long-term use rights for forest 
Explanation of the contract. For this purpose, a short version of the contract can be used, 
Joint Evaluation of the situation of the forest. The participants of the meeting reflect on the 
Overview of JFM. The basic principles (sharing of responsibilities and benefits between forest 
If JFM seems to be feasible for a certain forest area, an information seminar is conducted no more 
than three or four weeks after the field trip. The Forestry Community Facilitator agrees with the village 
representatives and the Leskhoz staff upon the time and place for the information seminar. The use of 
a projector (for showing Google Earth images and maps of the forest areas) has proven to be an 
efficient tool to support the decision-making process of the people. For some areas, Google Earth 
provides an opportunity to compare satellite images shot in different years. Standardized information 
material and power point presentations are available in Russian and Tajik. 
The information seminar includes: 
• 
condition and the necessary improvements of the nearby forest area.  
• 
users and Leskhoz) and the elements of JFM are outlined.  
• 
which outlines the main points in a customized manner. 
• 
plots, the access of other households to the forest is restricted. The implications for harvesting 
firewood and grazing in the forest need to be discussed. 
Explanation of the responsibilities of the forest users. Potential forest users should understand 
• 
the rights and obligations related to this role. They should realistically assess the extent to which their 
individual household is able to perform work in the forest. Examples of forest users in other villages 
can be presented. 
Realistic picture of the expected benefits. The work performed in the forest is not paid for in 
• 
cash, but forest users partially own the harvest. In the first years, benefits from forest management 
are often limited. Potential forest users should understand that they will only be allowed to harvest if 
they perform their tasks as agreed in the plan. 
• 
Introduction of the community agreement. The participants get acquainted with the 
implications of JFM for the village as a whole and with the community agreement to be discussed and 
signed. 
• 
• 
during the information seminar, a list of potential forest users can be immediately drawn up. In case 
some households explicitly state that they are not interested in JFM, this shall be recorded as well. 
In order to create maximum interest among staff of the Leskhoz they should be involved from the 
very beginning in the introductory process. This way the staff will feel themselves responsible for the 
introduction of JFM. The role of the Forestry Community Facilitator has to be made clear from the very 
beginning to villagers and Leskhoz staff. NGOs should spark the interest, to assure a transparent 
implementation and the use of possibilities and rights as provided by the forest legislation. The 
process of JFM implementation should then be driven by the Leskhoz and the forest users. 
Discussion of open questions.  
List of potential forest users. If the community already agrees on the introduction of JFM 
Draft - August 2021 
114 
3.  Community agreement 
As the introduction of JFM has implications not only for the JFM contract holders but for all villagers, 
e.g., restricted access to firewood and grazing areas, the informed consent of the community as a 
whole is crucial. 
Forestry Community Facilitator should make sure that all villagers (including non-participants of the 
information seminar) are informed about the suggested changes in forest management, and that 
everybody has the opportunity to apply for a forest plot. Otherwise hidden conflicts within the 
community might lead to the exclusion of some households or groups of households from the 
allocation of forest plots. In order to avoid a misunderstanding, villagers can be requested to sign in a 
list that they have been informed about the date and time of the community meeting. 
In villages that were resettled after the Soviet time, the communities are informally split into old-
residents and new-comers. This can cause a real challenge in community mobilization and provoke 
conflicts linked to allocation of forest plots. The mobilization and information work should be done with 
leaders of both old-residents and new-comers.  
Before the contracts between the Leskhoz and the forest users are concluded, an agreement between 
the community and the Leskhoz is signed. The community agreement states that the community is 
willing to support JFM, and it defines the responsibilities of the Leskhoz. Where community based 
organizations (CBO), like Village Organizations, are in place, they should be contacted for the 
agreement. 
4.  Definition and demarcation of JFM plots 
Demarcation of plots with similar features. This may mean that plots are similar in size and 
Demarcation of plots with similar harvest potential. This may mean that plots on good forest 
Continuation of pre-existing demarcation. In some villages the Leskhoz had previously leased 
The community, i.e., the village assembly, together with Leskhoz staff and strong support of the 
Forestry Community Facilitator, decides how to divide the forest area. The following approaches have 
been applied in various villages and regions: 
• 
forest plots or allotted use rights to individual households, or individual households had fenced a forest 
plot and started rehabilitating it without formal use rights. In such cases, the introduction of JFM may 
only bring a formalization of pre-existing use patterns, and the establishment of management and 
planning mechanisms. However, it might be that sometimes the Leskhoz is neglecting the JFM 
contracts (see section on managing conflicts). 
• 
areas are smaller, whereas plots on degraded forest areas are larger. Allocation may be done 
according to the preferences of the selected forest users (if consent can be achieved) or by lot. 
• 
quality and that they include both good and degraded forest areas. Allocation may be done according 
to the preferences of the selected forest users (if consent can be achieved) or by lot. 
• 
Demarcation of plots where JFM is a useful management approach for Leskhoz. The main 
motivation of Leskhoz for conclusion of JFM contracts is to gain an additional work force for forest 
rehabilitation and especially forest protection. While a part of the forest plot shall provide sufficient 
income to motivate the forest user, a sufficiently large area which needs labour input shall be 
allocated. Allocating only the “better pieces” of the forest land must be avoided. 
It is important that external Forestry Community Facilitator moderates the discussion in order to 
ensure that everybody’s voice in the community is heard. The discussion on distribution should be 
based on a map of the whole forest area. It is necessary to define “practical” boundaries, meaning 
that natural borders like rivers, mountain ridges, etc., serve as given borders. The use of Google Earth 
images and the delineation of boundaries with GIS have proven to serve as efficient tools in this 
context. 
The exact demarcation of the plots in the field is then done by a representative of the Leskhoz in the 
presence of the affected forest users. The Leskhoz staff and the forest user must clearly mark the 
boundaries of the forest plot in the field in order to avoid later quarrels. The boundaries of the 
individual forest plot are recorded using GPS, and the size of the plot is measured.   
As mentioned earlier, in some cases the individual plots are too big in size to be circled on the ground. 
In that case it is easier to develop the borders based on satellite imagery using clearly visible 
landmarks as borders. 
The demarcation process provides an opportunity for a rapid assessment of the forest plots, i.e., 
identification of main types and quantities of fruit and timber trees, shrubs, and marking of degraded 
and eroded areas. This information will later serve as a good basis for the planning of activities. 
Draft - August 2021 
115 
Experience has shown that a demarcation based on hand-drawn maps or forest planning maps of the 
1980s doesn’t provide sufficient certainty for contractual security. It has proven to be efficient to 
develop maps on the basis of satellite images as freely available in Google Earth. 
5.  Selection of forest users 
Experience: Experience in forestry techniques and with forest management is an asset 
State of Mind: Many of the well-performers are elder men with strong emotional ties to their 
Time: At least one member of a well-performing household has enough time for forest work. 
Long-term thinking: An individual who considers long-term benefits of the forest (timber, the 
Physical capability: At least one member of a well-performing household is physically capable 
Motivation: A well-performing household usually does not exclusively think of its own benefit, 
Villagers both willing and able to perform the tasks necessary to rehabilitate and manage a forest plot 
are selected to become forest users. After internal discussions in the village assembly and signing of 
the community agreement, the community representatives provide to the Forestry Community 
Facilitator a list of households interested/or not interested in becoming JFM forest users.  
The number of JFM forest users is based on the potential number of the demarcated forest plots (as 
defined under previous step 1.3.) and the number of willing and capable forest users.  
The following criteria have proven to be relevant to assess the expected performance of a potential 
forest user: 
- 
of forest work. 
- 
Employment, migration and the size of owned or leased arable land influence the availability for forest 
work. 
- 
(usually of former Leskhoz staff and their descendants). 
- 
children’s access to natural resources, etc.) will perform better than one who only thinks of short-term 
benefits (firewood, hay, etc.). 
- 
but also of the general interest, e.g., the general ecosystem functions of the forest. 
- 
village who intend to stay in the villages and have an intrinsic motivation on being leaders for the 
young generation. 
In case a whole community is applying for a JFM contract, the above listed criteria should be met by at 
least one third of the community and a strong leader should be present. 
The actual selection of the forest users then follows two steps: 
• 
is developed and used to interview the potential forest users included in the list provided by the 
community. In order to make the selection procedure transparent and acceptable to all affected 
households, it is recommended that the interviews be conducted by external Forestry Community 
Facilitator. 
• 
community representative, and an external facilitator. The committee evaluates the answers 
documented in the questionnaires and selects the forest users. Each questionnaire is signed by all 
members of the selection committee. If a candidate is not selected, the reason is documented on the 
questionnaire. 
In some cases, several people from the same household or close relatives apply to be forest users 
under JFM only to gain a bigger forest plot all together. Therefore, the external Forestry Community 
Facilitator should have close contacts with the village leaders to identify these details and prevent the 
capture of big plots by single families. When plots of different sizes are to be distributed, it is a 
capacity oriented approach should be used. For example, larger plots may be allocated to those forest 
users who have more time for working in the forest, or more experience with forestry techniques, than 
others. 
Interviews with potential forest users. Based on the above-mentioned criteria, a questionnaire 
Selection of forest users. The selection committee is made up of an Leskhoz representative, a 
6.  JFM contract 
After the division of the forest area into individual plots and their allocation to forest users, the JFM 
contract is signed by the Leskhoz and the forest user. The Leskhoz staff (in the field and in the office) 
and the forest users can only effectively cooperate in the framework of JFM if both sides fully 
understand the content of the contract. Based on the Forest Code and its respective By Law on JFM, 
the JFM contract is supposed to include the following points: 
• 
• 
for monito-ring the work of the forest user. 
The size and exact location of the plot as indicated on a map of sufficient quality. 
The name of the management unit or compartment of the Leskhoz and the person responsible 
Draft - August 2021 
116 
Rights and obligations of the Leskhoz and the forest user. Within the framework of 
The objectives of JFM. It is important to point out that the focus of JFM is on both forest 
Rules for the development and the contents of the management plan. 
Rules for the sharing of the harvest (percentages to be received by the Leskhoz and the forest 
• 
protection and an increase of forest productivity of a natural forest, not the establishment of orchards 
or timber plantations. 
• 
• 
user in the first, second, third, etc., year). 
• 
management and annual plans, the forest user is allowed to independently manage the plot, while the 
Leskhoz is supporting the forest user and monitors the use and protection of the plot. 
Contract period and rules for extension. The period should be sufficiently long to give 
• 
appropriate incentives for forest rehabilitation, the benefits of which will be available only in the long 
term. According to the Forest Code of 2011, contracts are concluded for 20 years, with right of 
extension. 
• 
The conditions for the cancellation of the contract and for changes in the contract. 
It is very important that the forest users clearly understand their rights and responsibilities as JFM 
forest users before signing the contract. Enough time should be invested to assure this.  Where the 
harvest sharing percentages have to be newly negotiated between the Leskhoz and the forest users, 
the negotiation should already be initiated at the stage of contract explanation so that all details have 
been clarified at the points of formal contract signature. The Forestry Community Facilitators are 
strongly advised not to determine the shares, or to support one party of the contract only. The full 
process of negotiation of shares should be steered by the Leskhoz and forest users themselves. 
Extensioners should be prepared to provide calculations of potential income and the annual (in kind) 
investment of both sides, demonstrating the costs and efforts that need to be made to rehabilitate the 
forest and to generate the income. 
7.  Management plan and annual plan 
The five-year management plan and the annual plan serve as tools for forest management planning 
and for the monitoring of activities and results. They are developed jointly by Leskhoz staff and the 
respective forest user for each individual plot. 
Ideally, planning would be based on data from a forest inventory in order to assess the biomass 
growth and the Annual Allowable Cut (AAC) of fuelwood/timber and the harvest potential of non-wood 
forest products. 
Ongoing engagement (years 2-7): 
8.  Monitoring of annual plans  
Leskhoz staff records whether and in what quality the forest user performed the tasks defined in the 
annual plan. The final annual monitoring and the development of the annual plan for the following 
year are usually done in autumn (October – December). For this, Leskhoz staff and the forest user 
jointly complete a form to compare the actual achievements with the annual plan. 
According to the contract, non-fulfilment of the annual plan or the violation of the JFM contract can 
result in its cancellation. The severity of a breach of the annual plan and an impending cancellation of 
the contract should be transparent to the affected forest user, and arbitrary decisions should be 
avoided. In accordance with the By-Laws on JFM, two warnings have to be issued by the head of the 
State Forest Enterprise before cancelling the contract. 
It has proven useful to enter the aggregated monitoring data into a simple excel database. This helps 
Leskhoz staff to report demanded figures, e.g., on afforestation activities to higher levels and at the 
same time serves as a reporting tool for the assisting NGO. 
9.  Technical consultation 
Many JFM forest users have no prior forestry experience; thus, supporting them with technical 
consultation is a precondition for effective management of their forest plots. This is first of all the task 
of the local foresters or the forest engineer of the Leskhoz. The Forestry Community Facilitators may 
help the Leskhoz to organize training events for the JFM users. In case the Leskhoz doesn’t have the 
necessary knowledge itself, external trainers can be engaged and both Leskhoz staff and forest users 
participate in the training.  
It is of course crucial to increase the knowledge of the local foresters in the medium and long term. 
For this purpose, Leskhoz are supported in Component 1 to have their foresters participate in a 
vocational education training course. In this context it is very important to support the Leskhoz in its 
change from a control entity to a management entity supporting and supervising forest users. Only 
continuous support enables them to develop a new understanding of their roles and responsibilities 
Draft - August 2021 
117 
Training on silvo-cultural techniques: Leskhoz and Forestry Community Facilitator support the 
Training on nursery management: The establishment of back yard nurseries is used to ensure 
and the technical capacities as the basis of sustainable forest management in the context of JFM and 
beyond.   
Technical training for forest users and Leskhoz staff may include: 
• 
forest users with training on planting, fencing, pruning, felling of trees and harvesting of non-timber 
forest products like dog rose and sea buckthorn. Such training units can be open to all villagers, who 
usually grow trees in their private gardens, in order to make the whole community benefit from JFM. 
Specific attention will be paid to fuelwood, including  
• 
the future availability of necessary planting material. Specific training on private small nurseries will 
be beneficial for the JFM forest users as well as other interested villagers beyond the context of JFM. 
The budget set aside for Backyard nurseries is intended to be sufficient to cover this practical training. 
Especially fruit tree seedlings can provide income possibilities. However, the common demand of 
forest users to enrich their plots with cultivated fruit tree species should be taken with care, as 
planting fruit trees on forest land dissolves the distinction of forestry and horticulture. Experienced 
trainers for nursery management come from the nursery of Vakhdat. 
• 
formal background in forestry education. They do not have sufficient knowledge on the rights and 
responsibilities that are part of their duties. Training in this field gives local foresters security in 
communication with forest users. This will form part of the curriculum under the forestry education in 
component 1. 
• 
Training on biodiversity conservation and management of rare fruit tree species: Qualified 
trainings in this field can be conducted, e.g., by the department for Horticulture at the academy of 
Science in Dushanbe or Tajiklesservice. 
Numerous training materials are already available: A handbook on forestry techniques relevant in 
riparian forests has been compiled and distributed to many forest users. Additionally, a guide on 
important tree species in the nut and fruit tree forests of Khovaling and a pocket guide on all tree and 
shrub species have been developed. For the specific management of pistachio forests, a short manual 
has been designed which points out the main management techniques for cultivation, planting, and 
harvesting of pistachio. 
Training on rights and responsibilities of Leskhoz staff: In many cases staff of Leskhoz have no 
10. Financial Support to Forest Management  
Nursery development: The establishment of backyard nurseries will ensure the future 
Provision with specified equipment: For example, good quality clippers for pruning activities, 
Infrastructure measures for afforestation, forest rehabilitation and protection and sustainable 
Often, additional financial resources are needed to support the implementation of management and 
annual JFM plans, or pasture plans (see section 3.5.) and provide the necessary incentive. The most 
common activities where financial support is usually needed are 
• 
availability of necessary planting material. Finances will be provided for construction materials and 
high quality seeds and training will be provided for backyard nursery operators. 
Provision with seeds and seedlings: In case quality seedlings cannot be grown and seeds 
• 
cannot be selected by the forest users themselves, they can be provided either by the Leskhoz or 
need to be purchased additionally, cuttings e.g. for willow may also be used. 
• 
or transportation devices like motorbikes or bicycles to ease patrolling of the area. 
• 
use: 
- 
idea is to divert spring water at higher altitudes to provide sufficient irrigation for forestry or to 
capture springs and store the water.  
- 
Construction of dams in riparian forests. This is often demanded by communities as a 
precondition to engage in forestry. It is feared that without protection, reoccurring floods will destroy 
the results of forest management. 
- 
Construction of fences. The fencing of individual plots is not recommended; better is the 
fencing of several plots, or plots of very big size and only sides which have a high risk for cattle 
entering into the forest, for example, along cattle tracks. 
- 
Pens for cattle retention. Pens of this kind have been established, e.g., in Pendjikent in 
Shohbod village. They are used by the forest users to detain illegally grazing cattle until the owner is 
identified.  
- 
Fencing of monitoring areas. Fencing a small plot of the forest to demonstrate the damaging 
impact from grazing cattle on the one hand can motivate the forest user to protect the forest and on 
the other hand helps to monitor the results of the protection measures of the whole plot. 
Rehabilitation, construction and maintenance of irrigation channels or water reservoirs. The 
Draft - August 2021 
118 
Collection, drying and processing devices to increase the income from Non-timber forest 
Storage points for firewood, as constructed in Ishkashim (GBAO), to promote legal fuelwood 
Forest Ranger. In case of big community plots, a ranger can be hired and paid by the 
- 
community, ensuring that cattle are kept away from the forest plot. In case the community is unable 
or still insufficiently convinced, the salary of such a ranger can be paid out of a Savings Book opened 
up for one representative of the community and supported by a Donor organization. This has been the 
case in Penjikent´s juniperus forests, Zimtud village. 
- 
trade. 
- 
products. 
•   Infrastructure measures for increased pasture productivity or access to alternative grazing grounds 
or fodder: 
- 
cattle can be used to locate cattle in areas outside of forest resources. 
- 
- 
- 
Natural and artificial reseeding to increase the productivity of pastures. 
Construction of bridges, or hay cables to ease the access to more distant pastures/ hay areas. 
Hiring of a professional herder. 
11.  Harvest and sales of forest products 
Water-points for cattle. When integrated in a concept of pasture planning, water points for 
Public institutions (schools, municipality admi-nistrations, military bases, etc.) which receive 
A significant proportion of the households in towns still use firewood for heating and cooking. 
The type and amount of forest products to be harvested from individual forest plots is defined in the 
annual plan. The forest user and the Leskhoz share the harvest according to the quota defined in the 
JFM contract. As defined in the By-laws on JFM, the system of defining the shares can become quite 
complex because shares depend on the forest product and sometimes change within the period of 
contract duration. It is recommended that the share mechanism be kept as simple as possible. 
To improve the marketing of forest products and thereby increase the income from JFM for both the 
Leskhoz and forest users, a thorough market analysis is the basis. The chances and challenges of the 
most common products are pointed out in the following: 
Fuelwood: The rural and mountainous regions of Tajikistan are characterized by a high demand for 
firewood by: 
• 
fuel budgets from the government. 
• 
Private households in (JFM) villages. Most of the households use firewood from their gardens, 
but some need additional fuel wood. They buy it from the forest users in their village or might illegally 
cut it in the forest. 
• 
They get their firewood from private gardens, neighbours, relatives from the villages, or buy it from 
the villages. 
The high demand and the allocation of government funds to public institutions for them to procure 
fuelwood opens opportunities for the development of a firewood value chain, preventing illegal 
cuttings by those who demand firewood, and providing financial incentives (income) to forest users.  
A successful practice in the Ishkashim district is to conclude contracts between a group of JFM forest 
users (to jointly provide the demanded amount) and one public institution on the supply of the yearly 
allocated firewood budget. It is recommended that these contracts be concluded as early as possible 
in the year. After harvesting the firewood, the forest users bring the harvest share owed to the 
Leskhoz and the sellable part of their own share to the collection point. The firewood is stored there, 
dried, and finally sold to both public institutions and private buyers. 
One of the key obstacles to the development of a free firewood market is the governmentally fixed 
and non-competitive prices for firewood which are binding for the Leskhoz. This problem has not been 
solved so far. 
Fruits and Walnuts: Especially the forests in the central districts like Khovaling, Muminobod and 
Shurobod provide a big variety of NTFP in the form of fruits, e.g., Wild Apple, Wild Pear, Plums or 
berries like Sea buckthorn and also nuts. The economically most valuable surely are Walnuts. 
The strong demand of Walnuts is driven from both the local buyers (intermediaries) and bulk buyers 
coming from other regions of Tajikistan  
In an early stage of developing value chains for the forest products, especially the fruits, it is very 
important to help the forest users to improve the quality of their processing practices of collecting and 
drying, and thus the quality of the products. Only this ensures that the products are competitive at 
market price. Bringing the forest users together for joint marketing can also help them to access 
external (bigger) markets and gain more profit, through avoiding intermediaries. .  
Pistachio: Pistachio need to be harvested within a given period in time in order to ensure a standard in 
quality. The main producers in Tajikistan are the Leskhoz in southern Khatlon, which engage local 
Draft - August 2021 
119 
villagers in the harvesting, giving them a certain percentage of the harvest. The Leskhoz sells its 
shares to international and national traders. The remaining pistachio nuts are sold on local markets. 
Generally there is a high local and international demand. This situation allows JFM forest users to 
either sell their share of Pistachio to the Leskhoz or organize the marketing themselves. 
Medicinal herbs: Medicinal herbs like Cumin and Ferula may provide more substantial additional 
income opportunities on a shorter term than afforestation and forest rehabilitation activities. However, 
sustainable collection practices are an absolute must in order not to degrade those resources further. 
It is possible and even highly recommended to support forest users in reseeding of such herbs. 
Medicinal herbs production within open forests can incentivize the protection from grazing. 
12. Managing upcoming cases of conflict 
Based on the fact that forest users start enforcing their right and obligation to protect the forest plots, 
e.g., against violation of grazing regulations, experience has shown that in an early stage following the 
conclusion of JFM contracts conflicts are likely to occur between forest users and non-JFM participants 
of the community, or between the community entering a JFM contract and neighbouring villages. 
Then, later in the ongoing stage of JFM implementation, conflicting issues are likely to arise between 
JFM forest users and the Leskhoz. This is commonly the case when the Leskhoz is monitoring the 
fulfilment of annual and management plans and both share the agreed harvests. Leskhoz staff often 
falls back into old patterns of forest governance, ignoring their obligations towards the JFM forest 
users and the eye-to eye relationship. 
In the following, frequently observed types of conflict and approaches to mitigation are outlined: 
• 
Illegal cutting of firewood by other villagers, who are not forest users: In many cases, 
villagers continued the illegal cutting of firewood on forest areas to which they formerly had had open 
access. Conflicts can be prevented by fostering information exchange between the Leskhoz and the 
forest users on one side, and the other villagers or community representatives on the other side, if 
necessary, supported by external Forestry Community Facilitator. In the case of conflict, reference to 
the community agreement can be made. It states that the whole community agreed to the 
implementation of JFM and that the forest users are responsible for the protection and sustainable 
management of their forest plots. It is also helpful if those who do not want to conclude a JFM contract 
have already stated their negative decision in the community agreement (see annex XXX). 
• 
Illegal grazing on JFM plots: Both the forest legislation (Forest Code, §59) and the JFM 
contracts forbid all grazing because it harms the newly growing shoots and is extremely detrimental to 
the regeneration of the forest. In many villages, however, the local population is used to letting their 
livestock graze in forest areas, especially in winter and spring, when alternative pastures are not 
available and fodder is scarce. Whenever livestock is found grazing on a JFM plot, the Leskhoz staff 
fines its owner and – in case the plot has not been properly protected – also the forest user 
responsible for the plot. When there is a problem identifying the owner of the cattle, the cattle are 
retained until the owner comes to claim them. For this purpose paddocks (Zagon skota) can be 
established, where the cattle can be stored for a while until the owner is identified. If a livestock 
owner does not pay the fine within a set period, the case is brought to court. The enforcement of a 
general grazing ban has proved to be difficult due to the long distances and the limited mobility of 
Leskhoz staff, the unwillingness of Leskhoz staff to damage their social relations by fining their fellow 
villagers, the lack of alternative pastures, and the delays in the settlement of cases by the court. As a 
complementary measure to the grazing ban, natural grass could be sown between the trees and 
harvested in autumn in order to produce a sufficient amount of winter fodder. Whenever cattle grazing 
is likely to become an issue of conflict, the development of pasture management/grazing plans with 
the cattle owner/ pasture user group can be facilitated. Additionally, financial support might be 
provided to implement these plans and to enable access alternative pastures or to improve the 
productivity of existing pastures. 
• 
Demand of Leskhoz to fulfil old use agreements: In many regions of Tajikistan, forest 
management is based on informal or semi-formal agreements in which the Leskhoz grants forest users 
the right of using local forest resources (compare section 1.1 Field visit). Unlike the formalized JFM 
contracts, these agreements are only of limited legal value. When JFM contracts are concluded, they 
sometimes replace the existing agreement, usually to the perceived disfavour of the Leskhoz. In times 
of harvest when the forest enterprise has to fulfil its management plans, it sometimes neglects the 
signed JFM contract and insists on fulfilment of the old use agreements (often because of pressure of 
the National Forestry Agency to deliver certain quantities of forest products). An open dialogue 
between Leskhoz management and its local staff is necessary to foster understanding and ownership 
for the JFM approach on the side of Leskhoz staff and to build trust. At the same time, Leskhoz 
Draft - August 2021 
120 
Non-performance of a forest user: In case a forest user is not fulfilling the tasks outlined in 
management has to demonstrate its readiness and willingness to sanction any violation of JFM rules 
by its own staff. External Forestry Community Facilitator play a crucial role in documenting violations 
of JFM contracts by the Leskhoz or the forest user. 
• 
the annual plan or violates the use limits, this not only affects negatively the rehabilitation of the 
forest plot, but can also negatively affect the attitude of the other forest users. According to the JFM 
regulations, Leskhoz is to issue 2 warnings, and in case of non-fulfilment of the prescriptions, the 
contract is to be cancelled. 
• 
Taxes: According to the JFM By-law, the forest user is responsible for tax payments from his 
income. In some cases the Leskhoz has been requested to pay taxes for all income from Forest Fund 
Land, including the income of the forest user, unless evidence of tax payment is provided by the forest 
user. Therefore, it is likely that in the future the Leskhoz will request Forest users to provide proofing 
documents on tax payment. 
13. Establishment of Forest User Groups 
In many regions of Tajikistan, community-based organizations like Mahalla Committees or Village 
Organizations (VOs) or similar structures have been implemented to enhance and structure 
community development. Different councils (subgroups) can be formed by community members to 
address given issues in community development and natural resource management specifically. 
Examples are subgroups for women, for agriculture, and for pasture.  
The idea is to support the establishment of Forest User Groups (FUGs) in every community where JFM 
is in place. Where possible they should be formally integrated into the existing structures of VOs. 
Members of FUGs can jointly organize work to improve forest and irrigation infrastructure, mutually 
monitor the fulfilment of annual plans, and establish a community fine system for illegal grazing and 
cutting. Additionally, they disseminate information about JFM within the village and solve conflicts 
between forest users.  
In many villages, all forest users use the same forest infrastructure for the management of their 
individual plots, or could manage them more effectively if they cooperated. For example, they could 
• 
schemes and patrols, 
• 
• 
access to markets is limited and public institutions can be attracted as customers. 
Furthermore, the leader of a forest user group acts as an intermediary between Leskhoz staff and the 
individual forest user. Local foresters communicate information only to the leader of the forest user 
group who then disseminates it among its members. 
Some forest user groups function very well, while others do not function at all. Groups which function 
well have a strong and accepted leadership, and the group members recognise the advantages of 
cooperating in a group.  A very good example of a functioning FUG is in the village of Langar 
(Ishkashim). In general the willingness of villagers to be part of formal forest user groups as, e.g., 
subgroups of Village organisations, varies greatly among communities. 
Save much time and work if they built a common good quality fence along the forest area, 
Benefit from the collective marketing of forest products, especially in remote areas where 
Jointly work on constructing and maintaining the irrigation systems or develop grazing 
Supervision and reporting  
The FCF will work under supervision of the CEP and in close collaboration with Leskhoz and Forest 
Agency. It will also collaborate with international and national consultants and technical experts in 
implementing its activities. The FCF will keep also the VO, jamoat/khukumat administrations informed 
of schedule of activities and any adjustments. 
The CF will establish and maintain close cooperation with the SEPMU Project staff and partners 
working in the Project target areas to ensure synergy. 
During the course of this assignment, the CF will directly report to the CASP+  Project Coordinator. 
The CF is required to provide brief monthly progress reports defining the status of ongoing and 
indicating planned activities as well as problems encountered with the proposed solutions. Other 
report requirements would be agreed during contract negotiations. 
Draft - August 2021 
121 
Outline. District Climate Resilience Diagnostic (DCRD)  
For each of the districts shall be elaborated a District Climate Resilience diagnostic (DCRD). The 
presentation of the information in each chapter shall be supported by analytical geospatial maps. It will 
be important to bear in mind that the DCRD will apply to the whole of each District, not just the areas 
being supported by the project and thus should not rely on the collection of village specific information, 
for example, that would require collection of local data, consultations, pre-existing local plans, etc.. 
The overall Diagnostic shall not exceed 40 pages, excluding maps and annexes.  
Introduction 
Physical-geographic characteristics 
- 
- 
-  Detailed description of natural resources available, based on geospatial analysis and in case of 
vegetation, the information shall be confirmed by the expert evaluation of the Geobotany expert 
that gives information about the types and characteristics of the main plants identified and their 
suitability for pasture, forestry and agricultural activities.   
o  Pasture 
o  Forest 
o  Agricultural land 
o  Water ways 
o  Other 
- 
Built assets, including  important  human  made  infrastructure that may be exposed to  climate 
risks, e.g. roads, water infrastructure 
Social and economic description (based on available government data) 
- 
-  Definition of sub-catchments (in cooperation with River Basin Organisations) 
-  Climate Resilience analysis (exposing the geographic areas where the effects of climate change 
poses  the greatest  threat  to the safety and livelihood  of inhabitants, built assets, agriculture 
and natural resources). Sub-chapters are the following: 
o  Climate Change hazards and sensitivity 
 
 
 
 
Past and Present Climate Trends and Risks 
Past and Present Sensitivity to Climate Change 
Future Exposure to Climate Hazards 
Future Sensitivity to Climate Change 
o  Adaptive Capacity to Climate Change 
o  Presence of Climate Change Vulnerability hotspots 
- 
Adaptation Options for (a) pasture improvement/ restoration (pasture management plans), (b) 
climate-resilient infrastructures strengthening /  rehabilitation,  (c) procurement of agricultural 
machineries and Forestry Investment for (d) Joint Forest Management, and (e) Direct leskhoz 
forestry (ranked according to “highly recommended”, “recommended” and “least recommended” 
and supported with maps identifying zones for potential investments. All recommendations and 
guidance should be reviewed in terms of Ecosystem Based Adaptation to ensure these principles 
are used.  
-  Guidelines for using the diagnostic in the frame of district planning and investment 
Draft - August 2021 
122 
Appendix. CsCAP Format 
Acceptance by the Jamoat Council 
 ________________________________________  
from ___/___________ 20___, Decision # _______  
REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN  
DISTRICT:  ………. 
JAMOAT: ………… 
 VILLAGE: ……………. 
CLIMATE SENSITIVE COMMUNITY ACTION PLAN (CsCAP)  
For the period 20… to 20….. 
1.  Assessment of socio-economic status of the community 
1.1.  Local government description –(Jamoat) 
Date of Establishment 
Name of Chairman and date of election 
Staff of Jamoat Office 
Total area 
Number of villages 
Population 
Social and Economic infrastructures 
1.2.  Village description  
Location (GPS coordinates) 
Number of households 
Main economic activities 
Overview of natural resources 
Overview of communal infrastructure 
1.3.  Village and community organization 
Existence of VO, PUU and other CBOs 
History, role and composition of organizations 
For each organization mentioned above (VO, PUU, other CBO), provide details in tables below 
VO Council Members (if existing VO) 
Full Name 
VO Council position 
Profession/position and employer 
(school, private entrepreneur, self-
employed, farmer, etc.) 
Other Community Based Organizations ( including PUU, 1 table/CBO) 
Full Name 
Position 
Profession/position and employer 
(school, private entrepreneur, self-
employed, farmer, etc.) 
1.4.  Activities implemented by VO, PUU or other CBO 
Draft - August 2021 
123 
For each organization, describe activities implemented and investments made so far. When relevant, 
and for each CBO, provide details in tables below: 
Activities and investments implemented through external resources  
Program  
Donor 
Budget  
Implementation 
period 
# 
1 
2 
3 
Activities and investments implemented through own resources 
Implementation 
period 
#  Activity 
Note 
1 
2 
3 
1.1.  Demography 
Text: General description and comments on village demography 
# 
1. 
2. 
2.1. 
2.2. 
3. 
4. 
4.1. 
4.2. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
10. 
Indicators   
Number of households (farm)  
Total population 
Including   – males 
                    females 
Youth 
Able-bodied adults (between 18 and 60) 
           Including  –employed  
                             - unemployed  
Retirement age population 
Women Headed households 
Families receiving pension 
Families with more than 5 children 
Families with migrants in other countries 
1.2.  Land use 
Population (person) 
Text: General description and comments on land availability and use 
Year ……. 
Total available ha  used (ha)  
Indicators  
# 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
9 
Total agricultural land, total 
   - including, irrigated  
Arable land, totally 
 - including, irrigated 
Perennial crops and trees, total 
 - including, irrigated 
Grassland 
Pasture 
Including allocated to Dekhan 
Including State reserve 
Including under Leshkoz 
Including protected areas 
Presidential land 
Non-agricultural lands  
Land occupied by buildings, plants, factories, 
roads and etc. 
1.3.  Agriculture  
Draft - August 2021 
124 
Text: Detailed description of agricultural (including livestock) activities in the village 
# 
Crop 
Year 
ha 
Production, ton  Productivity / 
ha, ton 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
11 
12 
Wheat  
Barley  
Oil production  
Leguminous plants  
Corn  
Vegetables  
Melon field  
Potato  
Garden (Fruit ) 
Vineyard (Grape) 
Hay from natural grassland 
Cultivated fodder  
Others (add as many rows as 
needed) 
Table 5. Horticulture  
Text: Main productions, constraints and strengths, marketing 
# 
Indicators  
Y-4 
Y-3 
Y-2 
Y-1 
Y0 
1 
2 
3 
Area, ha 
Production, tonnes 
Productivity, t / ha 
Table 6. Grain Crop Information  
Text: Main productions, constraints and strengths, marketing 
# 
Indicators  
Y-4 
Y-3 
Y-2 
Y-1 
Y0 
1 
2 
3 
Area, ha 
Production, tonnes 
Productivity, t / ha 
Table 7. Livestock and beekeeping  
Text: Main species, productions, resources, constraints and strengths, marketing 
# 
Indicators  
Y-4 
Y-3 
Y-2 
Y-1 
Y0 
1 
Number of HH owning 
herbivores (cattle, small 
ruminants, horses and 
donkeys) 
2 
Cattle 
Draft - August 2021 
125 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Adult cows 
Number of HH owning 
cattle 
Number of sheep 
Number of goats 
Number of horses and 
donkeys 
Poultry (chicken, turkeys, 
ducks) 
Honey bees (colonies) 
Table 8. Livestock and beekeeping productivity  
# 
Indicators  
Y-4 
Y-3 
Y-2 
Y-1 
Y0 
1 
Red meat (ton live 
animals) 
2  Milk (ton) 
3 
Milk per cow par year (liter 
) 
4  Honey (ton) 
5 
6 
Poultry (head) 
Eggs 
1.4.  Nonagricultural and agro-processing activities 
Text: 
Main activities 
Number of HH involved 
Constraints and strengths 
Details in the table below: 
№ 
Indicators 
Industry and food shops 
1 
2 
Fuel stations  
3  Wood production   
Mill/Crusher  
4 
Shoe repair 
5 
Barber shops  
6 
Livestock products processing 
7 
Fruits drying and packaging industry 
8 
Medical herbs, harvesting and packaging 
9 
10  Shop for the repair of cars and agricultural machinery 
11  Others (specify) – add rows if needed 
1.5.  Forest 
Draft - August 2021 
Year 
Unit  
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Employees 
number 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
126 
Description of forest area 
Condition 
Ownership 
Management 
Usage 
Constraints 
Degradation status 
1.6.   Drinking and irrigation water 
Main equipment and infrastructures (irrigation, domestic, livestock) 
Sources of water 
% of HH served 
Constraints and needs 
1.7.  Education, health, and culture (social infrastructure) 
Schools (number, level, number of pupils) 
Health facilities 
Sanitation (garbage) 
1.8.  Transport & infrastructure development 
Electricity 
Roads, bridges 
1.9.  Communications 
Mobile phone network and internet access 
Number of HH with mobile phone 
Number of HH with smartphone 
1.10. 
Climate and natural resources  
Occurrence and impact of climate natural disasters – trends 
Condition of natural resources: pasture, river banks, forests, water sources, flora and fauna 
Availability and sources of fuel for domestic use 
2.  Analyses of strengths, weaknesses, perspectives, and risks (SWOT) 
The SWOT analysis will be undertaken with the assistance of the community facilitator, and will 
involve all CBOs and all categories of village population (women, men, youth, farmers, non-farmers, 
etc…) 
Table 9. SWOT Summary 
Strengths 
Classify by order of importance as per the 
community’s perception 
Weaknesses 
Opportunities 
Threats 
Draft - August 2021 
127 
2.1.  Detailed SWOT analysis 
Synthesis and detailed analysis/comments on SWOT table. 
3.  The CsCAP 
Prioritization of problems and actions 
Problem (by order of 
priority) 
Expected outcome (change 
expected) 
Proposed action  
For each problem (classified by order of priority), the expected outcome (what should be changed to 
address the problem) as well as specific required actions 
3.1.  CsCAP objectives 
CsCAP goal 
Overall goal; what will be achived if all 
outcomes are achieved 
CsCAP Outcomes 
To be copied from table above 
3.2.  Activities and projects 
3.2.1.  Synthetic table 
Project proposals  
Estimated 
Cost (Somoni) 
Funding 
sources 
Brief description  
1 
2 
3 
3.2.2. 
 Detailed narrative description of each activity/project 
For each activity project describe: 
-  Rationale/Why: what is the problem we want to address 
-  What: describe activity in details 
-  Cost: estimated budget with main cost items; financing modalities including community 
contribution 
-  How: implementation modalities 
-  When: implementation timetable 
4.  SUPERVISION AND MONITORING 
Describe how activities will be supervised, and monitored, by whom including role of VO and other 
CBOs, and using which tools 
5.  Pasture Management Plan 
The Pasture Management Plan is an integral part of the CsCAP. It should be developed in parallel by 
the pasture users under the facilitation of the Community facilitator and PMT, and its 
actions/projects/budget should be integrated in the overall CsCAP. 
5.1.  Introduction 
Draft - August 2021 
128 
Formulation process of PMP 
Objectives and content of PMP 
5.2.  The PUU or PUG 
Creation 
Activities implemented if pre-existing PUU 
Legal status 
Challenges faced if pre-existing PUU 
Structure 
Executive members (table) 
Name 
Position 
Contact (phone 
number) 
5.3.  Situation of livestock and pasture 
5.3.1.  Livestock inventories 
Number of heads 
Equivalent sheep units 
Specie 
Number of HH owning 
herbivores 
Adult Cattle 
Young cattle (less than 1 year) 
Sheep 
Goats 
Horses 
Donkeys 
Yak 
Narrative: comments on livestock population including evolution with time 
5.3.2.  Feed resources and needs 
5.3.2.1. 
General description of livestock feeding system 
Including pasture resources (winter and summer, movements and transhumance), utilization of crop 
by products, fodder cultivation, utilization of concentrates 
5.3.2.2. 
Fodder production 
Description of fodder production systems (including straw, hay and cultivated fodder) 
Comparison between availability and needs (table) 
Fodder 
Yield (t 
DM/ha) 
Number of ha 
Total 
production (t) 
Daily need / 
Sheep unit 
Wheat straw 
Barley straw 
Hay 
Alfalfa 
Other (add as 
many rows  as 
needed) 
Availability 
Number of 
animal-days  
TOTAL 
Synthesis and comments on comparison between fodder needs and availability: number of Sheep 
units for which stall-feeding resources (depending on duration of stall feeding period; e.g. 90 days) 
5.3.2.3. 
Pasture availability and condition 
Description of pasture blocks: area, distance, infrastructures, legal usage status, period of utilization, 
condition, management modalities, number of sheep units, duration and period of grazing. 
Draft - August 2021 
129 
Comparison between carrying capacities and livestock needs 
5.4.  Pasture management Plan  
5.4.1.  Pasture map 
Georeferenced map 
5.4.2.  Detailed calculation of carrying capacity per block 
For each block: area * current yield = DM availability, to be converted in daily supply per sheep unit 
and compared with requirements (0.0012 tons DM par day per SU) 
5.4.3.  Pasture rotation plan 
For each block, indicate periods of grazing, resting, and number of sheep units allowed per day during 
grazing periods. 
5.4.4.  Pasture improvement and restoration investments (description) 
Provide details (purpose, area covered, number of units)  for each of the below eligible items: 
 
 
Pasture rotation (with or without fencing); 
Pasture restoration: pasture protection through fencing (permanent or mobile fences), 
reseeding and overseeding, fertilization, plantation of forage shrubs and trees; 
  Access to water for livestock: creation of water points in underutilized areas including remote 
and summer pasture (subject to impact studies in order to ensure that the creation of water 
point will not result in pasture degradation), improvement of existing water points to reduce 
pasture degradation and reduce sanitary risks, installation of water harvesting systems; 
  Creation and management of hay making areas; 
 
Pasture access: for pasture underutilized because of their remoteness and limited accessibility, 
access tracks and bridges; 
  Summer pasture infrastructures: in areas where mountain summer pasture are used for 
transhumance,: shepherd cabins, night fences and shelters for animals, cattle crushes for 
treatments, water points. 
5.4.5.  Budget of pasture improvement and restoration investments 
For each of the investments lister above, specify number of units for each cost item and unit price 
5.4.6.  Pasture monitoring 
Responsibilities 
Data to collect 
Tools (paper forms, digital tools) 
Data collection responsibilities 
Data reporting  
Data collection and reporting schedule 
5.5.  Annexes 
List of PUU (or PUG) members with detailed number of animals (herbivores) owned 
Animal health plan (dates of vaccination, treatments, animals targeted, responsibilities) 
Draft - August 2021 
130 
Budget allocation 
National level Allocations 
Under SEPMU implementation:  
(a). 
(b). 
(c). 
(d). 
Pasture Restoration Investment  
Cross-village Pasture Management Investments  
Climate Resilient infrastructure investments  
Community Agricultural equipment for productivity improvement  
Under CEP implementation:  
(e). 
(f).   
(g). 
Joint Forest Management Investments  
Direct Leskhoz Forestry Investments  
JFM in Protected Area buffer zones  
District level Allocations 
1.  The district level allocation for CsCAPs is fixed by SEPMU, pursuant to a composite of 
below indicators.  
Village population (excluding the village population of LPDP I and II target villages)27 
Climate vulnerability index (including socio-economic vulnerability), elaborated by IFAD during CASP+ 
design. The index is composed of the following dimensions:  
 
Exposure : 
-  Rainfall significant trend 1981-2019 
-  Daily heavy rains total 1981-2019 
-  Drought-SPEI (18 months) average 1981-2019 
-  Max temperature (trend) 1958-2019 
  Sensitivity 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Erosion RUSLE 
Land degradation (forest and pasture)  
Population rural total  
Poverty rate (%) 
  Adaptive capacity 
- 
- 
- 
Proximity to main roads 
Irrigated areas (land use) 
Labour force (youth n.) 
The district level allocation for forestry investment, and the sub-allocation Joint Forest 
Management (JFM) and Direct Leskhoz Forestry, and direct Leskhoz forestry in buffer zones 
of protected areas is defined by:  
 
Presence of leskhoz in the district, i.e., only to districts with at least one forest Leskhoz within 
it (not just a Nursery Leskhoz)  
  Districts with a minimum area of indicative plans for JFM of 150 Ha per year (to justify 
mobilizing the community). These data have been collected as part of Design Stage work. 
The shortlist of districts created in this way will then be allocated budget on basis of 
 
o  CsCAP (except forestry) allocation proportion (0.5) 
o  Estimate of number of JFM beneficiaries – from design stage estimates (0.5) 
The total FI budget will thus be allocated across the shortlisted districts and ring-fenced for forest 
investments. All the above data are available at design stage. The FI district selection is done by CEP 
based on the above.   
2.  Village level Allocations 
27 Removing from the population count the population of LPDP I and II target villages.  
Draft - August 2021 
131 
The village level allocation for CsCAPs (except forestry) gets fixed as follows:  
Necessary criteria for eligibility: 
 
 
 
 
Excluding villages with less than 50HH 
Excluding villages with previous/ongoing meaningful intervention providing the community 
with similar community investments 
Excluding villages with less than 1,000 Sheep Units (SU). 1 sheep/goat = 1 Sheep Unit; 1 cow 
= 0.2 Sheep Unit)28 
Excluding villages with less than 100ha pasture29 for their livelihoods  
Ranking criteria:  
Sub-catchments vulnerability, based on Climate Vulnerability Index for sub-catchments 
mapped at design stage (to be defined by IFAD, ECG)  
Allocation criteria. A composite of 
  Village Population (coefficient: 0.5) 
 
Pasture in terms of ha (coefficient 0.5) 
For villages with pastures, we will require a minimum allocation into pasture, and also a minimum 
allocation to the least attractive pasture investments (as they appear from community perspective) 
such as rehabilitation. Allocation to be done by the SEPMU based on the above criteria. Validation of 
selection of the targeted villages will occur during project implementation, to ensure that the selected 
villages meeting the necessary criteria above are also meeting qualitative criteria of sustainability, 
commitment, etc. (See Chapter 5 of the PIM).  
The village level allocation for Forestry investment is recommended as below 
Joint Forest Management outside of Protected Area buffer zones (5801 ha) 
On areas with more than 30% of shrubs and tree cover already in place. The works are carried out in 
each demarcated JFM plot by an individual household. These should be close to villages with easy 
access. Large blocks (which are subdivided) are preferred for efficient boundary fencing purposes.  
Direct Leskhoz forestry investment in buffer zones of protected areas (179 ha) 
This will be targeted for District Sh.Shohin in the buffer zone of Dashti-Jum protected area. On areas 
with more than 30% of shrubs and tree cover already in place. The works are carried out in each 
demarcated JFM plot by an individual household. These should be close to villages with easy access. 
Large blocks (which are subdivided) are preferred for efficient boundary fencing purposes.  
Direct Leskhoz forestry works (1350 ha) 
This is carried out on areas with less than 30% shrubs and tree cover and afforestation/reforestation 
is done by the Leskhoz themselves with contract workers (who may or may not also be JFM 
participants). Previously these areas were selected so that they were distant from communities and 
transhumance herding paths and, according to the applied logic, were less likely to suffer from 
overgrazing. If the project aims to have JFM contracts established on DF sites before the end of the 
project, the same site selection criteria should be applied as per JFM. These should therefore be close 
to villages with easy access and in large blocks (which can later be subdivided). Allocation to be done 
by the CEP based on the above criteria. Validation of selection of villages for FI investments will occur 
during project implementation, to ensure that the selected villages meeting the necessary criteria 
above are also meeting qualitative criteria of sustainability, commitment, etc (see Chapter 5 of the 
PIM). 
Village selection: The forestry villages for Direct Leskhoz and JFM are  
 
a subset of the Targeted  villages where at least 100 ha of JFM can be implemented over the 
lifetime of the project. 
  Villages with no previous/ongoing relevant intervention providing the community with 
reforestation investments similar to CASP+ 
28 average was 2,990 under LPDP 2 and only 5 had less than 1,000 
29 Average was 450 under LPDP 2 and only 5 had less than 100 ha.  
Draft - August 2021 
132 
Allocation for Forestry investments is a composite of 
  Village Population (coefficient: 0.5) 
 
Leskhoz land within 20kms of the village (ha) (coefficient 0.5) 
Funding restrictions 
Negative list 
1. 
While there is no list of activities that project funds can finance there is a negative list. The project will 
not finance:  
i)  social infrastructure including schools, kindergartens and health facilities;  
ii)  equipment that could be eligible for credit financing; and  
iii)  sub-projects that relate to illicit drugs or production of illegal crops, production and marketing 
of  rare  species  or  harmful  plant  materials,  illegal  logging  and  sales  of  illegal  logs  or  timber, 
marketing of products whose production has harmed reforestation or conservation of pasture 
lands. 
iv)  equipment  that  are  only  for  non-fodder  crops  (e.g.  combine  harvester,  3  wheel  tractor  for 
cotton). Multifunctional equipment should be toward building climate resilience and be for the 
benefit of smallholders.  
v)  crossbreeding of local cattle with exotic breeds where this leads to maladaptation. Any exotic 
breeds introduced in smallholder systems must show climate change resilience traits. 
vi)  Development of water points that could result in forest or pasture degradation 
vii)  Sub-projects that cause any conflict with neighbouring communities 
2. 
The /PMU will not consider, and will return for resubmission, any sub-project proposals where:  
Invalid proposals 
the proposed sub-project completion date is not within a maximum time frame of two years;  
i) 
ii)  the  value  of  the  grant  requested  is  higher  than  the  full  community  allocation  using  the 
beneficiary ratio at time of Community Grant Agreement signing without proper documentation 
that the additional funds are guaranteed;  
iii)  such grant supported projects were unsuccessful.  The criteria for considering a previous project 
a failure are as follows:  
  donor/supervision agency labelled it as a failure 
 
  community had to reimburse funding for cause 
funding was stopped for cause  
Additional restrictions 
Income-generating sub-project 
The VO Council/CIG(s) will be informed of the negative list and other project restrictions during training 
and advice sessions on proposal preparation and is provided with a copy of those lists. 
3. 
Proposals  for  income-generating  sub-projects,  like  farm  machinery  or  milk  collection  centres,  should 
clearly show that at least 30% of community will be the beneficiaries. 
4. 
Furthermore, a minimum of 20% of machinery budget will be spent on for fodder related mechanization 
equipment (Mowers, Hay rakes, Balers, Forager / Silage machines, Silage/haylage wrapper, Manure , 
Hay trailers - flatbed), 15% maximum for non-fodder crops mechanization (combine harvester, 3 wheel 
tractor for cotton), and up to 80% for mechanization equipment that can be used both for hay/fodder 
and other crops (Tractors, Tillage equipment :plough, harrows, cultivator , etc…, Other trailers, Planters, 
Fertilizer spreaders). 
Collect  evidence  that  the  proposed  sub-project  does  not  violate  existing  environmental  regulations, 
including  land  use  and  resource  use  restrictions  and  will  apply  ESMF  and  ESIA  tools  to  ensure  the 
investments have no negative environmental or social impacts. 
All Project infrastructures requiring land will be built on suitable community land in agreement with the 
Jamoat Administration and community. For implementation of construction works, the procedures for 
obtaining permissions for construction of infrastructure will be adopted. No trees, crops, structures or 
other land affixed assets currently being used for economic or residential purposes will be removed for 
the purpose of CsCAPs implementation. 
Draft - August 2021 
133 
Draft MOU: CEP and Forest Agency 
The Forest Agency agrees to provide co-financing in the form of in-kind contribution of  
1.  Involvement of experts in interpreting mapping and refining proposed interventions at 
Diagnostic phase;  
2.  Leskhoz staff to assist GIS experts in outline mapping of Leskhoz blocks (during diagnostic 
phase); 
3.  Organising access to paper mapping records/ ‘lesoustroistvo’ from local offices/HQ, forest 
4. 
institute, Tajiklesservice as required 
full participation in JFM introduction seminars, site selection, planning and site layout together 
with NGO appointed for JFM mobilisation; 
5.  perform site visits to each JFM plot to aid in the detailed site planning process;  
6.  undertake to ensure all JFM lands are fully registered and ready to form JFM contracts; 
7.  take part in relevant selection committees and plan approval committees as required; 
8.  physically mark JFM plot boundaries; 
9.  cooperate to resolve conflicts during planning including nominating alternative grazing areas, 
if possible, to minimize disruption at village level to grazing; 
10. process all JFM contracts in a timely way; 
11. adhere to JFM contract details, including provision of irrigation or other services using Leskhoz 
trucks and equipment; 
12. do not override JFM contracts with any previous agreements that may have been in place for 
the same areas; 
13. encourage and engage fully with Forest User Groups and provide technical assistance if 
needed; 
14. fully take ownership of implementing JFM, with the support of the forestry NGO, to plan (5 
year and annual plans) and monitor progress (making joint records with the JFM participants), 
resolve problems and divide revenues as set out in the JFM contract; 
15. participate in forestry training being organised by the project; 
16. utilising the project-provided mechanical equipment (or other) to prepare the JFM sites for 
planting, where needed; 
17. organise training for JFM participants relating to JFM, tree planting and aftercare and in 
sustainable fuelwood use; 
18. collection of seeds, cuttings, fruits from seed orchards or other genetic sources, as required, 
for nursery purposes and direct seeding; 
19. identification of planning and layout of enhancements to Leskhoz nurseries;  
20. identification, planning and layout of JFM backyard nurseries;  
21. training of staff for 14 upgraded nurseries using trainers from Vakhdat nursery and training of 
JFM participants in who have established backyard nurseries;  
22. participate in using smartphone methods of submitting plan and activity records from the 
field; 
23. contribute to pasture management plans and be open to forming grazing leases with existing 
PUUs rather than creating new PUUs under the Leskhoz 
Draft - August 2021 
134 
JFM Contract template 
Appendix 1 to Decree of the Government of RT ”On Approval of Rules of Joint Forest Management” 
AGREEMENT 
ON JOINT MANAGEMENT OF FOREST PLOT 
_________city   
  ____» ____________202__   
The State Forestry Institution of ___________ district ____________ province, represented by 
director of the organization __________ hereinafter referred to as «the Forestry», from one side, and 
citizen (Surname, Name and Middle Name) _________________ passport series_____ 
#____________residing at the address_______________________ hereinafter referred to as “Forest 
User”, from other side, conclude this Agreement on the following terms:  
1. Subject of Agreement 
1.1 Based on the Forestry Code of the Republic of Tajikistan _____________ the Forestry shall 
provide a forest fund plot with the area of ___ ha for joint management, in the natural boundary, 
being under the authority of ________ forestry of _________________ (district, province) on the 
territory of plot ___________, for performing joint forestry management aimed at protection and 
development of wooded area, reproduction and protection of forests; 
1.2.    The  Parties  shall  manage  and  develop  the  plot,  including  support  of  natural  forest 
reproduction,  reproduction  of  firewood,  timber  and  non-wood  products  of  forest  according  to  the 
Management Plan of Forest Plot enclosed to this Agreement (Appendix 1_); 
1.3.  The  Parties  shall  annually  determine  types  and  scope  of  works,  quantity  of  production  of 
forest products in the allocated territory according to Annual Plan of Action enclosed to this Agreement 
(Appendix 2); 
1.4. The fee for joint forest management shall be determined in the form of distribution of annual 
products, received from use of forest products.  
2. Period of Contract Validity. 
2.1 This Agreement shall enter into force upon signature by the Parties and is valid until 
«…»…………….202_.  
2.2. Upon fulfillment of all conditions of this Agreement by Forest User during the 20-year period, the 
agreement shall be extended for up to ___ years. 
3. Rights and duties of ______________forestry of ________       (district, province). 
3.1. ________________________ forestry _________ district (province) shall be obliged:  
- upon signature of the agreement to provide the Forest User with the forest fund plot provided 
for in this Agreement; 
-  to conduct marking of borders of the forest plot in place within 30 days of signing agreement;  
-  to  develop  schemes-maps  of  location  of  plots  to  be  enclosed  to  agreement  upon  signing 
agreement;  
- to keep records of agreement on joint forest management;  
- to create conditions for forest user for independent management in the allocated forest plot for 
more effective joint management of forestry and not to impede efficient use of the forest plot; 
- to develop a Management Plan of Forest Plot jointly with the Forest User and to approve this 
plan; 
-  to  agree the  types  and  scope  of  works,  to  be  performed  by  the  Forest  User,  jointly  with  the 
Forest User on annual basis, volume of production of forest products in the forest plot allocated to Forest 
User, and based thereupon to develop an Annual Plan of Action and Use of Plot thereto; 
-  to  timely  issue  the  Forest  User  a  permit  for  use  of  appropriate  volume  and  types  of  forest 
resources provided for in the annual plan; 
Draft - August 2021 
135 
-  to  timely  conduct  forest  protection  activities,  organize  activities  on  fire  extinguishing  and 
prevention of risks of natural disasters jointly with the Forest User; 
- not to allow use of forest plot and issue of a permit for use of forest resources by third parties 
during the period of validity of agreement on joint management; 
- to assist the Forest User in protection of the forest plot; 
-  to  provide  regular  and  full  informational  and  consultative  support  to  Forest  User  in  forestry 
management; 
-  to  provide  support  to  Forest  User  in  improvement  of  the  plot  and  creation  of  conditions  for 
forestry management; 
- to conduct an inventory of forest resources jointly with the Forest User aimed at development 
and  update  of  the  Management  Plan  and  Annual  Plans,  including  estimation  of  harvest  of  forest 
resources; 
- to reimburse the Forest User all losses, including loss of expected profit, upon withdrawal of 
the forest plot provided to him, for state and public needs, upon early termination of the agreement 
by Forestry.  
3.2.__________________________ Forestry shall have the right: 
- to conduct an inventory of forest resources jointly with a Tenant aimed at development and 
update of the Management Plan and Annual Plans, including estimation of harvest of forest resources; 
- to carry out control over use, protection and conservation of the forest plot transferred to Forest 
User; 
- to receive a part of forest products in kind or in cash according to annual plan and procedure of 
product distribution, provided for in the Appendix to this Agreement; 
-  to demand recovery or reimbursement of damage, inflicted to forestry institution as a result of 
non-fulfillment of contractual obligations; 
- to introduce amendments to the agreement in agreement with the forest user;  
- to demand submission of reports and other documents related to joint forest management from 
the Forest User; 
- to terminate agreement in cases, provided for in the agreement.    
4. Rights and Obligations of the Forest User 
4.1. The Forest User shall be obliged:  
- to observe the terms of agreement on forest use; 
- to timely accept the forest plot allocated to him; 
- to develop a Management Plan of Forest Plot jointly with the forestry institution, and manage 
and develop his forest plot on sustainable basis according to this plan, including support to natural forest 
reproduction, reproduction of firewood, timber and non-wood products of forest; 
-  to  determine  jointly  with  the  forestry  institution  the  types  and  scope  of  works,  volume  of 
production of forest products in the allocated territory on annual basis (Annual Plan of Action and Use 
of  Plot) and to perform the types and scope of works accordingly; 
- to provide a part of collected planned forest products in kind or in cash to the Forestry according 
to the scheme of distribution of income and products enclosed to the Agreement; 
-  to  protect  the  plot  from  unauthorized  felling,  grazing  and  other  infringements  of  the  forest 
legislation of the Republic of Tajikistan;  
- to timely notify the Forestry about detected centers of pests and diseases, and to participate in 
works on protection of forest from pests and diseases;  
- to observe fire safety measures, to immediately inform the forestry in case of detection of fire 
and to proceed with extinguishing fire; 
- to lead works using methods that prevent emergence of soil erosion, exclude or limit negative 
impact on forest condition and reproduction, as well as on condition of water and other natural objects, 
and ensure conservation of wildlife and their habitat; 
- to timely inform the Forestry about danger of mudflows, landslide and other emergencies, and 
to participate in works on forest protection; 
- to purposefully use the allocated forest plot;  
-  to  reimburse  damage  inflicted  to  the  Forestry  as  a  result  of  non-fulfillment  of  contractual 
obligations; 
- to timely submit a report to forestry institution in due format; 
Draft - August 2021 
136 
-  to observe safety regulations; 
- to timely pay taxes provided for in the legislation of the Republic of Tajikistan; 
- to participate in general works related to development and improvement of forest plot; 
- to let the forestry staff freely visit the forest plot; 
 4.2. The Forest User shall have the right:  
- to forest products, received as a result of joint management, including the right for free disposal 
of his share of products, produced according to the Annual Plan of Forest Products, and income resulting 
from sale of this products;  
- to independently lead economic activity in the allocated forest plot in accordance with terms of 
the Agreement, Management Plan of Forest Plot (Appendix 1_ to this Agreement) and Annual Plan of 
Actions (Appendix 2_ to this Agreement); 
-  to  interact  directly  with  governmental  and  non-governmental  organizations  with  the  aim  of 
developing forest resources, as well as in the framework of sale of products; 
- to reimbursement of expenses, invested to development and improvement of used forest plot, 
including loss of expected profit upon early termination of the agreement by forest owner; 
- to reimbursement of losses incurred as a result of withdrawal of state forest fund land for state 
needs;  
- to priority right to renegotiate agreement after expiry of the Agreement;  
- to detect and suppress cases of infringements of the forest legislation in the forest plot 
assigned to him; 
- to introduction of amendments to agreement in agreement with the state forestry institution. 
5.  Distribution of Forest Products 
5.1. The forest products, received from joint forest management, shall be distributed between 
the Parties as a percentage of the resulting harvest of forest products, in cash or in kind.  
5.2. The procedure of distribution of forest products shall be determined by Appendix 3_ to 
this Agreement. 
6.  Termination or Amendment of the Agreement  
6.1. This Agreement can be terminated in the following cases: 
- repeated (more than two times) violations  of requirements and terms of the Agreement by 
Forest User; 
- voluntary abandonment of the right to perform joint forestry management by Forest User;  
- expiry of Agreement on Joint Forest Management;  
- liquidation of legal entity - forest user;  
- withdrawal of forest plot for state or public interests; 
-  upon  inefficient  and  non-purpose  use  of  the  allocated  forest  plot  or  repeated  violations  of 
agrotechnical, forestry and environmental rules of use;  
- in other cases, provided for in the legislation of the Republic of Tajikistan. 
6.2. In case of non-fulfillment of requirements and terms of this Agreement by the Forest User, 
the Forestry shall warn the Forest User in writing about correcting the deficiencies with specification of 
the remedial period.  
6.3. In case of repeated (more than two times) violations of terms of agreement the agreement 
shall be terminated.   
7. Withdrawal from Agreement  
7.1. The Party wishing to terminate this Agreement should notify another Party in writing, stating 
reasons of termination of the Agreement, for three month prior to the date of termination proposzzzed 
by applicant. 
7.2. Upon termination of the Agreement, the costs of reproduction, protection, improvement and other 
types of works shall not be reimbursed. 
Draft - August 2021 
137 
7.3. Termination of joint forest management in the state forest fund plots shall not free the Forest 
User from liability for violation of the forest legislation of the Republic of Tajikistan. 
8. Consideration of Disputes 
8.1. All disputes and/or differences that may arise from this Agreement or in connection therewith, 
shall be settled by negotiation between the Parties.       
 8.2. In case of failure to settle disputes by negotiations, the Parties shall submit them to the court. 
8.3. The Parties shall be guided by legislation of the Republic of Tajikistan on matters not regulated by 
this Agreement. 
9. Force Majeure Circumstances  
9.1. Should any circumstances arise which prevent complete or partial fulfillment by any of the Parties 
of their respective obligations under this Agreement, namely: fire, flood and other force majeure 
circumstances beyond the control of the Parties, the term of fulfillment of obligations under this 
Agreement shall be extended to the period of effect of these circumstances. 
9.2. The Parties shall not be responsible for non-fulfillment of the terms of the Agreement, if they are 
not fulfilled due to force majeure. 
10. Concluding Provisions  
10.1. All amendments and additions to this Agreement shall be valid, if made in writing and duly 
signed by the Parties. 
10.2. Any agreement between the Parties involving new obligations that do not result from this 
Agreement, should be confirmed in writing, and the corresponding addendum to this Agreement 
should be signed. 
10.3. This Agreement is drawn up in three copies in Tajik language, having equal legal force, one copy 
for each Parties and one copy for local forestry.  
11. Addresses and requisites of the Parties 
Legal addresses of the Parties: 
Forestry _____________________                          Forest User _________________  
Signature____________________ 
Signature___________________ 
Draft - August 2021 
138 
JFM Annual plan template 
Annual plan 
YYYY year 
Leskhoz 
Forestry :  Forest plot:  
Forest user:  
JFM contract №:   
Contract sign date:  
Compilers: 
Date: 
№. 
Activities 
volume 
м3/kg/м
/ 
ha/pcs 
location 
Implementa
tion period 
(month) 
Harvest / income (TJS) 
Leskhoz 
Forest user 
Area 
(ha): 
comments 
(for example: 
firewood) /  
distance 
Annual plan implementation  
YYYY year 
JFM contract №:  
Leskhoz 
Forestry
: 
Forest plot:  
Forest user:  
Compilers: 
Date: 
Area 
(ha): 
№. 
Activities 
volume 
м3/kg/м/ 
ha/pcs 
location 
Imple
mentat
ion 
period 
(month
) 
Harvest / income (TJS) 
Leskhoz 
Forest user 
Comments 
139 
№  Questions 
1  From your observation when this year buds started 
Answer 
Phenological observations  
swelling and blossoming out and leaves of willow and 
poplars started sprouting? 
2  Did you observe increasing our decreasing of tree 
disease in the forest? is there any  appeared pests or 
diseases that you did not observe before in your 
forest? If yes what type? 
3  The rainiest month in this year? Early/late rain in 
spring, period and length of rainy days? 
Checked by (district forest ranger, name): 
Signature 
Forester: 
Date: 
Signature 
Forest User: 
Date: 
Signature 
140 
JFM Management Plan 
Contract concluded (date):                                                                                                                Forest area density_______% 
Leskho
z 
Forestry : 
Forest plot:  
Forest user:  
Compilers: 
Date: 
Area (ha): 
Management plan from 20____ tо 20___ 
Current situation:                                                                                                                              
Damaged                     
by livestock:       
 Low       Average       High                                                                                  
Plot is fully fenced:  
                 Yes          No         Partially 
Naturally damaged by:                    
( mudflow,  avalancher,  flood,  drought,  rockslide,  soil erosion,  diseases  and pests)  
variety  distribution: 
Species 
(%) or pcs 
Poplar  
Willow  
Sea buckthorn 
Dog rose 
Тamarisc  
Other (specify) 
Irrigation water availability:      Fully               Partially           No water                                                   
Timber forest products:                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                              Volume of non timber forest products 
Water recourses:                   Snow water            Glacial        Mixed (snow water- glacial)                        
Species 
(%)  or pcs 
Relief and Location:              Flat area                   Steep                                                                                                  
hay  
Type of soil: ________________________________       
Not used area___%:                 Swamp      Sand and stony soil         Ravine and steep slope 
licorice  
ephedrine  
Specifics of area (Ex., vegetable garden, size ___ type of vegetation ___________) 
141 
Planning 20____ – 20____ 
Management target:  
№ 
Activity 
When? 
(which 
year) 
Quantity 
and unit 
Location and 
placement  
Comments / rules  
142 
JFM Questionnaire For Forest User’s selection 
 Саволномаи/№ Questionnaire # : 
Mусохиб/(Interviewer) : 
 Сана/Date:  
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS / ТАСНИФИ УМУМИ 
1  Номи қишлоқ/Village name: 
2 
3 
4  Шумораи одамоне, ки дар хонаи Шумо зиндагӣ мекунанд (якҷоя бо Шумо)/(number of family members):   1-2 ___3-5 ___6-8 
Ҷинс (қайд кунед)/(Respondent, sex):            Мард/(Male)                         Зан/(Female) 
Синну сол (қайд кунед)/(Age):     18-24        25-31           32-38             39-45            46-52         аз 52 боло        
___ 8> ________  
5  Маълумот/(Education):   Олӣ/(High)            Миёнаи махсус/(Special secondary, College)          Миёна/(secondary school)  
             Дигар (қайд кунед)/(Others) ______________________ 
Савол (Question)  
Посух (Answer) 
Шумораи посух (quantity of 
answers) 
1. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE / ДОНИШИ УМУМИ 
  Оё Шумо оиди идоракунии муштараки чангал 
маълумот доред? Do you have any information 
on JFM 
Агар Ха, аз кучо маълумот пайдо намудаед?  
If Yes, please tell from you have got the 
information  
 Айни хол чи кораед? Ба кадом шугл машгулед? 
What is your current occupation? 
 Дар як хафта чанд руз ба кор машгулед? 
How many days you are busy with your 
current job?  
 Шумо чанд мох дар деха хастед/ дар давоми 
сол? 
How many months are you staying in a home 
village? 
Land Accessibility 
Мархамат карда гуед, ки ба Шумо( оилаи Шумо) 
чи намуд замин дастрас аст?/ Please, tell me 
about any land you/your family have access 
to. 
Yes / Ха____ 
No / Не____ 
Аз кормандони лоиха 
Аз кормандони чангал 
Аз мардум 
Дигар _________________ 
Омузгор                         4.  Сохтмончи 
Точир                              5. Бекор 
Дехкон                            6. Дигар 
1-3 руз 
4-5 руз 
6-7 руз 
1-5 мох 
1-7 мох 
1-12 мох 
Kitchen Garden / Наздихавлиги ___ha / га 
Dekhan Farm / Хочагии дехкони __ha / га 
Rent / Ичора _____ha / га 
Presidential / Президенти _____ha / га 
Forest plot / Китъаи чангал _____ha / га 
Have no any / Надорем____ 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
143 
Ин заминхо чи тавр истифода мешаванд?/ How 
is this land used? 
Даромади яксолаи Шумо чанд пулро ташкил 
медихад, (аз хисоби замин)? 
What is your annual benefit (profit) from the 
land? 
Ое он (даромад) барои Шумо басанда мебошад? 
Does the profit enough for your family? 
Forestry knowledge and interest 
Оё Шумо аз хисоби Хочангии чангал китъа 
гарифтан мехохед? 
Would you like to get land form Forest 
Department (to be involved in JFM and SBA) 
Чи кадар замин гирифтан метавонед? 
How much land can you afford to take? What 
is your ability? 
Ое Шумо тачриба оиди чангалпарвари доред? 
Пешаки ба корхои чангал е дарахтпарвари 
машгул будаед? Do you have any forestry 
and/or tree planting experience? 
Барои чи Шумо мехохед китъаи чангалро ба 
истифода гиред?  
For what you are planning to use the forest 
plots? 
Шумо метавонед дар фасли кишту кор аз ухдаи 
кор дар чангал бароед? Would you be able to 
do the forestry works in parallel to your own 
land works during the crops activities?  
Чанд кас аз аъзоени оилаатон метавонанд дар 
корхои чангал ба Шумо ери расонанд? 
How many members of your family can be 
involve in JFM? 
15a. Оё Шумо гуфта метавонед, ки онхо ба Шумо 
чи  муносибати оилави доранд? 
What is your relationship with those family 
members? 
Gardening / Бог ______ha / га 
Arable / Корам ______ha / га 
Pasture / Чарогох ______ha / га 
Grass Cutting / Алафдарав ______ha / га 
Badlands / Гайрикишоварзи ______ha / га 
None / Гайри истифода _______ 
2000-4000 сомони 
5000-8000 сомони 
8000 – 12000 сомони 
12000 зиед 
Yes / Ха____ 
No / Не____ 
Yes / Ха____ 
No / Не____ 
Агар Не, сабабашро пурсида дар поён кайд 
намоеду ба хамсухбататон хайрухуш намоед.  
0.5 -1 га 
1-1.5 га 
1.5-2 га 
Yes / Ха____ 
No / Не____ 
 Барои бунёди чангал (дарахтони мевадиханда-
to build a Orchard, (fruit garden)) 
 Барои бунёди чангал (дарахтони чангали)/ For 
afforestation (forest trees)  
 Барои бунёди чарогох/ To build pastures 
Yes / Ха____ 
No / Не____ 
2-3 нафар/members 
4-5нафар/members 
Падар/father 
Модар/mother 
Зан /Wife 
Шавхар/Husband 
Фарзандон/sons and daughters 
PASTURE MANAGEMENT / ИДОРАКУНИИ ЧАРОГОХ 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
якчанд чавоб имконпазир аст 
/several answers are possible 
144 
Шумо бо чорводори машгулед? Does your 
household keep a livestock?  
Aгар Xа,  бошад ба саволхои 17-19 шуруъ кунед 
/ If yes, then go to questions 17-19 
Yes / Ха____ 
No / Не____ 
1 
16a. Агар Ҳа, чи қадар чорво доред?/ If yes, 
could you please say the quantity of livestock 
do you have? 
Ҳайвони калони шохдор/cattle  ____ 
Ҳайвони майдаи шохдор/sheep and goat 
якчанд чавоб имконпазир аст / 
several answers are possible 
Оё Шумо ягон чорабинии идоракунии 
самараноки чарогоххоро медонед? Do you know 
any measures for efficient pasture 
management? 
Yes / Ха____ 
No / Не____ 
Not sure / аник намедонам____ 
1 
17a. Кадом усулро медонед? What kind of 
measures you know? 
якчанд чавоб имконпазир аст 
/several answers are possible 
Pasture rotation / чарогохгардон____ 
Controlled grazing / чаронидани ботанзим____ 
Re-cultivation of fodder crops / аз нав коридани 
тухми зироатҳои хӯроки чорво____  
Manual harvesting of steep slopes / Дастӣ 
даравидан дар нишебзаминхо____ 
Other / 
Ғайра____________________________________
_________________________________________
_________________________________________
_____________________ 
Пештар ин усулхоро истифода бурдаед? Have 
you ever used any of these methods? 
Yes / Ҳа____ 
No / Не____ 
Хӯроки зимистонаи чорворо захира мекунед? Do 
you keep stock fodder for the winter feeding 
of your livestock? 
Yes / Ҳа____ 
No / Не____ 
19а. Агар Ҳа, кадом намудашро захира мекунед? 
If yes, what kind of fodder do you keep? 
Grass / алаф___ 
Wheat straw/ Коҳи гандум ___ 
Other / Ғайра___ 
19b. Агар Ҳа, чанд даста (килограмм) захира 
мекунед? 
If yes, how many kilograms do you keep?  
1._______________       __________ 
2._______________       __________ 
3._______________       __________ 
4._______________       ___________ 
1 
1 
1 
145 
Ба саволҳо посух гиред (ба эътибор гиред, ки баъзе саволҳо метавонанд якчанд посух дошта бошанд, баъзеи дигарашон танҳо як посух 
доранд. Дар сутунчаи сеюм чи қадар будани варианти посух зикр гардидааст). Answer the questions (note that some questions may have more 
than one answer, others have only one answer. The third column shows how many answers there are). 
Щарори коммиссия / Decision of the commission: 
Ыайыати коммиссия щарор дод/The commission decided: 
Ба аризадиыанда щитъа ьангал ба масоыати ____ га дода шавад 
The applicant should be provided with a forest plot of ____ ha 
Ба аризадиыанда щитъа ьангал дода нашавад 
The applicant is not provided with a forest plot 
Агар аризадиыанда интихоб нашуд, сабаби интихоб нашуданашро шары диыед/ If the applicant is not selected, explain the reasons for not being 
selected: 
Эзоы /note: 
Имзои аъзоёни коммиссия/ Signatures of commission members: 
Ному насаб / full name____________________________  вазифа/position___________    Имзо/signature_______ 
Ному насаб / full name____________________________  вазифа/position___________    Имзо/signature_______ 
Ному насаб / full name____________________________  вазифа/position___________    Имзо/signature_______ 
Ному насаб / full name____________________________  вазифа/position___________    Имзо/signature_______ 
146 
Sample of share distribution between JFM and Leskhoz 
Attachment 3 to the joint forestry management contract 
Sample of the terms of forest output distribution by the parties   
Product 
Share of the forestry authority   Share of the 
Remarks  
forest user 
Commercial wood 
(poplar, willow) 
Fuel wood  (poplar, 
willow, and other 
tree species) 
Shrub-originated 
brushwood  
Строительный 
хворость  
Hay 
As part of the annual limit of 
the National Nature 
Conservation Committee of 
Tajikistan: 
The 1st year: 100%  
From the 2nd to 5th year of the 
concluded contract: 80%,  
From the 6th to the 10th year: 
50% 
From the 11th: 40% 
As part of the annual limit of 
the National Nature 
Conservation Committee of 
Tajikistan: 
The 1st year: 100%  
From the 2nd to 5th year of the 
concluded contract: 80%,  
From the 6th to the 10th year: 
50% 
From the 11th: 40% 
30% 
As part of the annual limit of 
the National Nature 
Conservation Committee of 
Tajikistan: 
The 1st year: 100%  
From the 2nd to 5th year of the 
concluded contract: 80%,  
From the 6th to the 20th year: 
40% 
35 % 
15% 
Fruits of sea 
buckthorn 
Briar  
20% 
20% 
Barberry   
Seeds of fruit trees    30% 
Fruits  (apricots, 
apples) 
As part of the annual limit of 
the National Nature 
Conservation Committee of 
Tajikistan: 
The 1st year: 100%  
From the 2nd to 5th year of the 
concluded contract: 80%,  
From the 6th to the 10th year: 
50% 
From the 11th: 40% 
30% 
Medicinal plants 
and other non-
timber forest 
products 
P
R
O
J
E
C
T
D
E
S
I
G
N
R
E
P
O
R
T
–
A
N
N
E
X
I
V
"
[
C
L
I
C
K
H
E
R
E
&
T
Y
P
E
S
H
O
R
T
C
O
U
N
T
R
Y
N
A
M
E
]
"
:
[
T
Y
P
E
F
U
L
L
P
R
O
J
E
C
T
/
P
R
O
G
R
A
M
M
E
N
A
M
E
]
–
Felling of live trees with a diameter greater than 15 cm 
(at a height of 1.3 m) is carried out over specific 
contract between forest user and responsible forester. 
Forestry's share provided in the form of harvested 
production 
Forestry's share provided in the form of harvested 
production 
Forestry's share provided in the form of harvested 
production 
Forestry's share provided in the form of harvested 
production 
Forestry's share provided in the form of harvested 
production 
Forestry’s share provided as percentage against 
revenue receipts after sales  
Felling of live trees with a diameter greater than 15 cm 
(at a height of 1.3 m) is carried out over specific 
contract between forest user and responsible forester. 
Forestry's share provided in the form of harvested 
production 
Forestry’s share provided as percentage against 
revenue receipts after sales 
0% 
20% 
50% 
60% 
0% 
20% 
50% 
60% 
70% 
0% 
50% 
60% 
65% 
85% 
80% 
80% 
70% 
0% 
20% 
50% 
60% 
70% 
  147 
4.3.  Component 3: Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market-
based approaches 
307.  Current production systems are not adapted to climate change impacts, rely on rainfed 
agriculture and are not integrated with market opportunities. This component will build the capacity of 
smallholders to identify and invest climate resilient and diversified production systems that link to local 
and national value chains. Outcome 3 “Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to 
climate risks of smallholder production systems” will be achieved through a combination of 
interventions targeting both the production and market access levels of the value chains.  
308.  The project will invest in developing linkages between smallholders and private sector actors, 
building smallholders capacities in climate resilient production practices and conducting farming as a 
business through three outputs:  
4.3.1. 
Outputs  
Output 3.1: Output 3.1.: 105,60030 smallholder livestock farmers receive AI, 
animal health or training services to increase productivity of their 
livestock. 
309.  The rationale for this sub-component will be to increase the productivity of livestock production 
systems in order to encourage the reduction of herd and flock size. The livestock productivity is 
currently weak and limited mostly by the poor genetic potential of animals, the poor animal status, and 
the inadequate animal husbandry practices, in particular the feeding and management of reproduction. 
It is expected that a combined action on three aspects: (i) provision of breeding services (AI and 
provision of improved bulls), (ii) increased proximity and access to animal health services and (iii) 
improved animal husbandry will result in a significant improvement in livestock productivity. In order to 
reduce the dependency of livestock on pasture, and thus their degradation, the project will promote 
utilization of fodder, concentrate feed and by products. Specific efforts will be dedicated to fodder 
harvesting and conservation for consumption during the winter stall-feeding period or during drought 
in summer. This critical behavioral change will contribute to improve animal productivity, reduce the 
seasonality of production, which is detrimental to the performance of the value chain and improve 
resilience to climate hazards. It will also benefit to pasture condition by reducing the magnitude of 
winter grazing, which is particularly detrimental to pasture condition. 
Output 3.2: By end of year 4, nine Productive Alliances31 between cattle 
producer groups and private aggregators established and 
operational  
310.  The purpose of this sub-component will be to facilitate business partnerships between groups of 
smallholder livestock farmers and private sector dairy aggregators and processors, to enable mutually 
beneficial business partnerships on dairy and beef livestock value chains. These partnerships 
(Productive Alliances) will be formalized, include an implementation plan, commitments on prices and 
quality aspects. This will enable both partners to properly plan their production, processing, 
procurement, supplies, as well as the marketing aspects.  
A Productive Alliance involves three core agents: a group of smallholder producers, one or more 
buyers, and the public sector. These three agents are connected through a business proposition, or 
“business plan”, which describes the capital and services needs of the producers and proposes 
improvements that would allow them to upgrade their production capacities and skills to strengthen 
their linkage with the market, i.e. the buyer(s). The implementation of such a business plan through a 
subproject is typically supported through three core inputs and/or activities directed towards the 
producers’ needs: productive investments, technical assistance, and business development. These 
30 105,600 unique AH beneficiaries (264 private vets x 400 Hhs), same beneficiaries receive (i) AI services (20,000 once per year for 5 years, (ii) 
bull mating services (20,000 once per year for 5 years) and training via FFS (12,500). 
31 8 for dairy, 1 for beef  
148 
core inputs are financed through public grants provided by the project, which are matched by the 
beneficiary producers and in some cases also by the buyer(s)32. 
311.  Benefits for the producers will include secure and predictable market and prices, but also access 
to services since the PA arrangements can include when feasible provision of inputs services by the 
aggregator to the producers. These services could in particular include provision of technical assistance 
to producers, in order to make sure that the commodities produced fit with the requirements of the 
aggregator and the market, in terms of quality, regularity, and quantity. They could also include 
provision of inputs and TA in order to improve the productivity and reduce the seasonality of 
production. As a general principle, the entry point for all business partnerships including productive 
alliances supported by the Project will be climate vulnerability. Supported VC and business 
arrangements should contribute to strengthen climate resilience and reduce environmental 
degradation. They should also be focused on and benefit to resource poor household, have low level of 
risk, and be profitable for both parties. 
312.  The dairy processors contacted during the pre-design and design phases confirmed that they 
were working under capacity because of raw milk supply limitations, and that they were ready to 
collaborate with the project to establish mechanisms that would enable them to collect sufficient, 
consistent and predictable quantities from smallholder farmers communities supported by the project. 
The proposed mechanism for milk aggregation (fixed or mobile MCCs) were considered as relevant and 
feasible by the processors, who in addition provided some technical inputs that were taken into 
account to design the two MCCs models. The aggregators also confirmed their readiness to enter into 
contract arrangement such as Productive Alliances, and to provide co financing (in kind, in the form of 
equipment) and technical training to ensure that the milk collected is of acceptable quality. 
Output 3.3: 10,20033 smallholders have strengthened climate resilient 
production practices and private sector market linkages. 
313.  This sub-component will facilitate two types of common interest groups (CIGs) to access support 
services to identify, analyze and adopt climate resilient production practices.  The first group of 800 
CIGS (identified through Activity 2.1.5) will focus on strengthening their capacity to adapt their 
production systems to become more resilient to changing climate conditions and in some cases identify 
opportunities to link to local markets.  This support will increase access for CIGs to productive assets 
and services to increase agricultural productivity and diversification. A second set of market-linked 
CIGS (identified in sub-activity 3.3.1.2) will receive capacity building in farming as a business, 
entrepreneurial skills and business plan development, so they can link to profitable value chains (e.g. 
small-scale poultry, horticulture, processing etc).  
4.3.2. 
Description of activities 
Activity 3.1.1 Improving the genetic potential of smallholder farmers’ livestock 
314.  One of the main triggers to promote the needed behavioral changes and support the reduction of 
herd size will be breeding. There is extraordinarily strong demand and a large consensus both at 
grassroot and higher institutional levels, that having better quality and more productive animals is a 
necessary condition for farmers to keep less heads of livestock.  There is a very strong demand from 
communities for this type of support, especially from women who are particularly interested in 
intensifying their dairy production systems and in getting better quality animals. The choice of breeds 
has a very direct influence on resilience of systems to climate shocks and climate change. It will thus 
be of foremost importance to carefully select the breeds disseminated under this activity, in order not 
to jeopardize the resilience and the mobility of the systems. Only hardy breeds, that can withstand 
short periods of feed deficit, extreme heat and cold, and long distances on hooves will be considered. 
Among these breeds, those with dual purpose potential that also improve the quality of carcasses will 
be privileged. Several mountain breeds originating from the Alps would perfectly fit the purpose, while 
Friesian Holstein and other highly specialized dairy breeds should be avoided, except in irrigated plain 
systems. 
32 See “Linking Farmers to Markets through Productive Alliances : An Assessment of the World Bank Experience in Latin America” - 
http://hdl.handle.net/10986/25752 
33 800 production and diversification CIGs of 10 members and 110 market-led CIGs of 20 people  
149 
Sub-activity 3.1.1.1. Training of youth in Artificial Insemination 
315.  There are currently around 250 trained AI technicians in the Country, located in 107 AI centers. 
However, this number is not sufficient to provide AI services to remote communities and in particular 
household farmers that will be the target group for this activity. The project will partner with TAU and 
the State Enterprise for AI and breeding train 50 additional young technicians, from the beneficiary 
communities. The trained technicians will be selected in priority among FFS facilitators and private 
veterinarians. This will provide them with a complementary source of incomes. Two training sessions of 
10 days (5 days theoretical, 5 days practical) will be organized in Year 1 and Year 2. All graduated 
technicians will be equipped with an AI kit (Liquid Nitrogen portable container, AI catheter and 
consumables such as gloves and tubes). 
Sub-activity 3.1.1.2. Organization of Artificial Insemination Campaigns 
316.  The economic modelling performed in the scope of this design (see annex on Cost Benefit 
analysis of AI campaign, showing a Cost Benefit ratio of 19 over 10 years) have shown that this 
activity could generate a significant return on investment, and impact on productivity. This will also 
meet the very high demand of beneficiary communities for these services, which are so far only 
available for dekhan farmers and agricultural enterprises. 20,000 AI will be performed every year in 
household farms. All the 400 targeted villages will benefit from the AI campaign every year. AI will be 
implemented on batches of around 40 animals per village, synchronized beforehand to come on heat at 
the same time. Synchronization will facilitate logistics and follow up. This activity will be implemented 
by the by the SE for AI and breeding, through its regional offices in the three targeted regions. The 
regional office in Kulob which will be responsible for most of these AI will be strengthened under 
Component 1.  
Sub-activity 3.1.1.3. Establishment of Off-Farm Mating stations 
317.  In addition to AI, off farm mating stations will be installed in selected targeted communities (1 
station/village in the 300 villages with the highest cattle population or with difficult access to AI 
services) to complement AI campaigns for those of the farmers who do not believe in AI, as well as for 
the cows that do not respond well to synchronization or have infertility issues. The stations will be 
endowed with one bull which will have to be renewed after two years because of the excessive weight 
of older bulls, not compatible with the local cow’s format. The bulls will be managed by Village 
Organizations and placed in private farms in the scope of a PPP contracts, which will allow the private 
farmer to use the bull for its own cows and will also set the obligations and conditions for providing 
mating services to the community; this model has been tested successfully under LPDP. Mating fees 
paid by users will cater both for the maintenance costs of the bull, and its renewal after two years, 
which will ensure the sustainability of the system. With 300 active bulls, it is expected that the number 
of services will be similar to the number of AI (around 20,000 services per year). This activity will be 
sub-contracted to the SE for AI and breeding which the national institution mandated for establishing 
such mechanisms. 
Activity: 3.1.2: Support to delivery of private animal health services  
318.  To increase the productivity of animals and protect the human population from diseases 
transmitted by animals, CASP+ will select and train veterinarians to meet beneficiary’s needs for high-
quality veterinary services. Each vet will cover 400 households, with a total of 105,600 households 
receiving animal health services during CASP+. Institutional support will be provided to the Tajik 
Veterinary Association. 
Sub-activity 3.1.2.1. Institutional support to Tajik Veterinary Association (TVA)  
319.  CASP+ will support the Tajik Veterinary Association (TVA), the only institution in the country 
responsible for the development of private veterinary services. Assistance will be provided in the form 
of office and study room renovations, transportation, office equipment, funds to attend international 
conferences and exchange visits. A MoU will outline the responsibilities of the TVA (e.g. replication of 
training programs to other regions of Tajikistan, the development of district veterinary associations, 
150 
and the preparation of the conditions for establishing a Veterinary Statutory Body in the country in 
accordance with the OIE’s recommendations). To support development of continuing veterinary 
education program, CASP+ will provide funds for recruitment and operation of one new staff member 
who is a specialist in veterinary education.  
Sub-activity 3.1.2.2. Training of private veterinarians 
320.  CASP+ will select and train private veterinarians to meet beneficiary’s needs for high-quality 
veterinary services. Each vet will cover 400 households, with a total of 105,600 households receiving 
animal health services during CASP+. The project will select and train in annual refresher courses 264 
private veterinarians involved in the project activities (two vets/jamoat) to upgrade their knowledge 
and skills. One of the two veterinarians in each jamoat is expected to be a woman or a youth. The 
topics of the training will be developed in accordance with the demands of the communities as well as 
topics on business and climate change response. These annual trainings will be implemented by the 
TVA.  
Sub-activity 3.1.2.3. Equipping private veterinarians  
321.  Selected veterinarians will be provided with motorcycles for mobility and veterinary equipment 
(surgical kit, refrigerator for storing medicines, vaccines, etc) according to their need. It is expected 
that by the end of Year 7 of the project an additional 132 veterinarians34 will join the private 
veterinarian service thereby bring the number to 396.  
Activity: 3.1.3: Support adoption of climate resilient innovative technologies  
322.  The productivity and resilience to climate change of traditional livestock production systems is 
limited by the poor capacities of farmers on animal husbandry, in particular related to fodder 
cultivation, fodder conservation and stall feeding, and the availability of and awareness on technical 
innovations that could improve productivity, resilience to climate change, and reduce environmental 
impact. 
323.  The project will support the dissemination of these technical innovations and their adoption by 
smallholder farmers through a combination of demonstrations and hands on training activities including 
FFS. 
324.  The main climate resilient technologies that will be disseminated through this activity will be: 
-  New varieties and species of drought and heat resistant fodder35  
-  Affordable and simple fodder conservation techniques, in order to reduce seasonality of 
production and dependence on pasture in winter 
-  Composting and manure management 
-  Husbandry of alternative livestock species, not or less dependent of pasture resources, and 
resilient to climate change: poultry, small ruminants, yaks 
-  Prevention and management of animal diseases (control of mastitis and parasitic diseases, 
implementation of basic biosecurity measures) 
-  Reproductive management (detection of heats36, management of calving and calf care37, drying 
off management) 
325.  In communities where the project will support marketing and processing of milk under Sub-
component 3.2 (specifically, within the support to the 8 productive alliances between livestock 
producers’ groups and private dairy processors),  a strong focus will be put on milk hygiene and milk 
quality/safety management, including control of mastitis, in particular through FFS. 
Sub-activity 3.1.3.1: promotion of technical climate smart innovations through demonstrations and 
exchange visits 
34 50% of 264 private vets 
35 E.g. saxaul, kochia prostrata, agropyron for dry land areas of Khatlon region 
36 In order to reduce the inter-calving interval, which is too long and has a direct impact on the proportion of dry and empty cows in herds, hence 
on productivity and carbon emissions per unit of output. 
37 Calf mortality is high in household systems and mostly due to respiratory diseases and diarrhoea that are preventable through better calving and 
calf management. 
151 
326.  Under this sub-activity, climate resilient technologies and innovations that have been tested, 
adapted and validated by research institutions under Component 1, as well as other selected 
innovations that had already been tested before and do not require further testing, will be 
demonstrated in the field to enable farmers to acknowledge their benefits and feasibility, and select 
those that will be further popularized and tested in real farm conditions through FFS. 
327.  The demo plots will be on fodder cultivation and management. Improved varieties of fodder 
adapted to the local ecosystem and previously successfully tested will be established on the plot and 
will be harvested during field days, in the presence of visiting farmers from beneficiary communities. At 
this occasion, harvesting and conservation techniques such as manual or mechanized hay baling, 
improved hay conservation methods to prevent degradation of fodder during winter, small scale silage 
making will be demonstrated. 21 demo plots (1/District) will be established in partnership with the 
State Enterprise for Capacity Development which already has some demonstration sites in the field in 
the project area, and with which an MoU will be entered into. In Districts where the SECD has already 
existing demo plots, these will be used for establishing the demos. In Districts where it is not the case, 
District Authorities will be requested to temporarily allocate land for this purpose. The average area of 
demo plot will be 0.5 h (3,000 to 7,000 square meters). In order to allow farmers to access to these 
demonstrations, field days will be organized and facilitated by the State Enterprise for Capacity 
Development. Each village will benefit from one exchange visit during the project duration. 400 field 
days will be organized between Y2 and Y5. Each field day will gather a group of 20 farmers, originating 
from 2 villages (10 from each village), in order to promote inter villages exchanges at the same time. 
The organization of each filed days will involve renting a minibus for one day, and meals for 
participants. The field day will be facilitated by SECD staff in charge of the demo plot. After the visit of 
the demo itself, a debriefing and synthesis will be organized on the spot and facilitated by SECD. Once 
participants will be back in their villages, they will be requested to organize feedback sessions with the 
VO, or the PUU depending of the topic. 
Sub-activity3.1.3.2: Development of FFS curricula and training of facilitators 
328.  This sub-activity will aim at training the Master Trainers and developing the training curriculum. It 
will be the first step of the establishment of the Farmers Field Schools. It will follow the conventional 
approach followed to establish FFS, developed by FAO and successfully implemented in the scope of 
several IFAD funded projects. These two tasks will be implemented which has a several years’ 
experience in rolling out FFS in Tajikistan and has been promoting this approach throughout the world 
for the last two decades. This activity will build on existing capacities and past experiences in the 
establishment of FFS in Tajikistan, including in the Livestock sector. It will also build on other successful 
experiences in establishing and running L-FFS, including those documented in the scope of the stock-
taking exercise on Livestock Farmer Schools (L-FFS) that was being undertaken by IFAD at the date of 
the design mission. An international Master Trainer (IMT) will be mobilized by FAO to (i) train 3 
National Master Trainers (NMT). These NMT will be recruited in priority among those already trained 
and present in the Country; in this case their training will mostly be a refresher, (ii) develop the 
curriculum for FFS, together with the NMTs and technical staff from the Ministry of Agriculture. For this 
purpose, the FAO IMT will conduct 2 missions in the Country during the first year of implementation. 
Training workshops for the training of NMT and Write shops for the formulation of the curricula will also 
be organized and facilitated by the IMT. Once the curriculum will be ready and NMT trained, they will 
train the 40 facilitators needed to run the 80 schools. 2 training sessions for facilitators with 20 
participants each will be organized for this purpose. It will be facilitated by the 3 NMT (2 NMT per 
session). 
Sub-activity 3.1.3.3: Roll out of Farmers’ Field Schools 
329.  A total of 80 FFS will be established in the villages that are engaged in dairy value chain activities 
under 3.2. The main focus of the FFS will be on dairy production and the participants will be the 
members of the group involved in the productive alliance. Each FFS will be active during 3 to 4 years 
and will train one cohort of 25 participants (2,000 beneficiaries in total); at least 50% of the FFS 
participants will be women since they are often the ones responsible for taking care of the dairy 
animals (stall feeding, cleaning, milking, milk marketing). At least 25% of participants should be youth. 
Participants to the FFS will be selected in priority among the participants to the dairy productive 
alliances.  
152 
330.  Each FFS group will meet once a week, for a hands-on training session of half a day that will take 
place on one of the participants’ farm. Participant’s welcoming the group on their farm will rotate in 
order to promote exchange of ideas. As required by the FFS methodology, thematic topics will be 
selected by participants according to their needs and priorities. However, since FFS groups composed 
of participants to dairy productive alliances, fodder production and conservation is expected be the first 
entry point, in order to increase milk supply and reduce seasonality,  and milk quality (milking hygiene, 
mastitis management, handling of milk) the second one, in order to comply with the quality 
requirements of the aggregator. This activity will be implemented by the State Enterprise for Capacity 
Development which has already been involved in FFS together with FAO. FAO, through its IMT, will 
provide quality assurance and regular (annual mission) technical and methodological backstopping. 
331.  Through the SECD, the project will support the creation and the operations of the 80 FFS. The 
project will cover the salaries and transport costs of the NMT to supervise the schools (around 27 
schools per NMT, 1 visit per month), and the fees of the 40 facilitators. The facilitators will all be 
equipped with a bicycle. In order to enable each FFS to test and operate hands on training on selected 
climate sensitive technologies, a startup capital will be allocated to each school to purchase the 
necessary equipment and inputs required by the technology (e.g. fodder seeds, tools for cultivation, 
hay baling boxes or silage bags, feed, milking hygiene equipment). 
332.  Training members will not be the only purpose of establishing FFS. It is expected that FFS groups 
will also provide a ground for other collective initiatives such as saving and credit groups, marketing 
groups, solidarity and collective safety net mechanisms. This spillover effect of FFS on community 
organization has been observed in many IFAD funded projects, often with an unexpected magnitude. 
Some FFS groups, especially women groups, that were initially established for a limited duration finally 
become permanent and sustainable community organizations, with various purposes that are 
sometimes independent from the initial purpose of the FFS. It is expected that this will also happen 
under CASP+ FFS and this will be encouraged by FFS facilitators. 
Activity 3.2.1 Identification of market and business opportunities  
333.  CASP+ will hire a service provider with good knowledge of the private sector actors and business 
operators (see ToRs in annex) to support the identification of business opportunities and 
arrangements/linkages that could be initiated, facilitated and financially supported under Activity 3.2.2 
334.  The identification process will involve: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
the identification of existing or potential groups of primary producers that have a potential 
for producing commodities for market but face difficulties in accessing the market in the 
current context (no or limited access to aggregators, poor pricing), 
the identification of aggregators and processors interested in increasing their supply through 
sourcing of commodities from smallholder farmers, 
the specifications of commodities required by the market/aggregators (quality, quantity, 
calendar)  
the modalities of the business arrangements that could be established, including the type of 
services and inputs that could be provided by the aggregators to address the constraints 
faced by producers. 
335.  A range of possible value chain and business models with better potential to contribute to project 
Theory of Change, build climate resilience and benefit to the priority target groups (poor rural 
households, women, youth) have been pre-selected, these are (i) milk collection centers (fixed or 
mobile) and (ii) marketing of quality yearlings for beef production (see description of models below). 
The process of identification will entail the following sub-activities: 
Sub-activity 3.2.1.1. Identification and assessment of market and business opportunities  
336.  The project will organize and facilitate consultation meetings for pre-selected value chains 
gathering potential Productive Alliance partners (Producers groups and business operators). 1 meeting 
will be organized per District and per Value Chain (dairy and beef), during Y1 and Y2 for dairy, and Y4 
and Y5 for beef. The facilitation of these meetings and mobilization of private sector actors will be 
entrusted to a service provider with good knowledge of the private sector actors and business 
operators. The output of this sub-activity will be the identification, financing and implementation of 
possible PA arrangements that will require further study (see sub-activity 3.2.1.2.) 
153 
Sub-activity 3.2.1.2. Feasibility studies of proposed business arrangements including Productive 
Alliances.  
337.  The feasibility study and business plan (addressing technical, economic and market aspects) of 
the proposed PA will be undertaken by the specialized service provider recruited through a Call for 
Proposal. It is expected that 14 feasibility studies and business plans (12 for dairy, 2 for beef) will be 
developed through this sub-activity. 
Activity 3.2.2. Provision of financing and technical support to the business 
partnerships for selected livestock commodities.  
338.  Under this activity, technical and financial support will be provided to facilitate the setup and the 
implementation of the eight dairy and one beef Productive Alliances:  
Sub-activity 3.2.2.1. Financing of business arrangements including Productive Alliances. 
339.  The feasibility studies and business plans of proposed productive alliances will be submitted to 
the PMU for approval. Once approved, the PMU will provide co-financing through direct procurement 
and provision of needed equipment and goods for the nine Productive Alliances. 
340.  The Matching grants provided by the project will be subject to the above conditions: 
-  Project co-financing should not exceed 70% of the total investment. 
-  Project co-financing should not exceed USD 50,000 per Business Plan (USD 30,000 in average) 
-  The contribution of the beneficiary group should amount to at least 10% of the total project 
cost. This contribution could be provided in kind (land for construction of the infrastructure, 
local material, local labour). 
-  The contribution of the private sector partner should be at least 20% of the total; it could be in 
kind (e.g. provision of a cooler or milk cans for the MCC) 
341.  For each of the contemplated PA model, a proposed detailed description with costs and financing 
modalities is provided below: 
Milk Collecting Center – dairy hub model, under PA arrangement: 
342.  The typical investment (to be adjusted according to the specificities of the context, in the scope 
of the feasibility study undertaken under 3.2.1.2.) will consist in a fixed milk-collecting center, as 
described below: 
-  MCC premises comprising one cooler room (around 25 sq meters), an office, a small laboratory 
(6 m2), and a milk reception room (15 sq meters). All floors tiled and walls tiled to a height of 
1.2 meters minimum. 
-  Connection to the power grid (3 phase preferred) and piped water 
-  A sewage soak pit 
-  A milk cooler of 1,500 liters capacity: three or single phase depending on power source 
-  Milk cans for primary collection (5 to 10 liters – Total capacity 2,000 liters) 
-  Milk cans for secondary collection (50 liters, total capacity 1,500 liters); this will be a 
contribution of aggregator) 
-  Basic laboratory equipment: alcohol guns, lacto-densimeters, California Mastitis Tests 
(contributions of aggregator) 
Furniture for lab and office and equipment and clothes for personnel 
- 
343.  The total cost of such investment stands between 40,000 and 50,000 USD (if it is equipped with 
a cooler and cans made in Eastern Europe or South Asia). Such an equipment can be managed by two 
persons: one milk operator, and one accountant (in charge of recording deliveries and organizing 
payments). The beneficiary/recipient of the investment will be the farmers groups involved in the PA. 
The land will be provided by the village authorities. The property of the investment will fall with the 
Local Government, which will delegate usage rights to the participating VOs. However, through the PA 
contract, the farmers group will delegate the management of the Milk Collecting Center to the private 
sector actor (processor) who has better management capacities and will thus be able to be in full 
control of milk quality aspects (most important criteria for processing), by undertaking the testing of 
milk at reception and ensuring that conservation is done properly. Through the hub system, when 
154 
feasible, the private actor will also provide services and inputs (that will deducted from the milk sales) 
to the farmers: AI, veterinary care, feed, equipment, fodder seeds. These services and inputs will 
contribute to increase the productivity, and reduce the seasonality of production, which is in the benefit 
of both parts. 
344.  It is expected that such an MCC will require the participation of 250 milk producers, bringing an 
average of 4,5 liters per day in average at the beginning (3 in year 1, 6 in year 6). These 250 
producers will typically come from 5 to 10 villages. 
345.  In each village participating in the mechanism, a dairy FFS will be established. Training on milk 
quality and hygiene, which is of foremost importance for the processor, will be provided in the scope of 
the FFS, but with the active participation of the processor if it is willing to participate, which is assumed 
to be the case for most aggregators. 
346.  The dairy processors (in Dushanbe and Kulob) that have been approached in the scope of the 
design have shown strong interest for this system. Ensuring that the quantity and quality of milk that 
they require is available is a sufficient incentive for them to take part in the arrangement, and no direct 
financing for their participation in the system will be required. The exact number of such MCCs that will 
be stablished will be determined through the studies, but from the feedback received from dairy 
processors during the design mission, it is expected that 3 to 4 could be established. 
Mobile milk collecting system, with Milk Collecting Points (MCP) under PA arrangement 
347.  This system will be an innovative alternative to the conventional fixed MCC system, that has 
proved its adequacy in many other contexts, but could not fit the purpose in areas where small villages 
are far from each other, which may hamper the primary collection from farm to MCC, and have 
negative consequences on milk quality, as well as on quantities collected. 
348.  This system is already used in the Country by some dairy processors, but the innovation in the 
CASP+ context will be that all equipment will be owned by the beneficiary community: 
349.  The system will consist in the following elements: 
-  One mobile insulated and refrigerated milk cooler, of 500 to 1,000 liters capacity, fitted on a 
small flat bed truck (payload 1.5 to 2.5 tons). The fat bed truck will to be imported, but without 
the tank  and the cooling system that can be manufactured and fitted in Tajikistan. 
-  10 (in average) basic Milk Collecting Points (MCPs) : they will consist in a concrete slab covered 
with a roof, or a simple and small one room house, if possible connected to piped water  
-  Milk cans for primary collection (5 to 10 liters), for a total capacity equivalent to the capacity of 
the mobile tank + 30% 
-  Basic laboratory equipment: alcohol guns, lactodensimeters, California Mastitis Tests 
(contribution of aggregator) 
-  Equipment and clothes for personnel 
350.  Every morning, the truck will pass by all MCPs at predetermined times and will collect the milk 
directly from farmers at MCP, after testing. It will then directly head to the factory for delivery and 
washing. The driver of the truck, who will also handle milk collection and testing, will be co-selected by 
the community and the aggregator, and then trained by the processor. Two management options for 
the truck will be envisaged depending of capacities of both parties: management by the group or, 
(preferred option) delegation of management to the processor, while the property of the equipment will 
remain with the beneficiary group. The management of MCP will remain the responsibility of each 
village where it is established. It is expected that 4 to 5 units of this type could be established. 
Production of quality yearling – Productive alliance arrangement 
351.  Starting from year 3, offspring from the AI campaign will be available for the beef market. If 
breeds used for AI are judiciously chosen (dual purpose breeds, such as simmental), the males 
produced will have better quality carcasses and a much higher value for beef production than the local 
breeds. They will also have a potential to grow faster and will be ready for sale as yearlings to 
fatteners at the age of 7 to 10 months. This change of practice will considerably reduce the number of 
animals in herds, using communal pasture. The environmental impact and carbon footprint will thus be 
decreased.  
352.  In order to valorize this market potential and support this change, a productive alliance between 
cattle farmers and one or several aggregators (feedlots) will be facilitated. This PA will involve a 
production cluster of around 50 villages and 500 producers, selected among the beneficiaries of AI and 
dairy FFS. It is expected that around 1,000 young males will be marketed through this arrangement 
155 
after 3 years of operations. The main investment needed to facilitate this PA arrangement will be 
collective and will consist in 5 cattle crushes equipped with a weigh scale and a loading dock. Each 
loading center will serve 10 villages in average. 
Sub-activity 3.2.2.2. Technical and business assistance to Productive Alliances in the dairy and beef 
value chains. 
353.  The implementation of the dairy and beef productive alliances will require strengthening of 
business and technical capacities of producers. The first area on which the producers involved in the PA 
will require technical support will be production, for instance to improve the productivity of their 
animals, reduce the seasonality through fodder production and conservation, for dairy to improve the 
quality of milk through better hygiene at farm and milk parlor level, and for beef to produce quality 
yearlings fitting the demand from feed lots. For this purpose, a specific FFS will be established for all 
groups involved in dairy and beef PA (see activity 3.1.3). When the aggregator is in the position to 
provide this technical assistance, for instance milk processors for provision on training on milk hygiene, 
or in more general manner to ensure that the characteristics of the commodity produced meets the 
standards required by the market, the option that provides more sustainability perspectives will be 
preferred. In this case, the training will be provided by the aggregator in the scope of the FFS and the 
aggregator will work in collaboration with the facilitator. In addition to the training, regular business 
and technical coaching will be provided to the group, through the District Agro-Department, which will 
be contracted specifically for this purpose.  
Activity 3.3.1. Strengthening of CIGs capacity 
Sub activity 3.3.1.1. Support to production/diversification CIGs  
354.  CASP+ will hire a service provider with good knowledge of the agriculture sector, climate resilient 
technologies, agribusiness environment and developing farmer-market linkages (see ToRs in annex) to 
support the 800 CIGs in the 400 communities identified in Activity 2.1.2.6. The service provider will 
develop the training curriculum modules on climate resilient crops production, drip irrigation, nurseries, 
greenhouse production, solar dryers, beehives, hydroponic fodder growing and small-scale processing 
of agriculture products and business plan writing so that groups are able to write business plans to 
apply for the Window 1 grants.   
355.  In Year 2 the PMU will sign a MoU with the MoA to identify 63 specialists of the agriculture 
departments in 21 districts. This will mobilize three experts in each district to be trained to support the 
CIGs. The Service provider will then deliver a ToT to the 12 District Officers hired under component 
3.3, the Matching Grant manager and the 63 specialists of the Ministry of Agriculture agro departments 
in 21 districts. The ToT trainings will take place in the 3rd quarter of Year 2 in the department of 
Agriculture of Khatlon region. District officers from Sughd and DRS will travel to Khatlon region to 
attend the TOT. PMU will ensure that each district officer and all the specialist of the agriculture 
department will receive training modules in soft and hard copies for further dissemination to the CIG. 
356.  Once trained these District Officers and MoA staff will work alongside the service provider in 
delivering trainings to CIGs in the first 100 villages by end of  Year 2. The capacitated staff will 
continue training CIGs in the remaining 300 villages. CIGs in 100 villages will be trained by the end of 
the 2nd year. 300 more villages will be trained by the end of the 3rd year. By the end of the 4th year all 
1020 CIG will receive their trainings. The District Officers will work closely with the CIGs in 
identification of potential production improvement and diversification options that they can invest in 
and manage successfully considering their experience, ability to invest, agronomic climate zone and 
access to market. Once the training is completed, the CIGs will be able to apply for funding under the 
MGF Window I below. District Officers will work closely with CIGs under Window 1 to review and revise 
the grant proposals so that they submit completed applications as per the MGF guidelines. Further they 
will support in implementation and monitoring of the sub projects. 
357.  Under Window 1 the following are ineligible investments:  
  Non-commercial social infrastructure such as schools, health clinics etc. 
  Large scale infrastructure development or activities in ecologically sensitive and/or protected 
areas 
156 
 
Infrastructure leading to un-sustainable water use (e.g. irrigation schemes, ground water 
extraction) 
  Commercial purchase of large stocks of inputs – e.g. fertilizers, chemicals, seeds. 
  Purchase of improved seeds/genetic material of un-adapted crop varieties/livestock breeds 
  Expenditures made before the signing of MGF agreement. 
  Expenses not directly related to the CIG sub-project being financed. 
  Land purchase, rent or leasehold (this could be considered as beneficiary contribution) 
  Salaries (this could be considered as beneficiary contribution) 
358.  The PMU already has experience of implementation of beehives, rosehips and improved seeds to 
CIGs in LPDP 2 and CASP projects and the Service Provider will develop training modules based on the 
experience and knowledge from the field. In addition, there are other options available to households 
to increase their production and diversify what they produce such as climate resilient crop production/ 
more timely operation through hiring of mechanization services, post-harvest storage, hydroponics for 
feed production, small-scale oil processing, greenhouse, nursery, and drip irrigation.  Some examples 
of other potential Window I investments by CIGs are:  
1. Drip irrigation for vegetable and horticulture: 
359.  The basic equipment of the drip irrigation system consists of: (i) water supply and filters, (ii) 
fertilizer preparation and application unit, (iii) pressure regulator and (iv) water pipes. The estimated 
cost for one ha depends on the crop and ranges from 1500-3000 USD. Drip irrigation offers the 
following specific advantages: (i) proven water savings, (ii) improved crop yields, (iii) more efficient 
use of fertilizers, (iv) reduced weed growth, (v) energy savings from less pumping, (vi) reduced labour 
costs, (vii) suitable for marginal lands and those with lower water quality and (viii) maintains soil 
quality and increased land productivity. 
2. Nurseries: 
360.  The cost for a 0.1 ha nursery is USD 7-8000 USD. The payback point is in Year 3 when the first 
seedlings are sold.  
3. Seasonal greenhouse (10m*30m) for 0.03 ha (model with improved air circulation)  
157 
361.  Seasonal greenhouses allows growing of eggplant in 40 days, paprika in 50-60 days, cabbage in 
30 days, tomatoes 60-65 days, cucumber 20-25 days, white cabbage early ripened 50 days, leek 50 
days, celery 50-60 days. All these vegetables are the existing major source of income for rural 
households.  Growing vegetables in a greenhouse gives them the opportunity to broaden their market 
opportunities by growing vegetables earlier in the season and selling them when the prices are higher. 
Trainings on greenhouse production by the service provider will include, production, cost benefit 
analysis, how to ensure  higher quality and safety standards to ensure marketability of the produced 
products, and how and where to sell the produced products. The greenhouses cost 3000 USD for 0.03 
ha. The experience from other projects in Khatlon region shows that it is possible to return the full 
amount of investment cost within a few seasons. 
5. Hydroponic fodder production 
362.  Year round livestock feed provision is constrained by high prices for hay and grain, un-availability 
of feed due to seasonal production and unpredictable weather patterns damaging pastures.  One option 
is production of feed using hydroponics, to ensure harvest 365 days a year regardless of temperature 
and climate, or to fill a feed gap during the winter. As this technology only requires a locally 
constructed greenhouse and a few trays and simple watering equipment, the cost ranges from 2-400 
USD. 
6. Small-scale oil processing machine 
363.  Cooking oil prices have increased tremendously and households are interested in producing their 
own cooking oil to replace expensive imported oils. Despite the diversity of oil seed crops originated 
from Tajikistan, most of oil is produced from cotton seed. Farmers currently grow oil seed crops like 
flax, safflower and sesame for local oil extraction. Introduction of sunflower and soybean in the early 
1980s for oil production was not successful due to the crops being socially unacceptance and the 
absence of processing facilities. Provision of small-scale oil processing machines is one option for rural 
households farmers to produce their oil and not depend on high import prices of oil from abroad. 
Depending on the crop, the oil-cake by-product can be used for making: (i) pastries and snacks and (ii) 
animal feed as the oil cake is rich in protein. It is proposed to provide CIG with technical knowledge on 
advantages of processing various kinds of oil and support in selecting necessary crops for cultivation. 
The average price for oil processing machine of 30 to 100 litres  per day costs 1.200-1,700 USD. 
Sub activity 3.3.1.2. Support to market-linked CIGs  
364.  A second service provider with experience in linking farmers to markets will be contracted to 
conduct a private sector scoping exercise to identity potential companies interested in linking to 
individuals and/or existing or new CIGs. During design a range of potential enterprises were met and 
identified as potential private sector partners (e.g. small scale dairy processing with capacity of 100-
300 litres per day, broiler chicken production, greenhouse large scale, fruit and nut orchard production 
158 
and solar dryers for fruit  and vegetable drying, oil processing as a business, local processing-canning 
of vegetables, cold storage) which will be further evaluated.  
365.  After the initial assessment the Service Provider, with these private sector companies will 
organize a meeting in 110 villages to identify existing/new CIGs who might be interesting in linking to 
these market opportunities and in applying for a grant under Window II of the MGP.  The criteria for 
the selection of the CIG are the following: 
1.  70 percent of members of the CIG must have at least 1 to 3 years of experience in the 
production or processing of proposed investment. 
2.  The combined members of the CIG must be able to pay a 20 percent cash contribution towards 
the matching grant. 
3.  Solid plan to establish registered production organization within 3 years after receiving the 
grant. 
4.  20 percent of the group must have entrepreneur skills and ability plan, take risks and strong 
leadership skills. 
5.  Have up to 20 members 
366.  The service provider will develop a curriculum that covers modules on farming as a business, 
business planning, financial literacy, matching grant proposal writing, climate smart agriculture, 
productivity improvement, value addition and developing market linkages and will deliver trainings to 
the CIGs in the 110 villages by the 2nd quarter of the third year.  
367.  The CIG planning process will also consist of surveys and discussions to take the CIG though a 
process of thinking what they have, what are the opportunities, how can they invest in this opportunity 
and what are the risks and returns on investing. The identification process will involve discussions and 
analysis on production, sales plans, ability of farmers to see the potential and identifying their own 
needs for adding value to the production, long term thinking. A key input in this decision making 
process is what the private sector is offering, this maybe in the form of technical assistance, signing of 
purchase contacts, access to finance etc. 
368.  Once grant awards have been awarded the Service Provider in collaboration with the District 
Officers and agro-department staff will provide technical assistance to each CIG on their chosen 
investment. The District Officers will work closely with CIGs under Window II to guide, review and 
revise grant proposals. Further they will support in implementation and monitoring of the sub projects 
for all 110 CIG under Window II. 
369.  Under Window 2 the following are ineligible investments:  
  Non-commercial social infrastructure such as schools, health clinics etc. 
  Large scale infrastructure development or activities in ecologically sensitive and/or protected 
 
areas 
Infrastructure leading to un-sustainable water use (e.g. irrigation schemes, ground water 
extraction) 
  Commercial purchase of large stocks of inputs – e.g. fertilizers, chemicals, seeds. 
  Purchase of improved seeds/genetic material of un-adapted crop varieties/livestock breeds 
  Expenditures made before the signing of MGF agreement. 
  Expenses not directly related to the CIG sub-project being financed. 
  Land purchase, rent or leasehold (this could be considered as beneficiary contribution) 
  Salaries (this could be considered as beneficiary contribution) 
370.  Examples of Window II investments that were identified during design are:  small scale dairy 
processing, broiler production, horticulture,  fruit and nut production and  solar drying for fruit and 
vegetable. Oil processing as a business, local processing-canning, cold storage.   
Small scale dairy processing  
159 
371.  This is proposed for the Districts furtherest from the processors current outreach and where they 
won’t travel to purchase milk and transport for processing. Small-scale village processing (100-300 
litres per day) was proposed by stakeholders during design mission meetings. The equipment for 
products such as pasteurized milk, sour cream, kaymak, cottage cheese, including basic packaging 
costs from 12-25,000 USD. 
1.  Solar Dryer 
372.  The high cost of electricity makes drying of fruits in electrical dryers to expensive and drying in 
the open air often results in low quality product. A third option is the use of solar driers, these have the 
following benefits: (i) higher temperatures, air movement and lower humidity increases the drying 
speed reducing the risk of microbial growth, (ii) the products are placed inside in the dryer and are 
therefore protected from dust, insects, birds and animals, (iii) higher drying rates also provide higher 
food throughput and less drying area (about one third), (iv) dryers are waterproof, so food does not 
need to be moved when it rains and (v) the dryer can be made from materials available in the local 
market and has a relatively low cost. A 30m by 10m solar drier tunnel can dry 5 tons of fruit or 
vegetable per once and costs from 6-8000 USD.  
2.  Cold storage 
373.  Fruit and vegetables are a major source of income for rural households in mountainous Tajikistan. 
Fresh produce such as sweet cherries, onions and table grapes make up an important share of the 
country’s agricultural exports. It is important that each farmer understands and applies grading and 
sorting produce, storing it properly and using modern packaging. With modernization of existing 
facilities into cold storage units CIGs will be able to store their produce and sell later when the prices 
rise.  The traditional storage is 33 m long, 7.30 m wide and 10 m high. The period of storing from 
October to January depending on when and where the group plan to sell their fruits. An improved cold 
store costs from 25-30,000 USD. 
3.  Fruit and nut orchard 
. 
160 
374.  Planting multiple types of fruits that grow during different seasons of the year where small-scale 
farmers have time and opportunity to focus on quality can generate good income. Fruit and nut trees 
require patience and planning before any profit can be generated, but once established the orchards 
can produce for several decades before trees need replacing. Improved dwarf fruit trees can produce 
their first fruit in two years, with traditional varieties needing seven years to mature. In the long run 
orchards generate very stable income. To bring in income while the trees are growing, new orchards 
are using “agroforestry,” which uses double-cropping of walnut trees with pasture crops for harvesting 
or livestock grazing. Trees are planted in widely-spaced rows, at about 100 trees per acre, with other 
crops between the rows. In addition to pasture crops, high-value crops like raspberries or blueberries 
can be grown. Agroforestry can provide income four different ways. For the first few years, the only 
income is from the crop planted between the trees. As the trees become larger, they are thinned to 
about 30 trees per acre, with wood from the thinning being sold. After a few years, the trees begin to 
produce for harvesting. For trees like walnut, when the trees are mature or become too old they can be 
harvested for veneer logs, which bring thousands of dollars per log. As they are not as common as 
fruits and vegetables, fresh local nuts bring premium prices at local or regional farmer’s markets, a 
roadside stand, direct from the tree (U-Pick), or in bulk to local retailers. An additional source of 
income is “value-added” nut products such as nut butters, candies and cookies which can be produced 
during off-season. Many growers also sell nut tree seedlings and grafted varieties from their own 
orchards. This can be even more lucrative than selling nuts. Establishment of 1 ha of modern orchards 
costs 20-30,000 USD. 
4.  Hydroponic feed production in groups 
375.  There is potential for some CIGs to develop a group feed production business to sell to their own 
and neighboring communities. This would require a higher level of organization and investment 
depending on the size of the planned production. 
Model 
Daily 
Output 
Dimension (L, 
W, H) 
Beef 
Cattle 
Dairy 
Cattle 
Horses 
Hogs  
Chickens 
1.5-4  25kg 
1.5*1.2*1.2m 
2 to 3 
2-4 
35kg 
2*1.2*1.2m 
3 to 5 
3-5 
60kg 
3*1.2*1.5m 
6 to 9 
4-6 
100kg  4*1.2*1.8m 
9 to 14 
- 
- 
1 to 
2 
3 to 
4 
2 to 3 
10 to 17 
490 to 860 
3 to 4 
15 to 24 
682 to 1129 
5 to 6 
25 to 42 
1176 to 1935 
8 to 10 
41 to 70 
1960 to 3225 
376.  The cost of an automatic hydroponic fodder unit depends on the size and ranges from 600-3,000 
USD. 
5.  Oil processing in groups 
161 
377.  Similarly, some CIGs may want to develop a group oil-pressing business. This would require a 
larger sale equipment with a processing capacity of up to a ton per day and cost in the range of 5-
8,000 USD. 
Activity 3.3.2. Management of the CIGs matching grant program  
378.  A Matching Grant Facility (MGF) will be established and administered by the PMU. The PMU will 
hire a MGF Manager to run the MGF Window 1 (livelihood diversification for vulnerable households) and 
Window 2 (commercialisation and agribusiness development). The 24 District Officers and the 76 
officers from the MoA Agro department trained above will provide implementation support to 
individuals and CIGs throughout the matching grant process. It is expected that 8,000 households will 
access 800 Window 1 grants and 2,200 households will access 110 Window 2 grants.   
379.  Window 1 will be for grants of up to 6,000 USD. These grants will be for, e.g.   small-scale 
processing equipment, local storage infrastructure, community-based seed production, inputs and 
service provision, drip irrigation, greenhouses, nurseries, shelterbelt establishment, riverbank stability, 
access to renewable energy. Farmers accessing Window 1 will match the grant with a 10 percent cash 
contribution. 
380.  Window 2 will be for CIG grants of up to 30 000 USD. These grants will be for larger scale 
investments, e.g., processing equipment, storage infrastructure, greenhouses, solar drying equipment.  
Window 2 beneficiaries will match the grant with a 20 percent cash contribution. 
Sub-activity 3.3.2.1. Matching grant manual developed 
381.  The PMU will hire a consultant to develop the MGF Implementation Manual. This will detail all 
activities from launch of the call, to review, award and implementation support. 
Sub-activity 3.3.2.2. Launch of the MGF  
382.  The PMU will publish through government channels and online the announcement of the matching 
grant program and organize a communication campaign with mobilization of district officers and agro 
department experts in the target Districts. Proposals will first be vetted by the District Officers and 
where needed discussed and revised with the applicant. Proposals that pass this first review will be 
sent to the PMU. The PMU will establish a MGF Review Committee to review proposals.  This will consist 
of the MGF manager, PMU Project Director, PMU M and E Manager, MoA representative(s). 
162 
4.3.3. 
Activity sequencing and timing, and responsibilities 
383.  The planned sequence and timeframe for implementation of Component 3 is outlined in Table 10 
and the implementation responsibilities in Table 11.   
Table 10. Timeframe and sequencing of Component 3 activities 
Y1 
Y2 
Sub-Activities 
Y7 
Output 3.1.:  105,600 smallholder livestock farmers receive AI, animal health and access to climate 
resilient innovations services to increase productivity of their livestock production systems. 
3.1.1.1. Training of youth in Artificial Insemination 
Preparation of training curriculum 
Procurement of AI kits for participants 
Organization of session No 1 
Organization of session No 2 
3.1.1.2. Organization of Artificial Insemination Campaigns 
Y3 
Y6 
Y4 
Y5 
Procurement of semen 
Procurement of synchronization products 
AI campaigns 
3.1.1.3. Establishment of Off-Farm Mating stations 
Procurement of 100 bulls 
Selection of 100 hosts for bulls 
Distribution of 100 bulls 
Monitoring of bulls 
3.1.2.1. Institutional support to TVA 
Renovation of TVA office and Training Center 
Purchase office equipment and furniture 
Car purchase 
Recruitment of specialist on Vet education 
Participation in international events and workshops 
3.1.2.2. Training of private veterinarians 
Definition of topics and development (revision) of 
training materials 
Conduct training 
3.1.2.3. Equipping of private veterinarians 
Selection of private vets 
Procurement/distribution of vet packages 
3.1.3.1: Promotion of technical climate smart innovations by demonstrations and exchange visits 
Selection of sites for demo plots 
Selection of technical innovations  
Establishment of demos 
Running of demo plots 
Organization of field days 
3.1.3.2: Development of FFS curricula and training of facilitators 
Recruitment of International Master Trainer 
Selection of National Master Trainers 
Missions on IMT 
Training of National MT 
Development of curriculum 
Selection of 40 facilitators 
Training of 40 facilitators 
3.1.3.3: Roll out of Farmers’ Field Schools 
Establishment of 80 FFS 
Operations of FFS 
Supervision of FFS by NMT 
163 
Y7 
Y1 
Y5 
Y2 
Y4 
Y6 
Y3 
Sub-Activities 
Supervision of FFS by SECD 
Output 3.2.: 9 Productive Alliances  between livestock producers groups and private aggregators 
established and operational by end of Year 4 
3.2.1.1. Identification and assessment of market and business opportunities 
Recruitment of service provider on market 
facilitation 
Organization of dairy VC consultation meetings 
(1/district) 
Organization of beef VC consultation meetings 
(1/district) 
Identification of potential PA 
3.2.1.2. Feasibility studies of proposed business arrangements including Productive Alliances. 
Implementation of feasibility studies / formulation 
of BPs for dairy 
Implementation of feasibility studies / formulation 
of BPs for beef 
3.2.2.1. Financing of business arrangements including Productive Alliances. 
Selection of 8 successful dairy BPs 
Procurement of equipment 
Procurement of contractor for MCCs and MCPs 
construction 
Construction of MCCs 
Community organization 
Preparation of contracts between farmers and 
aggregator 
Operations of MCCs 
Selection of 1 beef BP 
Procurement of equipment 
Procurement of contractor for cattle crush and 
loading dock 
Construction of cattle crush and loading dock 
Community organization 
Preparation of contracts between farmers and 
aggregator 
Operations of beef PA 
3.2.2.2. Technical and business assistance to Productive Alliances in the dairy and beef value chains. 
Training of PA member by private sector partner 
Coaching of groups 
Output 3.3: 10,200 smallholders have strengthened climate resilient production practices and 
private sector market linkages 
3.3.1.1. Support to production/diversification CIGs 
Recruitment of Service Provider  
MOU between  PMU and MOA of Khatlon, Sugd, 
DRS for mobilization of 76 agriculture department 
officers under Ministry of Agriculture in 21 districts 
Development of curriculum for Window I 
Training district officers and matching grant 
specialist and 76 officers of Agriculture 
Departments of MOA 
Delivery of trainings for Window 1 CIG by service 
provider for 100 villages with district officers 
Delivery of trainings for Window 1 CIG for 300 
villages by district officers 
3.3.1.2. Support to market-linked CIGs 
Recruitment of Service Provider 
Scoping exercise to identify potential private sector 
companies 
Identify and establish 110 CIG for Window II 
Development of curriculum 
Training CIG in 110 villages 
164 
Y2 
Y1 
Y3 
Sub-Activities 
3.3.1.3. Capacity building on climate smart resilient technologies for Window 1 and 2 beneficiaries. 
Tailoring the training to the investment of Window 
I and Window II beneficiaries 
Training in 100 villages by Service provider with 
presence of District officers and 76 officers of 
Agriculture Departments of MOA 
Delivery of capacity building to 300 villages CIG by 
district officers  
Mobilization of technical support for running 
equipment and business development 
3.3.2.1. Matching grant manual developed 
Y4 
Y5 
Y6 
Y7 
Hire MGF manager 
Hire a consultant and development of the MGF 
Implementation Manual 
3.3.2.2. Launch of the MGF 
Development of MGF awareness campaign 
materials 
Launch of the MGF 
Award of grants for Window 1 and 2 
Table 11. Implementation responsibilities for Component 3 
Sub-Activities 
Output 3.1.: 40,000 smallholder livestock farmers receive AI, animal health and access to climate 
resilient innovations services to increase productivity of their livestock production systems. 
3.1.1.1. Training of youth in Artificial Insemination 
Preparation of training curriculum 
Procurement of AI kits for participants 
Organization of session No 1 
Organization of session No 2 
SEABAI 
PMU (Livestock officer, procurement officer), SEABAI 
PMU (Livestock Officer), SEABAI 
PMU (Livestock Officer), SEABAI 
Responsible 
3.1.1.2. Organization of Artificial Insemination Campaigns 
Procurement of semen 
Procurement of synchronization products 
AI campaigns 
3.1.1.3. Establishment of Off-Farm Mating stations 
Procurement of bulls 
Selection of hosts for bulls 
Distribution of bulls 
Monitoring of bulls 
3.1.2.1. Institutional support to TVA 
Renovation of TVA office and Training Center 
Purchase office equipment and furniture 
PMU (Livestock officer, procurement officer), SEABAI 
PMU (Livestock officer, procurement officer), SEABAI 
SEABAI 
PMU (Livestock officer, procurement officer), SEABAI 
PMU (Livestock officer), SEABAI 
PMU (Livestock officer), SEABAI 
SEABAI 
TVA, PMU (Livestock officer, procurement officer) 
TVA, PMU (Livestock officer, procurement officer) 
TVA, PMU (Livestock officer, procurement officer) 
TVA, PMU (Livestock officer, procurement officer) 
TVA 
Car purchase 
Recruitment of specialist on Vet education 
Participation in international events and 
workshops 
3.1.2.2. Training of private veterinarians 
Definition of topics and development (revision) of 
training materials 
TVA 
Conduct training 
PMU (Livestock officer, procurement officer), TVA 
3.1.2.3. Equipping of private veterinarians 
TVA 
Selection of private vets 
TVA, PMU (Livestock officer, procurement officer) 
Procurement/distribution of vet packages 
3.1.3.1: Promotion of technical climate smart innovations through demonstrations and exchange visits 
Selection of sites for demo plots 
Selection of technical innovations to be 
demonstrated 
Establishment of demos 
SECD, Districts, PMU (Livestock officer) 
TVA (Vet education specialist) 
SECD, PMU (Livestock officer) 
SECD 
165 
Sub-Activities 
Running of demo plots 
Organization of field days 
3.1.3.2: Development of FFS curricula and training of facilitators 
Recruitment of International Master Trainer 
Selection of National Master Trainers 
FAO 
SECD, FAO 
Responsible 
SECD 
SECD, PMU (Livestock officer) 
SECD, FAO, PMU (Livestock officer) 
SECD, FAO, PMU (Livestock officer) 
SECD, FAO, PMU (Livestock officer) 
SECD 
FAO 
SECD, FAO 
SECD, FAO 
SECD, FAO, PMU (Livestock officer) 
SECD, FAO, PMU (Livestock officer) 
Missions on IMT 
Training of National MT 
Development of curriculum 
Selection of 40 facilitators 
Training of 40 facilitators 
3.1.3.3: Roll out of Farmers’ Field Schools 
Establishment of 80 FFS 
Operations of FFS 
Supervision of FFS by NMT 
Supervision of FFS by SECD 
Output 3.2.: 9 productive alliances  between livestock producers groups and private aggregators 
established and operational by End of year 4 
3.2.1.1. Identification and assessment of market and business opportunities 
Recruitment of service provider on market 
facilitation 
Organization of dairy VC consultation meetings 
(1/district) 
Organization of beef VC consultation meetings 
(1/district) 
Identification of potential PA 
3.2.1.2. Feasibility studies of proposed business arrangements including Productive Alliances. 
Implementation of feasibility studies / 
formulation of BPs for dairy 
Implementation of feasibility study / formulation 
of BPs for beef 
3.2.2.1. Financing of business arrangements including Productive Alliances. 
Market facilitation SP, PMU (market access specialist) 
Market facilitation SP, PMU (market access specialist) 
PMU (market access specialist, procurement) 
Market facilitation SP 
Market facilitation SP 
Market facilitation SP 
Selection of 8 successful dairy BPs 
Procurement of equipment 
Procurement of contractor for MCCs and MCPs 
construction 
Construction of MCCs 
Community organization 
Preparation of contracts between farmers and 
aggregator 
Follow up of operations of MCCs 
Selection of 1 beef BP 
Procurement of contractor for cattle crush and 
loading dock 
Construction of cattle crush and loading dock 
Community organization 
Preparation of contracts between farmers and 
aggregator 
Follow up of operations of beef PA 
PMU (market access specialist), Steering committee 
PMU (market access specialist, procurement) 
PMU (market access specialist, procurement) 
Contractor 
Community Facilitator, PMU (market access specialist) 
Market facilitation SP, PMU (market access specialist) 
Districts Agro departments Market facilitation SP, PMU 
(market access specialist) 
PMU (market access specialist), Steering committee 
Market facilitation SP, PMU (market access specialist) 
Contractor 
Community Facilitator, PMU (market access specialist) 
Market facilitation SP, PMU (market access specialist) 
Districts Agro departments Market facilitation SP, PMU 
(market access specialist) 
3.2.2.2. Technical and business assistance to Productive Alliances in the dairy and beef value chains. 
Training of PA member by private sector partner 
Coaching of groups 
Private sector partner, Market facilitation SP, PMU (market 
access specialist) 
Districts Agro departments Market facilitation SP, PMU 
(market access specialist) 
Output 3.3: 10,200 smallholders have strengthened climate resilient production practices and 
private sector market linkages.  
3.3.1.1. Support to production/diversification CIGs  
Recruitment of Service Provider facilitators 
PMU Project coordinator 
166 
Responsible 
Service provider 
Service provider 
Service provider 
Service provider 
PMU district officers 
PMU Project coordinator 
PMU Project coordinator 
Sub-Activities 
MOU between  PMU and MOA of Khatlon, Sugd, 
DRS for mobilization of 76 agriculture 
department officers under Ministry of Agriculture 
in 21 districts 
Development of curriculum for Window I 
Training district officers and matching grant 
specialist and 76 officers of Agriculture 
Departments of MOA 
Delivery of trainings for Window 1 CIG by service 
provider for 100 villages with district officers 
Delivery of trainings for Window 1 CIG for 300 
villages by district officers 
3.3.1.2. Support to market-linked CIGs 
Recruitment of Service Provider 
Scoping exercise to identify potential private 
companies 
Identify and establish 110 CIG under Window II 
Development of curriculum 
Training CIG in 110 villages 
3.3.1.3. Capacity building on climate smart resilient technologies for Window 1 and 2 beneficiaries. 
Tailoring the training to the investment of 
Window I and Window II beneficiaries 
Delivery of Training in 100 villages by Service 
provider with presence of District officers and 76 
officers of Agriculture Departments of MOA 
Delivery of Capacity building to 300 villages CIG 
by district officers  
Mobilization of Technical support for running 
equipment and business development advising 
3.3.2.1. Matching grant manual developed 
Hire MGP manager 
Hire a consultant and development of the MGF 
Implementation Manual 
3.3.2.2. Launch of the MGF 
Development of MGF awareness campaign 
materials 
Launch of the MGF 
Award of grants for Window 1 and 2 
MGP Manager 
MGP Manager, PMU Procurement 
Service provider 
Service provider 
Service provider 
PMU district officers 
PMU district officers 
Service provider 
Service provider 
MGP Manager 
MGP Manager 
PMU 
4.3.4. 
Component 3 performance indicators 
Expected 
Results 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Mid-term  Final 
Output 3.1.: 
105,60038 
smallholder 
livestock farmers 
receive AI, 
animal health or 
training services 
to increase 
productivity of 
their livestock.  
Number of 
farmers 
receiving 
breeding 
services 
Reports from 
SE for 
Breeding and 
AI Project 
reports 
Number of 
farmers 
accessing 
demonstration 
plots on climate 
Reports from 
SE for 
Capacity 
Development 
Project reports 
0 
63 360 
105 600 
0 
16 000 
40 000 
Assumptions 
MoU with SE for 
breeding and AI 
signed in Y1 
Capacities of  SE for 
breeding and AI for 
implementation are 
adequate 
MoU with SE for 
Capacity 
Development signed 
in Y1. 
38 105,600 unique AH beneficiaries (264 vets x 400 HHs ), same beneficiaries receive (i) AI services (20,000 once per year for 5 years, (ii) bull 
mating services (20,000 once per year for 5 years) and training via FFS (4000) 
167 
resilient 
technologies 
Number of 
farmers enrolled 
in FFS 
Number of 
private vets 
involved in 
project 
activities.  
Number of 
active and 
operational 
productive 
alliances for 
marketing of 
livestock 
commodities 
Number of 
farmers 
accessing 
market and 
services through 
productive 
alliances 
facilitated by the 
project 
Number of 
private vets 
(trained and 
equipped) 
involved in 
project 
activities.  
Number of 
group of 
smallholders 
under Window 1 
and under 
Window 2 
receiving access 
to matching 
grants, business 
trainings, 
climate resilient 
technology 
capacity building 
Reports from 
SE for 
Capacity 
Development 
Project reports 
Reports from 
TVA 
Project reports 
0 
2000 
2000 
0 
264 
396 
Reports from 
PA facilitator 
Project reports 
0 
3 (3 on 
dairy) 
9 (8 on 
dairy, 1 
on beef) 
Reports from 
PA facilitator 
Project reports 
0 
1 200 
4 000 
Reports from 
TVA 
Project reports 
0 
264 
39639 
Reports from 
service 
providers 
Reports from 
district officers 
0 
Report from 
Grant 
manager 
Project reports 
350 CIG 
groups 
under 
Window 
1 
50 CIG 
groups 
under 
Window 
2 
1020 
CIG 
groups 
under 
Window 
1 
110 CIG 
groups 
under 
Window 
2 
Capacities of SE 
Capacity 
Development 
implementation are 
adequate. 
Farmers, including 
women, are willing to 
attend FFS classes 
MoU with TVA signed 
in Y1 
Number of private 
vets are increased 
Private sector actors 
are willing to enter 
and invest in 
productive alliances 
arrangements. 
Market demand for 
livestock commodities 
keeps increasing at 
the same pace 
MoU with TVA signed 
in Y1 
Number of private 
vets are increased 
Market linkages 
established, primary 
production increased 
using climate resilient 
technologies quality 
improved, value 
addition, climate 
resilient technologies 
scaled-up 
Women/youth 
increase their 
incomes from 
diversified agriculture 
activities 
Output 3.2.: 
Nine productive 
alliances 
between 
livestock 
producers’ 
groups and 
private 
aggregators 
established and 
operational by 
end of Year 4 
Output 3.3: 
10,20040 
smallholders 
have 
strengthened 
climate resilient 
production 
practices and 
private sector 
market linkages. 
4.3.5. 
Activities’ results 
Activity 
Activity 3.1.1. 
Improving the 
genetic potential 
Description 
Provision of breeding 
services (AI and 
improved bulls) to 
Sub-activities 
Sub-activity 3.1.1.1. 
Training of youth in Artificial 
Insemination 
-  Deliverables 
50 youth from the beneficiary 
communities trained as AI 
technicians 
39 Private veterinarians will be encouraged to come into the field by the TVA as a result of project support thereby increasing the number by 
another 50% by the end of the project. 
40 800 production and diversification CIGs of 10 members and 110 market-led CIGs of 20 people  
168 
farmers in the 400 
targeted communities 
to improve 
productivity of cattle 
and support 
transition towards 
more intensive 
production systems 
involving a reduced 
number of animals 
Ensuring population’s 
access to quality 
veterinary services 
through training and 
provision of 
veterinary 
instruments, 
motorcycles to 
private veterinarians 
and support of 
institutions 
responsible for the 
development of a 
private veterinary 
service 
The project will 
support the 
dissemination of 
these technical 
innovations and their 
adoption by 
smallholder farmers 
through a 
combination of 
demonstrations and 
hands on training 
activities. 
Facilitate 
identification and 
contracting of 
business partnerships 
between groups of 
small holder farmers 
and aggregators, to 
facilitate access to 
market and services 
of smallholder 
farmers’ 
livestock. 
Activity 3.1.2. 
Support to 
delivery of 
private animal 
health services   
Activity: 3.1.3: 
Support 
adoption of 
climate resilient 
innovative 
technologies  
Activity 3.2.1 
Identification of 
market and 
business 
opportunities 
Activity 3.2.2. 
Provision of 
financing and 
technical 
support to the 
business 
partnerships for 
selected 
livestock 
commodities.  
Activity 3.3.1. 
Strengthening of 
CIGs capacity 
Sub-activity 3.1.1.2. 
Organization of Artificial 
Insemination Campaigns 
100,000 AI performed (20,000 
per year from Y2) by the end of 
Year 6 
Sub-activity 3.1.1.3. 
Establish Off-Farm Mating 
stations 
300 off-farm mating stations 
with improved bulls established 
by the end of Year 5 
Sub-activity 
3.1.2.1. Institutional 
support to Tajik Veterinary 
Association (TVA) 
Sub-activity 
3.1.2.2. Training of private 
veterinarians  
Sub-activity 3.1.2.3. 
Equipping private 
veterinarians  
Sub-activity 3.1.3.1. 
Promotion of technical 
climate smart innovations 
through demonstrations and 
exchange visits 
Sub-activity 3.1.3.2. 
Development of FFS 
curricula and training of 
facilitators 
Sub-activity 3.1.3.3: Roll 
out of FFS 
Sub-activity 3.1.1. 
Identification of market and 
business opportunities  
Sub-activity 3.1.1.2. 
Feasibility studies of 
proposed business 
arrangements including 
Productive Alliances. 
Sub-activity 3.2.2.1. 
Financing of business 
arrangements including 
Productive Alliances. 
Sub-activity 3.2.2.2. 
Technical and business 
assistance to business 
arrangements including 
Productive Alliances. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
TVA’s office and training rooms 
refurbished and equipped (office 
equipment, furniture, a car). 
National Specialist on 
Continuous Veterinary Education 
recruited for 6 years 
264 private vets have been 
trained (each once a year for 7 
years) 
264 private vets have been 
provided with motorbikes and 
veterinary packages according to 
their needs 
20 demo plots of climate 
resilient agricultural practices 
(with focus on fodder 
cultivation) established by the 
end of Year 2 
200 fields days (gathering each 
participants from 2 villages) 
organized every year on demo 
plots 
3 master trainers trained. 
40 FFS facilitator trained. 
FFS training curriculum 
developed 
80 FFS established by Year 2 
2000 farmers trained by end 
Year 4 
9 value chains (8 for dairy,1 for 
beef) stakeholder consultation 
meetings organized by the end 
of Y2 
14 feasibility/business plans for 
productive alliances in livestock 
value chains conducted 
9 Business plans financed (8 in 
dairy, 1 in beef) 
9 famers groups involved in 
productive alliances provided 
with technical and business 
assistance 
Identification and capacity 
building of 1020 CIGs in 400 
villages  
-  Service Provider identifies 110 
- 
groups in Year 2  
110 groups in villages will be 
served trainings by service 
169 
The Project will 
facilitate 
establishment of two 
types of common 
interest groups 
(CIGs) to access 
support services to 
Sub activity 3.3.1.1 Support 
to production and 
diversification CIGs 
Sub activity 3.3.1.2 Support 
to market-linked CIGs 
identify, analyse and 
adopt climate 
resilient production 
practices. 
Sub-activity 3.3.1.3 
Capacity building on climate 
smart resilient technologies 
for Window 1 and 2 
beneficiaries. 
Sub-activity 3.3.2.1:  
Matching grant manual 
developed 
Activity 3.3.2. 
Management of 
the CIG 
matching grant 
program 
Matching grant 
facility will be 
established for 
implementation of 
matching grant 
program for Window 
1 and Window 2 
Sub-activity 3.3.2.2 Launch 
of the MGF  
provider by end Year 2 on 
business plan writing, business 
planning, and proposal writing 
and looking at farm as a 
business. 
-  CIGs receive capacity building 
support. 
-  Grant manual to be developed 
by 3rd quarter of Year 2 
Internal Review committee to be 
established by third quarter of 
Year 2  
- 
-  Communication campaign to be 
organized (distribution of 
leaflets, informing communities 
via radio and other media 
channels) in Year 2 in  21 
districts 
-  Window 1 - 50 grants Year 2, 
355 grants Year 3, 355 grants  
Year 4, 260 grants in Year 5 
-  Window 2 - 10 grants Year 2, 35 
grants Year 3, 35 grants Year 4, 
30 grants in Year 5 
4.3.6. 
Implementation Arrangements needed 
Sub-Activities 
Output 3.1.: 105,600 smallholder livestock farmers receive AI, animal health and access to climate 
resilient innovations services to increase productivity of their livestock production systems. 
3.1.1.1. Training of youth in Artificial 
Insemination 
Implementation arrangement 
3.1.1.2. Organization of Artificial Insemination 
Campaigns 
3.1.1.3. Establishment of Off-Farm Mating 
stations 
3.1.3.1: Promotion of technical climate smart 
innovations through demonstrations and 
exchange visits 
3.1.2.1. Institutional support to TVA 
3.1.2.2. Training of private veterinarians 
3.1.2.3. Equipping of private veterinarians 
3.1.3.2: Development of FFS curricula and 
training of facilitators 
MoU with SEABAI 
Procurement technical specifications for AI kits 
MoU with SEABAI 
Procurement technical specifications for AI semen and 
synchronization products 
MoU with SEABAI 
MoU with host farmers 
MoU with SECD 
Land lease agreement with Districts for demo plots 
MoU with TVA, ToR of Veterinary Education Specialist 
MoU with TVA, ToR of Veterinary Education Specialist 
MoU with TVA 
MoU with FAO and SECD 
ToRs of International Master Trainer 
ToRs of NMT 
ToRs of FFS facilitators 
Training curriculum 
3.1.3.3: Roll out of Farmers’ Field Schools 
Output 3.2. : 9 productive alliances  between livestock producers groups and private aggregators 
established and operational by End of year 4 
3.2.1.1. Identification and assessment of market 
and business opportunities 
ToRs of service provider on market facilitation 
3.2.1.2. Feasibility studies of proposed business 
arrangements including Productive Alliances. 
ToRs of service provider on market facilitation 
BP template 
3.2.2.1. Financing of business arrangements 
including Productive Alliances. 
3.2.2.2. Technical and business assistance to 
Productive Alliances in the dairy and beef value 
chains 
Criteria for selection of BPs for financing 
Technical specifications for MCCs and cattle crushes 
MoU with Districts Agro departments 
MoU with Districts Agro departments 
170 
Sub-Activities 
Output 3.3: 10,200 smallholders have strengthened climate resilient production practices and private 
sector market linkages.  
Implementation arrangement 
3.3.1.1. Support to production/diversification 
CIGs  
3.3.1.2. Support to market-linked CIGs 
3.3.1.3. Capacity building on climate smart 
resilient technologies for Window 1 and 2 
beneficiaries. 
3.3.2.1. Matching grant manual developed 
3.3.2.2. Launch of the MGP 
PMU oversees the service provider 
ToR for Service provider 
MOU between  PMU and MOA of Khatlon, Sugd, DRS 
PMU oversees the service provider 
PMU district officers 
PMU oversees the service provider 
PMU district officers 
PMU based expert manages MGP 
MGP Officer 
171 
Annex to Chapter 4.3 
Component 3 Terms of Reference and MoU 
The ToRs and MoU outlines for all staff and service providers in Component 3 follows: 
1 - ToRs of livestock specialist 
2 - ToR of veterinary education specialist 
3 - ToRs of market/value chain specialist 
4 - MoU with SEABAI 
5 - MoU with SECD 
6 - MoU with TVA 
7 - ToRs of service provider on market facilitation 
8 - ToRs of District officers 
9 - ToR Service Provider for WINDOW II 
10 - ToR for technical specialists CIGs for sub-project implementation 
11 - MoU with MOA 
12 – ToR of Matching Grant Facility manager 
ToR for the livestock specialist 
Title of position: PMU livestock specialist  
Type and duration of contract: full time contract 
Location: the position is based in the PMU in Dushanbe  
Scope of work, Responsibilities and expected deliverables: The livestock specialist will be responsible for 
coordinating, monitoring and providing implementation support to activities related to animal health, breeding, 
technical demonstrations and training of farmers undertaken under Component 3, including: 
  Organize and coordinate implementation of AI campaigns in collaboration with SEABAI 
  Organize and coordinate implementation of off-farm mating stations in collaboration with SEABAI 
  Organize training of AI technicians and private veterinarians in partnership with SEABAI  
  Coordinate and supervise demonstrations of technical innovations on fodder production and conservation 
 
 
with the SECD 
Provide technical support to FAO for development of dairy FFS curricula and roll out of FFS 
Provide technical support to the value chain expert for design and monitoring of dairy productive alliances, 
on production and milk quality aspects 
Participate in the selection of private veterinarians to be involved in project activities 
 
  Coordinate and supervise implementation of institutional support to TVA 
  Coordinate and supervise TVA activities on trainings for private veterinarians 
He/She will also provide technical support to activities implemented under Component 1 in the domains of 
higher and technical education, research, and policy formulation implemented under Component 1, including: 
 
Provide technical support to Tau and TAAS for reviewing the training curricula of vets and livestock 
technicians 
  Monitor and provide technical support to the implementation of research projects in the domains of fodder 
 
production and animal husbandry 
Provide technical support and coordinate consultant work for the revision of the breeding strategy as well 
as improvement of veterinary legislation 
  Coordinate activities of the national specialist on epidemiology 
 
Provide logistical support to international experts (on veterinary management, veterinary surveillance and 
veterinary legislation 
Under component 2, the livestock specialist will support the pasture management specialist to design 
infrastructures and select investments in pasture management such as cattle crushes, fodder mechanization 
Provide technical support to regional teams and service providers including the community facilitators 
 
recruited for facilitation of CsCAPs under component 2 
  Contribute to recruitment and ensure supervision of consultants recruited to provide services in the animal 
health and animal production domains 
Supervision and reporting: He/She will be under the supervision of the PMU Project Coordinator to whom he/she 
will report directly. 
Required qualifications and experience: 
o  Advanced degree in livestock husbandry, veterinary medicine 
o  10 years of experience in the development of livestock in Tajikistan 
o  Prior experience in capacity building of smallholder farmers 
o  Alternatively, advanced degree in agronomy with at least 15 years of experience in the Livestock 
sector 
o  Prior experience in rural development projects implemented by Got or NGOs, or with development 
agencies will be an added advantage 
172 
o 
Languages: Tajik, Russian. Good knowledge of English will be an added advantage 
ToR of veterinary education specialist 
Title of position: TVA specialist on veterinary education  
Type and duration of contract: full time contract - secondment 
Location:  The position will be based in Dushanbe, TVA office 
Scope of work, Responsibilities and expected deliverables: 
The TVA specialist on veterinary education will provide technical and logistical support to TVA in the 
implementation of all Animal Health activities under Component 3, namely: 
Participation in all TVA institutional support activities identified in component 3 
 
  Monitoring the activities of private veterinarians within the project 
  Organization of work on the development of training materials and training of private veterinarians, 
namely : 
o 
Identifying the expectations of animal owners in veterinary services and priority topics for training 
private veterinarians 
o  Development of new and updating of existing training materials 
o  Study of Internet resources on online training of private veterinarians and their implementation 
into practice 
o  Drawing up a program and schedule of annual trainings 
  Organization of work on the selection of private veterinarians and their equipping with veterinary 
instruments, namely: 
o  Compilation (clarification) of criteria for the selection of private veterinarians to participate in the 
project 
Identifying the needs of private veterinarians for veterinary instruments 
o  Conducting kick-off meetings and selecting private veterinarians (together with the community) 
o 
o  Drawing up a technical specification for the purchased equipment 
o  Participation in the transfer of veterinary equipment to private veterinarians 
  Report on activities implemented by TVA in the scope of CASP+  
 
In addition to the above, the Veterinary Education Specialist will assist: 
o 
international consultants in improving veterinary legislation in terms of the legal framework for the 
activities and development of private veterinary practice and institutions responsible for the 
development of private veterinary services. 
o  TVA in developing a development strategy for TBA, for its sustainability and financial 
independence. 
Supervision and reporting 
The incumbent will be under the joint supervision of the PMU Project Coordinator to whom he/she will 
report directly, and of the head of the TVA. 
Required qualifications and experience 
o  Advanced degree in veterinary medicine 
o  At least 5 years of experience in the field of veterinary or allied education (animal husbandry) in 
Tajikistan or in the region  
o  Experience in international projects 
o  Having practical experience in the provision of veterinary services will be an advantage 
o  Skills in developing training and other educational materials 
o  Experience in organizing and conducting trainings 
o  Ability to use online learning resources 
o 
Languages: Good knowledge of Tajik, Russian and English 
ToRs of market/value chain specialist 
Title of position: PMU market & value chain specialist  
Type and duration of contract: full time contract 
Location:  the position will be based in Dushanbe - PMU  
Scope of work, Responsibilities and expected deliverables: 
The PMU market & value chain specialist will be in charge of coordinating, monitoring and providing technical and 
methodological backstopping to activities implemented by CASP+ in the scope of Component 3, particularly sub-
components 3.2 (support to productive alliances) and 3.3 (support to Common Interest Groups involved in value 
addition and marketing). 
173 
More specifically, the incumbent will have the following responsibilities: 
For Sub-component 3.2: 
Follow up and participate in the recruitment of the service provider on market facilitation 
 
  Organization of Value Chain consultation meetings, and support to the service provider for their facilitation 
  Support the service provider on market facilitation for the identification of potential productive alliances 
partnerships, including identification of beneficiary groups and private sector partners 
  Coordinate and monitor the Implementation of feasibility studies / formulation of BPs for Pas 
 
  Coordinate and monitor technical aspects of procurement of equipment and contractors for PAs financed 
Participate in the selection of successful Pas to be financed by the project 
by the project 
  Coordinate and monitor the construction of infrastructures for PAs (Milk collecting Centers, cattle loading 
crush) 
  Support the service provider on market facilitation for the establishment of contracts between aggregators 
and communities in the scope of the PAs 
  Monitor and provide technical backstopping to the service provider on market facilitation for the 
monitoring of PA projects in dairy and beef 
  Monitor and provide technical backstopping to the service provider on market facilitation for the training 
and coaching of groups involved in PAs 
For sub-component 3.3:  
Follow up and participate in the recruitment of the service provider under Window II 
 
  Support Service Provider to conduct a private sector scoping exercise to identity potential companies 
interested in linking to existing or new CIGs. 
  Support Service provider to conduct SWAT analysis to identify strength, opportunities, weaknesses and 
strength of the communities vis a vis their market linkage opportunities 
  Support service provider to train  CIGs in long term planning for linking to potential private sector 
 
companies 
Train CIG together with Service provider in  
value addition 
developing market linkages 
  After implementation of matching grant sub projects under Window II  evaluate all 110 CIG and their need 
for brand creation and brand management 
  Support CIG in brand creation and brand management based on evaluation via provision of training 
modules or practical consultations.  
Supervision and reporting 
The incumbent will be under the supervision of the PMU Project Coordinator to whom he/she will report directly. 
Required qualifications and experience 
  Advanced degree in agronomy or animal husbandry with at least 10 years of proven professional 
experience in supporting livestock value chains and marketing 
  Or, alternatively, advanced degree in business management, rural economy or trade and marketing, with 
at least 10 years of proven experience in the agricultural and livestock sector 
Prior experience in supporting farmers cooperatives and groups for access to market would be an added 
advantage 
Prior experience with the private sector 
Prior experience in rural development projects implemented by Got or NGOs, or with development 
agencies will be an added advantage 
Languages: Tajik, Russian. Good knowledge of English will be and added advantage 
 
 
 
 
MoU with State Enterprise for Animal Breeding and Artificial Insemination SEABAI 
Type of agreement:  Memorandum of understanding 
Duration: 7 years 
Object 
The purpose of this MoU is to define the modalities of collaboration between the CASP+ project, represented by 
the PMU, and the State Enterprise for Animal Breeding and Artificial Insemination (SEABAI), for the 
implementation of activities by SEABAI in the field of cattle breeding, in the scope of CASP+ project. 
Contributions and responsibilities from CASP+ 
174 
The contributions by CASP+ project to the partnership will be as follows: 
- 
Support the revision of the breeding strategy, including by providing international technical assistance and 
financing the organization of two stakeholder workshops 
-  Upgrade the Kulob AI laboratory of the regional branch of SEABAI, in the limits of the budget defined in the 
project detailed budget 
Procure and supply a liquid nitrogen production machine 
Procure and supply 50 AI kits for SAEBAI technicians, plus 50 kits for the newly trained young technicians 
Procure and supply semen and synchronization hormones for the projected 100,000 AI 
Facilitate the administration of the 100,000 AI by SEABAI through the payment of a service fee 
Purchase the 300 bulls required to establish the mating stations 
Provide budget for the organization of the training session for 50 Ai technicians 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Contributions and responsibilities from SEABAI 
The SEABAI will be responsible for the following activities under the project: 
- 
- 
- 
Implement a massive Artificial Campaign for smallholder farmers in the 400 villages targeted by the project: 
the detailed modalities of the AI campaign are described in the project PIM. The campaign will be implemented 
as per the plan jointly agreed between PMU and SEABAI. AI will be performed either by SEABAI staff or by 
contracted private service providers. 
Establish 300 off farm mating stations in selected villages as per the plan jointly agreed between PMU and 
SEABAI 
Train 50 youths in Artificial Insemination. The trainees will be selected from the CASP+ beneficiary 
communities by the PMU. SEABAI will organize 2 Training sessions of 10 days (5 days theoretical, 5 days 
practical) in Year 1 and year 2. All graduated technicians will be equipped with an AI kit (Liquid Nitrogen 
portable container, AI catheter and consumables such as gloves and tubes). 
Further details on the content and modalities of activities allocated to PMT in the scope of the CASP+ project are 
provided in the project PIM. 
MoU with State Enterprise for capacity development (SECD) 
Type of agreement:  Memorandum of understanding 
Duration: 7 years 
Object 
The purpose of this MoU is to define the modalities of collaboration between the CASP+ project, represented by 
the PMU, and the State Enterprise for Capacity Building, for the implementation of demonstrations and Farmer 
Field Schools. 
The project will support the dissemination of these technical innovations and their adoption by smallholder farmers 
through a combination of demonstrations and hands on training activities including FFS, that will be implemented 
by the SECD under this MoU. 
The main climate resilient technologies that will be disseminated through the partnership with SECD will be: 
-  New varieties and species of drought and heat resistant fodder41  
- 
Affordable and simple fodder conservation techniques, in order to reduce seasonality of production and 
dependence on pasture in winter 
Composting and manure management 
- 
-  Husbandry of alternative livestock species, not or less dependent of pasture resources, and resilient to climate 
- 
- 
change: poultry, small ruminants, yaks 
Prevention and management of animal diseases (control of mastitis and parasitic diseases, implementation of 
basic biosecurity measures) 
Reproductive management (detection of heats42, management of calving and calf care43, drying off 
management) 
Responsibilities of SCD regarding promotion of technical climate smart innovations through demonstrations and 
exchange visits 
- 
Climate resilient technologies and innovations that have been tested, adapted and validated by research 
institutions under Component 1, as well as other selected innovations that had already been tested before and 
41 E.g. saxaul, kochia prostrata, agropyron for dry land areas of Khatlon region 
42 In order to reduce the intercalving interval, which is too long and has a direct impact on the proportion of dry and empty cows in herds, hence on 
productivity and carbon emissions per unit of output. 
43 Calf mortality is high in household systems and mostly due to respiratory diseases and diarrhea that can be prevented through better calving and 
calf management. 
175 
- 
- 
- 
do not require further testing, will be demonstrated in the field to enable farmers to acknowledge their 
benefits and feasibility, and select those that will be further popularized and tested in real farm conditions 
through FFS. 
The main focus of the demo plots will be on fodder cultivation and management. Improved varieties of fodder 
adapted to the local ecosystem and previously successfully tested will be established on the plot and will be 
harvested during field days, in the presence of visiting farmers from beneficiary communities. At this occasion, 
harvesting and conservation techniques such as manual or mechanized hay baling, improved hay conservation 
methods to prevent degradation of fodder during winter, small scale silage making will be demonstrated. 
21 demo plots (1/District) will be established in partnership by State Enterprise for Capacity Development. In 
Districts where the SECD has already existing demo plots, these will be used for establishing the demos. In 
Districts where it is not the case, District Authorities will be requested to temporarily allocate land for this 
purpose. 
In order to allow farmers to access to these demonstrations, field days will be organized and facilitated by the 
State Enterprise for Capacity Development. Each village will benefit from one exchange visit during the project 
duration. 400 field days will be organized between Y2 and Y5. Each field day will gather a group of 20 farmers, 
originating from 2 villages (10 from each village), in order to promote inter villages exchanges at the same 
time. The organization of each filed days will involve renting a minibus for one day, and meals for participants. 
The field day will be facilitated by SECD staff in charge of the demo plot. After the visit of the demo itself, a 
debriefing and synthesis will be organized on the spot and facilitated by SECD. Once participants will be back 
in their villages, they will be requested to organize feedback sessions with the VO, or the PUU depending of 
the topic. 
Responsibilities of SCD regarding Roll out of Farmers’ Field Schools 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
A total of 80 FFS will be established by SECD in the villages that are engaged in dairy value chain activities 
under component 3.2. The main focus of the FFS will be on dairy production and the participants will be the 
members of the group involved in the productive alliance. 
Each FFS will be active during 3 to 4 years and will train one cohort of 25 participants (2,000 beneficiaries in 
total); at least 50% of the FFS participants will be women since they are often the ones responsible for taking 
care of the dairy animals (stall feeding, cleaning, milking, milk marketing). At least 25% of participants should 
be youth. Participants to the FFS will be selected in priority among the participants to the dairy productive 
alliances.  
Each FFS group will meet once a week, for a hands-on training session of half a day that will take place on one 
of the participants’ farm. Participant’s welcoming the group on their farm will rotate in order to promote 
exchange of ideas. 
As required by the FFS methodology, thematic topics will be selected by participants according to their needs 
and priorities. However, since FFS groups composed of participants to dairy productive alliances, fodder 
production and conservation is expected be the first entry point, in order to increase milk supply and reduce 
seasonality, and milk quality (milking hygiene, mastitis management, handling of milk) the second one, in 
order to comply with the quality requirements of the aggregator.  
The supervision of schools will be the responsibility of SECD and will be undertaken by the National Master 
Trainers, employed by SECD, (around 27 schools per NMT, 1 visit per month) that have been trained by FAO 
in the preparatory phase. 
The payment of the facilitators’ fees and the procurement and provision of startup capital for schools will be 
the responsibility of SECD 
Contributions and responsibilities from CASP+ 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
The project will cover the cost of establishment and maintenance of the 21 demo plots 
The project will cover the costs of exchange visits that will be organized by SECD 
The project will cover the cost of the salaries and transport costs of the NMT employed by SECD  
The project will pay for the fees of the 40 facilitators, through SECD 
The project will allocate a startup capital to each school. This will be channeled through SECD which will 
procure the necessary equipment and inputs 
Further details on the content and modalities of activities allocated to SECD in the scope of the CASP+ project are 
provided in the Project Implementation Manual. 
Reporting and supervision 
For activities implemented in the scope of this MoU, SECD will report to the PMU Coordinator. Financial and 
technical reports, based on a mutually agreed format, will be submitted every semester by SECD. The technical 
focal point within the PMU for activities implemented by the SECD will be the Livestock Officer.  
MoU with TVA 
Type of agreement:  Memorandum of understanding 
176 
Duration: 7 years 
Object 
The purpose of this MoU is to define the modalities of collaboration between the CASP+ project, represented by 
the PMU, and the Tajik Veterinary Association (TVA), for the implementation of activities by TVA in the field of 
animal health, in the scope of CASP+ project. 
6.  Contributions and responsibilities from CASP+ 
The contributions by CASP+ project to the partnership will be as follows: 
- 
- 
Secondment of a veterinary education specialist based in TVA office, for 7 years 
Refurbishment and equipment of the TVA training rooms, in the limits of the budget defined in the project 
documents 
Provision of a vehicle for field missions, in the limits of the budget defined in the project documents 
Contribution to the costs of TVA office maintenance for 7 years 
Contribution to the costs of procurement of equipment for private veterinarians  
Contribution to the cost of developing, updating training materials and conducting trainings for private 
veterinarians 
Financial assistance in organizing the participation of members of the association in international trainings, 
conferences, meetings and other events 
Technical assistance to the revision of veterinary legislation with regard to the development of private 
veterinary practice. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
7.  Contributions and responsibilities from TVA 
The TVA will be responsible for the following activities under the project: 
-  Organization of all TVA institutional support activities specified in component 3 
-  Organization and monitoring of the activities of private veterinarians within the framework of the project 
-  Organization of work on the development of training materials and training of private veterinarians, namely: 
Identifying priority topics for training private veterinarians  
o 
o  Organization and monitoring of the process of developing new training materials and updating existing 
ones 
o  Drawing up and agreeing on the program and schedule of annual trainings 
o 
Implementation of online training for private veterinarians  
-  Organization of work on the selection of private veterinarians and their equipping with veterinary instruments, 
namely : 
o  Drawing up and agreeing with PIM and FSC criteria for the selection of private veterinarians to 
participate in the project 
o  Organization and conduct of kick-off meetings and selection of private veterinarians (together with the 
community) 
o  Compilation of a list of veterinary instruments to purchase and provide to selected veterinarians 
o  Drawing up a technical specification for the purchased equipment  
o  Drafting the text of the agreement on the transfer of the veterinary package 
- 
In addition to the above, TVA will be responsible for: 
o  Technical and logistic assistance to international consultants in improving veterinary legislation 
o  Close cooperation with the FSC 
o  For increasing the capacity of district veterinary associations  
o  For the development of a development strategy for TVA, for its sustainability and financial 
independence. 
Supervision and reporting 
The TVA will be under the joint supervision of the PMU Project Coordinator to whom the TVA will report directly, 
and of the head of the FSC. 
Further details on the content and modalities of activities allocated to ТВА in the scope of the CASP+ project are 
provided in the project PIM. 
ToRs of service provider on market facilitation 
Selection of CF 
The service provider on market facilitation will be recruited through a national Call for proposals. 
National NGOs, civil society and stakeholders’ organizations, as well as private consultancy companies will 
be eligible to submit a proposal 
Duration of contract 
The contract with the SPMF will be for an initial duration of 3 years, with possible subsequent extensions of one 
year. 
177 
Staffing: 
The SPMF will have to form an LPDP team of experts and support staff at the national and district levels. It should 
appoint Project Manager and other relevant staff.  
Task and responsibilities 
The mission of the SPMF will be to provide market facilitation support to producers groups and their private 
partners in the scope of Component 3, particularly sub-components 3.2 (support to productive alliances) and 3.3 
(support to Common Interest Groups involved in value addition and marketing). 
The responsibilities of the SPMF will be as follows: 
Under SC 3.2: 
o  Organization of dairy VC consultation meetings (1/district) 
o  Organization of beef VC consultation meetings (1/district) 
o 
o 
identification of potential productive alliances partnerships, including identification of beneficiary groups 
and private sector partners 
Implementation of feasibility studies / formulation of BPs for dairy PAs (12) based on proposed models for 
dairy (fixed or mobile MCC) and beef (production of yearlings for fattening in feed lots) 
Implementation of feasibility studies / formulation of BPs for beef PAs (2) 
o 
o  Community organization: mobilize communities involved in PAs for dairy (8 PAs – 250 members in 
average from 5 to 10 villages), and beef (1 PA, 50 villages and 500 producers) 
o  Preparation of contracts between farmers and aggregator 
o  Follow up of operations of MCCs 
o  Training of PA member on technical aspects (in collaboration with aggregator), group governance and 
business management  
o  Coaching of groups, in collaboration with District Agro-Department during a two year period, to be handed 
over to District Agro-Department after this period. 
Under SC3.3: 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
Identify linkages between CIG smallholder farmers, and private sector buyers of agriculture products 
produced in the CASP+ target districts and farming communities (honey, rosehip, greenhouse vegetables, 
broiler, fruit and nuts) 
Increase ability of  CIG smallholder and farmers’ to be linked with 
input suppliers in order to meet value added (high value) market demands in an environmentally 
sustainable manner; 
Increase knowledge and capacity of smallholder farmers to understand how serving high added value 
markets;  
Identification of potential processing companies, including identification of beneficiary groups and private 
sector partners, retailers  
Implementation of feasibility studies / per district on potential profitable value chains according to climatic 
zone  
o  Community organization: mobilize communities involved in CIG under Window I (100 CIG – 10 members 
in a group in 50 villages), and under Window II (50 CIG with 20 members in a group in 50 villages) 
o  Preparation of contracts between farmers and aggregator 
o  Preparation of contracts between farmers and retailers 
o  Training of CIG members on technical aspects (in collaboration with processor, retailer), group governance 
and business management  
o  Coaching of groups, in collaboration with District Agro-Department during a two year period, to be handed 
over to District Agro-Department after this period. 
Supervision and reporting 
The SPMF will report to the PMU Project Coordinator. From the technical point of view, the SPMF will be placed 
under the supervision of the PMU Market and VC specialist. 
Required qualifications and experience 
The SPMF will have to demonstrate that its organization and the team proposed for the intervention has the 
following skills and experience: 
 
 
 
 
Experience and good knowledge of the private sector, in particular in the agricultural, dairy and beef sub-
sectors 
Experience in implementation of rural development projects implemented by GoT or NGOs 
Experience in community mobilization and organization 
Experience in capacity building in the domains of marketing and business management 
178 
ToRs for the District Officers 
Title of position: District Officer  
Type and duration of contract: full time contract – deliverables based 
Location:  The position will be based in Khatlon, Sughd and DRS regions. 
Scope of work, responsibilities and expected deliverables: The 12 District Officers will provide technical support to 
Window I and Window II CIGs. Each District Officer will cover two Districts and support approximately 33 villages. 
They will be responsible for coordinating, monitoring and providing implementation support to activities related to 
matching grant program, including but not limited to: 
  Working with the Window 1 service provider in Years 1 and 2 provide capacity building and technical 
support to 85 CIG under Window I and 10 CIG under Window II CIGs. This will include: 
o  Support the selection CIGs 
o  Organize and deliver trainings to CIGs as needed  
o  Provide technical support to CIGs  for proposal writing  and preparation of business plans  
o  Provide technical support to PMU for monitoring of matching grant program implementation  
o  Scale up the CIG capacity building and technical support outlined above to new Window 1 CIGs in 
17 villages by end of Year 3 and 16 villages by end of Year 4.  
  Working with the Window 2 service provider in Years 2 and 3, provide capacity building and technical 
support to 10 CIGs in 10 villages. This will include: 
Identification of private sector market-linkage opportunities 
o 
o  Facilitate private sector/village discussions to explore market linkage opportunities 
o  Support the selection CIGs 
o  Organize and deliver trainings to CIGs as needed  
o  Provide technical support to CIGs  for proposal writing  and preparation of business plans  
o  Provide technical support to PMU for monitoring of matching grant program implementation  
o  Support Grant Management Specialist in collecting, informing and selection of the grant proposals 
 
For both Windows provide: 
o  Regular monitoring of funded CIGS 
o  Regular technical support to funded CIGs 
o  Regular data collection on CIG implementation 
o  Provide monthly reports to the PMU 
o  Support development and maintenance of a database of CIGs for Windows I and 2 
Required qualifications and experience 
o  Advanced degree in agronomy or agribusiness 
o  Seven years of experience in the field of agriculture/agribusiness  development in Tajikistan or in 
the region 
o  Prior experience in rural development projects implemented by GoT or NGOs will be an advantage 
o 
Languages: Tajik, Russian. Good knowledge of English will be an advantage 
ToR for Service Provider for Window 2 
The main responsibilities and tasks of the SP will be: 
Selection of SP: The SP will be recruited through a national Call for Proposals. The SP will be divided in four lots, 
two for Khatlon, one for Sughd and one for DRS. Only national NGOs will be eligible to submit a proposal. NGOs 
working as SP under LPDP and CASP project will be invited to submit a proposal. Proposals can be submitted by 
the same applicant for more than one lot.  
Duration of contract: The contract with the SP will be for an initial duration of one year, deliverables based in the 
second year of the project. 
Staffing: The SP will have to Community Facilitator, Trainers to serve CIG and Train them in 110 villages.  
Task and responsibilities: The SP will have to select/appoint village facilitators and train them on Project 
objectives, tasks and processes. The responsibilities of the SP will be as follows: 
  Community awareness and mobilization and planning: 
o  mobilization of the target villages for its allocated lots.  
o  undertake an awareness creation programme to inform communities and key stakeholders on 
the Project objectives under Component 3.3, activities and processes at the district, jamoat 
and village levels.  
conduct participatory awareness programs on community development and participation; on 
formation and functions of the CIG under Window 2. 
o 
o  develop information materials and/or use materials developed by the PMU and other partners 
and ensure their communication to the community. 
o  The SP will conduct capacity building programme based on needs assessment to CIGs as well 
as to Agriculture Department specialists of the MOA  
 
Planning: CIG development 
179 
o  ensure open, fair and inclusive selection process should be conducted in accordance with 
developed and agreed Social Mobilization Programme and Targeting and Inclusion Strategy.   
o  Window 2 CIGs will have 20 people per group.   
o 
conduct a private sector scoping exercise to identity potential companies interested in linking 
to existing or new CIGs. 
o  110 meetings will be organized in 110 villages to identify potential CIG among existing and or 
farming as a business 
business planning  
financial literacy  
establish new ones for Window II matching grant. 
conduct SWAT analysis to identify strength, opportunities, weaknesses and strength of the 
communities vis a vis their market linkage opportunities 
train CIGs in long term planning for linking to potential private sector companies, the SP will 
develop and implement a training curriculum that covers modules on: 
 
 
 
  matching grant proposal writing 
 
 
 
 
facilitate the CIG Window 2 application and approval process  
climate smart agriculture 
productivity improvement 
value addition 
developing market linkages 
o 
o 
o 
 
Implementation of CIG grant sub projects 
The SP will facilitate community procurement process and provide technical support to the implementation of CIG 
grant sub-projects.  It will support CIGs to follow timely and proper procedures, review all forms for completion 
and compliance with project regulations, and review local bidding process for opening tenders for 
contractors/supplier. The SP will provide technical, managerial and other needed assistance to CIG in the course of 
their sub-project implementation. 
  Monitoring of CIGs 
The SP will support District Officers to conduct Project monitoring activities, baseline and impact assessment 
surveys in line with the CASP+ M and E programme. They will also support villages and jamoat/hukumat in 
conducting participatory monitoring. The SP and District Officers will  identify participants  for case studies to 
identify how they have utilised the assets, training opportunities, investments and technical knowledge provided 
by the Project. 
  Supervision and reporting  
During the course of this assignment, the SP will directly report to the CASP+  Project Coordinator. The SP is 
required to provide brief monthly progress reports defining the status of ongoing and indicating planned activities 
as well as problems encountered with the proposed solutions. Other report requirements would be agreed during 
contract negotiations. 
ToR for short-term technical specialists supporting CIGs project implementation  
Title of position: Technical specialist  
Type and duration of contract: on a needs basis (1-3 months) 
Location:  The position will be based in either Khatlon, Sughd or DRS 
Scope of work, responsibilities and expected deliverables: CIG sub-projects may include but not be limited to 
honey, rosehip, climate resilient crop production/ more timely operation, post-harvest storage, local hydroponics, 
small scale oil processing, greenhouse, nursery, drip irrigation under Window I and small-scale dairy processing, 
broiler production, greenhouse production, fruit and nut orchards, solar dryer, hydroponic feed production and oil 
processing as a business and cold storage under Window 2. The technical specialists will  
  Support CIGs to implement their CIG project from start-up, installation of any equipment, fault and 
problem solving and ensuring the sub-projects perform well 
  Work with the District Officers to identify any problems and potential solutions as they arise and to provide 
 
timely and quality information and technical advice on solutions  
Prepare status reports on visited sub-projects covering identification of problem, proposed solution and 
steps taken to eliminate and fix the problem 
  Document lessons learned of best practices 
Required qualifications and experience 
o  Advanced degree in agronomy or agribusiness, processing and or food engineering 
o  7 years of experience in the field of pasture management in Tajikistan or in the region 
o  Prior experience in rural development projects implemented by GoT or NGOs, will be an added 
advantage 
Languages: Tajik, Russian. Good knowledge of English will be and added advantage 
o 
MoU between PMU and Agro departments under MOA 
Type of agreement:  Memorandum of Understanding 
180 
Duration: Six years 
Objective: This MoU defines the modalities of collaboration between the CASP+ project (represented by the PMU) 
and the Agriculture Departments of the Ministry of Agriculture in Khatlon, Sughd and DRS.  Implementation of 
activities will be conducted by the PMU-hired District Officers and Agriculture Department specialists in the 
targeted Districts. 
Contributions and responsibilities from CASP+: The contributions by CASP+ project to the partnership will be as 
follows: 
 
Provide Trainings Curriculum for Window I production/diversification CIGs and Window  II market-
linked CIGs on crop diversification, business planning, matching grant proposal writing, climate smart 
agriculture, productivity improvement, value addition, increasing market linkages and income 
generation 
To provide trainings for 63 specialists of Agro departments  in targeted districts 
To ensure soft and or hard copies materials of trainings are with the Agriculture Department specialists 
for further dissemination 
To provide information on created CIG and link to Agriculture Department Specialists for further 
support 
 
 
 
Contributions and responsibilities from Agriculture Departments of MOA: The Agriculture Departments will be 
responsible for the following activities under the project: 
 
 
Identify and assign 63 Agriculture Departments specialists in 21 districts for capacity building to 
further serve communities 
Ensure participation of the specialists of Agriculture Departments in all targeted districts under the 
project in the all the trainings provided to develop their capacity to serve communities 
  Assign trained specialists to targeted districts  CIGs for further capacity building and provision of 
technical assistance to communities 
Further details on the content and modalities of activities allocated to Agriculture Departments in the scope of the 
CASP+ project are provided in the PIM. 
ToR for Matching Grants Facility (MGF) manager 
The Matching Grant Facility Manager will be based within the PMU and will report to the Programme Coordinator. 
He/she will be directly responsible for the development of the all aspects of establishing and running the MGF and 
implementation of Windows 1 and 2. He/she will serve as secretary of the Matching Grant Approval Committee 
(MAC). 
Specific responsibilities: 
i. Develop  promotional  materials  to  publicise  the  launch  of  the  MGF  and  publish  in  local  media,  distribute 
through District Offices etc. 
ii. Hire and manage a consultant to develop the MGF manual 
iii. In  conjunction  with  the  Window  1  and  Window  2  Service  Providers  (SPs)  and  PMU  technical  specialists, 
identify suitable activities for increasing production, diversification and linking farmers to markets on the 
basis of assessment(s) of existing constraints, opportunities and potentials of on-going and new enterprises 
iv. Provide  oversight  to  (SPs)  and  PMU  technical  specialists  who  are  assisting  CIGs  in  the  development  of 
applications for funding from the Matching Grant Facility 
v. Provide MGF secretariat  services, including establishing and maintaining hard  files of MGF activities i.e., 
proposals received, documents submitted, approval decisions, rejections etc 
i. Maintain a database for all MGF applications, those funded and implementation progress – including physical 
and financial milestones 
ii. Maintain  regular  contact  with  the  District  Officers  and  SPs  to  regularly  update  information  on  MGF 
implementation progress 
iii. Prepare monthly reports for the MGF and reconciliation monthly the MGF data with the Finance and M&E 
units 
iv. With  the  M&E  team,  document  and  disseminate  lessons  learned  to  inform  the  MGF  management  and 
scaling-up through other national and international projects  
Qualification and Experience:  
i. He/she should possess a degree in agriculture, agricultural economics, agribusiness, economics, finance, 
business administration or any relevant professional qualification; A master’s degree in any of the listed 
disciplines above will be an added advantage 
ii. He/she must have at least 8 years of work experience in projects linking famers to markets, developing 
farming as a business, agribusiness development etc;  
iii. Knowledge  of  agribusiness  and  linking  farmers  to  markets  across  a  range  of  commodities  and  the 
implementation of value chain enhancement programmes involving smallholder farmers;  
iv. Experience of project and enterprise planning techniques and systems and proven experience of working 
with private sector, NGO and civil society groups of various kinds in an advisory capacity 
v. Languages: Tajik, Russian. Good knowledge of English will be an added advantage 
Period of Service:  
Appointment will be on contract for rolling period of two years. 
181 
182 
5.  SOCIAL INCLUSION AND GENDER MAINSTREAMING IN PARTICIPATORY 
PLANNING PROCESS 
5.1.  Participatory Planning Process  
384.  Identification and planning for public and private investments will follow a three step community 
consultation process. It will be an integral part of the planning process of each village.  
385.  The three-step consultative planning process will comprise of: (i) sensitization, awareness 
creation and general consultations for engagement; (ii) situation analysis at village level, including 
dissemination of Diagnostic findings to better orient investments planning; and (iii) development of 
CsCAPs (and CIGs TBC) investment priorities.  
Step 1: Sensitization, Awareness Creation and General Consultations 
386.  This step is intended to lay the groundwork for broad based, inclusive and gender sensitive 
community planning for CASP+ community level interventions.  
387.  Inclusiveness and gender mainstreaming: Active participation of different community 
members and all social groups including women, youth and other potentially disadvantaged and 
vulnerable people (Poor Women Head of Households, Elders, PWD) will be promoted in all community 
consultations. At least 70% of the community members should be reached, different socio-economic 
groups should be represented (50% women and 40% youth) and special effort made to bring 
potentially marginalized groups into the discussion. During mobilization and awareness creation the 
community facilitators will explain to the broad community and all actors involved the social 
inclusiveness principles to be adopted under CASP+:  
  Women be 50% beneficiaries ( of which 20% WHHs);  
  Women 30% representation in decision making process (VOs, PUUs, FMGs); 
  Women 30% in the final workshop to determine CsCAPs ( and CIGs TBC) 
  Youth being 30% in the final workshop to determine CsCAPs ( and CIGs TBC) 
  Poorest households (below poverty line) to be prioritized for CIGs related to livelihood 
diversification; 
388.  It will also be explained in details which activities are directly targeting women and youth and 
why their participation is relevant. Specific gender and youth awareness sessions will take place as part 
of the overall consultation and will be under the responsibility of community facilitators.  
389.  Gender Focal Points among Facilitators in charge of those specific activities will be appointed and 
receive guidance from the gender and social inclusion expert of the PMU (see ToRs). 
Step 2: Situation Analysis and validation of the Diagnostic Study.  
390.  Step 2 is a detailed situation analysis done through a diagnostic study and validated by the 
community. The exercise is led by community facilitators and undertaken at village level. It will involve 
consultation and engagement with communities for the: (i) formulation of a development vision, (ii) 
discussion on vulnerability to climate changes, (iii) aspirations and values regarding economic 
livelihoods, (iv) proposed solutions for investments and validation of the diagnostic findings.  
391.  Since groups experience vulnerability to climate change differently, it is important that 
consultation is inclusive of all, including poor households, young people, women and women head of 
households. As part of the process, diagnostic’s findings on how CC affect differently women, men and 
socio-economic groups, will also be discussed. 
392.  During step 2 the community identify the primary development needs, problems, and perceived 
solutions as well as the prioritization of broad intervention areas for public and private investments. 
During this phase, it is possible to create small groups for consultation (where needed). Separate 
groups for vulnerable categories and women should also be created.  
183 
393.  Women, youth and poor households shall be consulted on their vision and ask feedback on the 
finding of the diagnostic study. During the separate consultations they will be also asked to identify 
leaders/spoke person to participate in the final meeting for finalization of community prioritization. This 
will ensure that their priorities will be considered and properly reflected into the final planning process. 
Consultations at village level must be planned to accommodate women’s needs.  
394.  Meetings at village level and/or within community groups, including separate consultation with 
women and youth to: 
  articulate a development vision  
  agree on the groups’ economic aspirations  
  undertake a situation analysis including discussions on past and current socio economic 
conditions/negative experience with CC, access to services, and needs by specific 
disadvantaged groups using the diagnostic as a reference study. 
  discuss development problems and opportunities vis-à-vis the development vision and 
aspirations of the group, root causes to the problems and perceived solutions and broad areas 
for priority intervention using appropriate PRA techniques such as SWOT analysis. 
  agree on possible priority intervention areas for public and private investments.  
  elect at least two women representatives to be able to participate in broad community 
consultation for finalization of CsCAPs.  
  Elect at least two youth representatives to be able to participate in the consultation for 
finalization of CsCAPs. 
395.  All information and outcome of discussions should be recorded in an appropriate way and a 
rapporteur should be selected at the outset of the discussions. The recorded information should be 
reported back to the group so that members fully understand and agree on the outcome of the 
discussions and entrust their representatives to present this to the village level discussions under step 
3.  
Step 3: Development of CsCAP 
396.  Once each community group has articulated its development vision and identified priority 
problems and opportunities, these visions will be translated into a village CsCAP. The community 
facilitators will be responsible for bringing together community representatives for the final workshop 
where 30% minimum are expected to be women and 20% youth.  
397.  Third step of planning process will be based on the following principles: an emphasis on being 
consultative engaging representatives from community groups (all socio-economic categories and 
women represented), focus on in-depth discussions, decision-making by voting and ensuring 
complementarity ( and no overlapping) with other development initiatives. 
398.  CsCAP development will be through a consultative process among community representatives and 
will seek solutions to priority investments and build on opportunities identified from the situation 
analyses and the diagnostic study (validated by the community).  
399.  Development issues (problems and opportunities) identified during step 2 will be discussed topic 
by topic to ensure in-depth discussions and the generation of investment ideas based on the menu of 
services offered by CASP+. 
400.  Priority investments will be derived from a community-wide development vision, combine with 
feasibility ( diagnostic) study. Final Investments to be prioritized for Project support will result through 
a voting process by community representatives participating in the workshop ( women minimum 30% 
and youth 20%). Community Facilitators will ensure that all representatives express their view and 
voting process is equal and transparent.  
401.  Appraisal: An appraisal team( led by the gender and social inclusion expert of PMU) will conduct 
an appraisal of the first CsCAPs developed. The purpose of the appraisal is to determine whether all 
social inclusion issues, (including gender equity) have bene properly addressed during CsCAP 
development. This monitoring exercise will help the team to draw lessons to strengthen the 
participatory an gender sensitive dimension of the planning process.  
184 
ANNEX to Chapter 5 – Terms of reference 
ToRs for Community Facilitators (to be included in the general ToRs for CF) 
A.  Community Mobilization and Engagement  
  Conduct a series of dialogues with the community members to inform them about project activities 
ensuring that women are included in these dialogues in the main group or in separate dialogues;  
  Seek community concurrence and feedback about the menu of options offered under CASP+ and offer 
them choice to select those most relevant for them and ascertain their interest in participating in the 
different activities.  
Facilitate a series of dialogues in support of: 
 
o 
o 
o 
o 
Identification of community investments (CsCAPs). 
Identification of CIGs  
Identification of community members for managing the infrastructure and strengthening their 
capacity, 
Identification of poor and vulnerable households ( including WHHs, Elders, PWD) through the 
Wealth ranking Exercise. 
  Support the organization of gender and youth related sensitisation events/sessions at village level for 
institutions and local leaders to create awareness on the importance to have women and youth as part of 
the economic development of the community. These sessions are preliminary to group formation to ensure 
women and youth are part of the community planning process and their concern captured during selection 
of investments.  
  Gender Awareness for Community Members: It is key to consider raising the awareness of men leaders and 
members of CBOs (i.e. VOs and PUUs) on the manifestations of gender bias (against women) and on the 
effects  of  discrimination  against  women  on  the  personal  and  interpersonal  growth  of  its  leaders  and 
members,  as  well  as  on  the  organizational  development  of  the  organisation.  The  activity  will  be  part  of 
gender awareness session taking place in all targeted village. The awareness session will also include briefing 
on women’s legal status (equality of rights) and legislation about women in representation and key position 
as outlined by the national gender strategy.  
Provide Overall monitoring and reporting of the process. 
 
B.  Participatory Planning Process. 
  Assist the communities to conduct the 3 steps participatory planning process for the identification of the 
 
priorities for climate resilient infrastructure ( AI and FI); 
Ensure that women and youth are informed, mobilised and involved in the identification of village level 
priorities (step1) and prepare their development vision and priorities (step2).  
  Organize and facilitate specific separate sessions/ Focus Group Discussion (FGD) with women and youth 
during the engagement process (step 2) and identify women/youth that can play a leadership role for 
investments prioritisation (step 3); 
Provide overall monitoring and reporting of the process.  
 
C.  Women’s leadership  
  Assist women’s groups in identification of the community representatives who will be trained to enhance 
leadership skills to be representatives in CBOs ( VOs, PUU and FMGs). 
  Support Service Provider (SP) in the organization of the women’s leadership trainings and keep track of 
monitoring of women in leadership positions (30%).  
  Support collection of data (quantitative and qualitative) on women and youth participation to ensure that 
proper M&E data collection is sex and age disaggregated; 
Terms of Reference of Gender and Social Inclusion specialist PMU 
Operationalisation of gender mainstreaming, youth mainstreaming and social inclusion strategies lies with the 
gender and social inclusion expert at PMU. The position is full time for the all duration of the project.  
Specific duties: 
A.  In line with gender and social inclusion action plan prepared at design, prepare an Annual Work Plan and 
Budget for the implementation of specific activities every year and submit to the coordinator; 
B.  Ensure adequate integration of gender and youth in the M&E system, Annual Work Plan and Budget and 
Progress reports;  
C.  Support and follow up on the recruitment of gender expert for (i) stocktaking tasks (policy review and 
analysis) and (ii) field work to contribute to the diagnostic assessment (gender and CC); Follow up and 
supervise the work of the expert and final deliverables.  
185 
D.  Support preparation of materials and take the lead in the organisation of thematic workshops on gender 
and climate change at national level for policy makers (through dissemination of findings from gender 
study, diagnostic, assessment).  
E.  Support and Follow up on the publication: Gender and Climate Change in Tajikistan (based on diagnostic 
findings); 
F.  Provide support to the organisation of women’s leadership training  
G.  Provide overall guidance, training support to community facilitators to organize separate consultation with 
women and vulnerable categories as part of mobilisation/consultation activities as well as for validation of 
diagnostic and (ii) participate in key field activities.  
H.  Draft specific ToRs are required for gender focal points among community facilitators working at village 
level, including training if any capacity gap is assessed.  
I.  Provide checklist to community facilitators to ensure that participatory planning process comply with 
gender and social inclusion principles of the project; 
J.  Form and lead a small appraisal team to conduct monitoring of CsCAPs planning process to ensure gender 
and social inclusion have been considered and (ii) draw lessons to improve the process.  
K.  Provide training support to Community facilitators to conduct the wealth ranking exercise at community 
level (ToT); 
L.  Conduct constant review of project implementation processes on how to achieve the best possible project 
outcomes with respect to targeting, gender equality, women’s empowerment and social inclusion with key 
focus on youth and vulnerable categories; 
M.  Coordinate capacity building and training sessions on gender-sensitive and youth sensitive interventions 
for project staff, implementers. The training should also include specific information on safeguard 
instruments for avoiding GBV, SEA and key information about GRM.  
Expected outputs: 
  Delivery of AWPB, Progress reports, project documentation related to gender, youth and Social Inclusion 
 
 
 
 
issues and activities; 
Finalisation of ToRs and recruitment of Service Provider (SP) for women’s leadership training  
Finalisation of ToRs and recruitment of Gender Expert to conduct study on gender and climate change; 
Thematic workshops (7) on gender and climate change for policy-makers ; 
Training materials for community facilitators finalized and trainings delivered, including for Wealth Ranking 
Exercise; 
  Appraisal report on participatory planning and gender mainstreaming; 
  Appropriated social safeguard instruments into operations are set. 
Relevant experience required: At least 5 years’ experience in (i) conducting and coordinating gender and social 
inclusion activities; (ii) wealth ranking Exercises and trainings; (iii) gender and M&E and reporting.  
Previous  working  experience  with  International  Organisations  in  Gender  and  rural  development/Gender  and 
environment is an advantage. 
ToR to conduct Leadership Training for Women ( to be added to the ToRs for the SP 
responsible for the mobilization process)  
Background:  Women  limited  capacity  to  assume  leadership  role  is  often  associated  to  cultural  constrains  and 
determining factors which include:  
 
 
 
Low  status  due  to  persistent  gender  discrimination  and  gender  stereotyping,  where  women  are 
generally  viewed  to  be  unfit  for  leadership,  and  subsequent  lack  of  support  for  women’s  entry  to 
leadership structures;  
Limited opportunity to engage full time in activities outside the home due to unequal burden of care 
work that falls upon them;  
Low self-esteem and inadequate leadership skills and experience as a result of the above factors. 
In  light  of  the  above  constrains,  the  project  intends  to  support  women’s  and  women’s  leaders  to  increase  their 
awareness  about  their  rights,  their  presence  in  the  decision  making  process  of  CBO  and  ability  to  exercise  their 
rights and express their opinion/voice. Specifically the project will set quotas to ensure a minimum representation 
of  women  in  decision  making  and  representation  positions.  In  order  to  succeed  with  the  objectives  above,  a 
leadership training for women, has been planned as part of CASP+. 
Objectives of the service 
(i) The main objective of the training is to support women from targeted communities with leadership skills that will 
enable  them  to  strategically  use  their  strengths  and  abilities  –  their  competitive  edge  while  participating  in  key 
decision-making bodied ( i.e. VOs, PUU, FMG) for the use and governance of NRM as well as planning processes for 
prioritization of investments (Adaptation and Forestry). The project set  quotas  for  participation  of women in  key 
decision making process and the leadership training is key to ensure that women are capacitated to undertaken the 
role in pro-active manner. 
Leadership Training for women: Trainings for women leaders, targeting 6 women per village, for a total of 2,400 
women across the 400 targeted villages. The objective is preparing women members of community organizations 
to be leaders and change agents in their organizations. They will be provided with sensitization on topics including 
gender  relations,  self-awareness,  leadership  and  accountability,  negotiation  and  conflict  management,  effective 
186 
communication. The training should specifically include modules about: Effective and gender-responsive leadership 
and  communication;  group  management;  coping  with  challenges/conflict  resolution  strategy;  and  personal 
development. 
The trainings (3 days training) will take place at district level (21). It will consider about 5 trainings per districts 
(considering about 20 participants each training).  
Scope of the service 
The service provider (SP) shall deliver all the services necessary to achieve the stated objective of these exercises, 
and in so doing, shall expeditiously execute the following: 
a.  Develop training programs and modules. 
b.  Conduct and submit pre training assessment report. 
c.  Deliver on-site training session. 
d.  Provide training materials and related documents. 
e.  Conduct and submit post- training assessment report. 
Education 
The consulting firm must provide experts in the area of leadership and women empowerment. The lead consultant 
of the firm should have at least 10 years in handling similar projects in international private or public sector. The 
lead expert for this assignment must have at least an MA with specification in Leadership, Economics, 
Psychology or any related Social Sciences. 
The lead expert must have proven track record in delivering similar assignments. 
Deliverables 
The service provider is expected to provide on-site training on leadership skills development for women farmers. 
The following deliverables are required under this assignment: 
a.  Develop training programs and modules. 
b.  Deliver on-site and remote training session (5 per districts, covering 21 districts and a total of 2,400 
women). 
c.  Provide training materials. 
d.  Conduct and submit post training assessment. 
Terms of reference for Gender and Climate Change Analysis (International Consultant) 
Objectives of the assignment:  
The goal of the gender and climate change analysis is to better understand the national context, particularly focusing 
at gender equality issues in key climate sectors from a gender and climate change perspective. The assignment will 
include conducting a comprehensive study elaborating gender climate linkages in relation to: (ii) policy development 
and policy dialogues at national level (ii) diagnostic assessment conducted in the CASP + Targeted districts (district 
level).  
The study should therefore be divided in two parts:  
Part I: Findings and analysis from in-depth assessment to address gender gaps, challenges, issues, and strengthen 
opportunities  with  relevant  policy  recommendations,  to  enhance  future  policy  documents  to  take  into  account 
relevant gender gap and proposed solutions. This part of the assignment will be conducted through desk review, 
and interviews with key policy makers (national level) CSOs. It is expected that the findings will contribute to key 
recommendations to integrate gender aspects into the formulation of key policy documents related to climate change 
agenda.  
Part II: Findings and analysis from field work to be conducted in selected districts (at least 2 per region, for  a total 
of 6 field visits) of the project target areas to interview women (at least 6 in each FGDs, for a total of 36 women) 
from different socio-economic level (poor WHHs, young girls, elders) and provide key examples of gender and climate 
change, including solutions related to women access to technology, knowledge, skills and livelihood diversification 
based on selected examples. The findings from the field work will: (i) support Part I of the study and gender thematic 
workshop (as above) and at the same time (ii) to enrich the diagnostic study conducted by an NGO covering the 
total target area of CASP+ (21 districts). The consultant will coordinate with the other partners while conducting the 
fieldwork in order to harmonize the work as needed.  
The consultant should provide concrete short term and long-term recommendations as part of: (i) policy dialogue 
and  policy  formulation  to  enhance  gender  and  climate  change  agenda  and  (ii)  detailed  technical  solutions  to  be 
provided  to  poor  rural  women  in  order  to  minimize  the  negative  impact  of  climate  change  and  strengthen  their 
resilience.  
Duration;  30  working  days  to  be  divided  approximately  as  follow:  15  days  for  part  I  to  conduct  research  and 
consultation in Dushanbe with key policy makers and CSOs actors and (ii) 15 days for part II to conduct research in 
the field and FGDs with women.  
Main Tasks:  
A.  Develop a detailed methodology and work plan for the in-depth gender analysis, an approximate timeline 
needed to complete the study and the required technical resources.  
B.  Conduct  a  desk  review  of  the  relevant  climate  and  gender-related  materials,  mechanisms,  institutional 
structures and frameworks to assess the national gender situational analysis. 
C.  Conduct interviews, surveys, working sessions with key Government actors and other stakeholder groups 
(i.e. civil society, academia, private sector, UN Agencies, development partners, private sector) involved in 
the  relevant  climate  and  gender  decision  making  and  planning  processes  to  ensure  broad  integration  of 
perspectives.  
187 
D.  Conduct field visits to three locations relevant to the analysis and identified during the desk review. 
E.  Conduct interviews with women to assess based on their vulnerability which priority solutions could help in 
terms of livelihood diversification and economic activities.  
F.  At the end of the assignment, in coordination with PMU gender expert, facilitate a mini-workshop to validate 
the preliminary findings of the analysis and data from the field by the various organizations involved in CC 
policy development,  
G.  Develop  a  concise  report  on  the  process,  findings,  challenges,  and  outcome  of  the  gender  analysis  and 
assessment,  and  list  concrete  short  term  and  long  terms  recommendations.  The  report  will  ensure  a 
comprehensive gender integration and mainstreaming plan that will be consistent with the diagnostic study.  
H.  Prepare a final version of the full report for publication Gender and Climate Change in Tajikistan.  
Expected deliverables:  
1.  Gender and Climate Change Study (Full Report)  
2.  Summary  of  key  findings  and  information  materials  to  be  disseminated  during  gender  thematic 
workshops for policy makers  which will be organized by the gender expert PMU (Focus gender and CC 
in policy dialogue).  
3.  Written inputs to enrich the diagnostic study in relation to gender and vulnerability to climate change 
with key example from the three CASP+ targeted regions (Focus should be on livelihood development 
and diversification).  
Competencies: 
  Substantive experience  conducting research  and  analysis in the area  of gender equality and at least one 
other related theme, including climate change mitigation and/or adaptation, environment and/or sustainable 
development.  
  Demonstrated  substantive  experience  in  working  with  developing  countries  and  undertaking  policy  and 
programmatic work in the area of expertise mentioned above. 
  Demonstrated experience in designing and facilitating capacity building processes in developing countries.  
  Strong understanding of the links between climate change/environment and gender issues.  
  Demonstrated experience working on policy and programmatic issues with national and local governments 
and civil society organizations.  
  Experience or strong familiarity with the work of IFAD and/or other multilateral, bilateral and civil society 
development partners.  
  Excellent analytical, writing, and communications skills.  
  Demonstrated ability to work in an independent manner and in teams.  
Qualifications:  
  Master’s degree in any of the related areas: gender, climate change, environment, sustainable development 
  7  years  of  professional  experience 
technical  areas  of  gender  equality,  climate 
in  relevant 
change/environment; 
  Proven ability to undertake gender analysis, design relevant criteria and gender strategy; 
  Demonstrated understanding of issues related to climate change/environment 
  Proven  ability  to  facilitate  workshops  and  trainings,  as  well  as  to  lead  discussions  with  researchers  and 
government officials; 
  Experience in designing and facilitating capacity building processes; 
  Strong verbal and written communications skills in English; 
  Demonstrated expertise in policy dialogue and high level advocacy is desirable; 
  Prior work experience in the region on similar surveys; 
  Experience and evidence in producing reports in English  
 
  Proficiency in Russian and English. Knowledge of Tajik is advantage.  
Familiarity with UN systems and procedures, management and monitoring tools is desirable; 
188 
6.  Planning, M&E, Learning and KM 
6.1.  M&E Structure 
402.  A monitoring and evaluation system will be established for the CASP+ project to measure the key 
indicators according to IFAD and GCF specific performance measurement frameworks. The indicators 
will be monitored and coordinated by the SEPMU as it will be lead implementing agency responsible for 
the major share of the work. Two M&E Units will be established, one in the SEPMU-LPD and one in CEP-
PIG, and M&E information will come from FAO-Tajikistan for the activities it is entrusted to implement. 
Monitoring and Evaluation Specialists will oversee the monitoring of all project activities and sub-
activities, ultimately reporting for the respective outputs, outcomes and impact. The M&E Officer in 
SEPMU will consolidate all reports for submission to IFAD and GCF. CEP-PIG and FAO and all other 
implementing partners will report to SEPMU to enable them to consolidate and submit regular progress 
reports to IFAD and GCF with inputs from each Executing Entity. IFAD, as the accredited entity (AE) of 
the GCF will oversee the process and submit the reports to the GCF.  
6.2.  CASP+ Logframe 
CASP+ Logframe is available at the file linked below 
6.3.  M&E Responsibilities 
403.  All executing agencies will be responsible for ensuring that the agencies working under their 
supervision provide them quarterly progress reports. These reports will be consolidated into annual 
progress reports and sent by CEP and FAO to SEPMU who will submit an Annual Performance Report to 
IFAD and GCF. The responsibility for reporting on the progress under each activity and sub-activity will 
be assumed by the agency responsible for ensuring its implementation in the field directly or through 
supervision by another implementing partner. All contracts or MOUs with implementing partners will 
specify their responsibility with respect to sex-disaggregated data collection and reporting. The 
implementing partners will submit reports to SEPMU, CEP-PIG or FAO depending upon which agency is 
overall responsible for overseeing the specific aspect on the ground.  
404.  Specific M&E responsibility include:  
  Component 1:  
CEP-PIG will coordinate all activities related to introduction of climate courses in the 
Academy for public Administration, selected universities, policy advocacy activities.  
SEPMU will record the progress on the national level strengthening of the PMT and 
FSC, veterinary legislation and the capacity for strengthening of AI technicians and 
development of technological packages for climate resilience. 
FAO will provide support to capacity development to government on strategic carbon 
accounting, and livestock related planning and strategic tools.  
  Component 2,  
CEP-PIG will report on the enhanced capacity for climate resilience in development 
planning at the district level through Hydromet and the CCC at the district level. CEP 
will identify suitable indicators in collaboration with district governments for the 
purpose.  
SFA will implement all forestry related activities under component 2 and report all 
activities related to forestry plantation in coordination with the selected Lezkhoz to 
189 
CASP+ Logframe (draft 29Jul21).xlsx 
CEP. The downstream benefits of adopting a catchment level approach and the 
households that this protects will be recorded by SFA and reported to CEP.   
The SEPMU will coordinate all activities related to the agriculture sector such as 
community mobilization aspects, PMPs, infrastructure, mechanization, etc. 
Infrastructure financed for disaster risk reduction by the COES will be reported to the 
SEPMU.  
  Component 3  
SEPMU is overall responsible to implement and monitor all activities (except FFS, 
implemented by FAO. Data for all grants provided and disaggregated by sex and age.  
FAO will report on strengthening private veterinaries’ services and on FFS execution. 
6.4.  Monitoring System  
6.4.1. 
Types of Reports 
405.  CEP-PIG, SEPMU and FAO will formulate an Annual Work Plan & Budget based on the annual 
physical targets based on the implementation plan (Annex 5) which will be approved by the PSC and 
approved by both IFAD and GCF. Consistent with the AWP&B, reporting formats will be developed for 
each of the reports namely the monthly statistical reports, the quarterly statistical and narrative 
reports and the Annual Performance Reports (APRs) by the M&E staff of each of the executing agencies 
and coordinated at the level of the SEPMU into one consolidated report. The Annual Performance 
Reports (APRs) will document the progress towards achieving the indicators in GCF’s Performance 
Managed Framework and any additional project level indicators. APRs will also contain a narrative with 
updates on the progress of each output and outcome envisaged at the project level. The GCF Logical 
Framework and the IFAD Logical Framework will both be monitored. While the two have been 
coordinated and synergized as much as possible, the two agencies focus on somewhat different 
elements and the reporting formats of both GCF and IFAD ORMS will be respected and reported upon. 
The contracts with each implementing agency will specify their reporting responsibilities, the frequency 
of the reports to be produced and provide them with the formats to be used. All partners will be 
required to review the Gender Action Plan which is an integral part of the proposal and report on the 
implementation and indicators of specific aspects related to gender. All data will be disaggregated by 
sex to enable an assessment of the progress in inclusion of women in the project. 
406.  The key reports that will be submitted have been identified in the M&E Reporting Matrix given 
below together with their timelines and reporting responsibility. More details are provided in the 
Monitoring and Evaluation plan. SEPMU, CEP and FAO as the main implementing partners will be 
responsible for maintaining records on all project activities on standard reporting formats. All 
implementing partners will be required to provide information on the core indicators, impact, outcome 
and output level indicators specified in the PMF.   The APRs will include the status of each funded 
activity throughout the relevant reporting period, including a narrative report on implementation 
progress based on the logical framework attached to this Funding Proposal.  The APR will be submitted 
to IFAD and the GCF Secretariat on an annual basis for the period ending on 31 December within sixty 
(60) days after the end of the relevant annual period, with the first APR required to be submitted 
following the end of the calendar year after the Parties have entered into the relevant FAA, and the last 
APR required to be submitted within six (6) months of the end of the relevant Reporting Period.  
6.4.2. 
MIS System 
407.  An MIS system will be developed for the project to record key information of all beneficiary 
households. The M&E Unit in SEPMU will coordinate and produce a consolidated MIS report for the 
project as a whole.  Within the first quarter of the second year, when activities have been initiated and 
sufficient outreach has been achieved and the M&E data base begins to get populated, thematic maps 
will be generated by the project and will be monitored through consolidated remote sensing practices 
or geospatial analysis. This is expected to yield a better understanding of trends and patterns and 
make the analysis more meaningful in understanding the relationship between climate parameters and 
the pattern of adoption and participation in project activities. The MIS system will geo-reference all 
activities using FAO’s Remote Sensing application- Earth Map. The MIS system will also record 
beneficiary phone numbers for feedback from participants. The MIS system will also be used for 
tracking beneficiaries over time and assessing impact. 
190 
6.4.3. 
CSCAP Monitoring 
408.   innovative methods will be employed to engage and incentivise stakeholders, including youth, to 
use smartphones for field reporting and ground truthing of remote sensing. A bridge will be established 
between the diagnostic output and citizen reporting to provide a means of tracking the realisation of 
predictions made, and the effects of CsCAP implementation. The approach will be integrated into 
updated formats of the annual reports submitted by these bodies. These will also appear as geotagged 
report points on the mapping portal produced under Component 1, alongside the layers that report on 
the status of NRM. The project will also introduce and pilot test some innovative approaches to 
assessing bio-diversity in pastures by using apiculture techniques (see component 1).  
6.4.4. 
Survey Methods 
409.    The project will commission a Baseline Survey by a third party in year one against which 
subsequent changes and impact will be measured. To measure attributable changes, the evaluations 
will draw on mixed-methods, using qualitative methods (e.g. participatory rural appraisal, focus group 
discussions, key informant interviews, etc.,) in combination with counterfactual analysis (e.g. quasi-
experimental methods, depending on the existence of reliable control group data from the project’s 
baseline and completion surveys, which will be confirmed during project inception). All surveys and 
impact assessments will be sex-disaggregated and key gender-sensitive indicators both quantitative 
and qualitative outlined in the Gender Action Plan will be captured in the initial and subsequent surveys 
and findings.  In addition, all impact evaluations will be conducted by external parties to ensure 
independence.   
6.4.5. 
Interim and final evaluations 
410.   IFAD has a well-structured system for undertaking annual supervision missions, a mid-term 
review and a project completion report.  The project will undertake surveys at mid-term and at 
completion to assess the performance of the project, draw important lessons and incorporate 
beneficiary feedback. The evaluator will assess the paradigm shift potential and sustainable 
development potential via a three-point scale scorecard that is being developed by the GCF Secretariat. 
The external surveys will feed into these review reports. The interim or mid-term survey will 
incorporate key aspects of impact on the targeted households up to that period and will be 
incorporated in IFAD’s Mid-Term Review Report. At project completion, a final impact assessment will 
be undertaken to assess the overall impact of the project on the beneficiaries.  The mid-term and final 
impact will compare project results with the expected outreach, adoption of climate adaptation 
practices and assess the overall impact on the paradigm shifts outlined in the project log-frame and the 
indicators of resilience outlined at the impact level.  The project completion review will also assess the 
extent to which the intervention has contributed to the Fund’s higher-level goal of achieving a 
paradigm shift in adaptation to climate change at the national level and in the selected project districts 
in Tajikistan.  The AE will also hold participatory workshops3 at the interim and final evaluation stages 
as necessary  
Table 12. Types of report, timeline and responsibility 
Types of Reports 
Reporting Timeline 
Responsibility 
Baseline Survey 
Year 1 
Independent Third Party 
Annual Work Plan and Budget 
Two months prior to the start of the 
relevant PY. 
SEPMU 
Quarterly Statistical and Narrative Reports on 
physical and financial progress. 
Two weeks after the end of the 
relevant quarter. 
Policy notes and briefs to highlight the project 
progress with policy and regulatory reform.  
On a periodic basis at each 
signficant point of reform. 
Geospatial analysis through thematic maps. 
Annual basis 
CEP-PIU-M&E Unit 
PMU- M&E Unit 
FAO-M&E 
Techncial Assistance 
PMU-M&E Unit 
CEP-PIU-M&E Unit 
FAO 
191 
Anuual Progress report on outputs and key 
performance indicators.  
One month after the end of the 
relevant PY.   
PMU- M&E Unit 
CEP-PIU-M&E Unit 
FAO-M&E 
Supervision Missions 
Annual 
IFAD 
Report on Co-financing in absolute numerical terms in 
accordance with the provisions of the relevant legal 
agreements between the AE and the GCF. 
Environmental & Social Safeguards Quarterly Report  
Beneficiary Feedback Analysis with both men and 
women. 
Leaning and Knowledge Products 
Interim Evaluation incorporating paradigm shift and 
impact based on GCF CIs. 
Mid-Terim Review  incorporating paradigm shift and 
impact  based on GCF CIs.. 
One month after the end of the 
relevant PY.   
SEPMU-Financial Specialist 
and CEP-PIU 
Two weeks after the end of the 
relevant quarter 
On a regular basis at the 
completion of key project 
investments.  
Periodically 
Year 4 
Year 4 
Environmental and Social 
Safegaurds Specialist 
SEPMU- M&E Unit 
TA 
Third party Survey   
IFAD 
Final Impact   incorporating paradigm shift and 
impact based on GCF CIs. 
Six months prior to end of the 
project in PY 7. 
Independent Third Party  
Completion Report  incorporating paradigm shift and 
impact based on GCF CIs.. 
Three months prior to the project 
end in PY 7. 
IFAD 
6.4.6. 
Quality control and quality assurance measures. 
411.  Each agency will establish a system for a periodic audit of the quality of its reports by fact 
checking 5% to 10% of the reports submitted by its staff. In addition, the M&E Units of SEPMU and 
CEP will also depute its staff in the field to fact check and verify 5% to 10% of the reports submitted 
by the implementing agencies or its own staff. Regular field visits will be undertaken for the verification 
with a well specified approach to engaging the beneficiary group representatives in the process and 
recording how the process and consultations were conducted. 
6.4.7. 
Beneficiary Feedback 
412.  Each partner will also establish a mechanism for beneficiary feedback and demonstrate how they 
have incorporated the feedback in improving their implementation approach. A beneficiary feedback 
will also be prepared by each implementing partner on an annual basis and will form part of the Annual 
Performance Report (APR). The implementing agency will ensure that the beneficiary feedback is 
organized so that the reports provide sex-disaggregated perspectives. The SEPMU and CEP-PIU will 
also establish a grievance redress system which will be communicated by each implementing agency to 
the participants to enable them to  directly access the system in a manner which guarantees their 
confidentiality. IFAD and GCF’s procedures for complaints related to the Environmental and Social 
Standards will be adopted. 
6.5.  Learning and knowledge management  
The Project will also synthesize the lessons that emerge from the Project in a separate section in the 
APRs, including lessons on innovations and mainstreaming gender.  These lessons will be shared with 
the NDA and the NCCC to enable them to incorporate them in the strategies and plans being developed 
by the country in its NAP and other key strategy documents.  TAs working on specific topics and policy 
briefs will be required to develop these products. IFAD and FAO will also capitalize on their in-house 
experience to undertake the development of knowledge products for wider dissemination.  
6.6.  Communication 
413.  All the interventions, data and results generated by the project will be effectively communicated 
and disseminated to the different stakeholders and beneficiaries at the national and district level. 
Specialized services will be contracted to implement gender-sensitive communications campaigns 
which will include the use of knowledge-sharing platforms and social-media networks to promote 
192 
participation, awareness raising and to strengthen project´s partnerships. Communication services will 
also make sure that all the documents requiring multi-lingual support will be available in Russian and 
English.    
193 
Annex to Chapter 6 – M&E plan 
Monitoring 
Monitoring and Evaluation Plan 
Data/Source 
Collection Tool 
Frequency 
Indicators 
Baseline study 
Baseline study 
Project Year 1 
Baseline socio-economic status of households with 
particular focus on capacity to deal with climate change 
and risks.   
Project MIS 
GIS data  
On-going 
Location of project activities and beneficiaries 
Government 
Data/GIS  
Remote sensing and 
ground truthing 
through field 
observations  and 
interviews 
Annually 
Pasture and forest cover, density and biodiversity  
Document Review 
On-Going 
M&E Reports 
Project Reports 
Monthly, Quarterly 
and Annual 
Mid-term surveys  
Survey/questionnaire  Year 4 
Final survey 
Survey/questionnaire  Year 7 
M9.1 Hectares of land or forests under improved and 
effective management that contributes to CO2 emission 
reductions 
A5.1 Institutional and regulatory systems that improve 
incentives for climate resilience and their effective 
implementation 
A.7.1Use by vulnerable households, communities, 
businesses and public-sector services of Fund-supported 
tools instruments, strategies and activities to respond to 
climate change and variability. 
A.8.1Number of males and females made aware of 
climate threats and related appropriate responses. 
ACrC1: Technologies introduced (including gender – 
sensitive technologies) to effectively implement 
adaptation actions.  
Overall Financial and Physical progress Reports. 
Environmental & Social Safeguards Quarterly Report  
  A.1.2 Number of males and females benefiting from 
the adoption of diversified, climate resilient livelihood 
options.  
  M4.1 Tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) 
reduced or avoided (including increased removals) - 
forest and land use. 
  A2.2 Number of food secure households (in 
areas/periods at risk of climate change impacts) 
  A.1.2 Number of males and females benefiting from 
the adoption of diversified, climate resilient livelihood 
options.  
  A4.1 Coverage/scale of ecosystems protected and 
stregnthened in response to climate variability and 
change. 
  M4.1 Tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) 
reduced or avoided (including increased removals) - 
forest and land use 
Knowledge 
Management 
Combination of tools 
and methods 
Periodic 
Special reports 
Evaluation schedule  
Evaluation 
Type 
Outcome 
Mid-term review 
Impact 
Project Completion Report 
Timing 
Year 4 
Year 4 
Year 7 
Year 7 
Independent/Self-
evaluation  
Independent 
IFAD 
Independent 
IFAD 
194 
7.  PROCUREMENT 
7.1.  CASP+ Procurement Rules and Guidance 
CASP+ Procurement Rules and Guidance is available 
at the file linked below: 
414.  Procurement of goods, works and services under the project will be conducted by the SEPMU and 
PIG CEP Procurement Units. Procurement goods, works and services for the proposed project will be 
carried out in accordance with the IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and provisions stipulated in the 
Financing Agreement/Letter to the Borrower. If there is conflict between the Government decrees, rules 
and regulations and the IFAD Procurement Guidelines, then IFAD Guidelines shall prevail.  
415.  The following basic principles shall guide the work of CASP+ while implementing the procurement 
activities: 
  economy and efficiency;  
  equal opportunities to all eligible bidders;  
 
fairness, transparency, integrity and good governance. 
Arrangements for procurement under the project 
416.  The PMU/PIG operational mode is to assign a Procurement consultant to each of its projects. 
Thus, new Procurement consultants/Assistants would be recruited and specifically assigned for the 
CASP+ and provided with appropriate training to develop the requisite capacity. Required qualifications 
and job descriptions for this position are detailed in Annex 1 of this section. Tentatively, in the initial 
Project phase, support could be given by PMU staff. 
417.  The team’s procurement and technical specialists will work closely with the PMU/PIG to provide 
continuous inputs into and feedback on the preparation of procurement packages and to carrying out 
procurement as such. 
418.  As per current practice under LPDP-II and CASP, an Evaluation Committee for the evaluation of 
each procurement would be appointed and composed of persons qualified in terms of relevant 
expertise, seniority and experience, depending on the type, value and complexity of the procurement. 
The number of members of the Evaluation Committee would depend on the value and complexity of 
the procurement requirement, but would in all cases be a minimum of three. A member of the 
Evaluation Committee will always declare when he/she has a conflict of interest in the procurement, 
which may impact on impartiality in the evaluation process. 
419.  For each contract financed from IFAD proceeds, the Recipient and IFAD will agree in advance in 
the procurement plan (PP) the following:  
types of procurement methods; 
 
  need for pre or post-qualification by IFAD;  
  estimated cost;  
  prior review requirements and timeframe. 
420.  PP will be available in the PMU/PIG’s project database; and will be updated in a manner agreed 
upon with project team, annually or as required, to reflect the needs and improvements in the 
implementing agencies’ institutional capacity. All the procurements of goods, works and services will be 
as per approved PP. Any revisions proposed to the PP shall be furnished to IFAD for its prior approval. 
195 
CASP+ PIM_Ch7_Procurement_(30Aug21).docx 
421. 
Goods and Non-consulting services shall be procured adhering to the following 
thresholds for procurement methods:  
 
International Competitive Bidding (ICB): Any contract estimated to cost more than US$ 200 000 
or equivalent;  
  National Competitive Bidding (NCB): any contract estimated to  cost  more than US$  70 000 or 
equivalent or less than US$ 200 000;  
  National Shopping (NS): any contract estimated to cost less than US$ 70 000 or equivalent; 
  Direct Contracting (DC): as an exception to the above regardless of value and if warranted by 
circumstances  with  due  justification  in  line  with  IFAD  procurement  guidelines  or  contracts 
estimated to cost less than US$ 2 000 or equivalent. 
422. 
Civil Works and Non-consulting services shall be procured adhering to the following 
thresholds for procurement methods: 
 
International competitive Bidding (ICB): Any contract estimated to cost more than US$ 800 000 
or equivalent;  
  National Competitive Bidding (NCB): any contract estimated to cost more than US$ 190 000 or 
equivalent or less than US$ 800 000;  
  National Shopping (NS): any contract estimated to cost less than US$ 190 000 or equivalent; 
  • 
Direct Contracting (DC): as an exception to the above regardless of value and if warranted 
by  circumstances  with  due  justification  in  line  with  IFAD  procurement  guidelines  or  contracts 
estimated to cost less than US$ 3 000 or equivalent. 
423. 
Consulting and Non-consulting services shall be procured adhering to the following 
thresholds for procurement methods: 
  Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS): Any contract estimated to cost US$ 100 000 or more 
shall  be  awarded  on  the  basis  of  QCBS,  unless  the  use  of  another  procurement  method  is 
expressly allowed. Advertising of REOI shall be international for any contract estimated to cost 
US$ 100 000 or more and where there is expected to be interest internationally. Otherwise the 
advertising shall national. 
  Quality Based Selection (QBS),  Fixed Budget Selection (FBS)   and Least Cost Selection (LCS): 
Any contract for  consulting services estimated to  cost US$ 100 000 equivalent or less may be 
awarded  on  the  basis  of  QBS,  FBS,  LCS  from  a  shortlist  prepared  by  the  PMU/CEP  PIG  and 
comprising three to six firms. Advertising of REOI shall be international for any contract where 
there is expected to be interest internationally. Otherwise the advertising shall national. 
  Selection based on Consultants’ Qualification (CQS): Any contract for consulting services 
estimated to cost US$ 70 000 equivalent or less may be awarded on the basis of CQS from a 
shortlist comprising three to six firms. Advertising of REOI shall be international for any contract 
where there is expected to be interest internationally. Otherwise the advertising shall national. 
Individual Consultant Selection (ICS): Any contracts for consulting services regardless of value 
may  be  awarded  on  the  basis  of  ICS  with  due  consideration  of  the  principles  set  out  in  the 
Procurement Guidelines.  
 
  Single Source Selection (SSS): as an exception to the above regardless of value and if warranted 
by circumstances with due justification in line with IFAD procurement guidelines and/or contracts 
with firms estimated to cost US$ 2 000 equivalent or less and contracts with individual consultants 
estimated to cost US$ 1 000 equivalent or less or with a contract duration of three months or less 
may be awarded on the basis of SSS.  
424.  IFAD’s procurement supervision would foresee three main tasks: (i) procurement plan review; (ii) 
prior review of procurements; and (iii) prequalification of bidders (if envisaged). 
425.  For purposes of IFAD's Procurement Guidelines, the following shall be subject to prior review by 
the Fund: 
  Goods/Non-consulting services - The first three (3) contracts regardless of value and thereafter 
all contracts for goods estimated to cost more than US$ 70 000 or equivalent;  
  Civil  works/Non-consulting  services  -  The  first  three  (3)  contracts  regardless  of  value  and 
thereafter all contracts for civil works estimated to cost more than US$ 150 000 or equivalent;  
  Consulting services/Non-consulting services - The first three (3) contracts regardless of value and 
thereafter  all  contracts  for  consulting  services  estimated  to  cost  more  than  US$  60  000  or 
equivalent;  
196 
  Awarding of any contract based on DC or SSS regardless of their costs. 
  All Terms of References (TORs), regardless of their costs. 
426.  The aforementioned thresholds may be modified by the Fund during the course of Project 
implementation. 
427.  Post review. All other contracts will be subject to post-review and procurement audit by IFAD. 
The CASP+ procurement consultant will maintain accurate records and separate files for each 
procurement activity. Details with regards to the content of a procurement file or dossier can be found 
in the Module C of the Procurement Handbook.  
428.  Contract register. All contracts, with or without IFAD prior approval, shall be listed in the 
register of contract maintained by the CASP+ procurement sections within the PMU/PIG including any 
amendments and cancelled contracts, the information will also be recorded, providing the relevant 
background. The register will to be updated and submitted to the IFAD Country Director on a monthly 
basis. Additionally, the contract data will be registered use NOTUS procurement system. 
429.  Bidding Documents. All bidding documents for the procurement of works, goods and services 
will be prepared by the PMU/PIG procurement sections, with the support of technical experts, as 
needed, who will provide specifications, terms of reference, and bill of quantities so forth as required. 
Sample procurement documents developed by PMU under the on-going IFAD projects will be available 
for the CEP PIG. 
430.  Responsibility. The procurement units within the PMU and CEP PIG will be responsible for 
undertaking the following tasks:  
consolidate annual procurement plans;  
implementation and monitoring of procurement activities;  
interface with IFAD and GCF for procurement reporting;  
 
 
 
  ensure that the procurement under the project is undertaken in line with the Project Design Report 
and IFAD Procurement Guidelines. 
431.  Filing and Records Keeping. The PMU and CEP PIG will use the existing filing, record keeping 
and storage systems established under the on-going projects, including hard and/or electronic copies 
of related procurement documents. The originals of various valuable documents (such as bid security, 
performance guarantee, advance guarantee) will be kept in the safe of the financial unit. 
Please refer to a separate detailed Project Procurement Manual for further information, which constitutes 
an integral part of this PIM. 
197 
ANNEX to Chapter 7 – Awards of Grants 44 
Grants:  Award  of  grants  (whether  monetary  or  in-kind)  is  as  provisioned  in  the  Project  Design.  Grants  may  be 
executed (i.e. disbursed in case of monetary grants or procured and distributed in case of in-kind grants) by the 
SEPMU and CEP PIG solely or in partnership with an Implementing Partner based on the provisions of the design. 
The  selection  of  Implementing  Partners  for  this  purpose  will  be  based  on  the  following  provisions  under  section 
3.4.1.  
Loans: In the case of micro-credits and loans (inclusive of refinancing), the SEPMU and CEP PIG will rely on Partner 
Financial  Institutions  (PFI)  either  as  nominated  in  the  project  design,  or  as  competitively  selected  based  on  the 
provisions of the Financing Agreement and National Law. 
Selection of Grant or Refinancing Partners 
Grants: In some cases, the SEPMU and CEP PIG may not be the direct entity responsible for disbursing grants. 
Disbursement of monetary grants is sometimes conducted through intermediaries, such as Implementing Partners 
(I.P.).  The  engagement  with  such  I.P.’s  can  be  made  through  a  proper  procurement  process  resulting  in  an 
agreement with each partner. This means that such first level agreements shall be duly registered separately in the 
PP with the proper selection method of the I.P. When the I.P. is stated in the Financing Agreement, the selection 
process  will be SSS (Single Source  Selection). Otherwise, it would be through a competitive process. The value, 
where applicable, of such agreements may be composed of several components depending on the case: (i) the fees 
that such I.P.’s charge for the services entrusted to them; and (ii) the other fees and expenses that the I.P. may be 
required to spend in providing support to beneficiaries (e.g. training, events, coaching, etc.). In very rare cases, if 
provisioned in the design, the grant funds may also be included in the agreement with the I.P. In any case, the I.P. 
agreement  should  be  processed  in  NOTUS  (No  Objection  Tracking  and  Utility  System)  and  recorded  in  the  CMT 
(Contract Management Tools). 
Whenever  the  grant  funds  to  be  disbursed  to  beneficiaries  are  included  in  the  I.P.  agreement,  the  I.P.  will  be 
responsible for the selection of those beneficiaries through a Call for Proposals (CfP) issued and managed by the I.P. 
In this case, the selection process is entered in the PP of the I.P. (and in NOTUS if subject to prior review) and the 
resulting grant contracts are entered in the CMT. In the other case, where the grant funds are to be disbursed by 
the SEPMU and CEP PIG to beneficiaries, the CfP shall be issued and managed by the SEPMU and CEP PIG. In 
this case, the CfP is entered in NOTUS (if subject to prior review) and the resulting grant contracts are entered in 
the CMT. For both cases, details of issuing the CfP and awarding the grants are found in section 3.4.2 below.  
Loans:  PFI’s  must  meet  eligibility  criteria  set  in  Government  Decisions  and  following  national  legislation.  Where 
Ministry  of  Finance  RT  has  a  role  in  the  selection  of  such  partners,  such  agencies  may  be  a  signatory  to  such 
Agreements. The draft agreement shall be subject to the prior review by IFAD; each such agreement shall be planned 
in the PP and registered in the CMT. However, credit and refinancing agreements (second-level agreements such as 
micro-credits) with third parties are neither entered in NOTUS nor in the CMT, but should be maintained in a separate 
CR.  
The table below summarizes the various types of agreements/contracts normally associated with grants and loans 
and specifies whether use of NOTUS and CMT are required: 
Type of Agreement/activity 
Grant Call for proposals launched by SEPMU and CEP PIG and 
subsequent Grant contracts signed between  SEPMU and  CEP 
PIG and beneficiaries (first-level agreements) 
Agreement  between  SEPMU  and  CEP  PIG  and  I.P.  for  the 
disbursement of monetary grants (first-level agreement) 
Agreement  between  SEPMU  and  CEP  PIG  and  I.P.  for  the 
procurement of in-kind grants (first-level agreement) 
Agreement  between  SEPMU  and  CEP  PIG  and  PFI  for  the 
refinancing of micro-credits (first-level agreement) 
Grant Call for proposals launched by I.P. and subsequent grant 
contracts  signed  between  I.P.  and  beneficiaries  (second-level 
agreements) for either monetary or in-kind grants 
Procurement of grant assets by SEPMU and CEP PIG (in-kind 
grants) 
Procurement of grant assets by I.P. (in-kind grants)  
Loan contracts signed between PFI and borrowers (second-level 
agreements) 
+ if above the prior review threshold as per the LtB. 
Entered in NOTUS  Entered in CMT 
Yes+ 
Yes+ 
Yes+ 
Yes+ 
Yes+ 
Yes+ 
Yes+ 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No* 
44 This Section refers to the Project Grants to Beneficiary individuals or entities concerning scholarships, research grants. 
198 
* even though not entered in the CMT, those contracts are entered in a dedicated and separate CR 
specific to the I.P./PFI. 
Table - Guidance on whether NOTUS and CMT apply for some types of contracts or agreements 
Grant Beneficiary Selection  
As mentioned under section 3.3.1 above, Grants provisioned in the Financing Agreement shall be openly advertised 
by the SEPMU and CEP PIG and/or an Implementing Partner (I.P.) as the case may be. In either case, the process 
shall follow the following steps: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Planning the call(s) for proposals in the respective PP(s) (SEPMU’s and CEP PIG’s PP or the I.P.’s PP as the 
case may be); the total value of grants provisioned under the CfP and the method used shall be the basis 
for the determination of the review procedure (prior or post). Grants award processes can be done through 
one of the services’ methods; 
Preparation of the Request for Proposals (by SEPMU and CEP PIG or I.P.) using the appropriate selection 
method  and  the  detailed  Terms  of  Reference  elaborating  the  requirements,  selection  criteria,  evaluation 
criteria, etc. for award of grants in multiple contracts; since the ceiling of the grant is usually fixed, selection 
should  ideally  follow  the  Fixed  Budget  selection.  The  template  to  be  used  shall  be  reviewed  by  IFAD  in 
advance and N.O. issued for adoption of the template; 
The use of REOI facilitates shortlisting of qualified applicants who later submit proposals in response to the 
RFP; all applicants meeting the eligibility criteria can be shortlisted for the next stage of the application. 
However, REOI is not mandatory as the CfP  for  grants may be launched directly subject to N.O. without 
threshold limitation;  
The grant proposals are evaluated based on the pre-disclosed  criteria, and an evaluation report is prepared 
recommending  award  of  grants  in  the  requisite  numbers  within  the  grant  cap  and  total  ceilings  set; 
evaluation shall include scoring of applications based on the evaluation criteria of the RFP to (i) identify those 
who pass from those who don’t and (ii) enable selection of the passing applicants that will be awarded grants 
in case the total number of eligible and passing applications exceeds the financial resources available. In the 
latter case, the selection will be starting from the top ranked applicant downwards; 
- 
-  When an I.P. launches the Call for Proposals, the I.P. will submit to SEPMU and CEP PIG the evaluation of 
the applications as well as the applications received for SEPMU and CEP PIG verification; SEPMU and CEP 
PIG will prepare a verification report approving/amending the evaluation process as is necessary;  
The resulting evaluation and selection reports shall be uploaded on NOTUS. In case the CfP is managed by 
the I.P., the SEPMU and CEP PIG will handle NOTUS submissions. If applicable, IFAD’s review will ensure 
consistency with the Financing Agreement, PIM, and CfP. Once N.O. is issued by IFAD, the grant contracting 
process with the selected beneficiaries may start by signature of Agreements by the SEPMU and CEP PIG 
or the I.P. as the case may be;  
All monetary grant agreements disbursed directly by the SEPMU and CEP PIG will be entered in the CMT. 
Monetary grants disbursed by an I.P. will also be recorded in the CMT;  
All In-kind grant agreements where the distributed assets are procured by the SEPMU and CEP PIG will be 
entered in the CMT with a monetary value set to zero. The purpose is to avoid double accounting for the 
grant amount since the value of the grant will appear in the procurement contract through which the SEPMU 
and CEP PIG will procure the subject of the grants (assets). Similarly, in-kind grant agreements where the 
assets are procured by an I.P. are registered in the CMT with a value of zero as the Partner will be procuring 
those assets through a separate contract.  
- 
- 
The flowcharts below summarize the basic steps in the selection process of grant beneficiaries: 
Figure 4 - Grants through Implementing Partners 
199 
Partnering Agreements signed by PMU and I.P.Selection of I.P. by PMU: based on Design; or competitively Selected; or mandated by lawIFAD N.O. on Partners and Agreements if prior reviewRecording I.P. in  CMT by PMU Calls for Proposals Prepared by I.P.Check if CfP is in PP; if not, PP upgrade by I.P.IFAD N.O. on each CfP through NOTUSAnnouncements by I.P.Screening and Evaluation of Applications by I.P.Evaluation Report(s) & Applications verified by PMUIFAD N.O. on each Eval. Report through NOTUSGrant Contracts Signed by I.P.Disbursement/Transfer by I.P.Grants through Implementing Partners Recording in CMTCash/EscrowYESI.P. PP upgrade with ICB/NCBNOProcurement Process Continues (N.O. through NOTUS handled by PMU)ICB/NCB Prepared by I.P. 
Figure 5 - Grants through PMU 
200 
Grants through PMU Calls for Proposals Prepared by PMUPMU PP upgrade with Calls for ProposalsIFAD N.O. on each CfP through NOTUSAnnouncements by PMUScreening and Evaluation of Applications by PMUEvaluation Report(s) prepared by PMUIFAD N.O. on each Eval. Report through NOTUSGrant Contracts Signed by PMU & BeneficiariesContracts are registered in CMT by PMUPMU PP upgrade with ICB/NCBCash/EscrowNODisbursement/Transfer by PMUYESICB/NCB Prepared by PMUProcurement Process Continues through NOTUS 
ANNEX to Chapter 7 – Terms of reference 
PROCUREMENT CONSULTANT 
Responsible to: Project Director  
Qualifications and Experience  
A  higher  degree  or  an  equivalent  qualification  in  Law,  Economy,  Management  or  equivalent  with  sound 
knowledge of the procurement procedures applicable under the legislation of  the Republic of  Tajikistan  and 
foreign donors‟  funded Programmes. A minimum  of  three years working experience  and  technical  capacity, 
and proven ability to work in a multi-disciplinary team. Familiarity with relevant legislation and procedures of 
the Republic of Tajikistan. Good analytical skills, skills to write reports and other materials. Fluent Russian and 
English, both spoken and written. Computer literate. The selected candidate will have a pragmatic, creative 
and energetic approach to problem solving and decision-making and the capacity to operate effectively with 
suppliers.  
Job Description  
Under the direct supervision of the SEPMU/PIG CEP Director the Procurement Specialist would be responsible 
for procurement  of  goods,  works and services  in the framework of the CASP+. Within this overall  role, the 
following tasks would be the specific responsibility of the SEPMU/PIG CEP Procurement Specialist.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To fulfill all obligations concerning the procurement of all kinds of works, goods and services in 
accordance  with  the  applicable  procurement  guidelines  of  IFAD  and  other  relevant  project 
documents; 
Prepare the annual Procurement Plans in accordance with the Annual Work Plans and Budgets and 
ensure their timely implementation;  
Draft the public announcement for each tender;  
Prepare Bidding Documents for each contract in accordance with the approved Standard Bidding 
Documents;  
Coordinate bid opening, evaluation and preparation of required documentation such as minutes of 
bid opening ceremony, written proposals and recommendations for contract award;  
Participate in Bid Opening and Evaluation Committee meetings and prepare the minutes;  
Prepare and submit bid evaluation reports and recommendations for contract award to the Tender 
Committee for review and approval.  
Prepare  and  submit to IFAD  all required information  for  prior  review and  no-objection for bids, 
evaluation, contracts award as per the Financing Agreement requirements.  
After agreement with IFAD for contract award initiate the contract signing procedure; 
Maintain a Contract Register for all the contracts signed under the project; 
Coordinate  all  procurement  procedures  within  SEPMU/PIG  CEP  regarding  the  CASP+ 
implementation;  
Carry out proper monitoring of the procurement process; 
Administer contracts concluded under the projects managed by the  SEPMU/PIG CEP, as well as 
with the Government agencies for specific works and\or components of the projects; 
Keep, systematize and store procurement files including bid correspondence. 
201 
8.  FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
CASP+ Financial Manual is available at the file linked below 
202 
CASP+ Financial Manual 05.07.2021.docx 
ANNEX to Chapter 8 – Terms of reference 
Terms of Reference (TOR): Financial Manager 
Terms of reference: Financial Manager 
Financial Manager of (SEPMU/CEP) 
Post title: 
Organisation: (SEPMU/CEP) 
Location:                Tajikistan, Dushanbe 
Name of Project: 
Duration: 
Type of contract: 
Closing date:  XXX 
CASP+ 
One-year renewable 
Fixed term 
Objective 
The main objective of the assignment is to maintain accounting procedures and manage activities related to 
the project financial management arrangements. In his/her activity the Finance Manager shall be guided by 
the Project Implementation Manual and current legislation of the Republic of Tajikistan.   
Scope of Services and Key Tasks  
The Financial Manager's tasks and responsibilities include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following: 
 
 
 
 
 
ensuring proper management of project funds and their disbursement in accordance with the accounting, budgeting, 
and financial control procedures established for the SEPMU/CEP in the light of IFAD and other donors requirements; 
preparing, and securing approval of budgets based on the operating plans of the projects' subcomponents; 
periodically evaluating  the  financial  reporting and  internal control arrangements  for  the projects' subcomponents 
and preparing proposals for improvements; 
performing a monthly review of the projects’ general ledgers with a view to identifying and clarifying any errors and 
anomalies, and particularly with reference to receivables and payables which have been overdue for more than one 
month; 
scrutinizing  financial  reports  submitted  by  project  components  and  subcomponents  and  agencies  or  institutions 
implementing or managing such components and subcomponents to ensure that they follow established procedures, 
and to take corrective action where necessary; 
  monitoring the status of budget utilization by project component and category of expenditure and reporting to the 
 
 
 
Director on any significant variances, together with recommendations for appropriate actions; 
liaising  with  officials  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  of  the  Tajikistan  other  concerned 
government bodies on financial  issues pertaining to the  SEPMU  and  the projects, for which  it is responsible, and 
particularly on the timely payment of government counterpart funds; 
paying periodic visits to remote project locations to check the operation of the system of internal control and control 
of reports submitted by the components; 
ensuring the timely preparation of financial, activity and monitoring reports to the Republic of Tajikistan Government, 
donors,  and  providing  the  projects'  internal  and  external  auditors  with  all  information,  documentation  and 
explanations required for the purposes of audit; 
  Review and confirm the final version of the interim financial reports (IFRs) required for withdrawing funds from IFAD 
as indicated in the LTB/R; 
approving and updating the SEPMU Financial Manual and ensuring adherence to its provisions; 
preparing TORs for the annual external audits; technical and financial assessment of auditors’ proposals; preparing 
annual  financial  statements  and  explanatory  notes  in  accordance  with  donor  requirements  and  with  IAS,  to  the 
extent applicable; agreeing with the auditors the form of their report; 
organizing and providing training workshops in accounting and financial management topics for finance staff of the 
SEPMU and components; 
supervising the operation of the projects' Designated Accounts and project accounts in accordance with IFAD and 
other donors' procedures; 
standing in for the Financial Unit specialists and performing their routine duties during periods when they are absent;  
Preparation and submission Government required financial reports to relevant Government Agencies; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
203 
  Responsible for consolidation of all financial reports for both SEPMU & CEP, coordination with external auditors on 
 
audit for all project accounts and submission to IFAD final consolidated report; 
Ensure  that  procedures  for  collecting,  checking  and  preparing  documentation  required  for  verifying  Supplier's 
invoices are maintained. Supervise record of payment documentation and payments to Suppliers. Ensure that all 
payments are made on a timely basis and according to contract terms and conditions as well as the IFAD relevant 
guidelines, regulations, legal agreements and other applicable documents; 
  Review and maintain appropriate Fixed Assets register to safeguard assets of the project; 
 
Perform such other duties as may be required by the SEPMU Director. 
Institutional Organization 
The Financial Manager will work closely with SEPMU staff, CEP staff, all partners, implementing agencies of the 
project and its components, government agencies and other organizations that have a direct link to the project 
implementation.   
Reporting and Approval  
The Financial Manager will report to SEPMU Director who will evaluate performance of his/her responsibilities 
every year. 
Client’s Contribution 
The client will provide a local specialist with relevant information on the Project, the basic documents of the 
Project, procurement plans and available technical materials on assignments described in the scope of work. 
The  client  will  provide  a  specialist  with  necessary  working  conditions  in  SEPMU  (room,  furniture,  office 
telephone, access to Internet, etc.). 
Qualification Requirements 
  MBA or equivalent qualification in accounting and finance for international standard; 
  Broad experience of budgeting, accounting and reporting procedures of IFAD and other donors; 
  Knowledge of Tajik Accounting and Tax regulations; 
  Hands-on  experience  of  setting  up  and  running  a  project  financial  management  and  accounting  information 
system in accordance with best international practice; 
  Complete, practice-based command of double-entry bookkeeping;  
  Ability to present financial information in a clear, concise manner and in formats suitable for non-specialists; 
 
  Experience  in  training  staff  of  local  counterparts  and  subcontractors  in  disbursement  procedures  and  in 
Fluency in Tajik and Russian; English is an asset; 
accounting theory and practice; 
  Computer literate; familiarity with Windows-based programs such as Word and Excel, PowerPoint, 1C Accounting 
Program and other MIS.  
  CAP Certificate (Certified Accountant Practitioner) will be considered as  advantage; 
Duration of Appointment 
The period of assignment in the position will be initially 12 months and may be extended by mutual agreement, 
with probation period of three months. 
Terms of Reference (TOR): Financial Specialist 
Terms of reference: Financial Specialist 
Post title: 
Organisation: (SEPMU) 
Location: 
Tajikistan, Dushanbe 
Financial Specialist of (SEPMU) 
204 
Name of Project: 
Duration: 
Type of contract: 
Closing date:  XXX 
Objective 
CASP+ 
One-year renewable 
Fixed term 
The  main  objective  of  the  assignment  is  to  maintain  accounting  procedures  and  support  SEPMU  Finance 
Manager  in  managing  the  activities  related  to  the  project  financial  management  arrangements.  In  his/her 
activity the Finance Specialist shall be guided by the Project Implementation Manual and current legislation of 
the Republic of Tajikistan.   
Scope of Services and Key Tasks  
The Financial Specialist's tasks and responsibilities include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following: 
  Support the Finance Manager in ensuring proper management of project funds and their disbursement in accordance 
with the accounting, budgeting, and financial control procedures established for the SEPMU/CEP in the light of IFAD 
and other donors requirements; 
  Assist  the  Finance  Manager  in  preparing,  and  securing  approval  of  budgets  based  on  the  operating  plans  of  the 
projects' subcomponents; 
  Assist  in  the  periodic  evaluating  of  the  financial  reporting  and  internal  control  arrangements  for  the  projects' 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subcomponents and preparing proposals for improvements; 
performing a monthly first review of the projects’ general ledgers with a view to identifying and clarifying any errors 
and anomalies, and particularly with reference to receivables and payables which have been overdue for more than 
one month; this is subject to the Finance Manager final review. 
scrutinizing of financial reports submitted by project components and subcomponents and agencies or institutions 
implementing or managing such components and subcomponents to ensure that they follow established procedures, 
and to take corrective action where necessary; subject to the Finance Manager final review 
support the Finance Manager in monitoring the status of budget utilization by project component and category of 
expenditure  and  reporting  to  the  Director  on  any  significant  variances,  together  with  recommendations  for 
appropriate actions; 
paying periodic visits to remote project locations to check the operation of the system of internal control and control 
of reports submitted by the components; 
follow up on timely preparation of financial, activity and monitoring reports to the Republic of Tajikistan Government, 
donors,  and  providing  the  projects'  internal  and  external  auditors  with  all  information,  documentation  and 
explanations required for the purposes of audit; 
preparing and submitting the interim financial reports (IFRs) required for withdrawing funds from IFAD as indicated 
in the LTB/R; 
play a key role and be proactive in updating SEPMU Financial Manual and ensuring adherence to its provisions; 
preparing drafts of TORs for the annual external audits; technical and financial assessment of auditors’ proposals; 
preparing annual financial statements and explanatory notes in accordance with donor requirements and with IAS, 
to the extent applicable; agreeing with the auditors the form of their report; 
support the finance manager in organizing and providing training workshops in accounting and financial management 
topics for finance staff of the SEPMU and components; 
standing in for the Financial Unit specialists and performing their routine duties during periods when they are absent;  
assist in the preparation and submission of Government required financial reports to relevant Government Agencies; 
assist  in  maintaining  procedures  for  collecting,  checking  and  preparing  documentation  required  for  verifying 
Supplier's  invoices.  Supervise  record  of  payment  documentation  and  payments  to  Suppliers.  Ensure  that  all 
payments are made on a timely basis and according to contract terms and conditions as well as the IFAD relevant 
guidelines, regulations, legal agreements and other applicable documents; 
prepare, update and monitor Fixed Assets register to safeguard assets of the project; 
Perform such other duties as may be required by the SEPMU Director and Finance Manager. 
Institutional Organization 
The Financial Manager will work closely with SEPMU staff, CEP staff, all partners, implementing agencies of the 
project and its components, government agencies and other organizations that have a direct link to the project 
implementation.   
205 
Reporting and Approval  
The Financial Specialist will report to SEPMU Director and Finance Manager who will evaluate performance of 
his/her responsibilities every year. 
Client’s Contribution 
The client will provide a local specialist with relevant information on the Project, the basic documents of the 
Project, procurement plans and available technical materials on assignments described in the scope of work. 
The  client  will  provide  a  specialist  with  necessary  working  conditions  in  SEPMU  (room,  furniture,  office 
telephone, access to Internet, etc.). 
Qualification Requirements 
  Bachelor degree in accounting and/or finance for international standard; 
  MBA or equivalent qualification in accounting and finance for international standard is preferred; 
  Experience of budgeting, accounting and reporting procedures of IFAD and other donors; 
  Knowledge of Tajik Accounting and Tax regulations; 
  Experience  in  project  financial  management  and  accounting  information  system  in  accordance  with  best 
international practice; 
  Complete, practice-based command of double-entry bookkeeping;  
  Ability to present financial information in a clear, concise manner and in formats suitable for non-specialists; 
 
  Experience  in  training  staff  of  local  counterparts  and  subcontractors  in  disbursement  procedures  and  in 
Fluency in Tajik and Russian; English is an asset; 
accounting theory and practice; 
  Computer literate; familiarity with Windows-based programs such as Word and Excel, PowerPoint, 1C Accounting 
Program and other MIS.  
Duration of Appointment 
The period of assignment in the position will be initially 12 months and may be extended by mutual agreement, 
with probation period of three months. 
Terms of Reference (TOR): Disbursement Specialist 
Terms of reference: Disbursement Specialist 
Disbursement Specialist of (SEPMU/CEP) 
Post title: 
Organisation: (SEPMU/CEP) 
Location: 
Name of Project: 
Duration: 
Type of contract: 
Closing date:  XXX 
Tajikistan, Dushanbe 
CASP+ 
One-year renewable 
Fixed term 
Objective 
The main objective of the assignment is to assist in maintaining accounting procedures and activities related 
to the project financial  management arrangements.  In  his/her activity the  Disbursement  Specialist  shall be 
guided by the Project Implementation Manual and current legislation of the Republic of Tajikistan.   
Scope of Services and Key Tasks  
206 
The Disbursement Specialist shall perform with all responsibility the works specified in the Terms of Reference 
and  scope  of  services  in  detail.  The  main  responsibilities  of  the  Disbursement  Specialist  (hereinafter,  the 
Consultant) include but do not limit to: 
 
Prepare  Withdrawal  Applications,  Statement  of  Expenditures,  Interim  Financial  Reports  package,  Direct 
Payments  in  accordance  with  the  Disbursement  Guidelines  of  IFAD  and  other  donors  financing  projects 
implemented by SEPMU; 
  Keep accounting; provide duly control of the project funds and their cash flow and payments following the 
adopted procedures and standards of the Republic of Tajikistan accounting in accordance with IFAD and 
other donors’ requirements; 
  Make  payments  on  advancing  the  component  expenses  according  to  their  requests;  pay  out  SEPMU 
 
expenses from the Project(s) designated accounts;  
Process the component reports and primary documents; enter all accounting transactions and daily bank 
operations into 1С Accounting Program according to bank statements; 
  Make  cash  and  advance  payments  from  the  project  cash  on  the  project operation  and  other  expenses; 
enter  all  daily  accounting  transactions  into  1С  Accounting  Program;  their  correct  classification  and 
proportion of expenses according to their categories;  
Prepare all confirming and supporting documents on the Project(s) expenses for withdrawal application; 
Prepare monthly reports on fund cash flow on all available accounts of the Project(s); 
Prepare monthly and quarterly reports for the TR Ministry of Finance, IFAD and other donors;   
 
 
 
  Assist the Financial Manager to prepare Interim financial reports, financial statements for auditors during 
 
 
Project(s) audit; 
Process accounting records for all temporary and permanent assets; participate in an annual inventory of 
the Project(s) and its component equipment; 
Prepare various reports, information materials at the request of the Ministry of Finance, IFAD, other donors 
and organizations; 
  Replace  financial  manager/specialist,  accountant-cashier;  perform  their  responsibilities  during  their 
absence;  
  Carry out other appropriate responsibilities upon request of the SEPMU Director and/or Financial Manager. 
Reporting and approval 
The disbursement specialist shall report to SEPMU Director, Financial Manager who will evaluate performance 
of his/her responsibilities on a regular basis.  
Institutional arrangement 
The  disbursement  specialist  will  work  closely  with  SEPMU  staff,  all  partners,  implementing  agencies  of  the 
project  and  its  components,  government  agencies  and  other  organizations  that  have  a  direct  link  to  the 
project(s) implementation.   
Client’s contribution 
The client will provide a specialist with relevant information on the Project, the basic documents of the 
Project and available technical materials on assignments described in the scope of work. The client will 
provide a specialist with necessary working conditions in SEPMU and ensure his (her) all necessary materials 
and tools to carry out this assignment. 
Qualification and experience   
The disbursement specialist should meet the following qualification criteria: 
  Higher education in accounting and finances; 
  At least 5-year work experience in accounting; 
  At least 3-year relevant work experience in donor funded project finances;  
  Good  knowledge  of  financial  management,  Republic  of  Tajikistan  accountancy,  tax  policy  and  other 
legislative financial norms; 
  Knowledge  of  procedures  of  international  organization  financial  management  such  as  IFAD/other 
donors etc.; 
Fluency in Russian and Tajik, knowledge of English is an asset; 
 
  Compulsory knowledge of 1С Accounting Program; 
  Compulsory computer knowledge of Windows, such as knowledge of Microsoft Office package. 
Duration of Assignment 
The period of assignment in the position will be initially 12 months and may be extended by agreement of the 
parties. 
207 
Terms of Reference (TOR): Accountant 
Terms of reference: Accountant 
Accountant of (SEPMU/CEP) 
Post title: 
Organisation: (SEPMU/CEP) 
Location: 
Name of Project: 
Duration: 
Type of contract: 
Closing date:  XXX 
Tajikistan, Dushanbe 
CASP+ 
One-year renewable 
Fixed term 
Objective 
The main objective of the assignment is support the finance unit to maintain accounting procedures and 
manage activities related to the project financial management arrangements. In his/her activity the Finance 
Manager shall be guided by the Project Implementation Manual and current legislation of the Republic of 
Tajikistan.   
Scope of Services and Key Tasks  
The Accountant must responsibly perform the activities detailed in the Terms of Reference and Scope of 
Services. The Accountant‘s duties include the following: 
  Disbursements for advancing the project components’ costs according to applications, payment of the 
SEPMU costs from the project designated accounts; 
Preparation of monthly cash flow reports for all available project accounts; 
Inventory of fixed assets, assets procured under the projects, monitoring and the like; 
 
 
  Accounting, ensuring proper control over the project (projects) financial resources, flow of resources 
and disbursements following the adopted procedures and accounting standards of the Tajik Republic 
complying with the requirements of IFAD and other donors; 
Processing the reports by components and primary documents, keeping the entire entries and daily 
banking operations in the 1C accounting software according to bank statements; 
Processing the advance reports of both the SEPMU staff and the components’ staff; 
 
  Keeping the electronic cash book and control over bank statements; 
  Control over the fuel consumption and keeping the SOE; 
  Cash  payments  and  advances  from  the  project  (projects)  cash  for  operating  and  other  project 
 
 
 
 
(projects) costs; 
Preparation of all supporting documents on the project (projects)costs accompanying the withdrawal 
application; 
Preparation of monthly cash flow reports for all available project (projects) accounts;  
Participation in preparation of various reports, information materials at the request of the Ministry of 
Finance, IFAD and other donors or organizations; 
  Act  as  a  Disbursement  Specialist,  Finance  Manager,  Finance  Specialist  and  perform  specific  duties 
during their absence; 
  Conduct regular reconciliations of the bank account balances to the project accounts; 
 
Perform other relevant duties at the request of the SEPMU management and/or the SEPMU Finance 
Manager. 
Reporting and approval 
The accountant will report to the SEPMU Director, Finance Manager who will assess fulfillment of his/her duties 
regularly.  
Institutional arrangement 
The accountant will work closely with the SEPMU staff, with all partners, implementing agencies of the 
project(s) and its(their) components, state institutions and other organizations relative to the project(s) 
implementation.  
208 
Client’s contribution 
The Client will provide the Consultant with relevant information on the Project(s), the basic documents of the 
Project(s), work plans and available technical materials on assignments described in the scope of work. 
The Client will provide the employee with working place in SEPMU as well as all necessary materials and tools 
needed to carry out this assignment. 
Assignment venue 
The accountant shall perform main part of works at SEPMU office. If necessary, the Consultant shall travel to 
districts and regions of the country to perform certain project(s) tasks. 
Qualification and Experience 
The Accountant shall meet the following criteria and qualifications: 
  Higher education in accounting and finance; 
  At least 3-year experience in accounting; 
  At least 3-year experience in international organizations for a similar position; 
  Good knowledge of procedures for financial management, accounting of the Tajik Republic, tax policy 
and other legislative regulations on financial management; 
  Knowledge of the procedures for  financial management in international organizations such as IFAD, 
other donors etc.; 
  Good knowledge of Russian and Tajik languages, knowledge of English is preferable; 
  Mandatory knowledge of the 1C accounting software; 
  Mandatory knowledge of computer programs based on Microsoft Office. 
Duration of work 
The period of this position assignment initially will be 12 (twelve) months and may be extended by agreement 
of the parties, with a trial period of 3 months. 
Terms of Reference (TOR): Accountant Assistant 
Terms of reference: Accountant Assistant 
Accountant Assistant of (SEPMU/CEP) 
Post title: 
Organisation: (SEPMU/CEP) 
Location: 
Name of Project: 
Duration: 
Type of contract: 
Closing date:  XXX 
Tajikistan, Dushanbe 
CASP+ 
One-year renewable 
Fixed term 
Objective 
The main objective of the assignment is support the finance unit/staff to maintain accounting procedures and 
manage activities related to the project financial management arrangements. In his/her activity the Finance 
Manager shall be guided by the Project Implementation Manual and current legislation of the Republic of 
Tajikistan.   
Scope of Services and Key Tasks  
The Accountant Assistant must responsibly perform the activities detailed in the Terms of Reference and 
Scope of Services. The Accountant Assistant‘s duties include the following: 
209 
  Assist  in  preparing  disbursements  for  advancing  the  project  components’  costs  according  to 
applications, payment of the SEPMU costs from the project designated accounts; 
preparation of cash disbursement vouchers for approval; 
 
participation in project audits; including preparation and timely submission of required information;  
 
ensure proper documentation for payments for maintenance of project equipment and vehicles; 
 
  Assist in updating the fixed asset register by ensuring correct tagging of assets and by inputting correct 
information about location of asset, invoice/payment details, etc;  
  Assist the Accountant and the Disbursement Specialist in recording all expenditures/receipt, monthly 
bank reconciliation for operating/Designated accounts in 1C accounting software; 
Proper documentation and monthly check for fuel consumption; 
 
  Assist  the  Accountant  in  project  cash  payments  and  advances  from  the  project  (projects)  cash  for 
operating and other project (projects) costs; 
  Assist the Accountant in preparation of all supporting documents on the project (projects)costs; 
  As requested, assist the finance staff in preparation of various reports, information materials at the 
request of the Ministry of Finance, IFAD and other donors or organizations; 
  Act as an Accountant to perform specific duties during the Accountant absence; 
  Assist  in  conducting  and  filing  regular  reconciliations  of  the  bank  account  balances  to  the  project 
 
accounts; 
Perform other relevant duties at the request of the SEPMU management and/or the SEPMU Finance 
Manager. 
Reporting and approval 
The  accountant  Assistant  will  report  to  the  SEPMU  Director,  Finance  Manager,  Accountant    who  will  assess 
fulfillment of his/her duties regularly.  
Institutional arrangement 
The accountant Assistant will work closely with the SEPMU staff, with all partners, implementing agencies of 
the project(s) and its(their) components, state institutions and other organizations relative to the project(s) 
implementation.  
Client’s contribution 
The Client will provide the Consultant with relevant information on the Project(s), the basic documents of the 
Project(s), work plans and available technical materials on assignments described in the scope of work. 
The Client will provide the employee with working place in SEPMU as well as all necessary materials and tools 
needed to carry out this assignment. 
Assignment venue 
The accountant Assistant shall perform main part of works at SEPMU office. If necessary, the Accountant 
Assistant shall travel with other finance staff to districts and regions of the country to perform certain 
project(s) tasks. 
Qualification and Experience 
The Accountant shall meet the following criteria and qualifications: 
  Bachelor degree in accounting and finance; 
 
 
  Good knowledge of procedures for financial management, accounting of the Tajik Republic, tax policy 
0-2 years experience in accounting; 
0-2 years experience in international organizations for a similar position; 
and other legislative regulations on financial management; 
  Knowledge of the procedures for financial management in international organizations such as IFAD, 
other donors etc.; 
  Good knowledge of Russian and Tajik languages, knowledge of English is preferable; 
  Knowledge of the 1C accounting software; 
210 
  Mandatory knowledge of computer programs based on Microsoft Office. 
Duration of work 
The period of this position assignment initially will be 12 (twelve) months and may be extended by agreement 
of the parties, with a trial period of 3 months. 
211 
======================  
CASP+ PIM -- End Page 
212 
Tajikistan
Community-based Agricultural Support Project Plus (CASP+)
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Project Risk Matrix (IPRM)
Mission Dates:
01 April - 09 June 2021
Document Date:
16/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002204
5854-TJ
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
1/14
Risk Category / Subcategory
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Substantial
Moderate
Overall Summary
Country Context
Political Commitment
Governance
Macroeconomic
Fragility and Security
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Policy Development and Implementation
Environment and Climate Context
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Technical Soundness
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Project Financial Management
Project Organization and Staffing
Project Budgeting
Project Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Project Internal Controls
Project Accounting and Financial Reporting
Project External Audit
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Accountability and Transparency
Capability in Public Procurement
Public Procurement Processes
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Cultural Heritage
Indigenous People
Labour and Working Conditions
Community Health and Safety
Physical and Economic Resettlement
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Substantial
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
Moderate
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
Moderate
Low
Risk Category / Subcategory
Inherent risk
Residual risk
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and
hazards
2/14
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Low
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Stakeholder Grievances
Overall
Country Context
Political Commitment
Risk:
There is a risk that a Tajikistan’s political developments result in delays or the
potential reversal of key political decisions and commitments that underpin the
project’s success. Furthermore, there is a high risk that Tajikistan’s government
would decline future financing agreements with IFAD if the current financing terms
remain. The worsened economic situation is likely to affect the level of political
commitment of the country in a near future, and IFAD may lose the ground for other
donors with more favourable debt sustainability framework
Mitigations:
IFAD needs to customize its development approach in Tajikistan. There is room for
harmonizing approaches with other donors intervening in the country. Softened
lending terms will be key for a sustained partnership with this country.
Governance
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
There is a risk that Tajikistan exhibits governance failures that may undermine
project implementation and achievement of project development objectives. Under
these circumstances, chances are that the resources allocated to the project
activities may be diverted for purposes other than those initially intended. Even
where there is purposeful use, the efficiency will be impacted.
Mitigations:
The mitigation measures include regular follow-up of project implementation and
management, capacity building and auditing. The capacity building activities
include trainings, awareness raising, and participation in forums for sharing
knowledge and best practices. Policy dialogue may also help in incentivizing
government to take corrective measures.
Macroeconomic
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Macroeconomic policies might undermine government capacity to mobilize
counterpart funding, and significantly impacting market dynamics of value chains.
From IFAD perspectives, the perceived risks include the country’s eventual
defaulting on debt service.
Mitigations:
Working out realistic debt sustainability framework with the country, and supporting
the government in implementing the necessary reforms aiming to reinvigorate
private sector development and to restore a diversified sustainable business and
investment environment.
Fragility and Security
Substantial
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
3/14
Tajikistan is vulnerable to natural and man-made shocks including civil unrest,
conflict, and/or weak governance structures and institutions. Tajikistan is afflicted
with problems, such as poverty, food scarcity, limited freshwater resources, a high
rate of debt, and limited employment opportunities among others. Weak
governance and limited government capacity to address these problems coupled
with exacerbated economic crisis risk to generate destabilization, unrest, and youth
migration in search of remunerative employments in neighbouring countries.
Mitigations:
Policy options placing focus on: (1) capacity-building of local stakeholders to build
resilience and (2) increased efforts in measures to mitigate fragility in the country
and improve the quality of life of all Tajiks.
Sector Strategies and Policies
Policy alignment
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
The risk that Tajikistan’s strategies and policies governing the rural and agricultural
sector are not sufficiently pro-poor and/or aligned with IFAD priorities (e.g. on land,
environment, climate, gender, indigenous peoples, nutrition, youth, private sector
engagement), undermining project implementation and the achievement of project
development objectives. However and so far, IFAD interventions align pretty well
with priorities defined by the government of Tajikistan (country strategic note in
2016 and COSOP 2019-2024).
Mitigations:
Through this collaborative framework, IFAD supports the country’s agricultural
sector, and works toward increasing the nutritional status and incomes in poor rural
communities, building the capacity of central and local institutions to improve
governance. The mitigations measures here include maintaining and reinforcing
policy dialogue in order to maintain the engagement, and to ensure always that
interventions align with national priorities. Political and social stability is key to
maintaining the engagement framework.
Policy Development and Implementation
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
A limited coordination between institutions for policy dialogue at inter-ministerial
level, and limited communication flow between central and decentralized levels
would risk reducing the commitment and engagement of all relevant actors. The
risk that Tajikistan’s strategies and policies governing the rural and agricultural
sector lack a sound evidence base, are not representative of rural peoples’
organizations views, are not adequately resourced or supported by legal/regulatory
frameworks, and/or are unsustainable, undermining project implementation and the
achievement of project development objectives.
Mitigations:
CASP+ will mitigate this risk by supporting an inclusive approach for project
decision making and monitoring. It envisages substantial capacity development,
including training where required and on-the-job learning opportunities, embracing
all relevant institutions, and monitor implementation closely including via
georeferencing Mitigation measures include continued and strengthened donor
coordination and policy dialogue with government as a whole, and with key
ministries; sustained and enhanced capacity building, and periodic reassessment of
capital investment needs by the Government. These measures will help the country
in its attempts to organize its economy for growth, and to capacitate its public
institutions for sound delivery of public and investment projects. The government is
undertaking many reforms aiming at solidifying institutions and improving the quality
of governance and decision-making.
Environment and Climate Context
Substantial
Moderate
Project vulnerability to environmental conditions
Risk:
4/14
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Available estimates suggest that 82.3 percent of all land and 97.9 percent of
agriculture land (including pastures) in the country suffer some level of erosion
(high to medium erosion in 88.7 percent of this land). This contributes to landslides,
which affect 36 percent of Tajikistan territory and 11 percent of its population. The
risk factors include the negative contribution of IFAD project activities in increasing
greenhouse gas emissions and land degradation. Climate change related hazards
have a substantial impact in the project area and may hamper the project results.
Losses have proven to be substantial and to affect the capacity of rural population
to develop sustainable livelihoods pattern.
Mitigations:
CASP+ will mitigate this by generating opportunities for disaster risk reduction
(typically, forestry and pasture investment, including in specific hot spots identified
in collaboration with the Committee on Emergency and Civil Defence). Investments
in climate adaptive and more resource efficient agricultural practices are expected
to result in positive outcomes. These developments will also enhance the resilience
of rural households to climate change and reduce their vulnerability to extreme
weather events.
Project vulnerability to climate change impacts
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
Tajikistan is the most vulnerable country in Central Asia. Climate projections predict
a worsening of the above-mentioned trends and events with significant impacts on
these ecosystems and consequently on eco-system services, people’s livelihood
and the economy. The risk factors include IFAD projects failure to address issues
of drought, degradation of pasturelands, lack of fodder, food insecurity, water
scarcity, inundation/mudslides, erosion, etc., all of which contributing to exacerbate
poverty.
Mitigations:
The projects explore income-generating options beyond livestock to gradually
reduce grazing pressure on pastures and mitigate the impact of climate change by
establishing Pasture User Unions to manage the common pastures. They also
provide financing and technical assistance to encourage and nurture new economic
activities through which the most vulnerable of the rural society – mainly women –
can build and develop additional sources of income as a safety net.
Project Scope
Project Relevance
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
CASP+ is relevant to the national development priorities as it comes under the
framework of the National Development Strategy 2016-2030. On demand by the
Government, this project will upscale the positive outcomes and impacts achieved
by KLSP and LPDP. It will contribute in stimulating inclusive economic growth and
reduction of poverty in rural communities. It will further improve access of
communities to productive infrastructure and services leading to sustainable
agricultural production and equitable returns.
Mitigations:
To mitigate the eventuality of CASP becoming irrelevant, IFAD must ensure that
implementation stays on track to achieving the development objective.
Technical Soundness
Moderate
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
5/14
IFAD’s current country program consists of the Livestock and Pasture Development
Project I and II and CASP I. These projects focus on income diversification and
promote alternative sources of income to diversify household economies. The
effective implementation of these projects will lead to established socio-economic
resilience, enhanced women’s nutritional status and incomes. Under this section,
the risk factors include the lack of appropriate implementing agency, the lack of
qualified human resources, and poor quality of coordination of activities limiting the
effectiveness of projects delivery.
Mitigations:
In order to reduce the likelihood of these risks to occur, IFAD must make sure
terms of reference about the profile of the implementing agency are clear enough,
and to collaborate closely with the government of Tajikistan in the selection
process. Additionally, it will be of utmost importance to ascertain that the
government adheres to IFAD procurement rules and procedures.
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability
Implementation Arrangements
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
The low capacities of decentralized institutions in charge of critical activities may
hamper the success of the community investment. In Tajikistan, public institutions
are usually poorly equipped, lack qualified personnel, and have insufficient financial
resources. Here the risk relates to the absence /lack of trained /qualified staffs,
which leads to difficulties in effective delivery of projects (poor targeting, poor
financial and procurement management, poor quality of data management, etc.).
Mitigations:
Capacity building and institutional support should not be limited to training and
grants providing. Mentoring programs, fixed-term, in-house international or national
experts, an on-call international expert, institutional twinning and partnerships,
short-term expert coaching, and study tours can all be effective ways of capacity
building. These capacity-building activities should be participative and inclusive of
women and youth to the extent possible. To improve project governance and
efficiency, a national Project Steering Committee will be setup, providing overall
guidance and project consistency, and maintain oversight of the Project’s Annual
Work Plans and Budgets. The experienced Project Management Unit (PMU) will be
responsible for overall project implementation as Leading Agency, jointly with pre-
selected additional implementing partners.
Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
The CSP M&E system has a three-level structure, consisting of output monitoring,
outcome monitoring and impact evaluation. A logical framework was established at
design with the three layers of indicators. The AWPBs provide the targets for first
level monitoring. PMU is responsible for regular data collection and reporting as
project activities roll out. The M&E related risk factors include the likelihood of data
not being properly or timely collected. Data collected may not be representative of
outputs and outcomes due to miscalculation or tallying issues. Data must also be
adequately disaggregated. Furthermore, risks at this level may also be about the
qualification of the project M&E specialist, and their overall use of appropriate tools.
Mitigations:
IFAD must make sure that capacity-building trainings are provided to assist project
M&E staff with, and that the data collection tools in use are in conformity with IFAD
guidelines. Regular missions must do fact checking to ensure data quality and
reporting. Regular assessment need to be carried out in order to determine and
apply corrective measures.
Project Financial Management
Moderate
Low
Project Organization and Staffing
Risk:
6/14
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
SEPMU: 
1- PMU is currently responsible for a two projects (CASP & LPDP II). With the
proposed segregation of duties and hiring of additional staff, PMU may have an
ability to take another project. 
2- Contrary to current projects, this new project includes other international donors
as co-financers and has higher value which would require additional time and
resources. 
3- Risk that new staff for CASP+ do not get proper trainings on IFAD procedures.
Risk of the language barrier where not full understanding is obtained. 
4- Current Finance Manager is expected to manage this project finances along with
the other two ongoing projects. This additional project is expected the work load. 
5- Currently PMU does not undertake staff performance evaluations / do not
identify areas of improvement (and training needs). 
6- No set of the Manuals and Guidelines 
7-Staff has previous experience working with international donors’ projects. 
CEP: 
1- CEP is currently responsible for a large workload of projects, but with the
proposed segregation of duties and hiring of additional; staff, may have an ability to
take another project. 
2- Currently not all the staff of financial department is hired 
3- Not all CEP staff have completed the IFAD training, FMS had in previous years. 
4- CEP does not undertake staff performance evaluations / do not identify areas of
improvement (and training needs). 
5- No set of the Manuals and Guidelines 
6- Staff has previous experience working with international donors’ projects.
Mitigations:
SEPMU: 
1-For current projects, SEPMU is managing the financial aspects properly and has
been rated from satisfactory to highly satisfactory. LPDP II is closing in September
2021 which will be before the start of CASP+. 
2- For this new project, PMU should ensure that the finance manager allocates 50%
of her/his time to CASP+. In addition three additional staff in the Financial
Department in order to ensure the right level of the internal control and obedience
with the IFAD procedures (accounting specialist and Finance officer/consultant). 
CEP: 
- The structure of CEP should include at least one finance manager, one
finance/disbursement officer and one accountant working on CASP+ project. CEP
should carefully plan the training process of on-boarding staff. It is recommended to
have a probation period of two month for the Finance Department staff. Financial
Manuals, Guidelines and Plans have to be developed, approved, signed, and
updated accordingly. 
Both: 
1- PMU/CEP should carefully plan the training process of on-boarding staff.
Financial Manuals, Guidelines and Plans have to be developed, approved, signed,
and updated accordingly. 
2- All new finance staff should take IFAD FM e-learning course within one month of
recruitment/project start-up. Course is available in Russian. 
3- Capacity building plans on IFAD procedures to be supported by Russian
speaking consultants as applicable and available. 
4- PMU/CEP should establish the performance evaluation system and ensure that
project staff are evaluated on annual basis. 
5- IFAD anti-corruption policy should be part of new staff induction.
Project Budgeting
Moderate
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
7/14
Current PMU practice: The first step in the Annual Budgeting process is a review of
financial plan. Therefore before the beginning of each financial year, PMU staff
review and revise as necessary the financial plan for changes due to: delays in
expenditures, assumptions, line items, activities, etc. In this way the Annual Budget
for the coming year will reflect changes in the budget. This will avoid reporting and
analysing variances that have not yet been reflected in an updated AWPB. It also
ensures that planning data remain realistic so that variance analysis remains
meaningful. Significant and material changes (as opposed to minor adjustments) in
the financial plan require Government and IFAD approval and may require updating
of the Project legal agreements and Project Cost Tables. 
The Annual Budget is broken down by quarter to take into consideration the
seasonality of cash flows. The Project includes in its Annual Budget tables a current
summary financial plan. Additionally, PMU budgets are to be prepared in
accordance with the IFR format, including disbursement categories, components
and activities, financiers, account codes and are to be divided by quarters. They are
to be in line with the Project Implementation Plan. 
The detailed Annual Budget provides a basis against which to compare actual
results. The Annual Budget is the document that provides a basis for monitoring the
financial aspects of the Project and identifying areas that require corrective action.
The PMU should bear in mind that the annual budget should be tightly linked to
procurement plans and physical targets. Budgetary processes are closely
monitored by Finance Manager Specialist and Finance Consultant, who are
responsible for presenting the draft PMU budget for a given year. The procurement
specialist, while working on the procurement plans, has to take into consideration
financial information provided by the Chief Accountant (e.g., cash flow). 
The process of detailed budgeting for the Annual Budget for the coming financial
year begins in last quarter of current year.
Mitigations:
1- The budgeting process for current SEPMU is in accordance with IFAD
requirements, forecasting takes place, and regular comparison of actual and
projected budget takes place. AWPB for current projects is submitted on time. 
2- The AWPB template should be updated in the project Finance Manual. 
3- It is the SEPMU responsibility to consolidate and submit the AWPB on time,
SEPMU should properly coordinate and manage the process to avoid any delays. 
4- Both SEPMU & CEP should ensure that monthly meetings are conducted at
each unit to discuss financial performance against budget figures and to discuss
variations. 
5- On quarterly basis, SEPMU should prepare consolidated budget vs actual report
and should arrange for a meeting with CEP to discuss performance, variance and
actions to be taken (as needed). 
6- Minutes of the meetings for the monthly meetings at each unit and for the
quarterly meetings for both units to be documented and filed properly.
Project Funds Flow/Disbursement Arrangements
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
SEPMU: 
1- SEPMU has experience disbursing from IFAD funds through the imprest
account. Current projects are using the Direct payment method for USD payments
due to difficulties in hard currency payments in the country. 
2- IFAD is the only source of the funds for the current projects. 
3- For CASP+ project there will be other sources of funds from international donors
such as GCF and FAO which are currently under revision. 
CEP: 
1- No experience in disbursing from IFAD funds. 
2- Existing projects have WB loans which are disbursed in USD and have
experienced exchange minimum rate losses (USD to TJS) 
3- Delays in receiving government contributions. Bills are not paid on time
sometimes. This is mainly since the accrual system and the prepayment system for
utilities is not applied in Tajikistan. 
4- Delays in receiving community contributions related to matching grant
mechanism (with impact on project disbursements).
Mitigations:
8/14
SEPMU/CEP: 
1- Beneficiaries will not receive funds directly instead goods, equipment and
infrastructure facilities to be distributed to them, this will reduce the risk of flow of
fund. 
2- 1C software eliminates exchange rate risks, timely bank reconciliations have to
be performed on the regular basis. Proposed 1C Accounting Software has cash
flow forecasting module which is relied on to determine the local currency cash
need daily. Project funds are kept in the USD account until needed, limiting
exposure to exchange rate fluctuations. The PAID stamp has to be used for the
supporting documents. 
3- Existing projects have reasonable disbursement rates and PMU is well
experienced in the IFAD disbursement process. 
4- Each unit should open separate bank account for each finance instrument and
for each financier to ensure tractability of funds. 
5- Contrary to previous projects, for CASP+, report based mechanism to be
explored to be used for the project instead of replenishment of the imprest fund.
Under report disbursement method, project will be withdrawing based on
submission and clearance of IFRs.
Project Internal Controls
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
1-Training on the importance of the internal control should take place 
2- Manuals and Guidelines on internal controls are weak. It is suggested to hire
additional internal audit specialist to ensure that there is a decent level of internal
control. 
3- IFAD projects are subject to ex-post review by the Accounts chamber and by the
Agency for State Financial Control and Fight with Corruption of the Republic of
Tajikistan.
Mitigations:
1- Beneficiaries will not receive funds directly instead goods, equipment and
infrastructure facilities to be distributed to them, this will reduce the risk of flow of
fund. 
2- Hiring staff for the financial department (experienced and educated) is crucial
part to make sure there is proper level of the segregation. FMS currently performs
most of the duty which decreases the level of internal control and increases the
level of material misstatement. 
3- The Financial Manual has to be developed in order to document detailed
controls related not only to PMU but also activities on the project field especially
matching grants. 
4- The Financial Manual to document detailed controls related to
payments/disbursements to smaller implementing partners/ community grant
payments/disbursements. 
5- Procure the service of an independent internal audit firm to perform an annual
review of project activities for both PMU & CEP. The audit plan should focus largely
on the activities of the smaller implementing agencies which is contracted by the
PMU. This firm to report to the project steering committee to ensure independence
Project Accounting and Financial Reporting
Moderate
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
9/14
1- 1C software is used by both CEP and SEPMU. These systems are not
integrated. 
2- Accounting software of smaller implementation agencies are not integrated with
PMU and transactions are recorded manually by the PMU based on monthly
reports provided by the implementing agencies. Advances are monitored to ensure
timely justification of underlying expenses. 
3- The PMU is using an outdated version of 1C (7,7) and there is a risk that
technical support will not be available. (CEP is using the most recent version 8,3) 
4- Need to accurately record and account for in-kind contributions. 
5- Annual financial statements and reports to be as per IFAD and the followed
accounting standards. 
6- Lack of regular monitoring of consolidated performance among both parties. 
7- As GCF and FAO are potential co-financiers, there is a risk that donors reporting
requirements are not met and complied with.
Mitigations:
SEPMU: 
1- Require PMU to fill the vacancy of the Internal Auditor before project start-up. 
2- Before the project start PMU to upgrade the 1C to 8.3 version 
3- Before the project starts IFRs templates to be updated in the accounting
software to facilitate withdrawal process since the project is planned to be using
report based disbursement. 
4- SEPMU prepares consolidated financial reports for the purposes of monitoring
and reporting to IFAD (IFRs and AFS). 
5- Consolidated financial reports to be submitted on quarterly basis to IFAD 
CEP: 
1- CEP to fill the vacancy of the Internal Auditor before project start-up. 
2- CEP team to complete the IFAD FM e-learning course within 2 months of project
start-up.fore the project starts IFRs templates to be updated in the accounting
software to facilitate withdrawal process since the project is planned to be using
report based disbursement. 
3- Before the project starts IFRs templates to be updated in the accounting
software to facilitate withdrawal process since the project is planned to be using
report based disbursement. 
Both: 
1- Financial statements/reports to include, but not to be limited to,: budget vs.
actual comparison, DA statements & Reconciliations, WA statement, sources and
uses of funds statements per categories and per components and financiers, cash
receipts and payments statement, fixed asset schedule and disclosure of in-kind
contribution. 
2- Both SEPMU and CEP to monitor the performance of the components for which
they are responsible. 
3- PDR, LTB and the finance manual to include details that cover additional
reporting requirements for co-financiers.
Project External Audit
Moderate
Low
Risk:
Moderate
Low
10/14
As per the local legislative environment, IFAD projects in Tajikistan are not audited
by the Account Chamber of the Republic of Tajikistan which is the Supreme audit
body in the country, instead private audit firms are contracted after completion of
the tendering process. 
SEPMU: 
1- Auditor assigned for the last couple of years for LPDP II is Baker Tilly
international and the local branch for the first year and RSM for the last two years. 
2- Audit work to be performed as per the followed standards, IFAD requirements
and a cleared TOR by IFAD FO.The TORs should require the auditor to provide a
Management letter – a report on internal controls and operating procedures (Annex
I to POM). 
3- The audits must be provided to IFAD within the deadline for the revision. 
CEP: 
1- Auditor assigned for the last couple years is Baker Tilly international al local
branch. The risk of familiarity presents 
2- Newly appointed project auditor for RPLP may not be familiar with the audit of
donor funded projects in Kyrgyzstan. 
3- Auditor TOR does not adequately address the audit of a sample of community
grants with the intention of confirming the eligibility of expenditure. (community
grants are considered high risk due to general lack of financial management
capabilities /arrangements).
Mitigations:
1- The performance of Baker Tilly/RSM, auditors for LPDP II for the last three years
has been rated between satisfactory and highly satisfactory. Rely on independent
external auditor from the private sector to perform the audit Project FS, rotate
auditors every three years. 
2-Auditor TOR/procurement process should specify the requirement that the
auditor have prior donor funded project audit experience. (to be outlined in
Financial Manual) 
3- Audit TOR to be cleared by IFAD FO 
4- Require the project to inform the newly appointed auditor of IFAD requirements
(as per Handbook) through the audit TOR. 
5- Recommend the use of a single auditor for all IFAD funded projects in Tajikistan
(subject to procurement processes being followed). 
6- Tendering to take place every 3 years as per country legislation and regulations.
(noting that it is 4 years as per IFAD requirements) 
7- SEPMU is the responsible party for coordinating the audit work after the year-
end and for submitting the unaudited financial statements within 4 months of year-
end and submitting final audit report within 6 months of year-end to IFAD.
Project Procurement
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Risk:
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
The national procurement manual does not sufficiently reflect the current
procurement legislative framework and no contract management manual exists.
Despite the development of a draft new law, there is need for further improvement
in the area of tenders’ definition, complaint resolution and following international
standards. In addition, only one Standard Bidding Document is available for
customization and adoption based on the type of procurement and method, and
SBD does not include a standard contract form.
Mitigations:
The project procurement sections of the PIM, was updated to mitigate the
inconsistency of a national procurement manual. Use of and compliance to IFAD
Procurement Guidelines and Procurement Handbook will be a critical mitigation
measure.
Accountability and Transparency
Substantial
Moderate
Risk:
Substantial
Moderate
11/14
According to Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Assessment, the
current mechanism for administrative complaints resolution is not independent and
a single tier of complaints risks to reduce its effectiveness The independence of
Public Anticorruption entities is weak and all fall under the executive body. The risk
that accountability, transparency and oversight arrangements are inadequate to
safeguard the integrity of project procurement and contract execution, leading to
the unintended use of funds or execution of project procurements outside of the
required time, cost and quality requirements.
Mitigations:
The terms, procedures, and responsibilities as clearly specified in the IFAD Policy
on preventing fraud and corruption in its activities and operations will be strictly
followed and their observation supervised by IFAD. IFAD’s Anti-corruption hotline
will be disseminated in all bidding documents.
Capability in Public Procurement
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
While the PMU has a long and solid history of procurement under IFAD financed
projects, for the additional implementing agency CEP (and its Project
Implementation Group) it will be the first project. This may entail some initial delays.
Mitigations:
Continuous capacity development of PMU and CEP will be provided, to ensure
timely procurement. CEP’s large volume of procurement is envisaged to start from
year two and three, which leaves sufficient time for CEP to develop internal
capacity and fill any competency, skills and knowledge gaps on IFAD procurement
procedures. PMU and CEP will mobilize an additional procurement
specialist/assistance.
Public Procurement Processes
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
There is a latent risk of limited participation of bidders, due to envisaged fee for the
bidding documents (NCB/ICB). The general limited procurement expertise is
invested in AWPB preparation needs to be addressed to ensure embedding
sufficient time for with procurement. A risk of non-transparent proceedings is
present due to evidence of not sharing minutes of bid opening process under
ICB/NCB and not publicizing awards (NCB).
Mitigations:
The possibility of submitting a free electronic version of the bidding document to the
participants will be considered. During CASP+ implementation, all implementing
agencies will prepare the AWPB in consultation with the Procurement Officer. The
procedures of dissemination of bid opening minutes and publication of awards will
be rigorously implemented to mitigate risks non-transparent proceedings. Capacity
development provided to the implementing agencies in the initial stages of the
project will ensure that procurement documentation is in line with the standard
forms agreed with IFAD – especially for CEP which is at the first experience of
IFAD-financed operations.
Environment, Social and Climate Impact
Biodiversity Conservation
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
12/14
A stocktaking by the World Bank states that Tajikistan has the unfortunate
distinction of being the country that is the most vulnerable to climate change in
Europe and Central Asia, because of its relatively high exposure, high sensitivity,
and very limited capacity to adapt to climate change. The country faces a huge
challenge of making the most of its limited resources to address climate threats
while also promoting economic and social development. Also, the risk of
mismanagement of pasturelands or misuse of water resources is perceptible, as
most stakeholders lack the required skills and knowledge.
Mitigations:
The CASP project seeks to reduce pressure on grazing lands, and to preserve
natural resources and biodiversity. To this end, the project requires that for each
activity, an environmental impact assessment be carried out, as well as mitigation
measures defined before the activity is approved. The project intervention districts
and villages are all sensitized to minimize the negative environmental effects of all
their activities under the project, and to present plans for compensating or
mitigating any such occurrences.
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
In Tajikistan, pollution is further exacerbated by deforestation leading to
desertification of some areas. Available estimates suggest that 82.3 percent of all
land and 97.9 percent of agriculture land (including pastures) in the country suffer
some level of erosion (high to medium erosion in 88.7 percent of this land), poorly
adapted farming practices, with intensive agriculture activity on slopes, excessive
use of pesticides and fertilizers for some commercial crops, poor irrigation practices
(e.g. seepage losses, siltation, 60-80 percent water use inefficiency, water logging)
causing water erosion in 97 percent of farmland and salinization in 16 percent of
irrigated lands. Risk resulting from environmental degradation include threats of
soil pollution and nitrate contamination of surface waters, and landslides, which
affect 36 percent of Tajikistan territory and 11 percent of its population.
Mitigations:
The project integrates adaptive and resilient activities as well as mitigation
measures in its intervention. With low level of income and education, most project
beneficiaries lack the skills for developing adaptation measures. The project helps
them build their capacities, so that they are able to apply recommended corrective
measures.
Cultural Heritage
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
The project has no threats to or the loss of resources of historical, religious or
cultural significance.
Mitigations:
N/A
Indigenous People
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
There are no indigenous people in the project area.
Labour and Working Conditions
Moderate
Moderate
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Within its climate adaptation angle, CASP+ will create income-generating activities
at community-level with the purpose of offering remunerative job opportunities to
women and youth. This is likely to reduce male-migration at long run, and stabilize
women-headed households. There is risk about elite capture of income-generating
activities as poor people are difficult to setup at their own. In addition, the risk of
poor targeting may further contribute to that elite capture.
13/14
Mitigations:
Targeting must be participatory, and in compliance with guidelines from the project
design paper. Access to enhanced incomes and productive services will further
stabilize the country and significantly reduce increase household resilience. Rural
women are also engaged in off-farm income generating activities. Such activities
are particularly important to the poorer women who have limited access to
productive assets, such as land and livestock. IFAD missions shall follow-up on the
targeting approach, and further discuss and address any flaws in the process with
project staff.
Community Health and Safety
Risk:
Substantial
Substantial
Moderate
Moderate
The COVID-19 impact on rural economies and their business development
potential has been significant. Market linkages became weaker and the capacity of
SMEs to procure agricultural products from project areas is more limited.
Nevertheless, it is critical to include support to establishing such linkages and
facilitate the creation of opportunities for employment and self-employment for rural
people, especially youth and women female headed households.
Mitigations:
The overall implementation will factor-in procedures and protocols to proactively
ensure high standards of minimization of health risks related to the ongoing
pandemic. Specifically this will entail reducing movements in-country and
international travel to a minimum (yet adapting to its possibility in case of lowering
health alerts), ensuring social distancing measures in place in community
mobilization, trainings and dialogues, monitoring and as appropriate contribute to
the availability and use of equipment and supplies to communities, service
providers (such as hydro-alcoholic gel, masks, etc…).
Physical and Economic Resettlement
The project and its sub-projects will not require resettlement
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Risk:
Tajikistan’s total GHG emissions represent 0.02 percent of global GHG emissions.
52.0 percent of Tajikistan’s carbon equivalent emissions originate from agriculture,
mostly from livestock related activities.
Mitigations:
To address the issue of climate change, CASP+ adopts a comprehensive approach
to climate change adaptation with a focus improved ecosystems management,
including improved pasture and forests – coupled with improved livestock
husbandry practices, which ultimately will increase carbon sequestration. These
measures are implemented through Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans, as
under close follow-up from both IFAD supervisory body and the PMU and the
overall oversight on climate change mitigation from CEP.
No risk envisaged -
not applicable
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Vulnerability of target populations and ecosystems to climate variability and
hazards
High
Moderate
Risk:
High
Moderate
14/14
The high proportion of the population depending on natural resources (with over 66
percent of people engaged in agriculture); the high food vulnerability (with two
thirds of the agricultural production depending on irrigation and 5 percent of
territories under cereal crops depending on precipitation); and the high level of
gross agricultural output losses caused by disasters (annual losses attributable to
climate events of one third of all losses), confirm the significant vulnerability of
target populations. Climate change will inevitably cause overall environmental
deterioration in rural areas through mass agricultural land degradation, deteriorated
soil quality and decreased natural soil fertility.
Mitigations:
The degree of vulnerability of target population associated with the deteriorated
ecosystems justify climate change intervention either embedded in IFAD projects,
or intervening in partnership with Tajikistan government.
Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement/Coordination
Risk:
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Under the overall responsibility of the MoA and CEP, CASP+ seeks to improve the
assets and incomes of selected rural communities, including smallholder farmers,
small rural processing enterprises, input suppliers and service providers, and the
rural unemployed by improving production in terms of building/renovating key
infrastructure, capacity enhancement, provision of improved services and
innovative technologies. Project support would be targeted, demand-driven and
participatory. The key risk factor here is about stakeholders’ lack of interest or
failure to take ownership of the project’s activities and results. This situation may
stem from a poor quality of project management and delivery approach. If this
happens, the sustainability of the project’s outcomes will be compromised. Such
risk factors are unlikely, as the project very much aligns with the country priorities.
Mitigations:
As mitigation measures, it will be important to regularly follow-up and make sure the
project reaches out to the right targeted groups. An annual outcome survey will be a
good practice to ascertain that targeted populations do participate in project
activities, and take ownership for achievements.
Stakeholder Grievances
Risk:
Low
Low
Low
Low
During the design, the relevant stakeholders were consulted and there is a low risk
of stakeholders disagreeing with the way project resources are allocated as per
design, PIM and due processes.
Mitigations:
The project has developed a sound grievance redress mechanism, consistent
between all financiers and for all implementing agencies. The project will work with
stakeholder platforms that include a wide range of stakeholders to coordinate the
allocation of project resources, make decisions and adjust activities. This will
reduce the potential for grievances and ensure that the mechanism is clear and
accessible to all project parties.
Tajikistan
Community-based Agricultural Support Project Plus (CASP+)
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Mission Dates:
01 April - 09 June 2021
Document Date:
16/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002204
5854-TJ
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 10: Exit Strategy 
1. 
There are several approaches for ensuring the sustainability of the project 
investments at the various levels. These include (i) undertaking all investments with a 
counterpart at the national and local level; (ii) emphasis on capacity building of 
institutions and individuals; (iii) strengthening of policy and regulatory frameworks in a 
manner that adds to sustainability of natural resource through improved management 
and governance; (iv) introduction of modern tools and technologies to strengthen 
institutional capacity; (v) use of participatory approaches to ensure beneficiary 
ownership and (v) a clear plan for operation and maintenance of all infrastructure, assets 
and equipment provided under the project, etc. The approach at the national and local 
level for the improvements to the enabling environment (component 1), climate 
sensitive community investments (component 2), and the focus on strengthening and 
diversifying livelihoods, focusing on key constraints within selected value chains and 
strong participation of the private sector (component 3) build project sustainability. The 
consolidated experience of the MoA’s PMU and CEP in consultative processes at the 
national and local level will ensure relevance to the needs of the institutions, 
communities and households targeted.  
At the national level, all the investments are expected to continue beyond the 
2. 
project period because of the nature of the investments.  The project will invest in very 
specific areas of institutional strengthening for a range of public sector institutions 
dealing with natural resources such as the  Ministry of Economic Development and 
Trade, the  State Forestry Agency, the State Enterprise for Animal Breeding and Artificial 
Insemination, the Land and Geodesy Department, the Pasture Meliorative Trust (PMT), 
several national livestock institutions dealing with public animal health and production 
services. The project is also introducing modern and efficient techniques and 
technologies such as remote sensing and carbon accounting tools such as the use of Ex-
ACT and GLEAM-i that will enhance the capacity of the institutions for managing and 
monitoring the resources. These institutions are all supported by the public budget and 
care will be taken to invest in only those activities which either have no implications for 
increase in their budgets, and where incremental budget is required, a commitment has 
been secured to increase the annual budget allocations for sustaining the investments 
beyond the project period.  The specific staff members trained in the project are long-
term public servants and even though they are not expected to be retained in their 
current positions for long, they can be expected to contribute within the institution 
during their service period.   
The expertise for understanding climate risks will be strengthened through 
3. 
supporting research and training of administrators and public sector decision-makers and 
building the capacity of academic institutions to train professionals on the subject. The 
institutions involved like the Tajik Agrarian University, Tajik Academy of Agricultural 
Science and Forest Research Institute will all be expected to offer these courses to their 
students as part of their regular curricula and thus these courses will be continued 
beyond the project period. The project is also planning a series of measures for the 
sustainable development of the country's veterinary system and ensuring access of 
animal owners to veterinary services. By supporting private veterinarians as well as their 
associations and the gradual shift towards private service provision, the project will 
contribute to the creation of a sustainable cadre of veterinary services paid for by the 
private users.   
The project will assist with the review of policy in a participatory and inclusive 
4. 
manner and suggest refinements with regards to pasture use and rehabilitation, joint 
forest management and livestock related regulatory frameworks. These refinements and 
regulations will be enacted into the legal framework of the country and implemented 
through the established agencies responsible for their implementation and enforcement. 
The policy measures proposed will be selected based on their potential for enhancing the 
sustainability of the nature resource base. Tajikistan’s national development policy 
framework and its commitments as part of its NDC will further mainstream climate 
change adaptation into national and sectoral development plans. The on-going GCF 
Readiness project for the NAP is expected to lay the foundation on which the current 
project will further consolidate ensuring synergy between the two projects that will add 
to the overall sustainability of investments.  At the district level, the capacity of district 
and Jamoat governments to better appreciate and prepare for climate risk analysis and 
adaptation in district level planning will be strengthened.  
In addition, The project will support mainstream River Basin planning and integrate 
5. 
it fully with subsidiary planning systems such as those for infrastructure, forests, 
pastures and water use. The principles and practical functioning of Joint Forest 
Management will be fully explained to Leskhoz staff and promoted amongst 
communities. Continued targeting based on objective evidence such as forest potential 
and vulnerability will guide forestry activity into the future. A robust system of 
participatory monitoring combining field level observations and remote sensing will 
strengthen the transparency and sustainability of sustainable land management.  
6. 
At the community level, the strengthening of community institutions particularly 
the use of the broad base Village Organizations and within that the formation of Pasture 
User Unions (PUU) that consist of interested households and PUA and Joint Forest 
Management arrangements where required, will enhance the chance of sustaining the 
investments. Many agencies have been investing in these institutions as well as the 
Mohallah Committees.  There are also plans to identify policy refinements that can make 
these local institutions more sustainable by providing them powers for generating 
revenue by collecting user fees through changes in the existing regulation and trying to 
emulate those in other regional countries of the region like Kyrgyzstan.  Furthermore, all 
investments that are included in the climate sensitive action plans (CsCAPs) will be 
identified through participation of the local governments, local stakeholders and 
community members to ensure ownership with a clear plan for operation and 
maintenance after completion. No investment in terms of either the physical 
infrastructure or assets will be provided which are beyond the capacity of the local 
government or community to operate and maintain after completion. The experience 
with previous IFAD projects has shown that communities are generally able to operate 
and maintain infrastructure investments well beyond project completion. The physical 
investment on the ground at community level in pasture, forestry, and agriculture 
productivity gains will generate capacity for the communities to adapt to climate risks 
and challenges that they currently face and add to the sustainability of their livelihoods. 
For investments at the household level, the project places strong emphasis on 
7. 
making livelihoods more sustainable through providing matching grants for investments 
that will be sustained by the households. The environmental sustainability of the 
investments will be ensured based on the fact that only green investments that enhance 
climate resilience will be financed. In addition, the project will have a strong private 
sector orientation and will work backwards from the markets in trying to identify 
opportunities in which the private sector are interested. The brokering of productive 
alliances between the private sector (dairy processors, feed lots operators, poultry 
processors) and groups of farmers for increased access to markets will strengthen their 
linkages. The underlying mutual interest of the small-holder producers and the private 
sector will ensure the sustainability of the arrangements beyond the project period. 
Tajikistan
Community-based Agricultural Support Project Plus (CASP+)
Project Design Report
Annex 11: Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
Mission Dates:
01 April - 09 June 2021
Document Date:
16/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002204
5854-TJ
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
 Gender transformational  
 Youth sensitive
1/1
 Nutrition sensitive
 Climate finance  
Situation
analysis
 National gender policies, strategies and
 National youth policies, strategies and
 National nutrition policies, strategies and
actors
 Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
actors
actors
 Main youth groups
 Challenges and opportunities by youth
 Key nutrition problems and underlying
causes, by group
 Key livelihood problems and
group
opportunities, by gender
 Nutritionally vulnerable beneficiaries, by
group
Theory of
change
 Gender policy objectives (empowerment,
 Pathways to youth socioeconomic
voice, workload)
empowerment
 Nutrition pathways
 Causal linkage between problems,
 Gender transformative pathways
 Policy engagement on GEWE
 Youth employment included in project
outcomes and impacts
objectives/activities
Logframe
indicators
 Outreach disaggregated by sex
 Women are > 40% of outreach
 Outreach disaggregated by sex and
 Outreach disaggregated by sex and
youth
youth, and IPs (if appropriate)
beneficiaries
IFAD empowerment index (IE.2.1)
Human
and
financial
resources
 Staff with gender TORs
 Funds for gender activities
 Funds for IFAD empowerment index in
M&E budget
ECG
Remarks
Gender
Output level CIs
CI 1.1.8 Mandatory
Outcome level CIs (at least one of
below)
CI 1.2.8
CI 1.2.9
 Staff with youth TORs
 Funds for youth activities
 Staff or partner with nutrition TORs
 Funds for nutrition activities
IFAD Adaptation Finance
$13,011,000
IFAD Mitigation Finance
$0
Total IFAD Climate-
focused Finance
$13,011,000
Project meets criteria for gender mainstreamed, but does not aim to be gender transformative. Contact Christa Ketting for any question.
Nutrition
Youth
Project was designed to be youth-sensitive. Contact Christa Ketting for any question.
☐ No social inclusion themes
Tajikistan
Community-based Agricultural Support Project Plus (CASP+)
Project Design Report
Annex 12: List of eligible activities to be financed by FIPS
Mission Dates:
01 April - 09 June 2021
Document Date:
16/11/2021
Project No.
Report No.
2000002204
5854-TJ
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 11: List of eligible activities to be financed by 
FIPS (if applicable) 
Not applicable.  
