Uganda
National Oilseeds Project
Project Design Report
Document Date:
10/02/2020
Project No.
2000002260
Report No.
5155-UG
Loan ID
2000003281
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Map of the Project Area
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AfDB
AIC
AIDS
ASSP
African Development Bank
Agriculture Insurance Consortium
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
Agriculture Sector Strategic Plan
AWPB
Annual Work Plan and Budget
B2B
BDS
BDSP
BoU
CAIIP
CAR
CC
Business-to-Business
Business Development Services
Business Development Service Provider
Bank of Uganda
Community Agric. Infrastructure Improvement Programme
Community Access Road
Climate Change
COSOP
Country Strategic Opportunities Programme
CSA
DDP
DfID
DLG
Climate Smart Agriculture
District Development Plans
Department for International Development
District Local Government
DTPC
District Technical Planning Committee
EDPRS
Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy
EFA
EIRR
ESIA
ESMF
ESMP
EU
FAO
FFS
FHH
FIRR
FS
Economic and Financial Analysis
Economic Internal Rate of Return
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
Environmental and Social Management Framework
Environmental and Social Management Plan
European Union
Food and Agriculture Organization
Farmer Field School
Female-Headed Households
Financial Internal Rate of Return
Feasibility Study
GALS
Gender Action Learning System
GAP
GDP
GHG
GIS
GoU
HH
HLFO
IFAD
IFMIS
Good Agricultural Practices
Gross Domestic Product
Greenhouse Gas
Geographic Information System
Government of Uganda
Household
Higher Level Farmers’ Organisation
International Fund for Agricultural Development
Integrated Financial Management Information Systems
IFPRI
International Food Policy Research Institute
IMF
IRF
ISSD
MAAIF
MoLG
MoWT
M&E
MFI
International Monetary Fund
Integrated Risk Framework
Integrated Seed Sector Development Programme
Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries
Ministry of Local Government
Ministry of Works and Transport
Monitoring and Evaluation
Microfinance Institution
MFPED
Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
MoU
MSP
MT
MTR
Memorandum of Understanding
Multi-Stakeholder Platform
Metric Ton
Mid Term Review
NaCCRI
National Crop Resources Research Institute
NAP
NARO
National Agricultural Policy
National Agricultural Research Organisation
NaSARRI
National Semi-Arid Resources Research Institute
NGO
NOPP
NOSP
NRM
NSCS
OFID
Non-Governmental Organisation
National Oil Palm Project
National Oilseeds Project
Natural Resources Management
National Seed Certification Service
OPEC Fund for International Development
ORMS
Operational Results Management System
O&M
p.a.
PICT
PCU
FPA
Operation and Maintenance
Per Annum
Project Implementation Coordination Team
Project Management Unit
Farm Production Advisor
PRELNOR
Project for the Restoration of Livelihoods in Northern Region
PROFIRA
Project for Financial Inclusion in Rural Areas
PPP
PDR
PSC
4P
QDS
SDG
Purchasing Power Parity
Project Design Report
Project Steering Committee
Public Private Producers Partnership
Quality Declared Seed
Sustainable Development Goal
SECAP
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures
SOE
SME
Statement of Expenditure
Small and Medium Enterprise
TOC
ToT
UAIS
UN
Theory of Change
Training of Trainers
Uganda Agricultural Insurance Scheme
United Nations
UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme
UGX
USD
VC
VODP
VODP2
VSLA
WB
Uganda Shilling
United States Dollar
Value Chain
Vegetable Oil Development Project
Vegetable Oil Development Project Phase 2
Village Savings and Loans Association
World Bank
In line with IFAD11 mainstreaming commitments, the project has been validated as:
☑ Gender transformational ☑ Youth sensitive ☑ Nutrition sensitive ☑ Climate finance
1/27
IFAD Adaptation Finance
IFAD Mitigation Finance
Total IFAD Climate-focused Finance
Executive Summary
$16,209,000
$0
$16,209,000
Economic and social context. Since 1990, Uganda has pursued a policy of a fully liberalised and market driven economy with the
private sector taking the driving seat to achieve economic growth and social development. This has facilitated the country’s
development which has been characterised by a high growth rate (6.1% in 2018[1]) and a significant decline in poverty. Despite the
improved growth performance, Uganda remains a low-income country, with 2018 GDP per capita at USD 604, and poverty remains a
serious development challenge. Uganda has one of the highest birth rates in Sub-Saharan Africa and one of the fastest population
growth rates in the world (3.3 percent p.a.). Poverty is still predominantly rural, with 23 percent[2] of the rural population falling into
the lowest wealth quintile, compared with nine percent in urban areas. The poorest districts are in the dryer areas in the northern and
eastern parts of the country.
Agricultural Sector. The agricultural sector remains the backbone of the Ugandan economy. Agriculture accounts for 70 percent of
employment, overwhelmingly on smallholder farms; occupies over half of all land area; and provides 50 percent of all exports and
25% of GDP. It is considered a leading sector for future economic growth and inclusion in the current National Development Plan.
About three quarters of agricultural households derive their livelihoods from largely subsistence-oriented, low input, rain-fed
agriculture, with land holdings averaging less than 1.5 hectares (ha).
Role of Oilseeds[3] Sector. Within the agricultural sector, the oilseeds industry ranks high on the government agenda, especially
because of its poverty reduction potential in the poorest Northern and North-Eastern Regions of the country[4]. In the Agricultural
Sector Strategic Plan (ASSP) it is one of the four Strategic Commodities, which is expected to lead the transformation of the
smallholders from, subsistence, to commercial farming. The ASSP sets ambitious targets for the growth of the oilseeds sector to
provide an increasing share of local vegetable oil consumption, develop into a major export crop and support the animal cake
industry[5] and subsequently the establishment of a viable animal feed industry in Uganda.
Lessons learned. Two IFAD oilseeds-related interventions, VODP and VODP2[6] provide a range of lessons learned in this sector.
The key lessons learnt include –need for consistent and transparent engagement between stakeholders along the value chain; a
structured brokering environment between smallholders and private sector; need to improve the bargaining position of smallholders;
the need to ensure and enhance effective service delivery (extension, inputs, financing etc.) through private-sector; and necessity of
all-weather market linkage roads in key oilseeds production areas – all needed for increased commercialisation and market-
orientation of smallholders in the value chain.
Project rationale. NOSP scales up prior IFAD investments to the oilseeds sector through systematic and sustainable private sector
led approaches and investments. NOSP approaches and investments will commercialize the oilseeds sector by capacitating and
empowering the smallholders to bring power parity to the sector. This will result in Uganda lowering the trade deficit through
increased export of both raw and processed oilseeds and the by-products[7]; improving foreign exchange and most important,
improving the wealth and welfare of smallholders in the northern regions of Uganda.
Mainstreaming strategy. NOSP contributes to the following IFAD11 mainstreaming priorities through these strategies and
approaches – (i) climate – identification of locally appropriate Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) practices and their application to
increase oilseeds production and productivity; (ii) gender – specific beneficiary investment criteria ensure that 60% women are
empowered and achieve gender equality at the household and group levels; (iii) nutrition - nutrition training will be integrated into
capacity building activities with producer and marketing groups, including the Gender Action Learning Systems (GALS) to promote
diversification of smallholder farmers through enhanced knowledge and availability of nutritious foods to high-risk households; (iv)
youth – investments ensuring at least 40% of the beneficiaries are the next generation of producers through productive work
opportunities within NOSP.
Goal and development objective. The project goal of the proposed NOSP is ”inclusive rural transformation through sustainable
development of the oilseeds sector”. The Programme Development Objective is to “to accelerate commercialisation in key oilseeds
value chains and thereby improve the livelihoods and resilience of the smallholders engaged in oilseed production and marketing.
Project area. Six area-based hubs - West Nile, Northern, Mid-Northern, Eastern, Mid-Western and Karamoja, were selected based
on agro-ecological, social, demographic and economic criteria.  Four of these hubs are existing VODP2 hubs[8]. Districts have been
selected based on existing: (i) concentration of smallholders growing oilseeds; (ii) conducive private sector led pull factors; (iii)
market-ready oilseeds groups to lead the clustering approach; and (iv) contiguous districts. Approximately 75 districts have been
identified.
Target group. The key NOSP groups are subsistence smallholder farmers - women (60%), men and youth (40%) - growing oilseeds.
NOSP’s private sector led approach, to ensure commercialisation, will also target oilseeds sector stakeholders, including nucleus
farmers.
Components. – NOSP has two mutually interdependent components: (a) Component 1: Support to Oilseed Value Chain
Development and (b) Component 2: Support to Market Linkage Infrastructure Serving Oilseed Sector.
2/27
Component 1: Support to Oilseed Value Chain Development. The objective is to cluster 120,000 smallholder farmer households
by accelerating the growth of competitive clusters and value chains for oilseeds and pro-actively developing opportunities for private
sector investments in oilseeds and related by-products like animal feeds. This is achieved through two sub-components: (a) Sub-
Component 1.1: Cluster Development – through an inclusive cluster development approach in each of the hubs and (b) Sub-
Component 1.2: Support Production, Productivity and Market Development – covering the supply of essential financial and technical
and input services.
Component 2: Support to Market Linkage Infrastructure Serving Oilseed Sector. The objective of this component is to improve
local level public transportation infrastructure to facilitate the commercialisation of the oilseed sector.
Implementation arrangements. NOSP will be implemented, at national level, by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and
Fisheries (MAAIF) and Ministry of Local Government (MoLG). A Project Coordination Unit (PCU) and Project Implementation
Coordination Team (PICT) established at MAAIF and MoLG respectively, will manage implementation. 
Project costs and financing.  The total costs for the project, including duties, taxes and contingencies, are estimated at USD
160.68 million (UGX 655,694 million) over the seven year period are financed by – (i) IFAD: USD 99.56 million (61.9%); (ii) OPEC
Fund for International Development (OFID): USD 30 million (18.7%); (iii) Heifer International: USD 6.2 million (3.8%); GoU: USD 14.3
million (9%); Beneficiaries and Private Sector: USD 10.7 million (6.6%); and Kuhene Foundation: USD 13,000 (0.1%).
Financial and economic analysis
The overall NOSP project economic net present value (ENPV) is USD 60 million at a 10 percent discount rate. The economic internal
rate of return (EIRR) is 17.9 per cent. The benefit cost ratio (BCR) of 1.744 indicates a return of approximately 1.744 dollars for every
dollar invested. Results indicate that the project is a worthwhile investment.
Risks. A number of risks have been identified and mitigation measures proposed. Risks include: (i) weak farmers organisations
unable to respond to commercialisation; (ii) unavailability of timely financing to smallholders; (iii) weak financial management at
district level; (iv) adverse social and environmental impacts from commercialisation of oilseeds; and (v) weak capacities to develop
community access roads could lead to implementation delays. A robust M&E system will monitor risks and ensure implementation of
timely mitigation measures. 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment procedures (SECAP). The social, and environmental category of NOSP is B. 
The climate risk classification is moderate. The risk mitigation and management measures will adhere to GoU procedures, by all
financiers for NOSP.
Financial Management.  NOSP’s financial management systems will be harmonized with the GoU country systems and be used for
budgeting, recording and accounting of all financial transactions.  The project will run on the Integrated Financial Management
System (IFMIS) of the GoU and annual audits will be conducted by the Office of the Auditor General.
Procurement.  Procurement will follow the GoU rules as determined by the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets
Authority (PPDA) where these are aligned to and consistent with the IFAD Procurement Guidelines. All NOSP procurements will be
implemented through a delegated contracts committee. To ensure efficient implementation, including procurement, for the rural
infrastructure, a procurement specialist will be based in the PICT at the MoLG, he/she will be responsible for coordination with the
PCU.
Sustainability. As the entire project is private sector led, the phasing out of the services will commence in Year 4, with services being
paid for by the beneficiaries. Sustainability is ensured at three different levels:
Smallholder level. Oilseed production systems viable in local agro-ecological zones and adapted to climatic conditions.
Additionally, smallholders will be strengthened to become business women and men who can pay for the services and
technical skills needed.
Group/Cooperative level. Investments will require co-financing and ownership by groups/cooperatives that will also have to
demonstrate, before investments, the business case and sustainability of the same. This is achieved as NOSP will ensure
producer groups and cooperatives that are fully independent, financially robust and self-managing within four years of project
engagement.
Value chain level. The core of the value chain and cluster development approach is a rolling process of action-oriented
brokering, dialogue and investment facilitation among the key actors in each cluster/hub to catalyse investments and remove
bottlenecks to increase trading and profits, and to make the most of practical opportunities for growth. Post-project, the MSPs
are expected to continue operating systematically according to a rolling joint cluster action plans and these could be replicated
for any product.
Scaling up.  The oilseeds subsector is critical in the agro industrialization agenda of the GoU. 70% of the extract of oilseeds results in
seed cake.  It is expected that at the completion of NOSP, the oilseeds subsector will be self-supporting.  During NOSP, the GoU will
commence development of the animal cake, feed and livestock sectors.  The processes used within NOSP, of cluster development of
the farmers, power parity building in stakeholder platforms, private sector led services and inputs, will, in a subsequent GoU
investments, be replicated to the livestock industry.
1. Context
A. National context and rationale for IFAD involvement
3/27
a. National Context
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Economic and Social Context. Since 1990, Uganda has pursued a policy of a fully liberalised economy and market
environment with the private sector taking the driving seat to achieve economic growth and social development. This has
facilitated the country’s development which has been characterised by a high growth rate and a significant decline in poverty.
Growth increased from 6.3 percent in the 1990s to an annual average of seven percent in the 2000s, giving Uganda one of the
highest sustained growth rates in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) over this period. The economy grew by 6.1 percent in FY17/18, with
a strong services sector and a rebound in agriculture from the previous year’s drought[9]. Investor surveys show that business
conditions and sentiment are strong, while credit to the private sector has improved, helped by an accommodative monetary
policy stance. Despite the improved growth performance, Uganda remains a low-income country, with 2018 GDP per capita at
USD 604, and poverty remains a serious development challenge. Uganda’s Human Development Index is 0.516, indicating low
human development and placing it in 162nd position out of 189 countries[10]
Uganda has one of the highest birth rates in Sub-Saharan Africa and one of the fastest population growth rates in the world
(3.3 percent p.a.). The total population of the country has grown from 12.5 million in the early 1980s to around 45.3 million at the
end of 2018 and is projected to reach 102 million by 2050[11] In 2016/17, around 21.4 percent of the total population (eight million
people) was considered poor. Poverty is still predominantly rural, with 23 percent of the rural population falling into the lowest
wealth quintile, compared with nine percent in urban areas. The poorest districts are in the dryer areas in the northern and
eastern parts of the country.  
Uganda’s public debt has been rapidly increasing in the past two decades, with the current debt-to-GDP ratio at around 35.6
percent[12], still below the risk threshold of 50 percent. Even at this level, the debt serving/repayment allocation is very high and
constrains government expenditure in many priority sectors. Substantial oil reserves were discovered in the Lake Albert Rift
Basin in 2006 and commercial oil production is expected to start in the early 2020s. The future challenge will be to use oil
revenue to reduce poverty and rural-urban inequalities and ensure sustainable and inclusive growth for a rapidly increasing
population.
Agriculture and Rural Development context. The agricultural sector remains the backbone of the Ugandan economy.
Agriculture accounts for 70 percent of employment, overwhelmingly on smallholder farms; occupies over half of all land area;
and provides 50 percent of all exports and 25 percent of GDP. It is considered a leading sector for future economic growth
and economic inclusion in the current National Development Plan. Agricultural production is regionally distinct, with some
regions being predominantly cropland and others engaging in mixed farming activities.
About three quarters of agricultural households derive their livelihoods from largely subsistence-oriented, low input rain-fed
agriculture, with landholdings averaging less than 1.5 hectares (ha). According to the Uganda Bureau of Statistics Statistical
Abstract[13], the area planted under cereals and root crops, pulses and oil crops increased between 2007 and 2017 by less than
one percent and there has been a reduction in crop production for most crops (e.g. plantains 27 percent, millet 18 percent,
maize 12 percent, sorghum 11 percent and beans 25 percent). Use of improved farming practices and fertilizers in Uganda
remains the lowest in the East and Southern African region, with less than 10 percent of smallholders using fertilizer on an
annual basis. Average household landholding has declined from 1.7 ha to 1.2 ha per household from 2006 to 2016[14] Clearly, if
agriculture is to remain and grow as the engine of economic growth, policies and actions are urgently required to intensify and
commercialise smallholder agriculture through market-led value chain investments, increasing market integration and value-
addition.
Within the agricultural sector, the oilseeds industry ranks high on the government agenda due to its poverty reduction
potential. In the highest potential areas for oilseeds production in the north and north-eastern Uganda, where 20 years of
conflict led to a crippling effect on agriculture, it is a strategic crop for the Government in the post-conflict economic
reconstruction and in the transformation of subsistence agriculture to market-oriented farming.
Oilseeds Sector: Role and Key Policies. The National Agricultural Policy (NAP) and the Agricultural Sector Strategic Plan
(ASSP) guide agricultural development in Uganda. The mission of the ASSP is “Transforming the sector from subsistence
farming to commercial farming”. The ASSP focuses on 12 Priority Commodities and four Strategic Commodities which are to
lead this transformation process. One of the Strategic Commodities is oilseeds. In addition to the importance of domestic
oilseeds production to the local vegetable oil industry, the by-products[15] from oilseed processing are important to the
development of the animal cake/feed industries and the whole livestock sector.
The ASSP sets ambitious targets for the growth of the oilseeds sector. From 758,500 tons in 2014, oilseed production is planned
to grow to 2,027,800 tons by 2020. During the same period, the value of exports of oilseeds is projected to grow from
USD 102 million to USD 281 million. The next ASSP, now under a planning phase, is expected to include similar ambitious
growth targets for oilseeds production and exports. So far, the progress towards the ASSP targets has been slower than
projected. In 2017, the total oilseeds production in the country was 917,000 metric tons, or about 45% of the 2020 target. It is
also to be noted that consumption of vegetable oil in Uganda is around 334,000 tons while the local production covers only some
28 percent of the country’s requirements. A study conducted in 2018[16] assessed that the sector faces particular development
challenges in the following key areas (a) the need for different interventions for annual and perennial oilseed crops; (b) the
engagement of both smallholders and estates in the sector (with their very different production characteristics); (c) processing in
both traditional mills and modern refineries (with their very different technologies); and (d) importing and blending different
refined and crude oils. Furthermore, to develop the oilseeds sector and to reach the development targets, the current ASSP calls
for interventions to (a) increase the production and productivity of oilseeds through appropriate input use, mechanisation and
effective extension; (b) build and strengthen farmers’ organisations to sustainably provide services to their members, particularly
in collective marketing; (c) improve the availability of credit to the sector; (d) reduce post-harvest losses; (e) organise the
marketing of quality seeds for planting; and (f) strengthen the oilseed sector platforms to coordinate the sectoral policies and
practices.
4/27
b. Special aspects relating to IFAD's corporate mainstreaming priorities
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
Climate Change. There are many climate factors affecting how the oilseeds sector will develop. These are: the average
temperature during the two rainy seasons in Uganda (March–June and June–September) warming more than 0.8 °C over the
last 35 years; the impacts of decreasing rainfall and periodic droughts; increased frequency of hot days and decreased
frequency of cold days; floods and droughts being frequent weather hazards; and climate projection (IPCC, AR5 - RCP 8.5)
scenarios indicating the possibility of an increase in average temperature in the order of +2.5 °C in the next 50 years and shorter
rains. To combat this NOSP mainstreams climate change adaptation in its investments through a range of interventions: (i)
farmer support and information to develop flexible adaptation and contingency plans; (ii) technologies to promote integrated soil
fertility management, agro-forestry, crop diversification, conservation agriculture (crop rotation, mulching, green cover crops and
low- or no-till), intercropping legumes with other crops, water management practices and adaptable planting times; (iii) crop
insurance, climate information and early warning systems; (iv) climate smart agriculture practices; (v) expanding value addition;
(vi) post-harvest handling and storage; and (vii) expanding water use efficiencies.
Fallow periods for land regeneration are decreasing as the landholdings become limited in many rural locations. At the same
time the widespread use of fuel wood and need for timber is leading to degradation of soil cover, thus impacting on soil fertility
and retention of moisture. Although the soils are generally fertile, there are already signs of moderate to severe erosion and in
some areas, soil compaction could prove a challenge to water infiltration. The anticipated expansion in oilseeds production and
entailed opening of new land could result in accelerated depletion of soil fertility and land degradation. Degradation is already
notable in some wetlands, which are used for off-season production. NOSP combats these environmental challenges to
smallholders by: (i) enhancing use of various practices to maintain soil fertility such as mulching, crop rotation, cover crop, use of
organic manure and timely planting; (ii) training on soil and water conservation measures; (iii) promotion of agroforestry; (iv)
capacity building on appropriate agro-chemicals use and integrated pest management.
Gender. Women play a predominant role in agriculture (planting, weeding, harvesting, post-harvest processing, storage and
food preparation), while men focus on land clearing and marketing of high value crops. Food crops are typically controlled by
women while men tend to have greater control over cash crops. Investments in value chains for non-traditional exports, like
oilseeds, have important gender implications given women’s more limited involvement in cash crop farming. While women are
increasingly involved in the cash crop production, they lack control over income and benefits from it, given men’s control over
marketing activities. Other constraints to women benefiting from oilseed production relate to their lack of ownership of land,
greater risk aversion, lack of access to inputs (like seed) and labour burden[17] NOSP empowers women through: (i) Gender
Action Learning System (GALS) with integrated nutrition; (ii) introduction of new labour-saving technologies and services; (iii)
incentivises and builds capacity to increase women’s active participation in and leadership of farmer organizations and service
provision (agronomists, machine operators etc.) thereby increasing women’s leadership roles in the community. NOSP will use
the Pro-WEAI methodology 60% of the beneficiaries in NOSP will be women.
The agriculture sector is likely to dominate the employment opportunities for rural youth for the foreseeable future, making the
welfare of youth closely tied to trends in agricultural development. The low levels of rural transformation require investments that
focus on building the capacities of rural youth through infrastructure development and education as well as increasing the
productivity and connectivity of youth in agriculture. Commercialisation is expected to increase the rural opportunity structure for
youth to participate in and benefit from agricultural transformation. NOSP mainstreams youth through opportunities and
engagement in the process of commercialisation such as – (i) harnessing youth farmer groups have been formed at schools as
part of GoU guidelines, to uptake practical demonstrations and field work; (ii) engagement of educated youth as economic
mobilizers in the community; and (iii) providing incentives for youth participation in the training as providers of auxiliary services.
The average dietary energy requirement for Uganda is 2,091 calories per person per day. Most sub-regions in the northern part
of the country face significant food energy gaps with staple food consumption making up a higher than optimal share of the diet,
and nutrient rich foods are greatly under-consumed. The Uganda Nutrition Action Plan 2011 sets a target of 75% of calories
coming from foods other than staples. Notably, the share of calories from nuts and pulses is very low. The inadequacy of diets of
children from six months to two years in Uganda is a major challenge. In 2016, an alarmingly low 15% of children received both
sufficient diversity and meal frequency to yield a minimum acceptable diet (UBOS & ICF, 2018). This rate falls even lower to
2.5% of children under two years receiving a minimum acceptable diet in Acholi, where also the stunting rate is very high. Finally,
wasting is higher than the national average in all NOSP targeted sub-regions except for Teso. NOSP mainstreams nutrition
interventions through – (i) provision of equipment and training to support greater aflatoxin control and awareness; (ii) enhanced
access to nutrition knowledge and healthy food culture through nutrition trainings and other awareness raising activities through
active partnerships with existing programmes to address challenges such as high levels of stunting, wasting and micro-nutrient
deficiencies.
c. Rationale for IFAD involvement
14.
a) IFAD’s strategy in Uganda over the past 20 years has been characterised by thematic consistence, with a focus on
supporting the Government’s achievement of its key ASSP target to move rural populations from subsistence farming to market-
oriented agriculture, through private-sector led models.
15.
b) NOSP is fully aligned with the current COSOP, directly contributing to its three strategic objectives by sustainably increasing -
(i) The production, productivity and climate resilience of smallholder agriculture; (ii) The integration of smallholders into the
markets; and (iii) The access to and use of financial services by the rural population. IFAD involvement is further strongly justified
through the poverty targeting within NOSP. The selected hubs cover the poorest regions of Uganda. As per the 2017 data from
the National Statistics Bureau, the average incidence of poverty[18] in the northern region of the country covering the NOSP
areas is 33%, which is considerably higher than the national average of 21.4%[19]. The NOSP target area covers the driest and
poorest districts of Uganda, many of which are just recovering from a long period of instability, and oilseeds is a “natural” target
sector when aiming to improve the livelihoods of low-income smallholders in these drier and less fertile area of the country.
Amongst other development partners supporting the GoU, IFAD has a comparative advantage in working with poorer and more
remote areas of the country.
5/27
c) Prior investments by IFAD (VODP1 & VODP2) have contributed towards investments in the oilseed sector through
development of inclusive value chain approaches. VODP developed a hub-based planning and implementation model, which
was scaled-up to three new hubs in VODP2. As VODP/VODP2 focussed predominantly on oil palm, these projects have not yet
achieved smallholder commercialisation of oilseeds, hence the GoU request for a pure oilseeds project to further scale-up this
hub-based approach. The investment is oilseeds is further supported by the potential future investments, the GoU is actively
pursuing, in the animal feeds and livestock sectors.
d) Income and investment pathways for smallholders are challenged with several issues e.g., unpredictable climatic events; poor
road infrastructure; limited post-harvest facilities; lack of access to inputs; insufficient and/or inadequate agriculture extension;
lack of sufficient bulking or mechanisms establishing the collective advantages; and lack of sufficient knowledge of the market
forces. IFAD experience of strengthening and building the capacity of smallholders, supporting farmer groups and developing the
productive and business skills of men and women, and in linking farmers to sustainable and profitable markets is highly valued
by the GoU.
e) The GoU’s request, to IFAD and OFID, for further development and full commercialisation of the oilseeds sector leading to - (i)
increased production and productivity of oilseeds and the by-products (especially oil cake) through appropriate input use,
mechanisation and effective private-sector led extension; (ii) build and strengthen smallholders in becoming parity players in the
sector; (iii) improve the accessibility of credit to the sector; (iv) ensure that road networks directly support the sector by increasing
ease of access to and from communities; and (v) organise the availability and increase access to fertilizers and other quality
inputs.
16.
17.
18.
19.
f) NOSP will invest in approaches to reduce these challenges faced by smallholders and meet the GoU’s priorities and targets
for the sector. IFAD’s investment in NOSP is rationalized below:
20.
21.
g) Income and Investment Pathways for smallholders: Oilseeds are predominantly market demand driven and grown by
smallholders in the drier and poorer Districts of Uganda.  Among the benefits of using farmer groups to commercialize are – (i)
farmers are able to directly engage with big millers as they have higher volumes to sell; (ii) minimize millers’ and transporters’
transaction costs related to accessing the crops and negotiation of contracts benefiting from economies of scale; and (iii)
opportunities for the development of the livestock and livestock feed sectors. 
h) Level the playing field for smallholders and millers: Millers need higher consolidated volumes from farmers to achieve
operational efficiencies (longer production runs[20]) and improve their processing flow management; and to reduce negotiation
and monitoring costs associated with sourcing oilseed grains from farmer groups and cooperatives instead of scattered individual
farmers.
22.
i) Availability of appropriate technical services, technology, inputs and services: Multi-Stakeholder Platforms allow the needs of
the stakeholders in the sector to be met by the most appropriate solutions based on a private sector approach.
23.
j) Access to rural finance: IFAD-supported PROFIRA (and prior projects) have built a strong VSLA and SACCO networks, which
can be harnessed better, through product development, including insurance products, to support smallholder access to finance.
24.
k) Results based delivery mechanisms: Contracts to service providers and project contracted staff will be based on outcomes
and milestones as opposed to activities thereby focusing on results that have the highest impact on the smallholders’
performance.
25.
l) Road networks for access to/from market: Development of community access roads will allow smallholders to access better
prices, information, markets and reduce the cost of getting to and from these markets.
B. Lessons learned
26.
IFAD’s prior interventions in Uganda and other countries provide a wealth of lessons for NOSP:
27.
28.
a) VODP reports and sectoral assessments confirm substantial inclusive and systematic growth potential for commercial
smallholder-based supply chains in soy, sunflower and sesame, driven by export and domestic market opportunities, including in
the animal feeds industry. In contrast, the groundnuts industry is almost exclusively domestically focused and opportunities are
smaller and proportionate to domestic growth.
b) An interim evaluation of VODP[21] and the PCR validation[22] revealed that while the poverty impact on all impact domains
were substantial, inclusion of the following would have had additional benefits to the project beneficiaries – (i) more applied
research on soil fertility and new varieties; (ii) encouragement of private sector seed suppliers; (iii) sustained and deepened
extension efforts; (iv) support for mechanization and value addition activities, as well as post-harvest handling and group
marketing; and (v) a stronger focus on promoting direct commercial relations between farmers and private sector actors.
29.
c) Privately-owned processing facilities, while varying in size and capacity, are rapidly expanding their capacities in key oilseed
30.
31.
32.
crops, and increasing their co-operation with well organised farmers’ organisations to ensure supplies of raw material.
d) Private sector-led mobilisation, extension services and capacity building of farmers and their organisations proved to be more
effective and efficient than interventions led by local government structures and public extension services.[23] Privately-owned
processing facilities; aggregators; and cooperatives are already providing extension services to farmers, which are financed by
the groups and/or the provider of the services.
6/27
e) While procurement and contracting of service providers has been efficient in IFAD projects, the following weaknesses were
observed – (i) payments were made in tranches, based on submissions of specific reports not specific outcomes; (ii) monitoring
and evaluation of groups did not follow agreed guidelines; (iii) results are not actively monitored by the PMU/PCU. NOSP will
mitigate the weaknesses by ensuring that contracts are explicit in the requirements for monitoring and evaluation and payments
to the service providers will be outcome based with measurable and monitored indicators. 
f) The oilseeds sub-sector stakeholder platforms, which were abandoned under VODP2 after the exit of an implementing partner,
can successfully be implemented when ultimately run by the private sector[24].These can be revitalised in oilseeds sector in
Uganda and will provide a planning approach that allows value chain actors to build trust, define gaps and constraints in specific
value chains, identify investment areas to improve value chain effectiveness and develop implementation arrangements amongst
stakeholders.
33.
g) Despite earlier interventions, the availability and timeliness of quality inputs, especially planting seeds, for smallholders for
key crops such as soya and sunflower remain a serious impediment to production and require further attention.
34.
35.
h) The operations of the IFAD-supported PROFIRA has improved the access of smallholders to financial services, including the
increased availability of small production loans from Village Savings and Loans Associations (VSLAs) for inputs and small
investment loans from formal financial institutions.
i) Opening new areas for effective and sustainable oilseeds production requires further investments in rural infrastructure,
especially roads. Work carried out by IFAD-supported PRELNOR and projects such as Community Agricultural Infrastructure
Improvement Programme (CAIIP I – III) on rural roads has resulted in lessons that demonstrate that when rural roads projects
are professionally designed, implemented and supervised, they result in significant increased returns to smallholder farmers who
are better connected to markets.
36.
j) Experience from the two MoLG implemented CAIIP projects have shown that where the district engineers have sufficient
supervision and support, they can carry out the construction supervision of CARs effectively and efficiently.
37.
38.
k) Planning and monitoring in relation to value for money:  To minimise the risk of ineligible expenditures, specifically of training
emphasis is placed on outcome/results based contracts with an emphasis on the necessity and reasonableness of the
expenses.
l) Internal control: Improve the system of internal controls, in financial management and procurement through a covenant in the
financial agreement. Harness the report by the Auditor General, as the reports are elaborate and cover areas inclusive value for
money and compliance.
2. Project Description
C. Project objectives, geographic area of intervention and target groups
39.
40.
41.
42.
Project objectives. The project goal of the proposed NOSP is ”inclusive rural transformation through sustainable development
of the oilseeds sector”. The Programme Development Objective is to “to accelerate commercialisation in key oilseeds value
chains and thereby improve the livelihoods and resilience of the smallholders engaged in oilseed production and marketing”.
Geographic area of intervention. NOSP is mplementated accross six area-based hubs in the agro-ecological areas that are
optimal for oilseeds production. Four hubs (West Nile, Northern, Mid-Northern and  Eastern Uganda) were developed during
implementation of VODP2.  Two new hubs will be established to scale-up VODP2 approaches and successes – the Mid-Western
hub and the Karamoja hub. Initial Karamoja hub activities will be supported by the Eastern Hub until the NOSP mid-term review,
when a decision will be if it will be converted to a full hub or not. Within the selected hubs, the project target area covers 75
districts.
The hub selection was based on oilseeds production potential as influenced by agro-ecological, social, demographic and
economic criteria including, existence of emerging processing facilities, entrepreneurial potential among the target groups and
the poverty level of the population.
Target groups and targeting strategy[25] NOSP will work directly with 120,000 smallholder households (HHs) in the six hubs
(four existing VODP2 hubs). The project’s primary beneficiary group is smallholder farmers (women, men and youth) growing
oilseeds. NOSP will also actively partner with processors, input suppliers, service providers, agents, traders, transporters,
financiers, and scientific and academic research institutions and nucleus farmers.
43.
The key criteria for selection of beneficiaries under oilseeds are those poor households that face constraints in their efforts to
commercialize their oilseeds value chain activities. An inclusive targeting approach will be adopted to ensure that the process of
commercialization does not threaten the tenuous livelihoods of the rural poor and that the women, the youth and other
disadvantaged groups have equal opportunities to share in the benefits. The project will provide differentiated support to three
distinct sub-groups of smallholder oilseeds growers, based on their degree of commercialization.
7/27
Target groups
Constraints
Project Support/Activities
Smallholder farmers
growing oilseeds
●  120,000 smallholder farmer HHs will be targeted
for oilseeds supply chain development
●  the percentage of participating poor smallholder
farmers living under the poverty line will be at least
proportional to the district poverty rate in each
district
●  formation of farmer groups
●  clustering of producer groups
●  poor group organisation and self- governance
●  establishment of linkages to traders, processors,
buyers, FIs through facilitation of multi-stakeholder
platforms
●  poor management in produce collection and
bulking
●  capacity-building trainings
●  limited land to grow oilseeds
●  low yield and quality
●  inadequate modern/labour saving equipment
and technologies
●  inadequate input supply, particularly quality
seeds
●  investment facilitation for private and public goods
investments
●  provision for small scale irrigation for local seed
production
●  provision of post harvesting facilities
●  support to research and irrigation
●  inadequate access to credit
●  provision of value addition facilities
●  inadequate assets for collateral
●  inadequate policy-related information
●  poor farm management, production and post-
harvesting skills
●  inadequate business development skills
●  inadequate access to market channels
●  price fluctuations
●  production and harvest affected by climate
change and environment risks
●  business skills training focusing on farming-as-a-
business skills
●  financial literacy training
●  availability of avenues with input supply,
especially quality seeds
●  crop insurance schemes will be in place with
selected FIs. Approximately 30% of the farmers are
expected to benefit from crop insurance.
●  training on nutritious diet and innovative uses of
oilseeds in the diet
●  select farmer groups will be supported to become
local seed businesses/LSBs
●  LSBs will be trained in seed production quality
management systems
●  availability of farm mechanization and auxiliary
farm service providers
●  development of a national curriculum for
agricultural service provision that focuses on good
agricultural practices including agronomic practices
for production, post-harvest handling etc.
New entrant and more
remote oilseeds
smallholders
Semi-commercial and
commercial smallholders in
oilseeds concentration
areas (no more than 20%
of the beneficiaries)
key characteristics: Cash crops
8/27
(cassava, maize, groundnuts), cultivate
0.6 - 2 acres, able to hire oxen and farm
labour;
production – limited by inadequate
access to finance; mechanization;
extension and quality inputs
 post harvest handling and issues with
aflatoxins
 inadequate transport and inadequate
roads as access to market infrastructure
key characteristics: Cash income from
employment, pensions, remittances,
crops (cassava, maize, groundnuts),
cultivate more than 2 acres, own own 1-2
cows, 2-3 goats, several chicken; hire
labour, own a bicycle
 need for technical production and
marketing knowledge;
limited by access to finance and
mechanization
promotion of high-quality  seed
promotion of climate smart agricultural
practices
promotion of mechanization and use of
legume seed inoculants
clustering for improved market access,
bulking and off-take services
promotion of high-quality OPV seed, with
move to purchase of hybrid seed
clustering for improved market access,
bulking and off-take services
explore potential of running the
mechanisation services
can be part of farmer group but will receive
no funds directly from NOSP
44.
Targeting of the 120,000 HH focuses on the following main criteria:
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
a) Located in the more remote districts with high poverty incidences but within the hubs;
b) Willing and able to engage in meaningful income generating enterprises;
c) Lacking extension on the critical aspects of production from enterprise selection, agronomics, harvesting and post-harvest
handling, market information and market information;
d) Largely entry level growers with interest in the oilseed crops:
Measures to avoid elite capture – household selection will focus on households with average or below average farm sizes[26],
those that are female/youth -headed and those that are not commercially linked to the oilseeds market.  More selection criteria
and details are given in the targeting section of the PIM.
50.
Furthermore, improvements to community access roads serving selected areas with NOSP-clustered oilseed producer groups
will improve the livelihoods of some 356,000 rural households in the six NOSP hubs.
51.
The project’s targeting strategy will ensure the inclusion of poor and marginalized HHs who meets the project selection criteria
which is further defined in the PIM. Women and youth (people aged 18-35) will be specially targeted. Considering the pivotal role
that women play in farming and household economy, 60% of the project beneficiaries are expected to be women who will be
targeted both as individual farmers and members of the HHs. At least 30% of the HHs is expected to be Female-headed
households (FHHs). Similarly, in the light of the GoU’s and IFAD’s vision and strategy to support youth and their employment in
the agriculture value chains, youth will be a core target group of NOSP comprising at least 40% of the beneficiaries in value
chain development. In addition, the rural unemployed in the area will benefit from employment opportunities on farm and in
oilseed processing units in the supported value chains. Selection of farmer groups for NOSP support will be finalised during the
participatory mapping and clustering process at project start-up, which will further define sub-county and parish coverage within
the targeted districts.
D. Components/outcomes and activities
NOSP Components and activities[27] The activities of the proposed NOSP are organised in two mutually interdependent
components:
Component 1: Support to Oilseed Value Chain Development
Component 2: Support to Market Linkage Infrastructure Serving Oilseed Sector.
52.
Component 1: Support to Oilseed Value Chain Development
53.
The objective of Component 1 is to facilitate the private sector led growth of competitive, inclusive value chains for priority
oilseeds and their associated support markets. NOSP will accelerate the growth of competitive clusters and value chains for
oilseeds and pro-actively develop opportunities for further private sector investments in oilseed-related by-products, especially to
establish a competitive animal feed industry in Uganda. To be truly sustainable, the commodities and production practices must
be well-suited to local agro-climatic condition, both now and in the future as the climate changes (see Figure 1). The clusters for
NOSP support will be selected based on the criteria outlined in the PIM. A critical part of the selection process is the detailed
analysis of each of the proposed commodities and associated small-scale production systems to establish that there are viable
and affordable investment pathways that are accessible to the target group.
9/27
54.
In addition, NOSP will support a small number of ‘demonstration’ clusters in downstream supply chains that add value to the
primary supply chain, especially related to soy, such as animal feed and smallholder commercial livestock. Performance of these
demonstration clusters will be reviewed at MTR to assess if they are an effective mechanism for further contributing to the
development objectives or can be scaled up in a subsequent investment.
55.
Component 1 is presented as two sub-components:
Sub-Component 1.1: Cluster Development – covering the primary supply chains through an inclusive cluster development
approach in each of the hubs
Sub-Component 1.2: Support Production, Productivity and Market Development – covering the supply of essential financial
and technical services and inputs.
56.
Sub-Component 1.1: Cluster Development
57.
The NOSP activities under Sub-component 1.1 fall into two categories: (a) supply chain brokering and investment facilitation and
(b) producer group mentoring.
58.
 a) Supply Chain Brokering and Investment Facilitation
59.
Cluster selection and verification. For each supported commodity, the potential for cluster development will be reconfirmed
through a series of validations, including the suitability of the crop in the area taking into account future climate projections,
followed by an opportunity verification workshop held for each commodity and cluster, represented to main stakeholders
60.
61.
62.
63.
(producers, buyers/millers, suppliers) for validation and confirmation of credible opportunities and commitments.
10/27
Multi-stakeholder platforms. The core of the value chain and cluster development approach is a rolling process of action-
oriented brokering, dialogue and investment facilitation among the key actors in each cluster/hub to catalyse investments and
remove bottlenecks to increase trading and profits, and to make the most of practical opportunities for growth. To achieve this,
NOSP will organise multi-stakeholder platforms (MSP) for oilseed supply chains at two levels: cluster and hub. The MSPs will
facilitate (i) the primary actors to jointly identify practical opportunities and bottlenecks for developing their cluster and
corresponding priorities for individual or joint actions, (ii) trust among the different players, (iii) greater common understanding of
the opportunities and challenges among critical suppliers, such as research and financial institutions; (iv) a mechanism for local
coordination of various investment initiatives to be harnessed; and (v) the conduit for enhancement of an enabling policy
environment, derived and driven by the stakeholders.This wil include enhancement of the policy agenda for women's
empowernment and towards youth socioeconomic empowerment, specifically in agriculture.
These are expected to result in developing and negotiating practical trading plans between producers and buyers/businesses.
MSPs will be held regularly (at least twice per year) at the cluster and hub level, initially facilitated by the NOSP team but later
jointly by the producers and businesses themselves. MSPs will operate systematically according to a rolling joint “cluster action
plan”, produced for each cluster as an output of the meetings. Subprojects identified by the MSPs will be subject to
environmental and social screening, in order to ensure that any risks are avoided or mitigated. Screening criteria, guidelines for
risk identification and generic mitigation for anticipated subproject activities are provided in the ESMF and incorporated in the
PIM. In addition, these subprojects will have to undertake ESIAs in line with NEMA’s requirements and NEMA certificates of
approval received, prior to implementation.
Investment Facilitation. Driven by the investment priorities set through the MSP process, two types of investments are likely to
be needed. Firstly, private goods investments (such as on-farm technology and auxiliary services), primarily financed with
private resources by an individual, producer group or enterprise (e.g. buyer or supplier). Secondly, public goods investments (for
example, action research, trials, policy enhancements), financed through a combination of public and private resources, where
the majority of benefits are captured by a broad network of primary actors and it is not feasible for the investments to be financed
as purely private enterprises. Each type of these investments will be facilitated in the targeted clusters by NOSP as required.
For the NOSP-supported six MSPs operating at the hub level in the main oilseed production regions, a key target is to pro-
actively facilitate private sector investments in value addition operations for oilseed cakes. It is expected that as a result of NOSP
activities, the volumes and quality of oilseed procured by the processors from smallholders will rapidly increase. This will create
a basis for the establishment of viable large-scale processing facilities for animal feeds. NOSP-supported hub-level MSPs will be
used as platforms to inform agro-enterprises of improved business opportunities in this sub-sector as the volume of available
seed cake grows. For the interested firms, NOSP will provide projections of future oilseed production levels and offer targeted
support for feasibility studies aiming at the establishment of animal feed plants.  
64.
(b) Producer Group Mentoring
65.
66.
67.
Group formation and mobilisation. The objective is that all producer groups in NOSP clusters should graduate to being fully
independent, financially robust and self-managing within four years of project engagement. Further, a majority of group members
and their households would have the skills and confidence to grow their farm enterprise, manage climate risks and face fewer
social barriers to their development. Mobilisation of individuals and households into the clusters and engaging them into NOSP
activities will be led by a team of market-oriented Economic Mobilizers (EM) in each hub with support from the hub Supply Chain
teams. For more mature groups, approximately 2-3 years of mentoring under NOSP are envisaged to suffice while they
increasingly commercialise in their activities.
Business skills training. Business skills for farmers are vital if they are to succeed in the supported clusters. Being better able
to assess the likely costs and benefits of investing in their farming enterprise will equip rural households to make more informed
choices in their small farm investments. It is especially important that young women and men, who will be prioritised for these
activities, gain these business skills. Business skills training, focused on farming as a business, will be provided to all interested
individuals in a cluster through a peer-to-peer process. Business Skills Mentors (BSMs), residents of the communities they work
in, will be nominated by each group from among their peers and will then be trained by NOSP to provide business skills training
in their local community. They will be paid by the programme for delivering training sessions and are expected to gain high
levels of skill and confidence, contributing increasingly to supporting the preparation of farm investment plans and helping with
collective negotiations between their group and traders/buyers.
Social Mentoring. Social mentoring will be offered to the households of all supported producer groups to address risks and
barriers and ensure that households are able to maximize their socio-economic progress. Mentoring activities will be delivered at
community level and in groups. In addition, approximately 40% of high-risk households will benefit from social mentoring at
household level to address specific gender equality issues such as household decision-making and control over productive
resources. Social mentoring activities will adopt the Gender Action Learning System (GALS). The impacts of climate change,
opportunities for youth as well as nutrition are important issues among target communities and especially for young women and
men. The group-based social mentoring processes and individual mentoring of high-risk households using household
methodologies will seek to address these issues.
68.
Sub-Component 1.2: Support Production, Productivity and Market Development
69.
Service market development forms a vital part of the supply chains development process. Vibrant support markets, including
commercial supply of inputs and services, are essential for sustaining competitive clusters and also for enabling other clusters to
emerge to copy the initial successes. Within profitable clusters and supply chains, the costs of such services and inputs should
be an affordable standard business cost for producers and businesses and should not require external subsidy. NOSP will
therefore focus on facilitating investments that develop, in a broadly harmonised manner, the demand and supply of these
market-based services and inputs in the clusters. The objective of Sub-component 1.2 is that there are active and vibrant
market-based providers for these critical services in all project-supported clusters. The approach to achieve this will be to
promote both supply and demand for these services in tandem. NOSP will initially focus on two critical types of services markets:
(a) financial services and (b) technical services.
11/27
70.
(a) Financial Services
71.
NOSP investments in rural financial services aim at increasing the investments by financial institutions (FI) in the oilseed value
chains. They will largely focus on improving the access of smallholder farmers to financial services. The project’s strategy of de-
risking smallholder production and building resilience including climate change in farming households will improve farmers’
negotiation position with FIs. At the same time business and financial literacy training and crop insurance will facilitate greater
flow of financial services to the producers.
72.
NOSP’s rural finance interventions will:
73.
(a) strengthen 4,600 VSLAs in the development of products for agricultural production finance, in addition to their present
consumption smoothening products. Based on production plans and gaps in credit supply, VSLAs will be linked to financial
institutions. The results of the work carried out by IFAD-supported PROFIRA programme in the development of VSLAs will be
fully utilised, the PROFIRA-established VSLAs will be further developed to finance oilseeds-related operations and the NOSP
support to VSLAs will be focused on clusters that were not covered by PROFIRA operations;
74.
(b) provide technical assistance to around 75 SACCOs/other cooperatives for agricultural lending and product development,
using VSLAs as linkages to farmers; and
75.
76.
(c) provide technical support at the national level to assist at least four regulated financial institutions to develop innovative
products for the NOSP target group, including investment finance with medium-term loans. Furthermore, the project will train the
frontline staff of lending institutions in innovative agriculture lending practices. Tri-partite partnerships between the Agricultural
Credit Facility in the Bank of Uganda, financing institutions and the project will be forged to ensure affordable credit for
smallholder farmers and SMEs working in the oilseeds value chains.
Agricultural insurance for oilseed smallholder producers will be piloted and scaled-up by NOSP in close partnership with the
Uganda Agricultural Insurance Scheme (UAIS), managed by the Agriculture Insurance Consortium (AIC), with technical support
from the INSURED programme[28] NOSP will support: (i) agricultural insurance literacy training to VSLA members, (ii)
agricultural insurance training for branch staff and credit officers of financial institutions, (iii) training of branch staff in insurance
companies and insurance agents to service NOSP target groups especially with timely claim settlement and (iv) provision of
limited technical assistance for product development/adjustment. The insurance will contribute to managing climate change risks.
77.
At the end of the project, about 60% of VSLAs are expected to be credit-linked with SACCOs and other FIs. The estimated
volume of credit disbursements is UGX 10 billion of crop loans in each season, and UGX 7 billion for equipment financing.
Approximately 30% of the farmers are expected to benefit from crop insurance.
78.
(b) Technical Services
79.
80.
Farm Production Advisor Scheme. Given the insufficiency of theGovernment extension service, the project, where the
Government extension service is not to the level of commercializing the farmers, NOSP  will launch a private service Farm
Production Advisors (FPA) promotion scheme.
Development of manuals for agriculture service provision. NOSP will support the enhancement/development of a manuals
for agricultural service provision that focuses on good agricultural practices, specifically for oilseeds, and farming as a business.
The curriculum will include disease/pest management, agronomic practices for production including climate smart agriculture
options, post-harvest handling, testing moisture content using simple methods, marketing, business skills, bookkeeping, financial
literacy and group dynamics. Simple technical guides/videos on good agronomic practices will be produced and translated into
local language.
81.
Though a competitive call for proposals individuals, producer groups or other primary actors in the supply chain (e.g. input
suppliers, agents, millers etc.) will outline their need for a FPA to support their business. The FPA scheme will identify and train
200 Farm Production Advisors on technical and business aspects over two full production seasons, including one week per
month residential training, supported by on-the-job coaching. NOSP will fund on a reducing subsidy the costs of the FPA for the
first two years only, after that the person should be able to be self-sustaining. Each FPA will be expected to:
Provide essential production and business advice to farmers grouped in the clusters to enable farmers to adopt the improved
production practices necessary for smallholder commercialisation of their oilseed crops.
Establish demonstration plots displaying best practice production systems and techniques, as well as use of small-scale
mechanization and equipment.
12/27
82.
To support the FPAs NOSP will conduct suitability mapping for the target oilseed crops to assess their suitability for their local
agro-ecological conditions and to quantify the expected future impacts of climate change. Crop suitability mapping will be
undertaken and informed by spatially explicit monitoring and modelling of land health and agronomic suitability as well multi-
dimensional trade-off analysis to identify locally appropriate Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) practices. Land health surveys will
be used to establish baseline conditions of soil constraints (including soil fertility assessments), as well as land use and cover,
assessment of farming practices etc. On-station trials, on-farm trials, demonstrations and field days will all be used to develop
profitable and climate resilient oilseed production practices.
83.
A lead technical service provider will be competitively procured and be responsible for the overall leadership and performance of
the FPA scheme, in each hub. They will design and set-up all aspects of the scheme, including design of the ToT training and
training materials to be used with farm clients. The lead service provider will also be responsible for supervising and quality
assurance of the performance of the scheme implementers in the field.
84.
Auxiliary Farm Services Promotion Scheme. NOSP will launch an Auxiliary Farm Services Promotion Scheme to stimulate
investment in local service provision for availability of powered tillage, spraying, planting, harvesting and threshing services.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.
90.
The scheme will offer partial investment incentives to cover some of the risk for the early adopters and then reduce these
incentives over three years to return to market-based financing. The project will offer partial investment incentives to absorb
some of the risk for the early adopters and then gradually reduce these incentives in subsequent rounds to return to market-
based financing. In the initial rounds of the scheme, own/loan financing of at least 60% will be contributed by prospective
Auxiliary Farm Service Providers. The rest will be from the project contribution and credit from financial institutions. The scheme
offers investment incentives ranging from 25-40% in round one (PY 2-3), 15-25% in round two (PY 4-5) and 10% in round three
(PY 6-7). 
NOSP also provides a full training package to the providers of these services, to ensure appropriate use and maintenance of the
procured equipment. Commercial auxiliary farm service providers may be dedicated businesses or embedded in the industry as
service units of other industry players, such as producer groups or input suppliers. Once established they are expected to run on
a fully commercial basis.
A lead technical service provider will be competitively procured and be responsible for the overall leadership and performance of
the scheme, in each hub. They will design and set-up all aspects of the scheme, including design of the graduated equipment
packages and associated business models as well as ToT training materials and operations and maintenance guides to be used
by the auxiliary service providers. The lead service provider will also be responsible for supervising and quality assurance of the
performance of the scheme implementers. They will also develop and manage the relations with key machinery suppliers as well
as focal points in the partner banks that are interested to provide partial loan financing to the auxiliary service providers. The lead
technical service provider will work closely with the senior rural finance staff in the PCU in developing the financing models and
establishing the necessary relationships with partner banks.
Quality Declared Seed Production Scheme. Farmer group seed production and delivery activities will be linked to the on-
going local seed business (LSB). The LSB programme has been working successfully with farmer groups for the last 10 years.
NOSP will build on this scheme and avoid duplication of efforts between different programmes. LSBs will be supported, through
the sector financing window, for irrigation. The objective of this scheme is to stimulate local seed businesses to supply Quality
Declared Seed (QDS) of soy, sunflower, sesame and groundnut. Firstly, NOSP will develop the capacity of farmer groups to
become local seed businesses (LSBs) through training in seed production quality management systems and by providing a
subsidy to cover certification and input and equipment costs for the first two seasons. One farmer group will be selected from
each cluster based on the demonstration of their capacity to grow and store the crop.
To support seed certification and to supplement the work of the National Seed Certification Service (NSCS) NOSP, in
partnership with the Integrated Seed Sector Development (ISSD) programme, will develop a network of NSCS-accredited private
seed inspectors and labs. This will address the capacity gaps within the department and at the same time introduce a private
sector-based inspection function to the sector, as allowed by the Seed and Plant Regulation Act of 2017.
The sustainability and resilience of local seed systems is directly linked to timely supply of quality foundation seed and access to
new varieties that suit smallholder farming systems. NOSP will therefore, with a focused approach, promote research projects on
the development of new oilseed varieties and crop husbandry practices by partnering with NARO, ZARDIS and relevant
universities. Scholarships will be awarded to Ugandan postgraduate students, to support the capacity of existing oilseed research
programmes at these institutions.
91.
Component 1 Implementation Arrangements
92.
The activities of Component 1 will be implemented jointly by the NOSP supply chain staff and experts, the NOSP co-financier
and service provider - Heifer International covering Component 1 operations in two hubs, contracted private service providers
and the key stakeholders in the oilseed industry. Detailed implementation arrangements, including the relevant TOR, are
described in the PIM attached to the PDR.
93.
Component 2: Support to Market Linkage Infrastructure Serving Oilseed Sector
94.
The objective of this component is to improve local level public transportation infrastructure to facilitate the commercialisation of
the oilseed sector. The implementation of activities under this component will encourage private sector investments in the sector,
promote the production and marketing of good quality oilseeds and reduce the time and cost of transport to the markets. The
component will reduce transaction costs and increase farmers' income through improved community access road (CAR)
networks. The successful implementation of Component 2 is a key prerequisite for the reaching of the productivity, production,
and household income growth targets of Component 1.
13/27
95.
The component implementation will be led by the MoLG and their district and sub-county local governments, in complete
cooperation with MAAIF.
96.
97.
98.
99.
Selection of community access roads. The identification of roads for NOSP support will be done through a consultative and
participatory process at the district/sub-county and multi-stakeholder platform levels. The identification will be initiated by a
mapping of priority oilseed production areas (current and potential) and the status of CARs in these areas. Community access
road improvement efforts will rehabilitate and open new roads serving priority oilseed production areas. The criteria for selection
of the CARs for NOSP financing are described in the PIM. Given that NOSP is a Category B project with regards to
environmental and social risks, the ESMF includes environmental and social screening criteria to ensure that, among others,
lengths of roads being prioritised adhere to the 10 km and below threshold, they do not cause physical and economic
displacement, or impact on environmentally sensitive areas. Detailed screening criteria related to the environment and social
aspects will be provided in the ESMF and incorporated into the PIM.
Districts will prepare a map of the selected sub-counties growing oilseeds and compile a list of priority roads including a survey
of existing roads, for potential NOSP support, assisted by the MSPs and oilseed farmers. It is not expected that every sub-
country will have a road. Further prioritisation of CARs will be done across the districts. The PCU will submit a list of the priority
roads to the Project Implementation Coordination Team (PICT) in the MoLG to begin the feasibility studies. The final list of roads
to be developed will be selected after feasibility studies. The roles and responsibilities for each implementation is defined with
the PIM.
Community awareness and social mobilization. When the roads to be improved are identified, the district and sub-county
local governments will hold community meetings in the villages that the road will pass through to make the citizens aware of the
upcoming project, make them fully aware of possible negative and positive impacts of the road and get acceptance of the road
applying the principals of free, prior and informed consent. The project will facilitate the establishment of area level road
committees to facilitate interaction with the communities during road design and construction activities. The committee will assist
in community consultation process, monitoring construction activities and their impacts, advising on mitigation measures
including participatory implementation of the environment and social management plans and organising road maintenance
groups. The committee will also assist in mobilizing labour during construction. The road committee will participate in the site
meetings and endorse the payment certificates, to express satisfaction with the way the contractor worked with the community.
Feasibility studies and detailed designs of CARs. Feasibility studies and detailed designs will be done by contracted
consulting companies. The consultants will be selected through a competitive procurement process by the PICT. Work packages
will be organised for efficiency and cost effectiveness in procurement. Socio-economic baseline studies will be undertaken in the
road zones of influence (2 km each side of the road). The baseline survey will identify areas opened for agriculture, types and
quantities of crops being grown, estimate usage of the exiting road/track by type of vehicles, and estimate time and cost to get
produce to the market. This data will be used to estimate the cost effectiveness of the selected option of road construction. The
cost of feasibility studies and engineering designs is estimated at US$1,000/km.
100.
Specification of CARs. Existing CARs upgraded or new ones built will be constructed with standards consistent with climate
change resilient norms. An estimated 2,495 km of CARs will be constructed or rehabilitated, including all the required ancillary
structures as per the requirements of the District Class III roads standard of the Ministry of Works and Transport (MoWT).
Concerning climate resilience, projections based on Global Climate Models indicate potential 10-20% increase in run-off for the
whole country, hence the use of District Class III road specifications for the CARs is a way to ensure that the roads are climate
proofed. In addition, the road design shall use hydrological models that include the future climate scenarios to confirm the
adequacy of hydraulic structures to extreme climate events, commensurate with the expected life of the road. In addition to
integrating emerging climate parameters and projections into road design, the project will work to incorporate road water
harvesting in all roads as feasible, where the opportunities are available and do not lead to excessive increase in construction
costs.
101.
Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs). ESIAs will be carried out for all roads that are selected as feasible,
in accordance with national laws and regulations. ESIAs are required for construction of new roads, rehabilitation of roads
involving new alignments, in cases where relocation of people will be required and rehabilitation or construction of a road that
passes through sensitive areas. A Project Brief (or limited environmental analysis) is required for opening up of community
access and feeder roads, construction of drainage channels, upgrading of community access and feeder roads to bitumen
standards, temporary roads less than 10km in length for access to infrastructure facilities, small bridge construction, swamp road
improvement (culvert installation), construction of agro-processing facilities, and establishment of farming demonstration
sites.[29]. They will then be screened based on criteria developed in the ESMF in order to ensure that environmental and social
risks are avoided or mitigated. Thus Project Briefs (equivalent to environmental and social management plans – ESMPs - per
IFAD SECAP requirements) will be undertaken as part of the feasibility studies. The Project Briefs/ESMPs will have to be
approved by NEMA prior to the implementation. The cost of preparing Project Briefs/ESMPs is estimated to be US$600/km.
102.
Implementation of Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs). The ESMPs will be developed during the impact
assessments or analysis. The plans will be developed in a participatory manner and implemented following the same principle.
The implementation of the ESMPs will be monitored by the road management committee. The resources for the ESMP
implementation will be included in the project budget. A provision of US$269,000 has been made for the implementation of
mitigation measures.
103.
Construction of roads. Road construction will be carried out by competitively recruited private contractors to District Class III
road specifications. The procurement processes will be managed by the Local Governments with support and supervision by the
PICT in MoLG. During construction, the contractor will prepare progress reports and organize regular site meetings. Work
packages will be organised to attract competition from contractors and provide good value for money. The cost of road
construction is estimated at US$20,000/km[30]. The cost will include all drainage ancillary works and other ESMP mitigation
measures that will be required for each road.
14/27
104.
The employment of workers will follow national construction industry standards, and ILO Core Conventios, paying attention to
conditions for workers, such as provision of safety clothes, adequate resting breaks, adequate clean water supply and toilet
facilities. The contractor will be encouraged to recruit both skilled and unskilled labour from the local communities as much as is
practical. Attention will be paid to identify work that can be done by women and facilitate their employment in a way convenient
for them.
105.
Construction supervision. The District Local Government engineers will be responsible for the supervision of construction
works. The PICT engineers will provide quality assurance during the construction by making periodic site inspections, attending
site meetings and reviewing proposed construction methodologies, test results, progress reports and payment certificates. The
PICT can reject a payment certificate that it considers inadequate. The road construction supervision can be contracted to
consultant companies, where the capacity of district engineers is limited. As a part of M&E activities, the construction supervision
reporting will be digitalised. The digital platform will also work as a collaborative platform among the project staff to help in
sharing experiences and solutions in real time across the project. The cost of supervising consulting services has been budgeted
at US$1,000/km.
106.
Commissioning and handover. At the completion of construction, each road will be commissioned and handed over to the
district authorities by the contractors. The road committee will also sign the handover certificate to indicate that they participated
in the construction and are satisfied with the way the contractor conducted work.
107.
Road maintenance: Road maintenance will be the responsibility of the district LG and the sub-county LG. These two local
government entities were recently provided with road maintenance equipment from the Road Fund. The local governments
receive annual financial allocations for road maintenance, but it is too low to cover all roads. The choice of using District Class III
road specifications was also informed by the need to have roads that will last for longer periods with minimum maintenance. The
tripartite agreement will include an undertaking by each district that adequate resources will be made available for the
maintenance of the roads. It is also preferred that that priority CARs selected are potential candidates for upgrading to district
roads, so that they can benefit from allocation of funding from the road fund.
108.
Implementation arrangements. The lead implementing agency for Component 2 is MoLG. The ministry will set up a PICT to
manage the day to day activities of the project. MAAIF and MoLG will identify the first batch of roads that will be designed in-
house by MoLG engineers to facilitate early start of activities, as practiced under the CAAIP project. The PICT will be
responsible for all the procurement under Component 2, including the procurement to be carried out at district level. NOSP will
provide senior level support to the procurement operations of Component 2 both at the PCU level (through the Procurement and
Contracts Manager) and at the PICT/MoLG (through the Procurement Specialist posted at the PICT).Comprehensive
implementation guidelines for Component 2, including timelines for the planned activities, are in the PIM.
E. Theory of Change
109.
The NOSP theory of change is based on the premise that a market-driven approach is needed to help smallholder oilseeds
producers to reach a higher level of commercialisation and a better bargaining position in their oilseeds operations, and thereby
to increase their incomes and improve their livelihoods, food security and nutrition. NOSP will provide targeted support to
smallholders and other stakeholders in the oilseeds sector to increase productivity and production, build sustainable livelihoods
and create stronger linkages with national and export markets (see the diagram for the NOSP Theory of Change in Annex 2).
This will directly contribute to GoU’s national priorities to commercialise the oilseeds sector and its related value chains, to
reduce economic disparity and to promote food security and nutrition. 
110.
Smallholder farmers in the NOSP target areas have demonstrated their willingness to produce marketable surpluses of oilseeds
for local and regional markets. The increasing demand for oilseeds and the higher returns from production have led to increased
areas being planted with these crops over the last five years. However, supply chains remain under-developed, farmers’
organisations weak and the prices for farmers’ produce are largely dictated by the off-takers. At the same time smallholder
farmers have to deal with increased threats from a changing climate and degradation of their natural resource base.
111.
Under NOSP, IFAD and its partners will build on their collective experience of strengthening and building the capacity of
smallholders, supporting farmer groups and developing the productive and business skills of men and women, and in linking
farmers to sustainable and profitable markets. By working to improve productivity, capacity and market development, NOSP will
contribute to poverty reduction and economic development in the project areas. The project offers an opportunity to develop an
approach that can be scaled-up by the GoU for achieving its strategic vision for agriculture growth and development. This is
operationalised in NOSP operations by: (i) facilitating a process where stakeholders (farmer groups, private agribusinesses,
private commercial service providers, public sector) can develop a common vision, build trust among themselves and identify
concrete business proposals in response to clear market opportunities; (ii) developing the capacity of local service providers to
provide timely and quality services; (iii) increasing household access to markets, good agricultural practices, better organization
and affordable credit; and (iv) using public and private sector funding to reduce production and transportation costs and post-
harvest losses through expanded and improved community access roads networks.
F. Alignment, ownership and partnerships
112.
Alignment with SDGs. The NOSP design is fully aligned with the key SDGs. It contributes directly to SDG 1 (end poverty), SDG
2 (end hunger) and SDG 10 (reduced inequalities) through its key targets of economic and social transformation and increased
commercialisation of the smallholder agriculture. Its targeting approach relies largely on active and beneficial participation of
women and girls in the NOSP groups and clusters (SDG 5 on gender and empowerment). The project directly promotes inclusive
economic growth and employment (SDG 8) in the leading cash crop sector in the whole implementation area and promotes
sustainable industrialisation in Northern and Eastern Uganda (SDG 9). Finally, on climate change (SDG 13), NOSP interventions
in each hub aim to increase adaptive capacity of the smallholders through new, smarter farming practices and at the same time
to generally improve the resilience of households through the improved household incomes and asset ownership in a “no regret”
manner.
15/27
113.
Alignment with national priorities. The NOSP objectives and interventions fully align to GoU’s development strategies of
NDPII and ASSP that focus on rural economic transformation and stress the importance of the commercialisation of smallholder
agriculture. Oilseeds are listed as strategic crops in the ASSP with strong linkages to the development of key agro-processing
industries as well as to the livestock sector through improved availability of animal cakes and feeds.
114.
Alignment with IFAD’s policies and corporate priorities. NOSP is fully aligned with the current Uganda COSOP, directly
contributing to its three strategic objectives. At the corporate level, NOSP contributes to IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025,
notably Strategic Objectives 2 and 3 (SO2 and SO3) of enabling inclusive and sustainable transformation of rural areas through
smallholder-led growth and mainstreaming priorities (climate change, gender, youth and nutrition).
115.
Harmonization and Partnerships. NOSP will develop synergies with the other IFAD-supported programmes in Uganda to
avoid duplication of efforts and to enhance the overall impact of the portfolio. It will link with PROFIRA to improve access to
financial services for NOSP beneficiaries and builds on the PROFIRA’s results to develop the VSLA model to better serve the
needs of the smallholder oilseed producers. Furthermore, the community access roads operations of NOSP benefit from the
models and results of PRELNOR on infrastructure development in the northern areas of Uganda. With some overlap between
PRELNOR and NOSP, the two projects will work together to have ensure that there is clear targeting, and approaches to the way
the development of CARs are done. IFAD/EU-supported Yield Uganda Investment Fund activities target, among other agro-
firms, companies investing in processing facilities in then oilseeds industry and the related animal feed industry with its equity
and semi-equity financing products. Key private sector players are considering expansion to the oilseeds sector and NOSP will
continue discussions with them in this respect. Heifer International and OFID are co-financing partners in the NOSP investments.
Furthermore, NOSP will build strategic and operational partnerships with other on-going and pipeline projects funded by other
development partners such GIZ/KfW, Danida, DfID, the EU and USAID in oilseeds sub-sector, especially with the projects
operating in the same geographic locations in Northern and Eastern Uganda.
G. Costs, benefits and financing
a. Project costs
116.
The total investment and recurrent cost for the project is estimated at USD 160.7 million (UGX 655,694 million) including
contingencies. The total base costs are USD 138.1 million (UGX 509,952 million). Physical and price contingencies account for
USD 11.5 million and USD 11.1 million, respectively (8 per cent and 8 per cent of the total base costs). Baseline investment
costs are estimated at USD 128.82 million representing 93 per cent of total baseline cost.
117.
Project Components 1 and 2 are respectively counted as 13.8% and 20% climate change adaptation finance. The total amount of
IFAD climate finance for this project is preliminarily calculated as US$16.2 million or 16% as per the MDB Methodologies for
Tracking Climate Adaptation and Mitigation Finance.
118.
The breakdown of the costs in USD by component/outputs and financiers is shown in the table 1 below:
119.
The breakdowns of the costs in USD by expenditure category and financiers, as well as by years are shown in the following
tables.
16/27
b. Project financing/co-financing strategy and plan
120.
The IFAD loan is programmed for USD 99.56 million. Co-financing from Opec Fund for International Development (OFID) is
targeted to cover roads civil works expenses totalling USD 30 million. Heifer International will finance USD 6.15 million of the
Producer Group mentoring activity under the Cluster Development Sub-Component. Smallholder beneficiaries and small
enterprises will contribute to the tractor mechanisation operations of the Auxiliary Farm Services Promotion Scheme USD 4.8
million and USD 5.3 million, respectively. The Government will contribute USD 14.3 million in the form of taxes, duties and
operating costs. In addition, technical assistance by Kuehne Foundation will be an in-kind contribution of USD 13,000 towards
the training of hub-based value chain experts over a period of three years to enhance their skills and methods in smallholder
oilseed producer training.
c. Disbursement
121.
Under NOSP, there will be three types of disbursement mechanisms for the programme consisting of: (i) Advance Withdrawals;
(ii) Direct Payments; and (iii) Reimbursements. Disbursements from IFAD will be made by way of an advance to the Designated
Accounts and subsequent replenishments based on expenditure incurred as supported with Statement of Expenditure (SoE).
There will be two designated accounts that would receive funds from IFAD, which will have a corresponding dedicated project
operational account in local currency managed by PMU. The modalities of the designated accounts for the IFAD resources will
be detailed in the Letter to the Borrower, which would be issued by IFAD. The IFAD loan will be disbursed in accordance with
IFAD Loan Disbursement Handbook. Details of the specific names, titles and signature(s) of the persons authorized to operate
the account will be submitted by Government of Uganda, MoFPED, and must reach IFAD before withdrawals are initiated.
 Component 2 is financed by both IFAD and OFID. OFID will extend a loan of USD 30 million to contribute to the financing of the
Infrastructure Development component. OFID loan is to be administered by IFAD. Contributions from OFID will be used only for
co-payments of component 2 using the Special Account Disbursement method. It is expected that disbursement from OFID will
start in year 2021 and end in year 2025. The Designated Accounts limit for NOSP- MAAIF and MoLG will be set at USD 7 million
for both accounts (USD 3.5 NOSP-MAAIF and USD 3.5 for NOSP-MoLG). In Project Years 4, 5, and 6, the payments from
NOSP through MOLG are expected to significantly increase as a result of large payments for road construction. The DA limit will
then be adjusted upward to accommodate the increased payments.
122.
There will be some activities to be carried out by participating districts mainly related to supervision and monitoring of rural
infrastructure development and environmental activities. The earmarked advances for specific activities agreed with the PCU will
be disbursed through Districts Treasury Single Accounts (TSA) using IFMIS and accounted for on a quarterly basis. To manage
risks related to delays in accounting for funds disbursed to districts, advances will be made covering quarterly budgets, and
additional amounts for the subsequent quarter made only after 50% of the previous disbursements has been accounted for.
Recording of expenditure to the project accounting system will be done by PCU/PICT based on expenditure reports submitted by
the districts. All key payments for consultancy and infrastructure contractors will be paid directly from the PCU.
17/27
123.
While MoFPED has demonstrated they have enhanced IFMIS to have adequate capabilities to carry out project accounting
requirements, no IFAD project is fully using IFMIS for project reporting. IFMIS requires special coding and mapping to enable it to
handle the key financial reporting and monitoring requirements, to be done at the commencement of the project. To mitigate on
the risks and to monitor the use of IFMIS for IFAD projects financial reporting, a simple off-the-shelf accounting system (Pastel)
will be installed at the PCU and PICT that will be run parallel to IFMIS. The system needs to integrate accounting and reporting
operations in the PCU at MAAIF and in the PICT at MoLG in a manner that allows for automatic consolidation of project’s
financial statements. After the first two years of operations, based on results of monitoring of IFMIS for project financial reporting,
the project will consider whether to report using solely the IFMIS.
124.
The project expenditure initiation, authorization and payments will be in line with Public Finance Act of GoU. The PS,
MAAIF/MoLG (and ministry officials under their delegation) will authorize all withdrawals from the project special account, local
account and GoU counterpart fund account under their components. The PSs of MAAIF and MoLG are the accounting officers
for MAAIF and MoLG, respectively. The Financial Controller at the PCU will be responsible for appropriate recording in
accounting system and all financial reporting for the project and will produce consolidated financial statements for all the
components covering all activities under MAAIF and MoLG. The financial reporting will comply with International Public-Sector
Accounting Standards (IPSAS)-Cash Basis.
125.
Audits. The consolidated financial statements for the project will be audited on an annual basis by the Office of the Auditor
General. The audited financial statements will be submitted to IFAD within six months after the financial year-end in accordance
with IFAD guidelines.
126.
NOSP will utilise the internal audit function at MAAIF and MoLG. The internal auditors in the two ministries are under the direct
supervision of the Internal Auditor General at MoFPED. Internal audits will be conducted to provide assurance that NOSP is
being implemented in accordance with the PIM, complies with GoU regulations and is complying with project’s financing
covenants.
d. Summary of benefits and economic analysis
127.
The commercialization of the oilseed sector covers all actors along the value chain and the supporting infrastructure required to
ensure its success and sustainability. The primary target of the core investments is the smallholder farming population engaged
in the production of oilseeds in the six NOSP hubs. These hubs cover the poorest regions of Uganda.
128.
In total, NOSP will support the operations of approximately 200 oilseed clusters in the six hubs covered by the project. The
average smallholder membership per cluster is projected at 500-600 households, with the total target of reaching 120,000
smallholder households. The NOSP support to the improvement of community access roads in and around the NOSP oilseed
clusters is expected to benefit approximately 350,000 rural households. The indirect target group to be reached with investments
in such services as agricultural demonstrations, rural financial services, policy development and presentations in radio, internet
and other media is expected to be much bigger.
129.
The projected household and beneficiary entry into the Project economic analysis over the seven-year implementation period is
shown table below.
130.
Household, Beneficiaries and Phasing
PY 1
PY 2
PY 3
PY 4
PY 5
PY 6
PY7
Total Households \1
   Incremental
   Cumulative
 -  
 -  
Households participating\2
 45,000
 34,500
 33,000
 7,500
 -  
 -  
 45,000
 79,500
112,500
120,000
120,000
120,000
   Incremental
 -  
 33,750
 25,875
 24,750
 5,625
 -  
 -  
PY 1
PY 2
PY 3
18/27
PY 4
PY 5
PY 6
PY7
Total Households \1
   Cumulative
 -  
 33,750
 59,625
 84,375
 90,000
 90,000
 90,000
Beneficiaries participating \3
   Incremental
   Cumulative
 -  
 -  
168,750
129,375
123,750
 28,125
 -   
 -  
168,750
298,125
421,875
450,000
450,000
450,000
131.
Direct benefits would accrue from smallholder agricultural development within a strengthening supply chain for the targeted
commodities. The foundation of the benefits quantified in the financial and economic analysis is the incremental production at
household level realized across the four farm types where existing practices and cropping patterns are changed to emphasise
oilseed production using improved seeds, inputs and practices.
132.
Financial viability. Illustrative models have been developed to examine the financial viability of the investments in the four
representative farm models. Net income cash flows and the net present value indicator are shown in the table below. All farm
system types examined were found financially viable. Incremental returns to incremental labour provide a sound incentive for
household production as well as an argument against outmigration of labour.
133.
Household Financial Incremental Income for NOSP Farm Models
                                                                   Household Incremental Income (UGX)
Project Year Sunflower – Sesame
Sunflower – Groundnut
Sesame - Soy bean
Soy bean – Sesame
PY1
-282,400
-272,400
-340,000
-348,960
PY2
-207,557
-1,086,231
169,086
-21,040
PY3
-148,081
-891,913
1,118,016
475,880
PY4
72,418
259,199
2,171,615
1,001,485
PY5
300,078
1,307,998
2,555,338
1,339,938
PY6
640,838
1,873,067
2,919,278
1,652,198
PY7
685,518
1,915,087
2,958,638
1,688,898
PY8
635,518
1,865,087
19/27
2,908,638
1,638,898
PY9
685,518
1,915,087
2,958,638
1,688,898
PY10 +
435,518
1,665,087
2,708,638
1,438,898
NPV \1
2,186,725
6,404,396
14,738,056
7,782,363
134.
Economic viability. The economic viability of the project is assessed by comparing the aggregated incremental benefits and
costs. The benefit stream is based on the value of the incremental production from the targeted 120,000 farm household models
phased in over the implementation period. A 75 per cent adoption rate is assumed so the actual update in modelled
conservatively on 90,000 farm households. A non-quantified benefit stream from the improvement of community access roads in
and around the NOSP oilseed clusters is expected to benefit approximately 350,000 rural households. The cost stream is based
on the value of the NOSP investment and recurrent costs. Both cash flows are projected over a 20-year analysis period that
includes appropriate recurrent costs beyond the NOSP implementation to justify the sustained benefits over that period. The
incremental net benefit stream so derived forms the basis of the investment appraisal.
135.
Economic indicators. The overall NOSP project economic net present value (ENPV) is USD 60 million at 10 per cent discount
rate. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is 1717.9 per cent. The benefit cost ratio (BCR) of 1.44 indicates a return of
approximately 1.44 dollars for every dollar invested. Results indicate that the project is a worthwhile investment.
136.
Sensitivity analysis. An increase in programme costs by 10 per cent will reduce the EIRR to 15.8 per cent, while a decrease in
overall programme benefits by 20 per cent will result in an EIRR of 13.0 per cent. A one-year delay in benefits reduces the EIRR
to 14.9 per cent and a two-year delay to 12.7 per cent. The modelling indicates that economic viability is maintained in the face
of a 31 per cent decrease in benefits, or a 44 per cent increase in costs.
e. Exit Strategy and Sustainability
137.
Sustainability of the NOSP benefits and results can be approached at three different levels: the smallholder, the farmer
group/cooperative and the value chain. The NOSP exit strategy and its success is closely linked to results achieved at all these
three sustainability levels.
138.
Sustainability: Smallholder level. At the smallholder farmer level, NOSP will support oilseed production systems that are
suitable to local agro-ecological zones and climatic conditions. Environmental management, resource use efficiency and climatic
adaptation will be enhanced in the NOSP messages. At the same time the long-term approach to mentoring and training in
business and technical skills is expected to significantly improve smallholders’ potential to sustain the benefits from NOSP
interventions even when the project support ends.
139.
Sustainability: Group/Cooperative level. Majority of the interventions supported by the project will be owned by community
organisations and structures that will be trained to professionally conduct their business. The key objective of NOSP is that all
producer groups in NOSP clusters should graduate to being fully independent, financially robust and self-managing within four
years of project engagement. Success in this area will be a decisive factor for whole sustainability of NOSP results and benefits
in the period after the project closure.  
140.
Sustainability: Value chain level. As indicated above, the core of the value chain and cluster development approach is a rolling
process of action-oriented brokering, dialogue and investment facilitation among the key actors in each cluster/hub to catalyse
investments and remove bottlenecks to increase trading and profits, and to make the most of practical opportunities for growth.
Even after the closing of NOSP, the MSPs are expected to continue operating systematically according to rolling joint cluster
action plans. In total, the combination of the project impact on farmers, groups/cooperatives and the whole value chain, as well
as the private-sector focus of the project, is expected to ensure favourable results on sustainability of the NOSP benefits.
141.
Exit strategy. The NOSP focus on sustainable results and on independent, profitable institutions and private sector-based
partnerships forms the core exit strategy for the project. The NOSP exit strategy is further discussed in Annex 10 of this PDR.
3. Risks
H. Project risks and mitigation measures
142.
The following can be envisioned as the main risks for the successful implementation of NOSP, including for the implications for
the ESMF, presented with the proposed mitigation measures[31]:
Main risks
Mitigation measures incorporated into NOSP
Design
20/27
Implications for the ESMF
Weak farmers’ organisations and
their members are unable to
respond to commercialisation
messages of NOSP in production
and marketing.  
Component 1 of NOSP aims to conduct major
capacity enhancement programme for clusters,
groups and their members covering production
technologies, marketing and business skills.
Enhanced technical support services support
these messages, as well as improved access to
finance. Cluster-level MSPs support contract
making with agro-companies at improved terms.
Capacity building will also include
awareness raising of environmental and
social repercussions resulting from adopting
or improving production technologies.
Smallholders will not be able to get
timely credit for procurement of
planting seeds and other inputs,
with adverse impact on productivity
and production targets.
NOSP will introduce agricultural input credit
products to all VSLAs in supported clusters.
Tailored TA will be provided to formal FIs and
SACCOs to develop and roll-out agricultural
financial products suitable for oilseed growers.
Financial advice on management of loans
as well as management of income from
oilseed sales to ensure that beneficiary
households do not default, and that income
is invested well for the benefit of household
members 
Financial management may be
challenging especially at district
level due to low capacities. Another
challenge is the MoFPED
requirement for project financial
reporting using IFMIS which has
not been tested comprehensively
on capability for project financial
reporting.
Key payments for infrastructure works will be
budgeted and paid from the parent ministry
(MoLG), hence reducing funds to be disbursed or
required to be budgeted by districts. A simple off-
shelf accounting system (Pastel) will run
concurrently with IFMIS for the first 18 months
which will serve as a pilot phase, after which a
review will be made.
Budgets will be provided for environmental
and social mitigation as well as for the
preparation of ESIAs/ESMPs. For new
districts, percentage of finances provided for
start-up activities, and in particular for
sensitisation, needs to be higher compared
to districts that implemented VODP.
Increased commercialisation of
cash crop production, such as in
the case of oilseeds, may have
adverse social and environmental
impacts.
The use of the GALS will promote gender
participation and empowerment in the target
areas. NOSP will promote environmentally
friendly technologies and resource use
efficiency. ESMPs will be developed for the road
infrastructure development.
The ESMP (Chapter 7) provides guidance
on the types of impacts anticipated, and
mitigation for those impacts.  Capacity
building proposed in Chapter 10 will assist
in the appreciation of environmentally
friendly technologies and resource use. 
The GALS methodology will promote value
addition – youth may find this easier than
farming. 
Increased rainfall variability results
in more droughts and intense
rainfall that adversely affects yields
of oil seeds and infrastructure
developed.
NOSP will promote climate smart agricultural
practices and the infrastructure designs will be
informed by climate risk analysis and mapping.
Chapter 8 of the ESMF addresses the
implications of climate change and makes
recommendations for improving resilience.
Weak technical and institutional
capacities in community access
road development in some project
area districts can lead to slow
disbursement, lower project
benefits as well as delays in
implementation.
Experiences and lessons learnt from currently
on-going road projects in same area will be fully
utilised in NOSP. Effective support from hub and
national level will be organised to fill the gaps in
capacities in weaker districts. For the rural roads-
related procurement operations, the NOSP
budget will include senior level support to the
procurement and implementation teams both at
the PCU and the PICT/MoLG level (see the PIM
for details). IFAD will also support the planning
and implementation of an intensive training
programme at the project start-up to familiarise
the Central Ministries and District PDUs with
NOSP/IFAD Guidelines on procurement and
contract management.
Capacity building includes training in
environmental and social aspects related to
project implementation.  These are
elaborated in Chapter 10 of the ESMF.
Main risks
Mitigation measures incorporated into NOSP
Design
21/27
Implications for the ESMF
Procurement related issues,
particularly at the district level,
include capacity constraints leading
to failure to comply with applicable
rules and contract awarding
principles; delays in processing
procurement and in evaluations,
reviews and approvals; weak
records keeping and filing as well
as overall weaknesses in contract
management and follow-up.
Mitigation measures include – a draft for a
comprehensive Procurement Manual for NOSP;
an experienced Procurement and Contracts
Manager will be recruited in the PCU and PICT
immediately after NOSP start-up; IFAD-
supported international TA will be provided at
early stages of the project to NOSP to strengthen
procurement capacity and to assist in the
planning and implementation of the procurement
operations; and IFAD will also support the
planning and implementation of an intensive
training programme at the project start-up to
familiarise the Central Ministries and District
PDUs with NOSP/IFAD Guidelines on
procurement and contract management.
Recommendations have been made in the
ESMF for environmental and social
considerations in contract documents for
CARs.
143.
Uganda’s inherent risk is high as measured by Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI). The 2018
Transparency International Corruption Perception Index for Uganda score rating was 26 (High Risk) which was same as 2017
and a drop from 2016 & 2015 that had a score of 25. The country ranking was 149 out of 180 and improvement from 2017 that
had a ranking of 151.
144.
The last Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment report was issued on December 2017. The reports
showed the following areas of weaknesses: 
1.  Aggregate Fiscal Discipline: control of contractual commitments is not sufficiently effective, creating a risk of generating
further expenditure arrears. The strong external audit function enhances fiscal discipline.
2.  Strategic allocation of resources: There is a strong emphasis on the overall fiscal framework. The Chart of Accounts
caters for a multidimensional analysis of expenditure. However, the link between the medium-term perspective in expenditure
budgeting and strategic plans needs to be developed to improve the strategic allocation of resources.
3.  Efficient use of resources for service delivery: The current weaknesses in competitive bidding in the procurement system
could have adverse implications for the efficiency in service delivery. The strengths in the accountability mechanisms such as
the comprehensiveness and production of annual financial statements - make external audits effective as counter checks on
inefficient use of resources. Publishing of performance targets and outcomes also assists the efficient use of resources,
though the lack of systematic program evaluation and data on resources available at service delivery units can undermine
accountability. Such information would help management decision-making to support improved service delivery
145.
The PEFA report concluded that there have been improvements in the orderliness and participation in the budget process as
well as multi-year fiscal forecasts and functional allocation. Debt recording and reporting had also improved as had payroll
functions and elements of procurement. It noted payroll and procurement had achieved this despite an ambitious
decentralization policy. Internal control and internal audit have also advanced. The main area of backsliding is arrears, tax audits
and reconciliation of arrears. Many of these improvements were attributed to strong management of the PFM reform programme
as well as the enactment of the new PFM Act (2015). Some improvements have already been made as a result of the Act and its
legal requirements, whilst others are still being developed.
146.
In March 2016, the World Bank Group issued a Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the Republic of Uganda for the period
2016 -2021. The overall risks to the CPF were assessed as substantial, with two areas rated as High Risk:
Institutional capacity for the effective implementation of projections - due to either understaffing, underutilization of capacity,
incomplete implementation of policies and weak oversight and control mechanisms
Environment and social - weak government ownership of safeguards
147.
The following areas having substantial ratings:
Political and governance – mainly due to concerns relating to governance and effective public-sector management
Sector studies and policies – lack of institutionalization and weak links between planning budgeting and implementation
Fiduciary – primarily in the area of procurement as well as weak financial management and internal audit functions.
I. Environment and Social category
148.
The social risks anticipated to result from the NOSP activities are linked to women's empowerment and nutrition. Given the
differentiated decision-making roles, commercialisation of oilseeds traditionally controlled by women as food crops (i.e.
groundnut and sesame) can reduce the share of household income and assets that women control. Similarly, commercialization
of oilseeds may reduce women’s involvement in decisions related to production of and income received from these crops. From
the nutrition perspective, while increased production of nutritious foods like oilseeds may increase supply and decrease prices,
participation in high-value supply chains can also dis-incentivise consumption as people prefer to sell for profit. The use of the
Gender Action Learning System (GALS) in NOSP clusters, which now integrates nutrition, should mitigate the above negative
impacts to some extent.
22/27
149.
In the event that land is to be acquired for Project supported interventions, the land will be identified by the communities in
conjunction with the local authorities, and the FPIC process will be followed. Should any individual not consent to relinquish land
for the purposes of subproject infrastructure (such as road alignments, demonstration plots, runoff harvesting structures), then
alternative sites/locations will be identified, again with community participation and consent. All consultations will be documented
as required by the FPIC process.
150.
Some adverse impacts on the environment are expected from the agricultural expansion activities, increased use of agro-
chemicals in some locations and the road infrastructure development. The impacts will include vegetation clearing, land use
change and point pollution. However, these impacts are expected to be site specific, mostly reversible and can be minimized
through appropriate mitigation measures.
151.
Therefore, the environmental and social categorization of NOSP is B. Appropriate environmental and social mitigation
measures will be further defined in subproject specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) during
implementation.
152.
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been elaborated during design that includes procedures to
ensure that environmental and social risks are avoided or mitigated. To adhere to the categorization, the infrastructure
development under NOSP will be limited to non-sensitive areas, road stretches of 10 km or less, and will not involve any
physical or economic displacement. The screening criteria for each of the projects, requirements for feasibility studies and
environmental and social impact analyses as well as approval procedures have been articulated in the ESMF.
J. Climate Risk classification
153.
The NOSP target beneficiaries are dependent on natural resources that are exposed and sensitive to climate change impacts.
The smallholders practice predominantly rain-fed agriculture. Despite having sufficient overall rainfall during the two rainy
seasons (March–June and October–January) in the south to central parts and one long rainy season in the northern-easterly
region, variability in rain distribution has been noted. The main climate risks being faced in the NOSP target areas are droughts,
floods and increasing temperatures. Agricultural productivity is adversely impacted by late rains and late cessation that have
been reported by smallholders. Climate variability also affects the post-harvest handling of the agricultural produce particularly
the drying and storage practices.
154.
Yield projections based on the Climate Adaptation in Rural Development Assessment Tool between 2021 and 2032 range for
groundnuts from 0.93% to 5.12% and for soybeans from 0.49% to 4.72%. Given the mixed projections and relative intensity of
the extreme events, the NOSP climate risk classification is Moderate.
155.
A climate vulnerability analysis is being conducted for Uganda by the University of Cape Town with financing from the
Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP 2). The study includes the oilseeds crops targeted by NOSP and
therefore, the implementation phase will benefit from recommendations for climate change adaptation measures that will be
promoted under Component 1. Initial findings indicate that between the present time and the Mid-Century Future (defined as
~2040-2069) the Central region of Uganda will be most vulnerable to climate change impacts for groundnut and sesame
cultivation and the Western Region for groundnuts and soyabean. For the Eastern and Northern Regions, the impacts of climate
change will generally have a positive impact on groundnuts, sesame, soyabean and sunflower, while soyabean production is
also anticipated to improve in Central Region. The recommendations will be incorporated in the climate smart agriculture
practices to be promoted by NOSP.
4. Implementation
K. Organizational Framework
a. Project management and coordination
156.
Project Oversight. The co-lead agencies for NOSP at national level will be MAAIF and MoLG. A Programme Steering
Committee (PSC) will be constituted to (i) provide strategic guidance to programme implementation, (ii) oversee programme
planning, (iii) endorse the Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPB) prior to submission to IFAD, and (iv) review implementation
progress and impact. The PSC shall meet twice a year and otherwise when required. The PSC will be chaired by the PS MAAIF
and comprise of representatives of public and private sector stakeholders engaged in the development of the oilseeds sector. A
Technical Steering Committee (TSC) will also be constituted to include members directly involved with implemenations. The key
role of the TSC will be to: (i) coordinate implementation between the two Ministries, (ii) monitor and guide implementation on a
regular basis, and (iii) review the Annul Work Plans and Budgets prior to endorsement by the PSC.  It is expected that the TSC
will meet at least every quarter.
157.
National Level. MAAIF will establish a Project Coordination Unit (PCU), to be responsible for managing the implementation of
the Project, with emphasis on Component 1. The PCU would have a small Liaison Office in MAAIF, Kampala. The
responsibilities of the PCU in MAAIF will include the following core tasks: (i) manage effectively project activities and finances,
with emphasis on Component 1; (ii) liaise with line ministries and other agencies to ensure smooth project implementation; (iii)
procure, contract, manage and supervise performance-based contracts with service providers as required for different NOSP
activities; (iv) prepare project AWPBs for the PSC and IFAD approval; (v) control the flow of NOSP funds; (vi) develop and
implement a knowledge management and communication strategy; (vii) report through a participatory M&E system to be
developed for NOSP; and (viii) submit required project implementation progress and financial reports to GoU, IFAD and other
stakeholders. It will be led by a Project Manager and include Financial Controller; Procurement Specialist; M&E Manager.  The
Mid-Northern Hub, located centrally in the project area, to facilitate close supervision, coordination and technical support of the
NOSP field activities. will include key positions that serve all 6 hubs i.e. Value Chain Leader and Deputy Manager; Specialists for
Social Inclusion; Environment and Climate;  KM; Rural Finance; and supporting staff.
23/27
158.
MoLG will establish a small NOSP Project Implementation Coordination Team (PICT) to coordinate the rural infrastructure
component of the project (Component 2). The PICT will comprise of a Coordinator; Infrastructure Engineering Advisor (seconded
by MoWT); Financial Controller; Procurement Specialist; and Accountant. In addition, five Infrastructure Engineers will be
recruited and based in selected hubs. Specific responsibilities of the PICT in MoLG will be: (i) manage project activities under
Component 2 and the related IFAD and OFID loan funds; (ii) procure, contract, manage and supervise design contracts for
CARs in liaison with DLGs; (iii) support DLGs in procurement and management of contractors of CARs; (iv) liaise with the MAAIF
PCU to prepare project AWPBs for PSC and IFAD approval; (v) disburse and control the flow of funds for Component 2
activities; and (vi) work with the MAAIF PCU to submit and consolidate required project implementation progress and financial
reports to GoU, IFAD and other stakeholders.
159.
The PCU in MAAIF and the PICT in MoLG will conduct regular joint planning and review sessions to ensure full harmonisation of
their respective components’ activities.
160.
Hub level. In each hub, a technical implementation team will be set up to lead the field implementation of project activities,
focusing on Component 1. The responsibilities of the hub-team will cover supply chain brokering; investment facilitation;
producer group mentoring; business skills development; as well as farm production enhancement, seed multiplication and
auxiliary services, environmental and social management of Hub activities.The MSPs in different hubs and clusters will play a
key role in Component 1 implementation and in the selection process of CARs for construction/rehabilitation, together with local
governments.
161.
District level. At the district level, the district local governments (DLG) will ensure that NOSP activities are coordinated within
the District Development Plans (DDPs) through the District Technical Planning Committees (DTPC) and will play a key role in
the NOSP-supported construction and rehabilitation of community access roads. In each district, the Chief Administrative Officer
(CAO) will be responsible for project implementation and will designate appropriate officers to different NOSP-related activities.
162.
At the start of project implementation, a tripartite Memorandum of Engagement (MoE) will be signed by the MAAIF, MoLG and
each participating DLG, defining their respective roles and responsibilities in NOSP implementation. The staff positions at each
operational level as well as the TOR for officers and private sector service providers in NOSP operations are presented in the
PIM.
163.
Summary of the implementation structure of NOSP is presented below:
b. Financial Management, Procurement and Governance
24/27
164.
Financial Management System: NOSP financial management arrangements follow the government of Uganda financial
management system with some enhancements proposed to mitigate on risks identified. A financial management assessment for
NOSP has been carried out in accordance with IFAD’s Guidance Note on Undertaking Financial Management Assessment at
Design. The objective of FMA is to provide assurance that NOSP will be implemented within sound financial management
practices (timely and efficient accounting systems), and punctual professional reviews; both internally (internal audit) and
externally (external audit). The assessment was based at the PCU of VODP2 Kampala because NOSP will be adopting similar
processes and procedures. The PCU-based assessment was combined with reviews at MoLG, the proposed implementing
agency for component 2. It also included discussion and review of IFMIS and other MoFPED processes and further reviews of
district level disbursements and financial reporting arrangements.
165.
The Government of Uganda (the Borrower) will be required to maintain acceptable financial management systems including
accounting, financial reporting, and auditing systems for the ‘National Oilseeds Project (NOSP)’. Some project’s specific
additional measures have been incorporated to enhance financial management of the project.
166.
Implementing and participating organizations with fiduciary responsibilities
167.
The Lead Project Implementing Agency (LPA) will be the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF)
through a dedicated Project Management Unit (PMU) which will directly manage all components. Component 2, “Support to
Public Infrastructure Serving Oil-Seed Sector” that will be implemented by Ministry of Local Government (MoLG) with close
coordination with MAAIF.
168.
MoLG will have a lean implementation support unit (ISU), that will manage component 2, including the districts that will be
implementing activities related to community access roads under component 2. The Permanent Secretary of MAAIF and MoLG
will be the accounting officers to Parliament for NOSP funds implemented under their ministries and are accountable to the
Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.
169.
Districts: Participating districts have some activities related to districts operations that will be paid at districts levels mainly
relating to supervisions and monitoring of infrastructure development, community awareness and other agricultural and
environmental related activities. All consultants and roads contractors will directly be paid by the PMUs. The basic role of the
participating districts will be to receive and to account for activity earmarked advances in line with instructions from the
PMU/ISU. The PMU/ISU will provide suitable templates to enable the districts to provide acceptable accountabilities of advances
received.
170.
Heifer Project International is a co-financier to the project and is contributing 20% matching amounts for the component/sub-
components that they will be managing. Heifer Project International is a non-profit corporation with head office in Arkansas, USA
that work with communities to end hunger and poverty and to care for the Earth by providing families in need with long-term
solutions in development. It has a memorandum of understanding with IFAD reference number EB 2017/122/INF.3 dated 17
September 2017 with a view to strengthening collaborations and leveraging investments in support of agricultural development
and improved food security. The organization has previous implemented IFAD funded projects in neighboring countries
(Rwanda and Tanzania) and has also implemented other donor funded projects in Uganda. It has a country office in Uganda,
which manages projects implemented in the country. They will receive matching funds from MAAIF as a performance contract
payments with specific deliverables upon which the payments are made. Heifer uses ERP accounting system called Aggreso
that is able to provide financial reports per components and categories as may be required by PMU.
171.
The Project Management Unit (PCU). The PMU under MAAIF will be the overall accounting hub for the project including
consolidation of the entire project financial statements while MoLG implementation support unit will manage component 2,
“Support to Public Infrastructure Serving Oil-Seed Sector” which is under MoLG. The PMU as the overall accounting hub will be
responsible for:
1.  Budget consolidation ensuring a bottom-up approach and timely submissions for inclusions in GoU overall approved budget
estimates of the components under MAAIF;
2.  Procurement planning, execution and support service;
3.  Disbursement of funds through IFMS (including advances to other implementing centres),
4.  Management of withdrawal applications from IFAD;
5.  Financial reporting and consolidation of financial statements for audits under the two ministries (MAAIF & MoLG).
6.  Any requests for No Objection to IFAD will emanate from the PCU.
172.
Infrastructure Support Unit: The Unit under MoLG will be the accounting hub for component 2, “Support to Public
Infrastructure Serving Oil-Seed Sector” under MoLG. The Unit as the overall accounting hub for component 2 will be responsible
for:
1.  Budget consolidation for component 2 activities ensuring a bottom-up approach and timely submissions for inclusions in GoU (
MoLG) overall approved budget estimates;
2.  Procurement planning, execution and support service;
3.  Regular financial reporting to PMU on project financial progress
173.
Audits. The consolidated financial statements for the project will be audited on an annual basis by the Office of the Auditor
General. The audited financial statements will be submitted to IFAD within six months after the financial year end in accordance
with IFAD guidelines.
174.
NOSP will utilise the internal audit function at MAAIF and MoLG. The internal auditors in the two ministries are under the direct
supervision of the Internal Auditor General at MoFPED. Internal audits will be conducted to provide assurance that NOSP is
being implemented in accordance with the PIM, complies with GoU regulations and is complying with project’s financing
covenants.
25/27
175.
Procurement. PRM Assessment. As part of the NOSP design process, a Project’s Procurement Risk Matrix (PRM) was
developed. The overall procurement risk is rated “Medium” at central level and “High” at district level. The assessment indicated
the following risks particularly at the district level: capacity constraints leading to failure to comply with applicable rules and
contract awarding principles; delays in processing procurement and in evaluations, reviews and approvals; weak records
keeping and filing as well as overall weaknesses in contract management and follow-up. Key mitigation measures to address
procurement capacity gaps are presented in detail in the comprehensive procurement section of the PIM.
176.
Procurement Regulations Applicable to NOSP. All procurements with cost estimate above the threshold for International
Competitive Bidding (ICB) will be undertaken according to the World Bank Guidelines. All contracts procured at national level
based on National Competitive Bidding (NCB) and other lower procurement procedures such as Restricted Bidding and
Shopping (Request for Quotations) will follow the national public procurement law (the Procurement and Disposal of Public
Assets Authority (PPDA) Act, 2003 and its attendant regulations. These procedures have been reviewed by IFAD and found to
be satisfactory, except for the following provisions, which will not be applicable under this project: (a) domestic preferences shall
not apply under NCB; (b) the charging of fees for dealing with bidder complaints at procuring entity level shall not be permitted;
(c) Paragraph 6(1) (b and c) of the fourth schedule of the PPDA Act (restrictions on contract amendments) shall not apply with
respect to consultancy services; and (d) procedure for conducting merit point evaluation for Work, Goods and Non-Consulting
Services shall not apply.
177.
Institutional Arrangements. The NOSP PCU in the MAAIF will be responsible for overseeing and implementing all
procurement transactions under Component 1 and 3 (Project Management). Activities under Component 2 will be implemented
under a two-tiered institutional arrangement. At the national level, the MoLG PDU and Contracts Committee will be the main
implementing agency for the activities that will cut across districts. Districts PDUs and Contracts Committees will be the
executing agencies for the road construction works.
178.
With regard to the management and execution of procurement activities under NOSP, an experienced Procurement and
Contracts Manager will be recruited in the PCU immediately after NOSP start-up. He/she will be in overall charge of the
implementation of the procurement activities under the project. Furthermore, a Procurement Specialist will be recruited at NOSP
effectiveness to the PICT in MoLG, to support and oversee the procurement activities related to the construction and
rehabilitation of rural roads (see detailed TOR for both procurement posts in the PIM). Furthermore, IFAD-supported
international TA will be provided at early stages of the project to NOSP to strengthen procurement capacity and to assist in the
planning and start-up of the procurement operations. IFAD will also support the planning and implementation of an intensive
training programme at the project start-up to familiarise the Central Ministries and District PDUs with NOSP/IFAD Guidelines on
procurement and contract management.
L. Planning, M&E, Learning, KM and Communication
a. Planning, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication
179.
Planning. The logframe of NOSP (see Annex 1 of PDR) will be the key guide in the development of work plans and budgets.
Planning and budgeting will be integrated in the GoU processes and cycles and will be based on Annual Work Plans and
Budgets (AWPBs). These, together with the logframe’s quantified results-based indicators and NOSP MIS database, will provide
the primary basis for monitoring the NOSP progress.
180.
The planning process will start at hub-level taking into consideration the priorities identified through MSPs. Under the guidance
of the PCU and PICT, hub plans and budgets will be consolidated into a comprehensive NOSP AWPB that will be submitted to
the PSC for review and approval and then to IFAD for review and the issuing of no objection. The AWPB will clearly indicate
which activities and budget lines fall under the Budget Framework Papers of MAAIF and MoLG, respectively.
181.
The PCU and PICT will jointly provide overall guidance in the planning and budgeting processes. The PCU M&E Specialist will
work in close liaison with Financial Controllers in both ministries to ensure the budgeting is adequate and conforms to the right
categories and components. Subsequent AWPB processes will offer the opportunities to the PCU and PICT to reflect on lessons
from the implementation experience of the previous years, and to propose activities and expenditures required to achieve the
intended programme outcomes. The Programme will have the possibility of revising the AWPB at any time of the year, and any
proposed adjustments will require approvals by both the GoU and IFAD.
182.
Monitoring and Evaluation. NOSP will develop a robust M&E system in compliance with IFAD and the GoU requirements. It
will be embedded in project management, coordinated by the PCU and supported by additional professional staff who will work
closely with NOSP subject-matter specialists to strengthen learning and knowledge management. The M&E system will be fully
aligned with IFAD’s Operational Results Management System (ORMS).
183.
The NOSP M&E system will: (i) collect, analyse and update information on project results and impact; (ii) support PCU and the
Steering Committee in planning and making informed decisions on NOSP strategies and actions; (iii) maintain and strengthen
strategic partnerships with stakeholders; (iv) create opportunities for learning and sharing results. The system will be
participatory, gender sensitive and results-oriented while enabling the integration of physical and financial progress reporting. In
addition, the system will enable the analysis of climate change vulnerability among the beneficiaries. It will incorporate in-depth
baseline and completion surveys, a mid-term review and other thematic studies as relevant, including qualitative studies. The
baseline surveys will include context-specific needs assessments of the concrete barriers to smallholder-driven agricultural
sector development in the oilseeds sector and address pressing information needs for implementation planning.
184.
Relevant indicators have been specified in the NOSP logframe and, to the extent possible, quantified. The indicators relate to
the different levels (output, outcome and impact) and include IFAD Core Indicators (CIs) as well as project specific indicators.
The approach is based on the Theory of Change of NOSP (see Annex 2 of the PDR), and demonstrates the logical links
between the results at their different levels, thereby enables the meaningful analysis of whether the project is on-track towards its
planned results even in the first years of implementation when higher-level results are not yet expected.
26/27
185.
Learning and knowledge management. After the project start-up, the project will, with support from IFAD experts, develop an
effective NOSP Knowledge Management (KM) Strategy. Lessons learnt in implementation will be actively shared between
clusters and hubs. Quarterly review meetings with implementing partners will be organised by project management to discuss
progress towards results in relation to each quarterly progress report, the format of which will explicitly include a focus on
lessons learnt in terms of challenges, good practices, etc. Study tours, exchange visits and learning routes will be organised for
lateral knowledge transfer. An effective downward and upward flow of information about project progress to beneficiaries and
implementing partners in the field is of utmost relevance in fostering ownership and participation.
186.
The KM Strategy will have a strong focus on documenting best practices as well as positive and negative lessons from NOSP
implementation experience, supported by reliable evidence and analysis. The wider adoption of NOSP’s documented best
practices will be an important measure of its success in knowledge management. Key elements of the NOSP approach to be
documented in KM products and promoted for wider adoption by other organizations are expected to include, inter alia: improved
business skills and financial literacy; multi-stakeholder cluster meetings and associated processes for inclusive cluster
development; producer groups and member mentoring; market-based service market development; social mentoring and
household methodologies; and promotion of private smallholder investment via savings and credit rather than grants.
b. Innovation and scaling up
187.
NOSP will focus on innovations that have a potential to be scaled up with financing from other sources than NOSP, either during
the project implementation or after the NOSP activities close. The innovative elements in the NOSP design include: (i) the use of
MSPs at cluster level to enhance investment and market relations; (ii) extensive use of private sector-based extension services
in both group/cluster development and in technical services; (iii) promotion of community-based extension agents as a
sustainable alternative to commission-based agents working for a single agro-company; (iv) extensive development of local seed
businesses in each cluster to support local self-reliance in quality planting seeds; and (v) rolling out of an agricultural credit
product to all VSLAs to provide local financing to cover input procurement costs, especially the cost of planting seeds, without
externally provided loans.
M. Implementation plans
a. Supervision, Mid-term Review and Completion plans.
188.
Implementation Readiness and Start-up Plans. Project implementation is planned to start in July 2020. To meet this target, (i)
IFAD will complete the Project Design Report and submit it to the GoU by 15 August 2019; (ii) the GoU’s comments will be
submitted to IFAD by 30 August 2019; and (iii) a final PDR will ready by 4 September 2019.
189.
Negotiations on the Loan Financing Agreement between the GoU and IFAD will be conducted by 15 October 2019, and NOSP
will be presented in early-December 2019 to the IFAD Executive Board for approval. The GoU will conduct the required internal
approvals, including the approval by MFPED by 30 September 2019, the Cabinet by 30 November 2019, and the Parliament by
31 May 2020.
190.
A draft Project Implementation Manual (PIM), a draft AWPB for the first 18 months of project implementation, and a draft
procurement plan for the first 18 months have been prepared as part of the NOSP design process. These documents aim to
ensure the project implementation starts as scheduled, without unnecessary delays during the first project year.
Footnotes
[1]https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.KD.ZG?locations=UG
[2]https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SI.POV.RUHC?locations=UG&view=chart
[3] Focus on Soy, Sunflower, Sesame and Groundnuts
[4] Which are also the best agro-ecological regions for oilseeds
[5] Currently mostly exported and re-imported as animal feed
[6] See Challenges to Oilseeds commercialization prepared by the VODP and VODP2 team (document available on request)
[7] Specifically animal feed cakes
[8] West Nile, Northern (Gulu in VODP2), Mid-Northern (Lira in VODP2) and Mid-Western
[9] Bank of Uganda, Key Economic Indicators for 2017/2018
[10] UNDP Human Development Index 2018
27/27
[11] United Nation’s population projections for 2050.
[12] Bank of Uganda, Key Economic Indicators, June 2019
[13]https://www.ubos.org/wp-content/uploads/publications/03_20182017_Statistical_Abstract.pdf
[14] World Bank: “Closing the Potential-Performance Divide in Ugandan Agriculture”, 2018
[15] Extraction rate of oil varies from 30%-60%
[16] James Joughin, “The Political Economy of the Edible Oil Industry in Uganda”, June 2018
[17] The SECAP Annex of this PDR (Annex 5) provides a summary of the Women Empowerment in Agriculture Index Survey
findings.
[18] People living below the poverty line of USD 1 per day
[19] Uganda National Household Survey 2016/17
[20] Long production runs reduce the setup costs per product unit.
[21] IOE Interim Evaluation; Report No. 2195-UG; 2011
[22] IOE Project Completion Report Validation for VODP; December 2014
[23] As VODP2 uses both private and public sector-led interventions, the results in production, productivity and farmer
group/cooperative development vary significantly between the two approaches, with better results in the private sector-led
interventions.
[24] Interventions in other countries (Nepal – High Value Agriculture Project; Cambodia – Project for Agricultural Development and
Economic Empowerment; Montenegro – Rural Clustering and Transformation Project) provide case studies of successfully run
private sector-run multi-stakeholder platforms.
[25] Detailed interventions, by target group, are available in the PIM. 
[26] Average landholding for smallholder farmers in the country  is about 1.1 hectares (2.7 acres). In the North is 1.6 hectares (3.9
acres); in the East, it is 1.1 hectares ( 2.7acres), in Mid Western it is 0.8 hectares (1.97acres);  2009 Agricultural Census Data. It is
estimated that these holding have further decreased as the population has increased and the lands have continued being divided
among the household members. 
[27] More detailed descriptions of NOSP activities and the implementation arrangements are provided in Annex 8 (Project
Implementation Manual PIM).
[28] Until October 2021, the Sida-financed, IFAD-implemented technical assistance programme INSURED is supporting assessment
and implementation of a new agricultural insurance product and/or efficient delivery mechanisms to help to scale-up coverage for
oilseed smallholder farming, in collaboration with the insurance sector.
[29] National Environment Act, 2019
[30] This estimation is derived from a weighted average of recently awarded contracts under the PRELNOR (ranging between
US$9,000 to US$80,000 per km) project and verified with the costs from the CAIIP projects.
[31] See Annex 9 for other risks and mitigation measures foreseen for NOSP.
Uganda
National Oilseeds Project
Project Design Report
Annex 1: Logframe
Document Date:
10/02/2020
Project No.
2000002260
Report No.
5155-UG
Loan ID
2000003281
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
National Oilseeds Project
Logical Framework
1/6
Results Hierarchy
Indicators
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Name
Baseline
Mid-
Term
End
Target
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Outreach 
1.b Estimated corresponding total number of households members
Household
members
1 089 300 1 750 000
1.a Corresponding number of households reached
Women-headed
households
Non-women-
headed
households
Households
67 540
108 500
217 860
350 000
1 Persons receiving services promoted or supported by the project
Females
Males
Young
Not Young
Total number of
persons
receiving
services
44 820
72 000
29 880
48 000
29 880
48 000
74 700
120 000
Annual
PCU/PICT
Annual
PCU/PICT
Continued social,
political and
economic stability in
the country and
region. Manageable
climatic events.
Macro-economy
continues to
improve.
Annual
PCU/PICT
Project
reports,
Outcome
surveys
Project
reports,
Outcome
surveys
Project
reports,
Outcome
surveys
Project Goal 
Inclusive rural transformation
through sustainable
development of the oilseeds
sector
Number of households that experience an increase in household assets
Women Headed
Households
17 370
27 900
Households
56 020
90 000
IFAD Impact
Study
Before and
after project
implementation
IFAD/PMU
Economic policies
continue to support
oilseeds sector and
associated value
chains for
smallholder farmers.
Results Hierarchy
Name
Baseline
Indicators
2/6
End
Target
Mid-
Term
Women reporting improved quality of their diets
Females
20
50
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Development Objective 
To accelerate
commercialisation in key
oilseeds value chains and
thereby improve the
livelihoods and resilience of
the smallholders engaged
oilseed production and
marketing
Outcome 
Outcome 1 - Increased
production, productivity and
profitability in oilseeds sector
Output 
Output 1.1 - Multi-
stakeholder platforms (MSP)
formed and oilseed
production clusters
established
Number of households that experience an increase in household income
Households
56 020
90 000
Males
Females
Young
Number of HHs reporting increased sales of oilseed crops
Total Number of
households
56 020
90 000
1.2.4 Households reporting an increase in production
Households
40
75
IFAD Impact
study
Before and
after project
implementation
PMU
Outcome
Surveys,
IFAD Impact
Study
Outcome
Surveys,
IFAD Impact
Study
Outcome
Suveys
Annual
PMU
Annual
PMU
Annual
PMU
3.2.2 Households reporting adoption of environmentally sustainable and climate-resilient
technologies and practices
Outcome
Suveys
Annual
PMU
Households
50
80
Multi-stakeholder platforms (MSPs)/Clusters established and brokering deals between
stakeholders
MSPs Cluster
level
MSPs Hub level
Number of
Clusters
400
400
5
200
6
200
Number of MSPs
0
405
406
Quartely
PMU/HCU
HCU
Reports,
PCU
Reports
Implementation
builds on limited
local government
capacity through
private sector led
support services to
smallholder oilseeds
farmers. Local and
international
demand for oilseeds
continues to grow.
No adverse climatic
events destabilize
the oilseeds sector.
The project
beneficiaries utilize
the knowledge and
skills given during
the trainings.
Project resources at
village level can
strengthen group
capacity.
Smallholder farmers
are influenced by
the clustering of
production, thereby
allowing them to
have parity with off-
takers. Suitable
agricultural related
income-generating
activities.
Results Hierarchy
Name
Baseline
Indicators
3/6
End
Target
Mid-
Term
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
2.1.2 Persons trained in income-generating activities or business management
Output 
Output 1.2 - Production
Groups trained in market-
orientation and business
skills
Females
Males
Young
Persons trained
in IGAs or BM
(total)
44 820
72 000
29 880
48 000
74 400
120 000
200
200
Output 
Output 1.3 - Social
mentoring provided to
production groups and high-
risk households
Clusters facilitated in GALS
Number of
Clusters
Number of high-risk HHs receive HH mentoring
Female-Headed
HHs
Number of high-
risk HHs -
Number
Youth-Headed
HHs - Number
12 000
12 000
20 000
20 000
8 000
8 000
Percentage of VSLAs credit-linked with FIs
Women farmers
assessing
credit/financial
services
VLSAs with
majority women
members
40
60
85
85
Output 
Output 1.4. Financial
Services enhanced in
supported clusters
Off-takers are
interested intrading
with clustered
smallholder oilseeds
producers.
Producers and
private sector can
negotiate
satisfactory
arrangements
Social mentoring
can resolve priority
issues/constraints.
Quartely
PMU/HCU
Quartely
PMU/HCU
Quartely
PMU/HCU
Business
Skills Mentor
reports, HCU
and PCU
reports
Mentoring
Reports from
Mentors,
HCU reports,
PCU reports
Mentoring
Reports from
Mentors,
HCU reports,
PCU reports
HCU and
PCU reports
Quartely
PMU/HCU
The GoU facilitates
access to the
Agriculture Credit
Facility to benefit
smallholder oilseeds
producers.
Results Hierarchy
Name
Baseline
Youth farmers
assessing credit/
financial services
% of VLSAs
Indicators
4/6
End
Target
Mid-
Term
30
30
40
60
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Number of formal FIs supported to launch innovative oilseeds products
Number of formal
FIs supported
Number of formal
FIs with
innovative
oilseeds products
2
2
4
4
1.1.7 Persons in rural areas trained in financial literacy and/or use of financial products and
services
HCU and
PCU reports
Quartely
PMU/HCU
44 820
72 000
29 880
48 000
Females
Males
Young
Persons in rural
areas trained in
FL and/or use of
FProd and
Services (total)
Output 
Output 1.5 Market-based
technical services for
smallholders enhanced
Number of Farm Production Advisors (FPA) mobilised and trained
Women FPAs
Youth FPAs
Total Numbers of
FPA
60
40
100
120
80
200
HCU and
PCU reports
Quartely
HCU
Smallholders willing
to, through
commercialization,
pay for the private
sector led support
services.
Number of Auxiliary Farm Service Providers (AFSP) trained and operational
HCU and
PCU reports
Quartely
HCU
Results Hierarchy
Name
Baseline
Total Numbers of
AFSPs
Youth AFSPs
Women AFSPs
Indicators
5/6
End
Target
Mid-
Term
100
200
40
60
80
120
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Local seed businesses (LSB) supplying Quality Declared Seeds established and operational HCU and
Quartely
HCU
Outcome 
Outcome 2 - Transport
Infrastructure Serving
Oilseeds Sector Improved
Women LSB
run/led
Youth LSB
run/led
60
40
120
80
Total LSB run/led
100
200
2.2.6 Households reporting improved physical access to markets, processing and storage
facilities
20
75
Households
reporting
improved
physical access
to markets
Males
Females
Young
Males
Females
Young
PCU reports
Project
reports,
Outcome/HH
surveys,
Market
Surveys
Annual
PMU
Local government
has the resources to
support to maintain
upgraded or new
CARs. CARs
complement other
NOSP activities.
Results Hierarchy
Name
Baseline
Indicators
6/6
End
Target
Mid-
Term
Oilseeds producers reporting reduced transport costs
Percentage of
oilseeds
producers
Youth oilseeds
producers
20
20
75
40
Output 
Output 2.1 - Community
access roads constructed or
rehabilitated to all- weather
standard
2.1.5 Roads constructed, rehabilitated or upgraded
Length of roads
2 500
Annual
Result
Cumulative
Result
Cumulative
Result %
Source
Frequency
Responsibility
Means of Verification
Assumptions
Project
reports,
Outcome/HH
surveys,
Market
Surveys
Project
Engineers’
reports, PMU
report
Annual
PMU
Quartely
PMU
Local government
has the resources to
support road design,
construction and
maintenance.
Uganda
National Oilseeds Project
Project Design Report
Annex 2: Theory of change
Document Date:
10/02/2020
Project No.
2000002260
Report No.
5155-UG
Loan ID
2000003281
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
NOSP PDR 
ANNEX 2 
NOSP THEORY OF CHANGE 
Smallholders do not have 
sufficient bargaining 
power in a demand 
driven market 
Clustering of farmers; 
bulking of produce and 
facilitated brokering (by 
MSP) will build trust and 
identify investments 
Stakeholders collaborate to 
increase value chain efficiency 
and profitably 
Inadequate rural road 
network limits access to 
efficient markets 
New market linkage 
roads are aligned to the 
clustered farmers 
Improved market linkages 
reduces input and output costs 
and increases smallholders  
profits  
Rural financial services 
are inaccessible and 
products are unsuited to 
commercial agriculture 
and value chain financing
Enhance linkages to rural 
financial service 
providers and facilitate 
financial product 
development 
Financial service providers  
find value in providing 
financing and offer  
appropriate product mix for all 
value chain actors  
Availability and quality of 
public agricultural  
services  are weak 
and/or absent 
All services will have a  
beneficiary cost-share to 
build towards full private 
sector driven services 
Quality, appropriate and timely 
services enhance production 
and productivity 
Commercialise 
key oilseeds 
value chains 
and thereby 
improve the 
livelihoods and 
resilience of the 
smallholders 
engaged in 
oilseed 
production and 
marketing 
Inclusive rural 
transformation 
through 
sustainable 
development 
of the oilseeds 
sector 
Uganda
National Oilseeds Project
Project Design Report
Annex 3: Project cost and financing: Detailed costs tables
Document Date:
10/02/2020
Project No.
2000002260
Report No.
5155-UG
Loan ID
2000003281
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Annex 3:  Project Costs and Financing 
A.  Main assumptions  
Programme duration. The duration of the NOSP implementation is seven years 
with an intended project start in July 2020. 
Prices and costs. Costs have been collected as of July 2019. Costs are entered in 
US dollars with inflation adjustments made for the differing cost bases. Data were 
collected by the consultants in the field and via partners and other IFAD projects. The 
Project costs are presented in both Ugandan Shillings (UGX) and USD. Conversions from 
current USD values into UGX over the course of project implementation assume constant 
purchasing power exchange rates. 
Inflation. The local inflation scenario for the 7 years of the programme is provided 
in Table 1. 1 below. The average inflation over the past 10 years has been 7.2 per cent, 
with a high of 15.0 per cent in 2011 and a low of 2.6 per cent in 2018 (IMF 2019 1). The 
forecasts of the IMF and the World Bank for the next period estimate continuous 
moderate level of inflation. Foreign inflation is set at 2 per cent per annum over the 
Project period, based on the Manufactures Unit Value Index of 15 large economies 
(MUV15). 
Table 1. 1: Inflation rates (local and foreign) 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
Components 
Foreign inflation 
2% 
2% 
2% 
2% 
2% 
2% 
Local inflation 
4.4% 
4.9% 
5.0% 
5.0% 
5.0% 
5.0% 
2.% 
5.0% 
Exchange rate. The Bank Uganda reference rate as of 4 October 2019 of 
UGX 3,675/USD has been assumed.2 
Contingencies, taxes and duties. The expenditure categories assumed in the 
cost model and shown in Table 1. 2 below.3 
Table 1. 2: Physical contingencies, foreign exchange and taxes/duties 
Expenditure accounts 
Works 
Goods, services and inputs 
Equipment and materials 
Consultancies – TA – International 
Consultancies – TA – National 
Trainings and workshops 
Grants and subsidies 
Salaries and allowances 
Other operating costs 
Physical 
contingencies 
Foreign 
exchange 
Duties/taxes 
15% 
5% 
10% 
- 
- 
10% 
- 
- 
10% 
10% 
20% 
65% 
100% 
- 
- 
- 
- 
5% 
10% 
10% 
20% 
- 
15% 
10% 
- 
- 
10% 
1 https://www.imf.org/external/datamapper/PCPIPCH@WEO/OEMDC/UGA Accessed 16 Jul 2019 
2 Bank of Uganda https://www.bou.or.ug/bou/rates_statistics/statistics.html Accessed 8 October 2019 
3 The categories applied a consistent with the Standardised Category Descriptions for Loan Grant Allocation Table 
(Schedule 2) in Financing Agreements, IC/FOD/02/2013, dated 29 August 2013. 
1 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
The Government of Uganda finances the taxes on all goods and services purchased 
under the project. 
B.  Component costs 
Total component cost. The total investment and recurrent cost for the Project is 
estimated at USD 160.7 million (UGX 655,694 million) including contingencies. The total 
base costs are USD 138.1 million (UGX 509,952 million). Physical and price 
contingencies account for USD 11.5 million and USD 11.1 million respectively (8 per cent 
and 8 per cent of the total base costs). Baseline investment costs are estimated at 
USD 128.2 million representing 93 per cent of baseline cost. The breakdown of the costs 
by component is shown in Table 1. 3 
Table 1. 3 – Components Project Cost Summary 
Component costs. The Project costs comprise two components as follows. 
Component 1 Support to Oilseed Supply Chain Development is estimated at 
USD 68.9 million or 50 per cent of the base costs. This component comprises: Sub-
Component 1.1 Cluster development USD 41.8 million or 30 per cent of base costs; and, 
Sub-Component 1.2 Support production, productivity and market development 
USD 27.1 million or 20 per cent of base costs. Component 2 Component 2 Support to 
Public Infrastructure Serving Oilseed Sector is estimated at USD 56.7 million or 
41 per cent of base costs. Project Coordination, Knowledge Management and Monitoring 
and Evaluation combined is estimated at USD 12.5 million or 9 per cent of base costs. 
Further breakdown is shown above in Table 1. 3. 
C.  Financing plan 
Component cost by financier. An IFAD loan will finance USD 99.56 million or 
62.0 per cent of total project costs. The IFAD loan includes: USD 53.5 million or 69.5 per 
cent of Component 1: Support to Oilseed Supply Chain Development for which the total 
cost is USD 77.1 million; and, USD 32.9 million or 47.0 per cent of Component 2: 
Support to Public Infrastructure Serving Oilseed Sector for which the total cost is 
USD 69.9 million. The OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID) will finance 
USD 30 million of Component 2 Support to Public Infrastructure Serving Oilseed Sector 
or 42.3 per cent of that component. Heifer International will finance USD 6.15 million or 
13.3 per cent of Sub-Component 1.1 Cluster development within Component 1 Support 
to Oilseed Supply Chain Development. The Kuehne Foundation will finance USD 13,000 
2 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project %% TotalComponents Project Cost Summary (UGX Million)(US$ Million)ForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsA. Component 1 Support to Oilseed Value Chain Development 1. Sub-Component 1.1 Cluster development a. Supply chain brokering and investment facilitation 54 119.87 852.361 972.014.72.116.81312b. Producer group mentoring 66 580.425 886.892 467.218.07.025.02818Subtotal Sub-Component 1.1 Cluster development 120 700.233 739.1154 439.332.79.141.822302. Sub-Component 1.2 Support production, productivity and market development a. Financial services 8 191.819.28 211.02.20.02.2-2b. Technical Services Farm Production Advisors Scheme 12 481.64 564.317 046.03.41.24.6273Auxiliary Farm Services Promotion Scheme 56 366.311 625.367 991.615.33.118.41713Quality Declared Seed Production Scheme 5 020.81 809.86 830.61.40.51.8261Subtotal Technical Services 73 868.817 999.491 868.220.04.924.92018Subtotal Sub-Component 1.2 Support production, productivity and market development 82 060.618 018.6100 079.222.24.927.11820Subtotal Component 1 Support to Oilseed Value Chain Development 202 760.851 757.7254 518.554.914.068.92050B. Component 2 Support to Market Linkage Infrastructure Serving Oilseed Sector 185 011.424 231.8209 243.250.16.656.71241C. Project Coordination and Management 35 833.12 289.938 123.09.70.610.367D. Knowledge Management and Monitoring & Evaluation 6 143.01 924.48 067.41.70.52.2242Total BASELINE COSTS 429 748.280 203.8509 952.0116.421.7138.116100Physical Contingencies 36 864.85 755.642 620.410.01.611.5148Price Contingencies 89 325.213 796.2103 121.49.61.511.1138Total PROJECT COSTS 555 938.299 755.6655 693.8135.924.8160.715116 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
for supply chain logistics training under the Supply chain brokering and investment 
facilitation activity. 
  The beneficiaries will finance USD 4.83 million or 3.0 per cent of the total project 
costs. The private sector will finance USD 5.84 million or 3.6 per cent of the total project 
costs. Co-financing from the beneficiaries and the private sector with both take place 
within the Auxiliary Farm Services Promotion Scheme activity under the Support Market 
Development Sub-Component 
  The Government will finance USD 14.29 million in the form of taxes and duties or 
9 per cent of the total project costs. The NOSP financing plan is shown in Table 1. 4 
Table 1. 4 – Disbursement Accounts by Financiers 
  The NOSP financing plan by components is shown in Table 1. 5. 
3 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Disbursement Accounts by FinanciersKuehne(US$ '000) IFAD LoanOFIDHeiferFoundationBeneficiariesPrivate sectorGovernmentTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%1. Works 25,51141.430,00048.6--------6,16810.061,67938.42. Grants & Subsidies 9,59995.0--------5055.0--10,1056.33. Goods, Services & Inputs 33,00260.2--6,15011.2--4,8348.85,3319.75,48010.054,79634.14. Equipment and Materials 4,59880.0----------1,14920.05,7473.65. Consultancies 4,73198.0----------992.04,8303.06. Training and Workshops 11,42789.9----130.1----1,27110.012,7107.97. Recurrent Costs 10,69298.8----------1271.210,8196.7Total PROJECT COSTS 99,56062.030,00018.76,1503.813-4,8343.05,8363.614,2948.9160,686100.0 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Table 1. 5 – NOSP Components by Financiers
4 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Components by Financiers Kuehne(US$ '000) IFAD LoanOFIDHeiferFoundationBeneficiariesPrivate sectorGovernmentTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Component 1 Support to Oilseed Value Chain Development 1. Sub-Component 1.1 Cluster development a. Supply chain brokering and investment facilitation 16 87591.0--1720.9130.1--5052.79765.318 54111.5b. Producer group mentoring 19 22169.6--5 97821.7------2 4078.727 60617.2Subtotal Sub-Component 1.1 Cluster development 36 09678.2--6 15013.313---5051.13 3837.346 14728.72. Sub-Component 1.2 Support production, productivity and market development a. Financial services 2 18890.0----------24310.02 4311.5b. Technical Services Farm Production Advisors Scheme 4 61787.0----------68713.05 3043.3Auxiliary Farm Services Promotion Scheme 8 78341.7------4 83423.05 33125.32 10510.021 05313.1Quality Declared Seed Production Scheme 1 83486.5----------28613.52 1201.3Subtotal Technical Services 15 23453.5------4 83417.05 33118.73 07810.828 47717.7Subtotal Sub-Component 1.2 Support production, productivity and market development 17 42256.4------4 83415.65 33117.23 32110.730 90819.2Subtotal Component 1 Support to Oilseed Value Chain Development 53 51869.5--6 1508.013-4 8346.35 8367.66 7048.777 05548.0B. Component 2 Support to Market Linkage Infrastructure Serving Oilseed Sector 32 90047.030 00042.9--------7 03310.169 93343.5C. Project Coordination and Management 10 95597.4----------2962.611 2517.0D. Knowledge Management and Monitoring & Evaluation 2 18789.4----------26010.62 4471.5Total PROJECT COSTS 99 56062.030 00018.76 1503.813-4 8343.05 8363.614 2948.9160 686100.0 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
D.  Appendix 1.1 Summary Cost and Financing Tables 
Table 1: 
Components Project Cost Summary 
Table 2: 
Expenditure Accounts Project Cost Summary 
Table 3: 
Expenditure Accounts by Components – Totals including Contingencies (USD Million) 
Table 4: 
Expenditure Accounts by Components – Totals including Contingencies (UGX Million) 
Table 5: 
Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (USD Million) 
Table 6: 
Project Components by Year -- Investment/Recurrent Costs (USD Million) 
Table 7: 
Expenditure Accounts by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (USD Million) 
Table 8: 
Expenditure Accounts Breakdown (USD Million) 
Table 9: 
Components by Financiers (USD Million) 
Table 10:  Disbursement Accounts by Financiers (USD ’000) 
Table 11:  Expenditure Accounts by Financiers (USD ’000) 
Table 12:  Allocation of Loan Proceed (Loan Agreement Schedule 2) 
5 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.1 Summary Cost and Financing Tables 
Table 1:  Components Project Cost Summary 
6 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project %% TotalComponents Project Cost Summary (UGX Million)(US$ Million)ForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalLocalForeignTotalExchangeCostsA. Component 1 Support to Oilseed Value Chain Development 1. Sub-Component 1.1 Cluster development a. Supply chain brokering and investment facilitation 54 119.87 852.361 972.014.72.116.81312b. Producer group mentoring 66 580.425 886.892 467.218.07.025.02818Subtotal Sub-Component 1.1 Cluster development 120 700.233 739.1154 439.332.79.141.822302. Sub-Component 1.2 Support production, productivity and market development a. Financial services 8 191.819.28 211.02.20.02.2-2b. Technical Services Farm Production Advisors Scheme 12 481.64 564.317 046.03.41.24.6273Auxiliary Farm Services Promotion Scheme 56 366.311 625.367 991.615.33.118.41713Quality Declared Seed Production Scheme 5 020.81 809.86 830.61.40.51.8261Subtotal Technical Services 73 868.817 999.491 868.220.04.924.92018Subtotal Sub-Component 1.2 Support production, productivity and market development 82 060.618 018.6100 079.222.24.927.11820Subtotal Component 1 Support to Oilseed Value Chain Development 202 760.851 757.7254 518.554.914.068.92050B. Component 2 Support to Market Linkage Infrastructure Serving Oilseed Sector 185 011.424 231.8209 243.250.16.656.71241C. Project Coordination and Management 35 833.12 289.938 123.09.70.610.367D. Knowledge Management and Monitoring & Evaluation 6 143.01 924.48 067.41.70.52.2242Total BASELINE COSTS 429 748.280 203.8509 952.0116.421.7138.116100Physical Contingencies 36 864.85 755.642 620.410.01.611.5148Price Contingencies 89 325.213 796.2103 121.49.61.511.1138Total PROJECT COSTS 555 938.299 755.6655 693.8135.924.8160.715116 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.1 Summary Cost and Financing Tables 
Table 2:  Expenditure Accounts Project Cost Summary 
7 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project %% TotalExpenditure Accounts Project Cost Summary (UGX Million)(US$ Million)ForeignBaseLocalForeignTotalLocalForeignTotalExchangeCosts I. Investment Costs A. Works 163 756.718 195.2181 951.944.34.949.31036B. Goods, Services & Inputs 144 653.836 163.5180 817.339.29.849.02035C. Equipment and Materials 6 452.811 983.818 436.61.73.25.0654D. Consultancies 1. Technical Assistance International Technical Assistance -13 664.113 664.1-3.73.71003National Technical Assistance 3 656.1-3 656.11.0-1.0-1Subtotal Technical Assistance 3 656.113 664.117 320.21.03.74.7793E. Training and Workshops 40 484.9-40 484.911.0-11.0-8F. Grants and Subsidies 34 344.9-34 344.99.3-9.3-7Total Investment Costs 393 349.280 006.5473 355.7106.521.7128.21793II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and allowances 32 650.7-32 650.78.8-8.8-6B. Operating costs 3 748.3197.33 945.61.00.11.151Total Recurrent Costs 36 399.1197.336 596.39.90.19.917Total BASELINE COSTS 429 748.280 203.8509 952.0116.421.7138.116100Physical Contingencies 36 864.85 755.642 620.410.01.611.5148Price Contingencies 89 325.213 796.2103 121.49.61.511.1138Total PROJECT COSTS 555 938.299 755.6655 693.8135.924.8160.715116 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.1 Summary Cost and Financing Tables 
Table 3:  Expenditure Accounts by Components – Totals including Contingencies (USD million) 
8 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
9 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Component 1 Support to Oilseed Value Chain DevelopmentExpenditure Accounts by Components - Totals Including Contingencies Sub-Component 1.2 Support production,(US$ Million) Sub-Component 1.1productivity and market developmentCluster developmentTechnical ServicesComponent 2KnowledgeSupply chainAuxiliaryQualitySupport toManagementbrokeringFarmFarmDeclaredMarket LinkageProjectandandProducerProductionServicesSeedInfrastructureCoordinationMonitoringinvestmentgroupFinancialAdvisorsPromotionProductionServingand&facilitationmentoringservicesSchemeSchemeSchemeOilseed SectorManagementEvaluationTotal I. Investment Costs A. Works ------61.7--61.7B. Goods, Services & Inputs 4.519.90.02.017.90.47.9-2.154.8C. Equipment and Materials 1.8--1.6-0.70.41.00.35.7D. Consultancies 1. Technical Assistance International Technical Assistance 0.33.5-------3.8National Technical Assistance --0.8----0.2-1.0Subtotal Technical Assistance 0.33.50.8----0.2-4.8E. Training and Workshops 1.24.11.61.73.20.9---12.7F. Grants and Subsidies 10.1--------10.1Total Investment Costs 17.927.62.45.321.12.069.91.32.4149.9II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and allowances 0.1------9.30.19.6B. Operating costs 0.5----0.1-0.6-1.3Total Recurrent Costs 0.6----0.1-10.00.110.8Total PROJECT COSTS 18.527.62.45.321.12.169.911.32.4160.7  Taxes 1.02.40.20.72.10.37.00.30.314.3Foreign Exchange 2.47.50.01.43.60.68.00.70.624.8 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.1 Summary Cost and Financing Tables 
Table 4:  Expenditure Accounts by Components – Totals including Contingencies (UGX million) 
10 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
11 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Component 1 Support to Oilseed Value Chain DevelopmentExpenditure Accounts by Components - Totals Including Contingencies Sub-Component 1.2 Support production,(UGX Million) Sub-Component 1.1 Clusterproductivity and market developmentdevelopmentTechnical ServicesComponent 2KnowledgeAuxiliaryQualitySupport toManagementSupply chainFarmFarmDeclaredMarket LinkageProjectandbrokering andProducerProductionServicesSeedInfrastructureCoordinationMonitoringinvestmentgroupFinancialAdvisorsPromotionProductionServingand&facilitationmentoringservicesSchemeSchemeSchemeOilseed SectorManagementEvaluationTotal I. Investment Costs A. Works ------256 342.6--256 342.6B. Goods, Services & Inputs 18 239.778 984.6117.88 242.774 017.31 533.831 558.6-8 535.6221 230.0C. Equipment and Materials 6 866.3--6 294.9-2 922.21 532.14 055.2941.822 612.4D. Consultancies 1. Technical Assistance International Technical Assistance 1 175.613 740.8-------14 916.4National Technical Assistance --2 814.1----842.0-3 656.1Subtotal Technical Assistance 1 175.613 740.82 814.1----842.0-18 572.5E. Training and Workshops 4 791.416 236.96 376.86 822.912 840.93 428.4---50 497.4F. Grants and Subsidies 41 895.0--------41 895.0Total Investment Costs 72 968.0108 962.39 308.621 360.486 858.17 884.4289 433.24 897.29 477.5611 149.8II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and allowances 511.5------38 430.0385.939 327.5B. Operating costs 2 048.3----495.3-2 672.8-5 216.4Total Recurrent Costs 2 559.8----495.3-41 102.9385.944 543.9Total PROJECT COSTS 75 527.8108 962.39 308.621 360.486 858.18 379.7289 433.246 000.09 863.4655 693.8  Taxes 3 881.29 522.2930.92 765.58 685.81 130.229 096.51 162.51 041.958 216.7Foreign Exchange 9 389.129 537.723.65 740.214 803.52 231.032 941.82 769.52 319.399 755.6 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.1 Summary Cost and Financing Tables 
Table 5:  Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (USD million) 
12 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Project Components by Year -- Totals Including Contingencies (US$ Million) Totals Including Contingencies20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27TotalA. Component 1 Support to Oilseed Value Chain Development 1. Sub-Component 1.1 Cluster development a. Supply chain brokering and investment facilitation 1.41.83.04.34.63.40.118.5b. Producer group mentoring 3.68.47.74.02.01.10.827.6Subtotal Sub-Component 1.1 Cluster development 5.010.110.78.36.64.60.946.12. Sub-Component 1.2 Support production, productivity and market development a. Financial services 0.60.90.60.20.20.00.02.4b. Technical Services Farm Production Advisors Scheme 0.80.71.01.10.80.50.45.3Auxiliary Farm Services Promotion Scheme 0.92.93.12.94.23.63.521.1Quality Declared Seed Production Scheme 0.20.90.30.30.20.20.02.1Subtotal Technical Services 1.94.54.44.45.24.24.028.5Subtotal Sub-Component 1.2 Support production, productivity and market development 2.55.44.94.65.34.24.030.9Subtotal Component 1 Support to Oilseed Value Chain Development 7.415.615.612.911.98.84.977.1B. Component 2 Support to Market Linkage Infrastructure Serving Oilseed Sector -2.12.826.026.512.30.269.9C. Project Coordination and Management 0.51.92.21.61.61.71.711.3D. Knowledge Management and Monitoring & Evaluation 0.60.10.11.00.20.10.32.4Total PROJECT COSTS 8.619.720.741.540.322.87.1160.7 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.1 Summary Cost and Financing Tables 
Table 6:  Project Components by Year -- Investment/Recurrent Costs (USD million) 
13 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
14 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Project Components by Year -- Investment/Recurrent Costs Totals Including Contingencies (US$ Million)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27TotalA. Component 1 Support to Oilseed Value Chain Development 1. Sub-Component 1.1 Cluster development a. Supply chain brokering and investment facilitation Investment Costs 1.31.72.94.24.53.30.017.9Recurrent Costs 0.00.10.10.10.10.10.10.6Subtotal Supply chain brokering and investment facilitation 1.41.83.04.34.63.40.118.5b. Producer group mentoring Investment Costs 3.68.47.74.02.01.10.827.6Subtotal Sub-Component 1.1 Cluster development 5.010.110.78.36.64.60.946.12. Sub-Component 1.2 Support production, productivity and market development a. Financial services Investment Costs 0.60.90.60.20.20.00.02.4b. Technical Services Farm Production Advisors Scheme Investment Costs 0.80.71.01.10.80.50.45.3Auxiliary Farm Services Promotion Scheme Investment Costs 0.92.93.12.94.23.63.521.1Quality Declared Seed Production Scheme Investment Costs 0.20.80.30.30.20.2-2.0Recurrent Costs 0.00.00.00.00.00.00.00.1Subtotal Quality Declared Seed Production Scheme 0.20.90.30.30.20.20.02.1Subtotal Technical Services 1.94.54.44.45.24.24.028.5Subtotal Sub-Component 1.2 Support production, productivity and market development 2.55.44.94.65.34.24.030.9Subtotal Component 1 Support to Oilseed Value Chain Development 7.415.615.612.911.98.84.977.1B. Component 2 Support to Market Linkage Infrastructure Serving Oilseed Sector Investment Costs -2.12.826.026.512.30.269.9Subtotal Component 2 Support to Market Linkage Infrastructure Serving Oilseed Sector -2.12.826.026.512.30.269.9C. Project Coordination and Management Investment Costs 0.20.40.60.00.00.00.01.3Recurrent Costs 0.31.51.61.61.61.71.710.0Subtotal Project Coordination and Management 0.51.92.21.61.61.71.711.3D. Knowledge Management and Monitoring & Evaluation Investment Costs 0.60.10.11.00.20.10.32.4Recurrent Costs 0.00.00.00.00.00.00.00.1Subtotal Knowledge Management and Monitoring & Evaluation 0.60.10.11.00.20.10.32.4Total PROJECT COSTS 8.619.720.741.540.322.87.1160.7Total Investment Costs 8.218.119.039.838.521.15.3149.9Total Recurrent Costs 0.41.61.71.71.81.81.810.8 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.1 Summary Cost and Financing Tables 
Table 7:  Expenditure Accounts by Years -- Totals Including Contingencies (USD million) 
15 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
16 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Expenditure Accounts by Years -- Totals Including Contingencies (US$ Million) Totals Including Contingencies20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total I. Investment Costs A. Works ---24.825.211.60.161.7B. Goods, Services & Inputs 3.212.012.98.97.85.74.454.8C. Equipment and Materials 1.61.21.30.50.50.40.25.7D. Consultancies 1. Technical Assistance International Technical Assistance 1.21.20.70.40.40.0-3.8National Technical Assistance 0.30.40.30.0-0.00.01.0Subtotal Technical Assistance 1.41.61.00.40.40.00.04.8E. Training and Workshops 1.93.32.52.51.20.70.612.7F. Grants and Subsidies -0.11.42.73.32.7-10.1Total Investment Costs 8.218.119.039.838.521.15.3149.9II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and allowances 0.31.41.51.51.61.61.69.6B. Operating costs 0.10.20.20.20.20.20.21.3Total Recurrent Costs 0.41.61.71.71.81.81.810.8Total PROJECT COSTS 8.619.720.741.540.322.87.1160.7 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.1 Summary Cost and Financing Tables 
Table 8:  Expenditure Accounts Breakdown (USD million) 
17 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project PhysicalExpenditure Accounts Breakdown BaseCont.(US$ Million) Costs +PlusBase CostPhysical ContingenciesPrice ContingenciesTotal Incl. Cont.PricePriceLocalLocalLocalLocalCont. onCont. onFor.(Excl.Duties &For.(Excl.Duties &For.(Excl.Duties &For.(Excl.Duties &BasePhysicalExch.Taxes)TaxesTotalExch.Taxes)TaxesTotalExch.Taxes)TaxesTotalExch.Taxes)TaxesTotalCostsCont. I. Investment Costs A. Works 4.939.44.949.30.75.90.77.40.54.00.55.06.249.36.261.753.68.0B. Goods, Services & Inputs 9.834.34.949.00.51.70.22.40.72.40.33.411.038.45.554.852.22.6C. Equipment and Materials 3.20.71.05.00.30.10.10.50.20.00.10.33.70.91.15.75.20.5D. Consultancies 1. Technical Assistance International Technical Assistance 3.7--3.7----0.1--0.13.8--3.83.8-National Technical Assistance -0.90.11.0---------0.90.11.01.0-Subtotal Technical Assistance 3.70.90.14.7----0.1--0.13.80.90.14.84.8-E. Training and Workshops -9.91.111.0-1.00.11.1-0.60.10.7-11.41.312.711.61.2F. Grants and Subsidies -9.3-9.3-----0.8-0.8-10.1-10.110.1-Total Investment Costs 21.794.512.0128.21.68.71.211.41.57.81.010.324.7111.014.2149.9137.512.3II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and allowances -8.8-8.8-----0.7-0.7-9.6-9.69.6-B. Operating costs 0.10.90.11.10.00.10.00.10.00.10.00.10.11.10.11.31.20.1Total Recurrent Costs 0.19.70.19.90.00.10.00.10.00.80.00.80.110.60.110.810.70.1Total 21.7104.212.1138.11.68.81.211.51.58.61.011.124.8121.614.3160.7148.212.4 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.1 Summary Cost and Financing Tables 
Table 9:  Components by Financiers (USD ’000) 
18 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Components by Financiers Kuehne(US$ '000) IFAD LoanOFIDHeiferFoundationBeneficiariesPrivate sectorGovernmentTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%A. Component 1 Support to Oilseed Value Chain Development 1. Sub-Component 1.1 Cluster development a. Supply chain brokering and investment facilitation 16 87591.0--1720.9130.1--5052.79765.318 54111.5b. Producer group mentoring 19 22169.6--5 97821.7------2 4078.727 60617.2Subtotal Sub-Component 1.1 Cluster development 36 09678.2--6 15013.313---5051.13 3837.346 14728.72. Sub-Component 1.2 Support production, productivity and market development a. Financial services 2 18890.0----------24310.02 4311.5b. Technical Services Farm Production Advisors Scheme 4 61787.0----------68713.05 3043.3Auxiliary Farm Services Promotion Scheme 8 78341.7------4 83423.05 33125.32 10510.021 05313.1Quality Declared Seed Production Scheme 1 83486.5----------28613.52 1201.3Subtotal Technical Services 15 23453.5------4 83417.05 33118.73 07810.828 47717.7Subtotal Sub-Component 1.2 Support production, productivity and market development 17 42256.4------4 83415.65 33117.23 32110.730 90819.2Subtotal Component 1 Support to Oilseed Value Chain Development 53 51869.5--6 1508.013-4 8346.35 8367.66 7048.777 05548.0B. Component 2 Support to Market Linkage Infrastructure Serving Oilseed Sector 32 90047.030 00042.9--------7 03310.169 93343.5C. Project Coordination and Management 10 95597.4----------2962.611 2517.0D. Knowledge Management and Monitoring & Evaluation 2 18789.4----------26010.62 4471.5Total PROJECT COSTS 99 56062.030 00018.76 1503.813-4 8343.05 8363.614 2948.9160 686100.0 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.1 Summary Cost and Financing Tables 
Table 10:  Disbursement Accounts by Financiers (USD ’000) 
Table 11:  Expenditure Accounts by Financiers (USD ’000) 
19 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Disbursement Accounts by FinanciersKuehne(US$ '000) IFAD LoanOFIDHeiferFoundationBeneficiariesPrivate sectorGovernmentTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%1. Works 25,51141.430,00048.6--------6,16810.061,67938.42. Grants & Subsidies 9,59995.0--------5055.0--10,1056.33. Goods, Services & Inputs 33,00260.2--6,15011.2--4,8348.85,3319.75,48010.054,79634.14. Equipment and Materials 4,59880.0----------1,14920.05,7473.65. Consultancies 4,73198.0----------992.04,8303.06. Training and Workshops 11,42789.9----130.1----1,27110.012,7107.97. Recurrent Costs 10,69298.8----------1271.210,8196.7Total PROJECT COSTS 99,56062.030,00018.76,1503.813-4,8343.05,8363.614,2948.9160,686100.0Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Expenditure Accounts by Financiers Kuehne(US$ '000) IFAD LoanOFIDHeiferFoundationBeneficiariesPrivate sectorGovernmentTotalAmount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%Amount%I. Investment Costs A. Works 25,51141.430,00048.6--------6,16810.061,67938.4B. Goods, Services & Inputs 33,00260.2--6,15011.2--4,8348.85,3319.75,48010.054,79634.1C. Equipment and Materials 4,59880.0----------1,14920.05,7473.6D. Consultancies 1. Technical Assistance International Technical Assistance 3,840100.0------------3,8402.4National Technical Assistance 89190.0----------9910.09900.6Subtotal Technical Assistance 4,73198.0----------992.04,8303.0E. Training and Workshops 11,42789.9----130.1----1,27110.012,7107.9F. Grants and Subsidies 9,59995.0--------5055.0--10,1056.3Total Investment Costs 88,86859.330,00020.06,1504.113-4,8343.25,8363.914,1679.5149,86893.3II. Recurrent Costs A. Salaries and allowances 9,550100.0------------9,5505.9B. Operating costs 1,14190.0----------12710.01,2680.8Total Recurrent Costs 10,69298.8----------1271.210,8196.7Total PROJECT COSTS 99,56062.030,00018.76,1503.813-4,8343.05,8363.614,2948.9160,686100.0 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.1 Summary Cost and Financing Tables 
Table 12:  Allocation of Loan Proceed (Loan Agreement Schedule 2) 
20 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Allocation of Loan Proceeds Suggested AllocationIFAD Loan of Loan ProceedsLoan Amounts(US$ '000) LoanDisbursementTotal Project CostAverage Disbursement %UnallocatedAllocatedAmount%TotalLocalForeignTotalLocalForeignTotalTotalLocalForeignTotalLocalForeign1. Works 22,9604161,67955,5116,16841414625,5112,5512,26828322,96020,4092,5512. Equipment and Materials 4,138805,7472,0123,73680431004,598460863744,1387763,3623. Consultancies 4,258984,8309903,84098901004,731473893844,2588023,4564. Grants and Subsidies 8,6399510,10510,105-9595-9,599960960-8,6398,639-5. Recurrent Costs 9,6239910,81910,75563999910010,6921,0691,06369,6239,566576. Training and Workshops 10,2849012,71012,710-9090-11,4271,1431,143-10,28410,284-7. Goods, Services and Inputs 29,7016054,79643,83610,95960596733,0023,3002,56773329,70123,1016,600Unallocated 9,956--------------Total 99,56062160,686135,92024,767---99,5609,9568,1751,78189,60473,57716,027 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
E.  Appendix 1.2 Detailed Cost Tables 
Table 1: 
Supply Chain Brokering and Investment Facilitation 
Table 2: 
Producer Group Mentoring 
Table 3: 
Financial Services 
Table 4: 
Farm Production Advisors Scheme 
Table 5: 
Auxiliary Farm Services Promotion Scheme 
Table 6: 
Quality Declared Seed Production Scheme 
Table 7: 
Public Infrastructure Serving Oilseed Sector 
Table 8: 
Project Management and Coordination 
Table 9: 
Knowledge Management and Monitoring and Evaluation 
21 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 1. Supply Chain Brokering and Investment Facilitation 
22 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Table 1. Supply Chain Brokering and Investment Facilitation Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total I. Investment Costs A. Supply chain bokering and facilitation 1. Projected HH, groups and clusters: QUANTITIES ONLY /a No of HHs reached (cumulative) HH-45,00079,500112,500120,000120,000120,000597,000--------No of groups formed - existing (incremental) /b group-900-----900--------No of groups formed - new (incremental) /c group-300-----300--------Overall no. of groups (cumulative) /d group-9001,2001,2001,2001,2001,2006,900--------No of clusters (cumulative) /e cluster-1502002002002002001,150--------Subtotal Projected HH, groups and clusters: QUANTITIES ONLY --------2. Hub and cluster operations /f MSP Hub level meetings /g meeting-3628266--962,500-90706515--240MSP cluster level meetings /h meeting-863661663144--2,331250-21616516636--583Pre-investment support, training and demonstration and B2B activities cluster-15050----2001,000-15050----200Hub coordination and consultative meeting /i meeting1333333191,000133333319Subtotal Hub and cluster operations 145928823454331,042Subtotal Supply chain bokering and facilitation 145928823454331,042B. Support to Value Chain Development Technical Support to Value Chain Specialists /j pers-month663----1520,00012012060----300C. Oilseed Sector Development Facility Public Fund to address specific bottlenecks to the SC development /k lumpsum-113253024-9395,000-951,2352,3752,8502,280-8,835Industry Contribution to the Public Fund 5% /l lumpsum-113253024-935,000-565125150120-465Subtotal Oilseed Sector Development Facility -1001,3002,5003,0002,400-9,300D. Vehicles and Equipment 1. PMU - Vehicles and equipment Office furniture for PMU SCT set3------34001------1Tablets for PMU for M&E entry no3--3---61500--0---1Laptop for PMU for M&E entry no3--33---361,5005--50---54Subtotal PMU - Vehicles and equipment 6--50---562. Hub - Vehicles and equipment 4x4 Vehicles for Hubs Supply chain team (2 per hub) no10-1----1142,000420-42----4624x4 Vehicles - Hubs operation and maintenance lumpsum10510511611611611611683Motorcycles for hubs supply chain team no20-2----223,00060-6----66Motorcycles - Hub O&M lumpsum151517171717298Office furniture for Hub SCTs set30------3040012------12Tablets for Hub SCTs - for M&E entry no33--30---631505--5---9Laptop for Hub SCTs - for M&E entry no30--30---601,50045--45---90Printer/Photocopier/Scanner for Hub (1 per hub) no5-1----66,00030-6----36LCD Projector & screen for hub (1 per each office) no5-1----62,00010-2----12Dig. camera with GPS for hub (1 per each office) no5-1----65003-1----3Subtotal Hub - Vehicles and equipment 704120189182132132121,470Subtotal Vehicles and Equipment 711120189231132132121,527E. Hub Coordination Consultancies Supply Chain Team Leader - Hub (1 per hub) - 5 hubs @ start, Karamoja from Yr 3 (small hub) pers-month306072727236-3422,5007515018018018090-855Snr Supply Chain Specialists - Hub (2 per hub, 1 in Karamoja from Yr 3) pers-month6012013213213266-6422,000120240264264264132-1,284Supply Chain Specialists - Hub (3 per hub, 1 in Karmoja from Yr 3) pers-month9018019219219296-9421,500135270288288288144-1,413Environment and Social Officer - Hub (1 per hub, 1 in Karamoja from Yr 3) pers-month306072727236-3421,500459010810810854-513Subtotal Hub Coordination Consultancies 375750840840840420-4,065 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 1. Supply Chain Brokering and Investment Facilitation (Continued) 
23 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Table 1. Supply Chain Brokering and Investment Facilitation Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total I. Investment Costs F. Supply Chain Logistics Training Trainer pers-day-55-5--15300-22-2--5Travel costs /m lumpsum-00-0--1Accommodation day-55-5--15120-11-1--2DSA day-55-5--1550-00-0--1Materials lumpsum-00-0--0Venue hire lumpsum-11-1--2Miscellaneous lumpsum-11-1--2Subtotal Supply Chain Logistics Training -44-4--12Total Investment Costs 1,2071,5532,6813,8054,0302,9551516,245II. Recurrent Costs A. Hub Expenses Hub office expenses office month306066666666664201,00030606666666666420B. Hub Allowances DSA fo SC PMU & Hub staff pers-year173436363636362315009171818181818116Total Recurrent Costs 39778484848484536Total 1,2451,6302,7653,8894,1143,0399916,781 _________________________________\a This section indicates the physical quantities only, for reference purposes.\b Existing mature from VODP2 (average: start 50HH/group w/ consolidation, end 100HH/group)\c New or immature from VODP (average: start 40HH/group, end 100HH/group)\d 100 HH/group when mature, 30 HH/group when new (cumulative)\e Average 500 HHs / cluster\f NOSP does not pay facilitation / attendance allowance for any MSP meetings at hub or cluster\g Multi-stakeholder platforms (2 time / year per 'commodity group' - x2 commodity groups e.g.  soy/sunflower as one commodity group,)\h 2x / year per 'commodity group' - e.g.  soy/sunflower as one commodity group\i Every 4 months for the project management on rotation basis\j Based at PMU, intermittent TA\k Identified by the SC actors (95% of the total cost)\l 5% of the total cost\m Air fares 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 2. Producer Group Mentoring 
24 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Table 2. Producer Group Mentoring Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total I. Investment Costs A. Projected HH, groups and clusters: QUANTITIES ONLY /a No of HHs reached (cumulative) HH-45,00079,500112,500120,000120,000120,000597,000--------No of groups formed - existing (incremental) /b group-900-----900--------No of groups formed - new (incremental) /c group-300-----300--------Overall no. of groups (cumulative) /d group-9001,2001,2001,2001,2001,2006,900--------No of clusters (cumulative) /e cluster-1502002002002002001,150--------Subtotal Projected HH, groups and clusters: QUANTITIES ONLY --------B. Producer Group Mentoring Economic Mobilisation (existing & new groups) group-900300----1,20050-4515----60B2B interaction - Village level /f meeting-3,6004,2004,0002,0002,0002,00017,80050-180210200100100100890Subtotal Producer Group Mentoring -225225200100100100950C. Business Skills Training Businss Skills Training (BST) course development /g month36441112025,00075150100100252525500ToT Training to Business Skills Mentors (BSM) /h event-248----3210,000-24080----320BST related printing /i per HH-45,00034,50033,0007,500--120,0005-22517316538--600BST course roll-out - group level /j course-1,8001,3801,320300--4,800200-36027626460--960Fee to BSMs to teach BST courses /k course-1,8001,3801,320300--4,800100-18013813230--480BSM partial renumeration /l year-1,7251,3231,265288--4,60140-69535112--184Tablets for BSMs /m unit-600200-300100-1,200120-7224-3612-144Subtotal Business Skills Training 751,29684371220037253,188D. Memo Note: Economic Mobilizers - quantities only Economic Mobilizers (EM), at cluster level /n person-1502002002002002001,150--------EM Supervisors (1 Supervisor: 10 EMs) person-152020202020115--------EM Manager (1 per hub) person-55666634--------Subtotal Memo Note: Economic Mobilizers - quantities only --------E. Salaries - Economic Mobilizers Economic Mobilizers /o pers-month-9001,5902,2501,5008101507,200100-901592251508115720EM Supervisors - salary pers-month-901592251508115720400-36649060326288EM Managers - salary pers-month-27486845245217600-16294127143130Subtotal Salaries - Economic Mobilizers -142251356237128241,138F. VSLA mobilization VSLA Facilitator /p month175250300300250--1,2752003550606050--255G. EM Capacity building EM training on EMs and other PSP staff /q event-72----920,000-14040----180Follow up EM training on EM, MIS, VC & MSP /r event--7929-277,500--53681568-203Subtotal EM Capacity building -14093681568-383H. EM Equipment Tablets for EMs unit-15050----200150-238----30Tablets for EM Supervisors and Managers unit-155----20150-21----3Laptop / Desktop for EM Supervisors / Managers unit-2051---261,500-3082---39Subtotal EM Equipment -55162---72 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 2. Producer Group Mentoring (Continued) 
25 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Table 2. Producer Group Mentoring Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total I. Investment Costs I. EM Vehicles 4WD pickups - EM Hub Team /s each10-1----1142,000420-42----4624WD operations and maitenance lumpsum105105116116116116116788Motorcycles - EM field team /t each50-2----523,000150-6----156Motorcycle operation and maintenance lumpsum38383939393939270Subtotal EM Vehicles 7131432031551551551551,676J. Office operating Internet fees /u pers-year-1652202202202202201,26550-8111111111163K. Allowances pers-year-1702252262262262261,299750-128169170170170170974L. Other Hub operating costs hub-5566663410,000-505060606060340M. Gender Action Learning System 1. Memo: Overall Target Potential farmer groups group1,2001,2001,2001,200---4,800--------High risk HHs within FGs HH-20,00020,000----40,000--------Probable HHs for HH Mentoring /v HH-20,00020,000----40,000--------No of Mentors /w person-2,4002,400----4,800--------No of Mentors to be trained /x person2,400------2,400--------HHM Field Supervisors /y person240240240----720--------HHM Field Supervisors to be trained in TOT person240------240--------HHM Senior Supervisors /z person2424240----288--------Subtotal Memo: Overall Target --------2. HHs Methodology & Social Mentoring ToT costs for HHM Mentoring Field Supervisors event8------810,00080------80Training costs for HHM Mentors event25------255,000125------125Bicycles for Mentors each2,400------2,400120288------288Materials for HHM /aa set2,400------2,40050120------120Support to Young Farmer Groups /bb school-240-----240150-36-----36Subtotal HHs Methodology & Social Mentoring 61336-----6493. Study (Mapping,  Assessments,) HH Methodology Impact Study study-1-1---2100,000-100-100---200National level Knowledge Event/Workshop of HH methodology w/shop----1--17,000----7--7Subtotal Study (Mapping,  Assessments,) -100-1007--2074. GALS salaries HHM Senior Supervisors /cc pers-year-2424----486,000-144144----288HHM Field Supervisors /dd pers-year-240240----4803,600-864864----1,728HHM Mentors /ee pers-year-2,4002,400----4,800780-1,8721,872----3,744Subtotal GALS salaries -2,8802,880----5,760Subtotal Gender Action Learning System 6133,0162,8801007--6,616N. Provision for PSP (Hub Mentoring & GALS ) Overhead /ff lumpsum366397434101481251132,214O. Improved climate information services 1. Climate data collection a. Uganda National Meterological Authority (UNMA) Clean historic climate data lumpsum5050-----100Generate down-scaled climate models for improved agricultural planning lumpsum1515-----30Subtotal Uganda National Meterological Authority (UNMA) 6565-----130b. Farmers Groups Rain Gauges & Temperature Recording Micro Stations unit600600600600---2,4006036363636---144c. Training material and dissemination Develop dissemination Programs and material on climate risk and information analysis lumpsum2525-----50Develop training modules on climate awareness and data interpretation for the farmer groups lumpsum2525-----50Establish links with the Land Degradation Surveillance Framework (LDSF) lumpsum25------25Subtotal Training material and dissemination 7550-----125Subtotal Climate data collection 1761513636---399 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 2. Producer Group Mentoring (Continued) 
26 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Table 2. Producer Group Mentoring Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total I. Investment Costs 2. Capacity Building for Climate Change and Environmental Management Awareness, Knowledge and Participation of Farmers on CC and Weather-related Info session50505050---2005,000250250250250---1,000Build capacity for technical staff /gg w/shop55-55--2020,000100100-100100--400Information transfer at local level for improved forecasting - MAAIF/MLG lumpsum555555-30Build capacity of UNMA staff on weather data analysis, interpretation and dissemination w/shop1--1---250,00050--50---100Annual Refresh 3-day Training on Environmental, Climate Change w/shop555555-3020,000100100100100100100-600Build capacity of Communities in the use of rain gauges w/shop50505050---200503333---10Subtotal Capacity Building for Climate Change and Environmental Management 508458358508205105-2,1403. Climate risk and vulnerability assessment Climate Risk and Vulnerability Assessment (District level) no202010----5020,000400400200----1,000Service provision for the risk assessment no111----340,000404040----120Subtotal Climate risk and vulnerability assessment 440440240----1,1204. Social Impact Assessments Data collection survey4040404040--2001,0004040404040--200Data analysis and reporting contract10010050----250Subtotal Social Impact Assessments 140140904040--4505. Soil health assessments Land degradation surveillance framework sites site1010101010--5030,000300300300300300--1,500Capacity building for LDSF w/shop1-1-1--320,00020-20-20--60Monitoring of the soil fertility and health site-1515151515-75200-33333-15Subtotal Soil health assessments 3203033233033233-1,5756. Environmental awareness raising Radio progarmmes (regional level) sessions151515151515-90400666666-367. Nutrition awareness raising Nutrition Fairs no100100100100100--5005005050505050--250Training on aflatoxin reduction (group level) session600600600600---2,400500300300300300---1,200Subtotal Nutrition awareness raising 35035035035050--1,450Subtotal Improved climate information services 1,9401,8481,4031,243624114-7,170Total 3,4117,7396,9463,5441,77696665725,039 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 2. Producer Group Mentoring (Continued) 
27 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Table 2. Producer Group Mentoring Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total _________________________________\a This section indicates the physical quantities only, for reference purposes.\b Existing mature from VODP2 (average: start 50HH/group w/ consolidation, end 100HH/group)\c New or immature from VODP (average: start 40HH/group, end 100HH/group)\d 100 HH/group when mature, 30 HH/group when new (cumulative)\e Average 500 HHs / cluster\f 4 / Cluster MSP, 10 / Hub MSP, 50% after MTR.\g Course design, materials development, Master ToT delivery, QA\h Business Skills Training course delivery & Data Entry on Tablet by Econ. Mobilizers 4 BMS per cluster, 25 BSMs per ToT class for 10 days.\i Business skills training material and Farm Business Diary\j Business Skills Training - 25 pp/ course x 20 session by BSMs\k 20 Session @ $5 per session\l For data collection+MIS Entry via tablet $20 /seasaon, paid annually\m Including 50% replacement after 3 yrs\n Approximatley 1 EM : 6 groups\o Phased with the recruitment of the HH, each cohort of EM funded by NOSP from three years before assumed that the private sector adopts the expense.\p 15 to 20 VSLAs per mobiliser - decreasing engagement with VSLAs as per age.\q covering MIS, MSP, B2B, BSMs, Gender & CYGN  - 25-30 pp per class, for max 20 training days\r 25-30 SMS per class  for max 5 training days.\s 2 per hub plus 1 in Karamoja in the 3rd year.\t 10 per hub plus 2 in karamoja in the 3rd year.\u For MIS Data Entry / Online Discussion for SM and BLF\v 50% of high risk family\w 2 for each FG of approx. 100 members who will work together to deliver mentoring at both group and HH level\x 2 for each FG of approx. 100 members\y Under PSP\z Under PSP\aa At FG and HH level\bb Pilot in 1 school per sub county. Exact no of sub counties yet to be determined\cc 1 for 10 HHM Field Supervisors\dd 1 for 10 HHM Field Supervisors\ee 2 for each group comprising around 100 members\ff Taken as 15% of (annual cost minus BST training development). i.e. excludes PSP  business skills development contract costs.\gg Mainstreaming environmental management and CC risk management 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 3. Financial Services 
28 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Table 3. Financial Services Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total I. Investment Costs A. VSLA Training Training on VSLA governance, book keeping /a batches65-----113,0001815-----33Training to VSLAs on governance,member responsibility, book keeping /b days6,500300300----7,1002013066----142Subtotal VSLA Training 148216----175B. VSLA level financial  products for oil seed production Training material development /c lumpsum1------1Training of personnel in financial products at VSLA /d batch101153---291,500151785---44Subtotal VSLA level financial  products for oil seed production 161785---45C. Training on Financial literacy including insurance literacy Curriculum adjustment for financial literacy modules and insurance literacy and training material development /e lumpsum2------2Training of trainers on finanical literacy including insurance literacy /f batch1620-----363,0004860-----108Training of VSLA members on financial literacy including insurance literacy /g day5,46012,6607,200----25,32020109253144----506Subtotal Training on Financial literacy including insurance literacy 159313144----616D. Training on VSLA linkage banking and other mainstream bank linkages Training of trainers on VSLA linkage banking /VC financing /h batch1010105---352,00020202010---70Training of VSLA members on linkage banking/ VC financing /i VSLA5207801,5002,2002,600--7,6001058152226--76Subtotal Training on VSLA linkage banking and other mainstream bank linkages 2528353226--146E. Engagement with banks High level meeting with Financial instiuttions, Insurance companies and Bank of Uganda /j meeting22-----450011-----2Planning and co ordination meeting at hub level with major financial institutions and insurance companies /k meeting520201010101085200144222217Policy briefs and other KM products per brief-11221-71,000-11221-7Subtotal Engagement with banks 265443226F. Technical assistance to Financial institutions 1. Tier 4 institutions a. Agri product development - SACCOs, Agriculture enterprise co operatives /l SACCO252525----756,000150150150----4502. Tier 1, 2  & 3 Financial Institutions a. TA for product development/ product modifications /m pers-day601806060---36040024722424---144b. Training of branch managers and credit officers on new products including crop insurance /n batch21511----286,000129066----168Subtotal Tier 1, 2  & 3 Financial Institutions 361629024---3123. Training programme on oil seed value chain financing for bank staff including crop insurance /o batch-222---67,500-151515---454. Exposure visit  for senior management banks and Government officials /p batch-1-11--375,000-75-7575--225Subtotal Technical assistance to Financial institutions 18640225511475--1,032G. Support to Insurance Companies 1. Training of insurance company staff in branches, PSP agents, /q batch2444---141,0002444---142. Piloting and scaling up of agriculture insurance products /r annual contract-11----250,000-5050----100Subtotal Support to Insurance Companies 254544---114H. Training on crop insurance for PSP and mobilisers /s training-1051010--352,000-20102020--70Total 538861517179125322,223 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 3. Financial Services (Continued) 
29 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Table 3. Financial Services Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total _________________________________\a 5 days training to  PSPs- 6 EM managers,  20 EM supervisors,  300  VSLA facilitators,. USD 1250  per batch of 20 persons.\b Village level as part of group meetings. USD 20 per training day covering 2 groups per day\c Material development\d 2 days training by RF manager with local support from a local trainer. Trainees include 6 Hub co ordinators, 6 Hub M&E officers, PSP - 6 EM managers,  20 EM supervisors, 200 - EMs, 300  VSLA facilitators.\e Available material to be reviewed and modified to suit proejct requirements\f 5 days training to  PSPs- 6 EM managers,  20 EM supervisors, 200 - Economic mobilisers, 300  VSLA facilitators.\g VSLA facilitator to train two groups in a day during group meetings. 70% of old groups and all new groups will under go the training\h 2 day training  to 6 Hub co ordinators, 6 Hub M&E officers, PSP- 6 EM managers,  20 EM supervisors, 200 - Economic mobilisers, 300  VSLA facilitators,\i During VSLA meeting before such linkages. USD 10 per training\j Senior management of financial institutions and Bank of Uganda\k Quarterly meetings in the initial three years and half yearly there after.\l 75 SACCOs;30 days per SACCO spread over 12 months and one TA provider per hub. VSLA linkage banking, agri product, equipment financing.\m 4  institutions with about 8 products; year 1 one FI;year 2 -2 FIs: year 3- 1 FI\n 720 persons trained (5 partners with total 40 branches & other outreach units and 6 loan officers per branch); 3 day training; fees of trainers to be borne by project & all logistics by the FIs.  USD6000 / 2 persons 6 days incl. preparation/delivery\o 3 week training course for bank staff - cost of trainers covered. Banks to bare logistics.\p 5 days exposure visit for senior Government officilas and seniuor management of financial instiuttions to study value chain financing\q 45 persons in total - trained twice a year.\r technical assistance for one oilseed crop insurance product per year. Policy briefs on the intiatives f the project including new financial products,\s two days training to  PSPs- 6 EM managers,  20 EM supervisors, 200 - Economic mobilisers, 300  VSLA facilitators 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 4. Farm Production Advisors Scheme 
30 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Table 4. Farm Production Advisors Scheme Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total I. Investment Costs A. Farm Production Advisors Training Develop course curriculum /a manual4--4--41215,00060--60--60180Production of training material /b units5,000--5,000--5,00015,0001050--50--50150Training of Trainers /c trainers12--12---245,00060--60---120Training of FPA on the field /d persons75133188200125681180050038679410063346400Training of FPA theory classes /e persons75133188200125681180050038679410063346400Subtotal Farm Production Advisors Training 245133188370125681211,250B. Demonstration Plots Inputs - seed ,fert,CPP /f input packs7513318820012568118001008131920137180Equipment and tools /g pack75133188200125681180075610141595160Signage /h signs75133188200125681180025235532020Purchase of Mechanisation services acres7513318820012568118006058111284148M&E of Demo plot (inspections by PSP) inspection7513318820012568118001008131920137180Field days for farmer groups in cluster /i field days300530750800500270503,2001003053758050275320Distribution and logistics /j plots300530750800500270503,200200601061501601005410640Subtotal Demonstration Plots 117207293312195105191,248C. FPA Extension program Development of audio visual extension material /k programs12-12-12--367,50090-90-90--270Portable Audio visual equipment for extension kits100100-----2007507575-----150Tablet for M&E unit100100101010101025015015152222238Soft ware for M&E unit2002002002002002002001,400501010101010101070IT tech support from systems service provider day5483653653653653653652,73810055373737373737274Training of FPA's on extension service provision /l each7513318820012568138022501933475031173201Transport allowance for extension /m days2,7004,7706,7507,2004,5202,43045028,82051424343623122144Subtotal FPA Extension program 27719421913419277541,146D. General Support to FPAS M&E : production and trade data  from groups farmers45,00079,500112,500120,000120,000120,000120,000717,0000.5525446266666666394M&E: Data management and processing /n lumpsum36363636363636252Logistics support /o seasons22222221412,00024242424242424168Program review /p review1111111722,50023232323232323158Subtotal General Support to FPAS 107126144149149149149972Total 7466608449656603993424,616 _________________________________\a Develop course curriculum. Program level PSP will develop course material for all oil seed crops and produce a production hand book. X4 book @ $10 000/book. New additions will be provided in the 4th and 7th year of the project\b Production of training material: this will be a lever arch book so new material can be added, 5000 copies (x25/cluster)\c TOT by Program level PSP. $5000 per trainer PSP. This will cover food accomodation, venue and training for four weeks in kampala, x2 trainers per custer\d Training of FPA on the field 9 months , x1 contact session every 2 weeks = 18 contact sessions . Hub level PSP\e Training of FPA on the field 9 months , x1 contact session every 2 weeks = 18 contact sessions . Hub level PSP\f Inputs - seed ,fert, CPP $100 (to be procured by PMU) +$25 for delivery (PSP)\g Equipment and tools- nap sack sprayer, tarpaulin, gerry can, PPE, record book\h Signage for show garden with NOSP logo and demo plot number. Local PSP to be contracted to produce signage\i Field days for farmer groups in cluster, cost of refreshments and administration\j Distribution of inputs tool and equipment PSP - $50/plot per season (x4 seasons) from kampala to plot\k Development of audio visual extension material $7500 per production x8 crop specific programs and x4 general programs\l Training of FPA's on extension service provision, $250/student course\m Transport allowance for extension $5/ session to facilitate public transport within the clusters and DSA, 36 extension days per annum (18 per season)\n IT consultant support\o Logistics support - general support for distribution of materials and co ordinating the program\p Program review, technical review to check the program is on track 30days *$750 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 5. Auxiliary Farm Services Promotion Scheme 
31 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Table 5. Auxiliary Farm Services Promotion Scheme Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total I. Investment Costs A. Scheme Design and Supervision 1. Mechanization Business Training Course Set-up Develop curriculum & materials for training program module6------610,00060------60Procurment Support to PMU /a lump sum1010101010101070ToT Mech Bus. training of hub implementers (PSP) implementer444----1240,000160160160----480Monitoring & Mentoring of Hub Implementers /b implementer--8888-3210,000--80808080-320Subtotal Mechanization Business Training Course Set-up 230170250909090109302. Machinery packages for Hub Implementers usage Small scale thresher package for Hub training package10------105,00050------50Small scale mechanization package for Hub training package5------58,40042------42Medium scale mechanization package for Hub training package5------538,800194------194Large scale mechanization package for Hub training package5------555,800279------279Subtotal Machinery packages for Hub Implementers usage 565------565Subtotal Scheme Design and Supervision 795170250909090101,495B. Mechanization Business Training Tractor operator training /c each-2102102102402202201,3101,250-2632632633002752751,638Mechanic training course man6666666422,40014141414141414101Field Visits and mentoring of operators each-105105105120110110655500-535353605555328Monitoring of extensions session-105105105120110110655100-11111112111166Subtotal Mechanization Business Training 143403403403863553552,131C. Mechanization Business Financing Round 1 - First movers 1. Small-scale mech package (USD 11,200 each, incl taxes) a. Investor = Producer group (incentive = 50% w/ women bonus) Investment incentive - NOSP package-5050----1005,600-280280----560Beneficary contribution package-5050----1005,600-280280----560Subtotal Investor = Producer group (incentive = 50% w/ women bonus) -560560----1,120b. Investor = SME (incentive = 35% w/ women bonus) Investment incentive - NOSP package-2525----503,920-9898----196Beneficary contribution package-2525----507,280-182182----364Subtotal Investor = SME (incentive = 35% w/ women bonus) -280280----560Subtotal Small-scale mech package (USD 11,200 each, incl taxes) -840840----1,6802. Medium-scale mech package (USD 44,310 each, incl taxes) a. Investor = Producer group (incentive = 50% w/ women bonus) Investment incentive - NOSP package-1515----3022,155-332332----665Beneficary contribution package-1515----3022,155-332332----665Subtotal Investor = Producer group (incentive = 50% w/ women bonus) -665665----1,329b. Investor = SME (incentive = 35% w/ women bonus) Investment incentive - NOSP package-1515----3015,508-233233----465Beneficary contribution package-1515----3028,802-432432----864Subtotal Investor = SME (incentive = 35% w/ women bonus) -665665----1,329Subtotal Medium-scale mech package (USD 44,310 each, incl taxes) -1,3291,329----2,659Subtotal Mechanization Business Financing Round 1 - First movers -2,1692,169----4,339 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 5. Auxiliary Farm Services Promotion Scheme (Continued) 
32 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Table 5. Auxiliary Farm Services Promotion Scheme Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total I. Investment Costs D. Mechanization Business Financing Round 2 - Early expanders 1. Small-scale mech package (USD 11,200 each, incl taxes) a. Investor = Producer group (incentive = 40% w/ women bonus) Investment incentive - NOSP package---5050--1004,480---224224--448Beneficary contribution package---5050--1006,720---336336--672Subtotal Investor = Producer group (incentive = 40% w/ women bonus) ---560560--1,120b. Investor = SME (incentive = 25% w/ women bonus) Investment incentive - NOSP package---2525--502,800---7070--140Beneficary contribution package---2525--508,400---210210--420Subtotal Investor = SME (incentive = 25% w/ women bonus) ---280280--560Subtotal Small-scale mech package (USD 11,200 each, incl taxes) ---840840--1,6802. Medium-scale mech package (USD 44,310 each, incl taxes) a. Investor = Producer group (incentive = 40% w/ women bonus) Investment incentive - NOSP package---1510--2517,724---266177--443Beneficary contribution package---1510--2526,586---399266--665Subtotal Investor = Producer group (incentive = 40% w/ women bonus) ---665443--1,108b. Investor = SME (incentive = 25% w/ women bonus) Investment incentive - NOSP package---1510--2511,077---166111--277Beneficary contribution package---1510--2533,233---498332--831Subtotal Investor = SME (incentive = 25% w/ women bonus) ---665443--1,108Subtotal Medium-scale mech package (USD 44,310 each, incl taxes) ---1,329886--2,2163. Large-scale mech package (USD 56,330 each, incl taxes) a. Investor = Producer group (incentive = 40% w/ women bonus) Investment incentive - NOSP package----10--1022,532----225--225Beneficary contribution package----10--1033,798----338--338Subtotal Investor = Producer group (incentive = 40% w/ women bonus) ----563--563b. Investor = SME (incentive = 25% w/ women bonus) Investment incentive - NOSP package----15--1514,082----211--211Beneficary contribution package----15--1542,248----634--634Subtotal Investor = SME (incentive = 25% w/ women bonus) ----845--845Subtotal Large-scale mech package (USD 56,330 each, incl taxes) ----1,408--1,408Subtotal Mechanization Business Financing Round 2 - Early expanders ---2,1693,134--5,304E. Mechanization Business Financing Round 3 - Main adopters 1. Small-scale mech package (USD 11,200 each, incl taxes) a. Investor = Producer group (incentive = 30% w/ women bonus) Investment incentive - NOSP package-----50501003,360-----168168336Beneficary contribution package-----50501007,840-----392392784Subtotal Investor = Producer group (incentive = 30% w/ women bonus) -----5605601,120b. Investor = SME (incentive = 20% w/ women bonus) Investment incentive - NOSP package-----2525502,240-----5656112Business contribution package-----2525508,960-----224224448Subtotal Investor = SME (incentive = 20% w/ women bonus) -----280280560Subtotal Small-scale mech package (USD 11,200 each, incl taxes) -----8408401,680 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 5. Auxiliary Farm Services Promotion Scheme (Continued) 
33 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Table 5. Auxiliary Farm Services Promotion Scheme Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total2. Medium-scale mech package (USD 44,310 each, incl taxes) a. Investor = Producer group (incentive = 30% w/ women bonus) Investment incentive - NOSP package-----10102013,293-----133133266Beneficary contribution package-----10102031,017-----310310620Subtotal Investor = Producer group (incentive = 30% w/ women bonus) -----443443886b. Investor = SME (incentive = 20% w/ women bonus) Investment incentive - NOSP package-----1010208,862-----8989177Business contribution package-----10102035,448-----354354709Subtotal Investor = SME (incentive = 20% w/ women bonus) -----443443886Subtotal Medium-scale mech package (USD 44,310 each, incl taxes) -----8868861,7723. Large-scale mech package (USD 56,330 each, incl taxes) a. Investor = Producer group (incentive = 30% w/ women bonus) Investment incentive - NOSP package-----551016,899-----8484169Beneficary contribution package-----551039,431-----197197394Subtotal Investor = Producer group (incentive = 30% w/ women bonus) -----282282563b. Investor = SME (incentive = 20% w/ women bonus) Investment incentive - NOSP package-----10102011,266-----113113225Business contribution package-----10102045,064-----451451901Subtotal Investor = SME (incentive = 20% w/ women bonus) -----5635631,127Subtotal Large-scale mech package (USD 56,330 each, incl taxes) -----8458451,690Subtotal Mechanization Business Financing Round 3 - Main adopters -----2,5712,5715,142Total 8092,6792,7592,5993,6113,0172,93718,411 _________________________________\a Scheme Implementer / Machinery Suppliers: Define ToRs, techncial advise to PMU, due dilligence\b 1 / season / implementer\c On usage and maintenance of equipment - 2 operators per package 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 6. Quality Declared Seed Production Scheme 
34 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Table 6. Quality Declared Seed Production Scheme Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total I. Investment Costs A. Local Seed Business Training Develop and implement QMS documentation /a manual1------125,00025------25Production of training material and documentation copies500-500----1,0002513-13----25PSP training LSB /b pers-day900900900900900900-5,40020181818181818-108Subtotal Local Seed Business Training 561831181818-158B. Local Seed Business Plots Inputs - seed, fertilizer, crop protection products /c packs202530354550-205300689111415-62Equipment and tools /d no202530354550-20550112223-10Signage /e no202530354550-20520011111-4Purchase of mechanisation services /f acres4050607090100-41085345689-35Certification and inspection /g no100125150175225250-1,02520233455-21Tablets for M&E /h no202530354550-205150345578-31Software developement /i lumpsum20------20Software and reg /j no204575110155205-610501246810-31M&E : production and trade data from groups /k LSB202530354550-20550112223-10M&E: Data management and processing /l pers-day100100100100100100-60050555555-30Subtotal Local Seed Business Plots 432834405157-253C. Supply Chain Development no-1010101010-501,500-1515151515-75D. Training of Seed Inspectors /m Seed inspectors training by PSP inspectors-3829286--1011,000-3829286--101Equiping seed inspectors set-3839386--121500-1920193--61Subtotal Training of Seed Inspectors -5749479--162E. Supporting Seed Production Systems 1. Soy Seed - Increase genetic yield potential of local varieties trial-11111-525,000-2525252525-1252. Build Capacity of plant breeders scholarships-1-----125,000-25-----253. Increasing capacity for foundation seed supply Develop a sustainble business model and Supply chain to provide LSB with foundation seed plan-1-----110,000-10-----10Irrigation system for foundation seed production acres-10-----105,000-50-----50Training on irrigation system operation and maintenance session-1-----12,500-3-----3Subtotal Increasing capacity for foundation seed supply -63-----634. Support to National Soy Bean Seed Production 4WD Pickup no1------142,00042------42Subtotal Supporting Seed Production Systems 4211325252525-255F. Innoculant Supply Chain Develop capacity of private sector labs to produce innoculant /n labs-1-----1115,000-115-----115Innoculant storage /o no4040404040--2001,0004040404040--200Set up certification scheme for innoculant at Makarere University /p lumpsum-30-----30Set up QMS for production of innoculant /q lumpsum-20-----20Capacity building  - production of innoculant /r course-11----210,000-1010----20Equip Makarere Laboratory for innoculant production /s lumpsum-120-----120Subtotal Innoculant Supply Chain 40335504040--505G. Research and Development Scholarships MSc students-10-10---206,000-60-60---120Scholarships PhD students-55----1012,000-6060----120Workshops w/shop-11111-510,000-1010101010-50Supporting institutons on oil seed research programs-2-----225,000-50-----50Subtotal Research and Development -18070701010-340Total Investment Costs 180746273255168125-1,747 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 6. Quality Declared Seed Production Scheme (Continued) 
35 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Table 6. Quality Declared Seed Production Scheme Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27TotalII. Recurrent Costs A. Support to National Soy Bean Production Vehicle operating lumpsum15151515151515103Total Recurrent Costs 15151515151515103Total 195760288270182140151,850 _________________________________\a Develop and implement QMS documentation and Quality Manuals for seed companies\b Training and mentoring of LSB on the field x 5 trainer per hub, full time to mentor and guide LSB $18000/trainer to PSP for full cost\c Inputs - seed ,fert,seed bags, labels CPP $250/acres x2 acres\d Equipment and tools, PPE, napsakc sprayer, tarpaulins\e Signage for fields to ID project\f Purchase of Mechanisation services, tillage for 2 acres x3 passes\g Certification and inspection, cost of private inspector, 5 inspection per season\h Tablets for M&E, one tablet per LSB for M&E\i lump sum for developing software - will link to NSCS & NOPS data base\j Software licences for operating systems\k M&E : productionand trade data  from groups, LSB paid $25 /season to submit all data on sales, production etc\l M&E: Data management and processing, of all data from LSB on sales and volumes, customers\m Training of seed inspectors - training provided by NSCS - 25 days - DSA = $30 =$750 + $250 for equipment = $1000\n Subsidy scheme for private sector innoculant producer\o Fridges for innoculant supply chain scheme - $1,000 refrigerated storage/offgrid subsidy for agrodealers / coops\p Set up certification scheme for innoculant at Makarere University TA $500 @ 60 days = $30000\q Set up QMS for production of innoculant PSP $20 000\r Capacity buiding  and training of private sector labs PSP 1 training = 5 days $10000\s Equip Laboratory at Makarere for certification 560 000 lab equipment $10 000 IT/labels 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 7. Public Infrastructure Serving Oilseed Sector 
36 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Table 7. Public Infrastructure Serving Oilseed Sector Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total I. Investment Costs A. Vehicles 4WD Pickups no-5-----542,000-210-----210Office car no-1-----150,000-50-----50Subtotal Vehicles -260-----260B. Office equipment Desktop computers no--15----151,000--15----15Laptops no--15----151,500--23----23Printers no--15----15500--8----8Multifunctional Printer/Scanner no--1----112,000--12----12Office furniture set--11----112,000--22----22GPS and Tablet equipment no--6----61,000--6----6Software no-1111116500-1111113Subtotal Office equipment -186111188C. Community awareness and social mobilisation lumpsum-0.10.10.20.20.20.21600,000-6060120120120120600D. Feasibility studies and engineering designs /a kms-1,0001,495----2,4951,000-1,0001,495----2,495E. Environmental and Social Impact Assessments /b kms-1,0001,495----2,495600-600897----1,497F. ESMP implementation - Restoration of water supply lumpsum---0.30.30.20.21269,400---81815454269G. Road construction works Road Construction works kms---1,0001,000450-2,45020,000---20,00020,0009,000-49,000H. Construction supervision /c kms---1,0001,000450-2,4501,000---1,0001,000450-2,450Total Investment Costs -1,9212,53821,20121,2019,62417456,659II. Recurrent Costs Total -1,9212,53821,20121,2019,62417456,659 _________________________________\a 5% of construction costs\b Consultancy services 3% of construction costs\c 5% of construction costs 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 8. Project Management and Coordination 
37 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Table 8. Project Coordination and Management Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total I. Investment Costs A. MAAIF PCU 1. Technical Assistance National M&E, KM and Communication Specialist /a pers-month444--22168,000323232--1616128TA to strengthen the PEs lumpsum1338-----50Procurement Capacity Building Programme lumpsum2525-----50Subtotal Technical Assistance 709532--16162282. Vehicles 4WD Pickups no--9----942,000--378----378Office car (Station wagon) no1------150,00050------50Subtotal Vehicles 50-378----4283. Office equipment Desktop computer unit--13----131,000--13----13Laptops unit--12----121,500--18----18Mutifunctional printer/scanner unit--1----112,000--12----12Office furniture set--13----132,000--26----26GPS and tablet equipment unit--6----61,000--6----6Software lumpsum-1111113Subtotal Office equipment -176111178Subtotal MAAIF PCU 12095486111717734B. MoLG PCU 1. Vehicles 4WD Pickups no-6-----642,000-252-----252Office car (Station wagon) no11-----250,0005050-----100Subtotal Vehicles 50302-----3522. Office equipment Desktop computer unit--8----81,000--8----8Laptops unit--6----61,500--9----9Mutifunctional printer/scanner unit--1----112,000--12----12Office furniture set--8----82,000--16----16GPS and tablet equipment unit--6----61,000--6----6Software lumpsum-1111113Subtotal Office equipment -152111154Subtotal MoLG PCU 50303521111406Total Investment Costs 1703985371117171,140 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 8. Project Management and Coordination (Continued) 
38 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Table 8. Project Coordination and Management Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27TotalII. Recurrent Costs A. MAAIF PCU 1. Staff Salaries Project Coordinator pers-month6121212121212785,00030606060606060390Agronomist pers-month6121212121212784,00024484848484848312Supply Chain Team Leader pers-month6121212121212784,00024484848484848312Supply Chain Deputy Team Leader pers-month122424242424241563,00036727272727272468Financial Controller pers-month6121212121212783,00018363636363636234Procurement and Contract Manager pers-month612121212126723,50021424242424221252Social Inclusion Specialist /b pers-month-121212121212723,000-363636363636216Environment and Climate Specialist pers-month-121212121212723,000-363636363636216M&E and KM Specialist pers-month12121212121212843,00036363636363636252Rural Finance Advisor pers-month-121212121212723,000-363636363636216Accountant pers-month6121212121212782,00012242424242424156Account Assistant pers-month6121212121212781,5009181818181818117Data Management Assistant pers-month-121212121212721,000-12121212121272Office Administrator pers-month-121212121212721,000-12121212121272Office Attendants pers-month-242424242424144500-12121212121272Drivers pers-month-108108108108108108648500-545454545454324Subtotal Staff Salaries 2105825825825825825613,6812. Staff Salary Other NSSF contribution (10% of salary) lumpsum21585858585856368Gratuity lumpsum32878787878784552Staff Medical Insurance lumpsum-222222222222130Subtotal Staff Salary Other 531671671671671671621,0503. Staff Allowances Per diem for national travel day-3006006006006006003,30050-153030303030165Tele and internet subs month-2,2202,2202,2202,2202,2202,22013,3205-11111111111167Subtotal Staff Allowances -2641414141412324. Operation and maintenance a. Vehicle O&M lumpsum-272727272727162b. Office supplies Office supplies lumpsum-10101010101060Pastel Software( Provisional cost) lumpsum20------20Pastel Annual Maintenance /c lumpsum-33333318Performance Audit - Bi Annual bi-annual--1-1-1320,000--20-20-2060IFMIS Mapping for financial reporting /d day20------202505------5Subtotal Office supplies 25133313331333163Subtotal Operation and maintenance 254060406040603255. Office rent pers-month-555555555555330Subtotal MAAIF PCU 2888709058859058858795,618B. MoLG NOSP Implementation Support Team 1. Staff Salaries Project Coordinator pers-month-121212121212722,000-242424242424144Infrastructure Engineering Advisor (from MoWT) pers-month-121212121212721,500-181818181818108Infrastructure Engineers pers-month-6060606060603603,000-1801801801801801801,080Social and Community Development Specialist pers-month-121212121212722,000-242424242424144M&E Officer pers-month-121212121212722,000-242424242424144Project Accountant pers-month6121212121212782,00012242424242424156Procurement Specialist pers-month612121212126723,00018363636363618216Accounts Assistant pers-month6121212121212781,5009181818181818117Office Administrator pers-month-121212121212721,000-12121212121272Drivers pers-month-848484848484504500-424242424242252Subtotal Staff Salaries 394024024024024023842,433 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 8. Project Management and Coordination (Continued) 
39 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Table 8. Project Coordination and Management Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total2. Staff Salary Other NSSF contribution (10% of salary) lumpsum4404040404038243Gratuity lumpsum6606060606058365Staff Medical Insurance lumpsum-202020202020122Subtotal Staff Salary Other 101211211211211211167303. Staff Allowances Per diem for national travel day-3006006006006006003,30035-112121212121116Tele and internet subs month-2,2202,2202,2202,2202,2202,22013,3205-11111111111167Subtotal Staff Allowances -2232323232321824. Operation and maintenance a. Vehicle O&M lumpsum-272727272727162b. Office supplies lumpsum-1010101010959Subtotal Operation and maintenance -373737373736221Subtotal MoLG NOSP Implementation Support Team 495815925925925925683,565Total Recurrent Costs 3361,4521,4971,4771,4971,4771,4479,183Total 5061,8492,0341,4781,4981,4941,46410,323 _________________________________\a ITA including international travel.\b a.k.a Community Development Officer\c Provisional cost\d Provision for a financial consultant to support on IFMIS Mapping  for financial reporting 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Annex 3: Project Costs and Financing 
Appendix 1.2 Detailed Tables 
Table 9. Knowledge Management and Monitoring and Evaluation 
40 
Republic of Uganda National Oilseeds Project Table 9. Knowledge Management and Monitoring & Evaluation Detailed Costs QuantitiesUnit CostBase Cost (US$ '000)Unit20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total(US$)20/2121/2222/2323/2424/2525/2626/27Total I. Investment Costs A. M&E System /a Establish MIS /b contract100------100Server / Cloud costs lumpsum11111114Baseline survey survey1------1150,000150------150SC annual tracking survey /c survey1111111750,00050505050505050350Mid-term survey /d survey---1---1800,000---800---800Impact Assessment Survey survey----1--150,000----50--50End-line survey survey------11150,000------150150Subtotal M&E System 3015151851101512011,604B. KM products and communications Annual review workshop for PCU/PICT/Hub Environ+Social w/shop-111111610,000-10101010101060KM product and communication activities /e lumpsum30303030303030210Subtotal KM products and communications 30404040404040270C. Equipment GSM-enabled tablet /f unit1,345------1,345140188------188GPS units /g unit25------2550013------13Desktop computer /h unit10------101,50015------15Digital Camera professional /i unit7------71,0007------7Subtotal Equipment 223------223Total Investment Costs 5539191891141912412,096II. Recurrent Costs A. Staff allowances M&E and KM Specialist /j pers-day303030303030302104011111118PMU Data Management Assistant pers-day3535353535353524540111111110Hub M&E Assistant /k pers-day2502502502502502502501,750401010101010101070Total Recurrent Costs 1313131313131388Total 5661031039031531032532,185 _________________________________\a Monitoring and evaluation, Management Information System\b Contract for establishment of M&E/MIS and KM systems and strategies.\c For all active SCs includes rolling baseline, SC survey combined with limted HH survey (annual outcome)\d Contracted by IFAD\e Includes policy briefings, website, webinars, printing etc.\f For HHM mentors, Supervisors, M&E and core comp staff at Hub and M&E team at PMU; excluding BSs team as it has been budgeted in Component 1 separately.\g For areas where there is no cellular connection. 10 in each Hub\h 2 at PMU and 1 at each Hub and 3 for when additional data management support is required\i 1 in each hub and 2 at PMU.\j At PCU\k One per hub 
Uganda
National Oilseeds Project
Project Design Report
Annex 4: Economic and Financial Analysis
Document Date:
10/02/2020
Project No.
2000002260
Report No.
5155-UG
Loan ID
2000003281
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Annex 4:  Economic and Financial Analysis 
EFA Summary Page 1 
Table A: Household Financial Incremental Income for NOSP Farm Models 
Project 
Year 
Sunflower - 
Sesame 
Sunflower - 
Groundnut 
Sesame - Soy 
bean 
Soy bean - 
Sesame 
Household Incremental Income (UGX) 
PY1 
PY2 
PY3 
PY4 
PY5 
PY6 
PY7 
PY8 
PY9 
PY10 + 
NPV @ 
12% \1 
-282,400 
-207,557 
-148,081 
72,418 
300,078 
640,838 
685,518 
635,518 
685,518 
435,518 
-272,400 
-1,086,231 
-891,913 
259,199 
1,307,998 
1,873,067 
1,915,087 
1,865,087 
1,915,087 
1,665,087 
-340,000 
169,086 
1,118,016 
2,171,615 
2,555,338 
2,919,278 
2,958,638 
2,908,638 
2,958,638 
2,708,638 
-348,960 
-21,040 
475,880 
1,001,485 
1,339,938 
1,652,198 
1,688,898 
1,638,898 
1,688,898 
1,438,898 
2,186,725 
6,404,396 
14,738,056 
7,782,363 
\1 12% discount rate equivalent to average interest rate of term deposits 
Table B: Project Cost and Log Frame Indicators 
Total Project Costs (USD m): 160.81 
IFAD loan: (USD m): 99.56 
Target population \1 
Cost per targeted population\3 
People:  
600,000 \2 
268 USD / 
person 
Households: 
120,000 
1,340 USD / HH 
Components / Outputs and Cost (USD M) 
Selected Outputs and Indicators 
A. Increased production, productivity and 
profitability in oilseeds sector 
A.1.1 - Oilseed production clusters 
established 
A.1.2 - Multi-stakeholder platforms formed 
A.1.3 - Production Groups trained in 
market-orientation and business skills 
A.1.4 - Social mentoring provided to 
production groups and high-risk households 
A.1.5  Financial  Services  enhanced 
supported clusters 
in 
16.1 
19.2 
200 
200 
200 
# Clustered established 
and functional 
#  MSPs  established  and 
functional 
#  Clusters 
in 
Business Skills and market 
orientation 
trained 
20,000 
# Number of high risk HHs 
receive HH mentoring 
2.2 
60% 
Percentage 
credit-linked with FIs 
of 
VSLAs 
4 
#  formal  FIs  supported  in 
innovative 
product 
development 
1 As per IFAD PMD Operational Instruction: Revised Guidance on Logframes and EFA 31 July 2015 
1 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
30% 
% of farmers availing crop 
insurance services 
A.1.6  Market-based  technical  services  for 
smallholders enhanced 
4.5 
400 
18.8 
650 
1.9 
200 
Farm 
# 
Production 
Advisors  mobilised  and 
trained 
#  Auxiliary  Farm  Service 
Providers 
and 
operational 
trained 
#  local  seed  businesses 
supplying  Quality  Declared 
Seeds 
and 
operational 
established 
B. Transport Infrastructure Serving Oilseeds Sector 
Improved 
B.1  -  Community  access  roads  constructed 
or rehabilitated to all weather standard 
33.8 
2,450 km 
# 
Length 
constructed 
rehabilitated 
of 
roads 
or 
\1 The primary target of the core investments is the smallholder farming population engaged in the production 
of oilseeds in the six NOSP hubs. In total, NOSP will support the operations of approximately 200 oilseed 
clusters in the six hubs covered by the project. with the total target of reaching 120,000 smallholder 
households. 
\2 Direct beneficiaries - assumes 5 persons per household. 
\3 IFAD loan (USD 99.56 million) / Project target HHs (i.e. reached by project interventions) 
Table C: Selected Financial Analysis Assumptions 
Parameters 
Selected Outputs 
Av. Yield \1 
Price 
(UGX/kg) 
Selected Inputs  
Price (UGX) 
Sunflower hybrid 
 490 kg/acre 
1,00  Hybrid sunflower seed 
45,000 / kg 
Ground nuts 
1,090 kg/acre 
3,000  Sesame seed 
Soy bean 
Sesame 
540 kg/acre 
1,400  Groundnut seed 
300 kg/acre 
4,000  Soy bean seed 
4,000 / kg 
5,000 / kg 
5,000 / kg 
Hired Labour 
4,000 / per-day 
\1 Full development - rounded 
Table D: Household, Beneficiaries and Phasing 
PY 1 
PY 2 
PY 3 
PY 4 
PY 5 
PY 6 
PY7 
 -      45,000  
 -      45,000  
 -      33,750  
 -      33,750  
Total Households \1 
  Incremental 
  Cumulative 
Households participating \2 
  Incremental 
  Cumulative 
Beneficiaries participating \3 
  Incremental 
  Cumulative 
\1 Refer to Main Report Targeting Section 
\2 75% adoption rate economic modelling 
\3 Assuming 5 persons per household. 
 34,500  
 7,500  
 79,500   112,500   120,000   120,000   120,000  
 33,000  
 -    
 -    
 25,875  
 59,625  
 24,750  
 84,375  
 5,625  
 90,000  
 -    
 -    
 90,000  
 90,000  
 -    168,750   129,375   123,750  
 -    168,750   298,125   421,875   450,000   450,000   450,000  
 28,125  
 -    
 -    
2 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table E: Key Economic Analysis Assumptions 
Parameter 
Value  Remarks 
Official exchange rate 
3,675 
Shadow exchange 
rate factor (SERF) 
1.02 
Shadow wage rate 
factor (SWRF) 
85% 
USD 1 = UGX 3,693 Bank of Uganda reference rate 4th Oct 
2019* 
Project costs are estimated in USD and converted using the 
Costab software to economic terms using the SERF. All 
financial costs are converted into economic costs through 
the elimination of subsidies, duties and taxes 
Applied to unskilled wage rates to reflect the relative 
abundance of unskilled labour, though in some locations at 
sometimes of year this may undervalue unskilled labour due 
to the temporary migration of labour to other parts of 
Uganda or abroad. 
Financial  opportunity 
cost of capital 
12% 
Equivalent  to  the  current  average  deposit  rate  commercial 
banks 
Social rate of discount 
10% 
Assumed to: i) reflect the public nature of the investment; 
ii) account for scarcity of resources; and iii) ensure good use 
of public funds. Consistent with current recent IFAD 
appraisals. 
Project life 
20 
Twenty 20 years is been assumed or the project life in line 
with the investment lifecycle and IFAD Guidelines. 
Bank of Uganda https://www.bou.or.ug/bou/collateral/interbank_forms/2019/Jul/MAJOR_12-July-2019.html 
Table F: Project Economic Cash Flow (UGX million) 
Selected 
years 
Incremental 
benefits \1 
Invest Costs 
Recurrent 
Costs 
Post Rural 
Roads \2 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10… 
15… 
20… 
 -    
 26,861  
 1,488  
 (10,122) 
 58,644  
 5,746  
 (11,034) 
 60,593  
 5,939  
 206  
 124,354  
 5,866  
 40,181  
 118,258  
 5,939  
 89,900  
 63,696  
 5,866  
 128,030  
 15,434  
 5,754  
 152,729  
 162,779  
 166,178  
 167,441  
 167,223  
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
3 
Total 
incremental 
costs 
Net incremental 
benefits 
 28,349  
 (28,349) 
 64,391  
 (74,513) 
 66,532  
 (77,566) 
 130,220  
 (130,014) 
 124,197  
 (84,016) 
 69,562  
 20,337  
 21,188  
 106,842  
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 42,805  
 42,805  
 109,924  
 42,805  
 42,805  
 119,974  
 42,805  
 42,805  
 123,373  
 42,805  
 42,805  
 125,727  
 42,805  
 42,805  
 117,870  
ENPV @ 10% UGX million 
 220,740  
ENPV @ 10% USD million 
EIRR 
 60.07  
 17.9%  
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
BCR 
Switching value benefits 
Switching value costs 
 1.44  
 (31%) 
 44%  
\1 Provision to account for ongoing rural access maintenance. 
Graph G: NOSP Economic Incremental Net Cash Flow 
4 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table H: NOSP Sensitivity Analysis 
Scenario 
Base Case 
 ∆% to Base Case 
Project 
Costs       
Incr’l 
Benefits 
Benefits 
delayed 
+ 10% 
+ 20% 
- 20% 
- 40% 
+ 10% 
+ 20% 
- 10% 
- 20% 
1 year 
Base 
Case 
Base Case 
2 years 
3 years 
1 year 
2 years 
3 years 
Base 
case 
- 20% 
+ 20% 
- 20% 
2 years 
Switching Values \2 
Link to Risk Matrix Issues 
EIRR \1 
17.9%  
ENPV  
(UGX m)\2 
220,740  
Increase in the cost of inputs. 
Reduced producer prices / demand. 
Infrastructure investments are not 
directed to areas of highest production 
potential. 
Technical coordination by the 
implementing agencies and service 
providers is not responsive to the group 
level needs. 
Combinations of the above 
Ineffective inter-institutional 
cooperation & dialogue on development 
issues means financing is not disbursed 
in a timely manner to support field 
implementation. 
Insufficient cohesion within farmer 
groups affect their success potential  
Ineffective coordination between 
districts, sub-counties, villages and 
supply chain enterprises undermining 
implementation progress 
Financial service providers not 
interested to invest in Programme-
targeted value chain 
Borrowers divert loans for other 
purpose 
Climate-change and disaster impacts. 
External shocks to macro economy. 
 15.8%  
 13.9%  
 13.0%  
 170,620  
 120,500  
 76,350  
 6.8%  
 (68,040) 
 13.5%  
 98,430  
 9.1%  
 (23,890) 
 14.9%  
 155,110  
 12.7%  
 95,440  
 11.1%  
 41,200  
 9.1%  
 (26,270) 
 7.8%  
 (74,010) 
 6.8%  
 (117,400) 
 6.4%  
 (124,130) 
Benefits 
Costs 
(31%) 
44% 
\1 Hurdle rate 10 per cent. 
\2 Rounded. 
\3 Percent change in cost and/or benefit streams to obtain an ENPV of USD 0, i.e., economic viability threshold.  
5 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Graph I: Switching Value Frontier2 
2 As per IFAD (2015) Economic and Financial Analysis of Rural Investment Projects – Internal Guide 
6 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
I.   FINANCIAL ANALYSIS 
A.  Objective and Methodology 
The objective of the financial analysis is to assess the viability of the move into 
1.
commercialisation at the farm household. Profitability at this level underpins the supply 
chain and farmer group development sought by the Project. The approach is guided by 
the development objective that seeks to commercialise key oilseeds value chains and 
improve the livelihoods and resilience of the smallholders engaged in oilseed production 
and marketing. The approach developed provides insights into: (i) the increased oilseed 
trade volumes, and, (ii) increased household income, two of the key indicators. 
The methodology employed establishes individual gross margin enterprise budgets 
2.
for the oilseed crops (sunflowers, soya bean, sesame and groundnuts) as well as 
representative domestic crops (e.g.: sorghum, beans cassava and maize). These later 
crops are included due to the need to present results at a household level, the farm 
models presented look at the total cropping picture and how the introduction or 
expansion of oilseed crops affects household income and labour productivity. These 
budgets provide the basic building blocks of the household farming businesses and are 
combined according generalised cropping patterns to form farm budgets. 
3.
At the level of the farm, other characteristics of the household are included to 
provide an overall representation of operations and profitability. These other factors can 
include financing (including short and/or long credit, grants), on-farm use, household 
consumption, household labour availability, taxes and farm level investment and 
operating expenses.  
4.
  The financial and economic analysis is formulated on an incremental basis and as 
such compares the with project (WP) situation to the without project (WoP)3. In this way, 
the difference between the two scenarios, the incremental net benefit, is the basis of the 
appraisal4. This approach is applied both for the financial analysis from the perspective of 
the household and in aggregated form for the economic analysis from the perspective of 
society (see next section).  
5.
The remainder of this section presents the assumptions and the results of the 
individual enterprise and farm budgets. Farm budgets are developed for four generalised 
types of smallholder farming household targeted in the Project area. These four types 
are: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Sunflower – Sesame Farm Model 
Sunflower – Groundnut Farm Model 
Sesame – Soy bean Farm Model 
Soy bean – Sesame Farm Model 
The generalised cropping patterns assumed for these four categories of farms is 
6.
show below in following four tables. These cropping patterns were developed in 
association with the IFAD Mission agronomists and the VODP2 Hub coordinators and staff 
of private service providers. Note that a complete household cropping pattern is 
presented that includes non-oilseed crops used for home consumption and some sales. 
3 The descriptions below “Without Project” is synonymous with “Existing”, while “With Project” is 
synonymous with “New”. 
4 The methodology is guided by: Gittinger, J.P (1982), Economic Analysis of Agricultural Projects, 
Second Edition, EDI World Bank, and (IFAD (2015) Economic and Financial Analysis of Rural Investment 
Projects – Internal Guide. 
7 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
These crops are included in order to ensure a total household income is derived which 
includes the decline of some traditional crops as the move into more commercial oilseed 
production is achieved. In all instances it is assumed that additional land will be rented 
(as is the current practice) as the profitability of the move to oilseed crops becomes 
apparent. 
Table 1: Sunflower – Sesame Farm Model – Cropping Pattern 
Season 
WOP – Existing Technology 
Farm size 1.5 acres 
WP – New Technology 
Farm size 1.5 expanding to 
3.8 acres 
Crop 
Maize 
Beans 
Groundnuts 
Cassava (1 – 4 mths) 
Sesame 
Sweet potato 
Cassava (5 – 9 mths) 
Acres 
0.25 
0.25 
0.50 
0.50 
0.50 
0.50 
0.50 
Crop 
Soy bean 
Maize 
Sunflower 
Sesame 
Sunflower 
Acres 
0.95 
0.95 
1.90 
1.90 
1.90 
First Rains – Season A 
Second Rains – Season B 
Example hubs: Lira and Gulu 
Table 2: Sunflower – Groundnut Farm Model – Cropping Pattern 
Season 
WOP – Existing Technology 
Farm size 1.5 acres 
WP – New Technology 
Farm size 1.5 expanding to 
3.8 acres 
Crop 
Maize 
Beans 
Groundnuts 
Cassava (1 – 4 mths) 
Sesame 
Sweet potato 
Cassava (5 – 9 mths) 
Acres 
0.25 
0.25 
0.50 
0.50 
0.50 
0.50 
0.50 
Crop 
Soy bean 
Maize 
Sunflower 
Groundnuts 
Sunflower 
Acres 
1.43 
0.48 
1.90 
0.95 
2.85 
First Rains – Season A 
Second Rains – Season B 
Example hub: Eastern 
Table 3: Sesame – Soy bean Farm Model – Cropping Pattern 
Season 
WOP – Existing Technology 
Farm size 2 acres 
WP – New Technology 
Farm size 2 expanding to 3.8 
acres 
First Rains – Season A 
Crop 
Cassava (1–4 months) 
Beans 
Sorghum 
Acres 
0.25 
0.75 
1.00 
Crop 
Sunflower 
Soy bean 
Cassava (1–4 months) 
Acres 
0.95 
1.90 
0.95 
Second Rains – Season B 
Sesame 
Beans 
Cassava (5–9 months) 
1.50 
0.25 
Sesame 
Cassava (5-9 months) 
2.85 
0.95 
0.25 
Example hub: West Nile – Lower belt 
8 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 4: Soy bean - Sesame Farm Model – Cropping Pattern 
Season 
WOP – Existing Technology 
Farm size 2 acres 
First Rains – Season A 
Second Rains – Season B 
Crop 
Sesame 
Soy beans 
Cassava (1–4 months) 
Cassava (5-9 months) 
Soy beans 
Beans 
Sorghum 
Acres 
1.00 
0.25 
0.25 
0.25 
0.50 
0.25 
0.50 
Example hub: West Nile – Lower belt 
WP – New Technology 
Farm size 2 expanding to 2.85 
acres 
Crop 
Sesame 
Soy bean 
Cassava (1–4 months) 
Cassava (5-9 months) 
Bean 
Soy bean 
Acres 
1.90 
0.48 
0.48 
0.48 
0.48 
1.90 
The changes in crops and cropping area as well as the productivity changes 
7.
described below are facilitated by the transition from existing to new technologies. These 
technologies and the processes involved are described in the main text and the project 
implementation manual. A summary of the existing and new circumstances as well as 
the related NOSP investments is provided in Table 5. Further details of the investments 
are available in the Main Report and Annex 8 Project Implementation Manual. 
Table 5: Summary of NOSP Technological Changes and Investments 
produced, 
Without Project Existing 
Technologies 
food 
for 
Crops  grown 
selling  excess 
security, 
when 
no 
commercial  production  of 
oilseeds.    Little  support 
from  extension  services. 
Land  preparation  by  hand 
or 
animal 
traction.  Use  of  retained 
of 
seeds. 
purchased inputs. 
hiring 
use 
No 
of 
timely 
With Project New 
Technologies 
Change  in  land  allocation  to 
focus  on  commercial  oilseed 
crops,  with  some  food  crop 
production.  Hiring  of  additional 
land 
land.  More 
hired 
using 
preparation 
services.  For 
mechanisation 
payment  extension 
services 
available. Use of improved OPV 
and  hybrid  seeds.  Adoption  of 
use  of  fertilisers  (TSP,  NPK) 
(not 
sunflower),  agro-
chemicals  and  inoculant  (soy 
groups 
Producer 
bean). 
formed, 
joint  marketing  of 
production.  Access  to  inputs, 
field  services  and  marketing 
improved 
through 
facilitated 
market linkage infrastructure. 
for 
Project Support / Investments 
covering 
including 
and 
inclusive 
approach 
Support  to  oilseed  value  chain 
through  a)  Cluster  Development  – 
covering the primary supply chains 
cluster 
through 
an 
development 
and 
producer  mentoring in each of  the 
investment 
hubs 
b)  Market 
facilitation, 
Development  – 
the 
supply  of  essential  financial  and 
technical  services  and 
inputs. 
Technical  services  to  include  both 
a 
advisors 
production 
scheme, an auxiliary farm services 
promotion  scheme  and  a  quality 
declared seed production scheme. 
Support to the provision of market 
linkage  infrastructure  serving  the 
oilseed sector. 
[Refer to Main Report for details] 
farm 
Source: NOSP Design Team 
B.  Oilseed Production Models 
  Gross margins. Each model presents revenues based on projected yields and 
8.
prices, together with operating expenses are defined in terms of inputs and labour. 
Labour is defined in terms of month, based on the cropping calendar activities and 
9 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
gender.5 The income (gross margin) is reported before and after the valuation of family 
labour costs. 6 
9.
The prices of the inputs to, and outputs from these models are provided in 
Appendix 1. It is recognised that cropping patterns vary considerably from year to year 
depending on market conditions. The models developed are meant to indicate average 
conditions as well as be reflective of typical returns for field and oilseed crops. 
  The yield and input assumptions for the production models indicated in the 
10.
cropping patterns above are provided in Appendix 2. Changes in values for the 20-year 
projection period are indicated. 
11.
  The investment in market linkage infrastructure results in a range of benefits at the 
farm level which are factored into this financial and consequently the economic analysis. 
The benefits include decline in transportation costs, increased availability of inputs and 
services, decline of losses and improved access to markets. The incremental use of 
inputs and tractor services and improved market channels and prices assumed in these 
models are largely owed to improvements in rural roads. 
  Sunflower The key characteristics of this production model are presented in Table 
12.
6. The current production level with local varieties is assumed at 350 kg per acre. With 
the NOSP interventions these yields are expected to increase to 493 per acre over 5 
years, an increase of 41 per cent. This is the result of hybrid seed as well as improved 
inputs and practices. The gross margin before and after labour costs is projected to 
increase by 65 and 111 per cent respectively. Details of the operating inputs and 
financial results are shown in Appendix 2 Tables 1 and 2 respectively. 7 
Table 6: Sunflower Gross Margin Summary 
Parameter 
Unit 
Without 
With \1 
% change 
Post harvest yield 
kg/acre 
350 
493 
Revenue 
UGX/acre 
280,000 
493,000 
Operating costs 
UGX/acre 
69,300 
146,000 
Gross margin – before labour 
UGX/acre 
210,700 
347,000 
Gross margin – after labour 
UGX/acre 
122,700 
259,000 
41% 
176% 
111% 
65% 
111% 
Source: NOSP Design Team 
\1 At full development 
  Soy bean The key characteristics of this production model are presented in Table 
13.
7. The current production levels with local varieties is assumed at 200 kg per acre. With 
the NOSP interventions these yields are expected to increase to 540 per acre over 5 
years, an increase of 170 per cent. This is the result of improved seed, inoculant, ag 
5 Labour budgets for each crop were specified in conjunction with the VODP2 hub coordinators and staff 
of service providers many of whom are farmers. The budgets suggested are consistent with the project 
design team’s experiences elsewhere.  
6 The models presented are based on a rapid appraisal with VODP2 Hub coordinators and private service 
providers (PSP) during the field visit to Lira in July 2019. It was noted that VODP2 had yet to develop 
oilseed gross margins or HH farm models as part of their planning or M&E processes. Yield estimates 
therefore are based on the local expertise of the coordinators and the PSP in addition to the consultant. 
The models should be considered as an illustrative and the basis for further development. 
7 Note that while the Sunflower gross margin model depicts both the WOP and WP scenarios, the farm 
level modelling does not include sunflower in WOP scenarios. 
10 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
chemicals and practices. Net income before and after labour costs is projected to 
increase by 78 and 198 per cent respectively. Details of the operating inputs and 
financial results are shown in Appendix 2 Tables 3 and 4 respectively. 
Table 7: Soy Bean Gross Margin Summary 
Parameter 
Post harvest yield 
Revenue 
Unit 
kg/acre 
Without 
With \1 
% change 
200 
540 
UGX/acre 
250,000 
756,000 
Operating costs 
UGX/acre 
118,400 
522,000 
Gross margin – before labour 
UGX/acre 
131,600 
234,000 
Gross margin – after labour 
UGX/acre 
43,600 
130,000 
Source: NOSP Design Team 
\1 At full development 
  Sesame The key characteristics of this production model are presented in Table 8. 
14.
With the NOSP interventions these yields are expected to increase from 150 to 250 kg 
per acre over 5 years, an increase of 97 per cent. This is the result of improved seed, 
inputs and practices. Net income before and after labour costs is projected to increase by 
63 and 93 per cent respectively. Details of the operating inputs and financial results are 
shown in Appendix 2 Tables 5 and 6 respectively. 
Table 8: Sesame Gross Margin Summary 
Parameter 
Post harvest yield 
Revenue 
Unit 
kg/acre 
Without 
With\1 
% change 
150 
295 
UGX/acre 
600,000 
1,239,000 
Operating costs 
UGX/acre 
124,200 
288,650 
Gross margin – before labour  
UGX/acre 
475,800 
950,350 
Gross margin – after labour 
UGX/acre 
355,800 
862,350 
Source: NOSP Design Team 
\1 At full development 
170% 
202% 
341% 
78% 
198% 
97% 
107% 
132% 
100% 
142% 
  Groundnuts. The key features of this production model are presented in Table 9. 
15.
With the NOSP interventions these yields are expected to increase to 1,100 kg per acre 
over 5 years, an increase of 47 per cent. This is the result of improved seed, inputs and 
practices. Net income before and after labour costs is projected to increase by 47 and 
53 per cent respectively. Details of the operating inputs and financial results are shown 
in Appendix 2 Tables 7 and 8 respectively. 
11 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 9: Groundnuts Gross Margin Summary 
Parameter 
Post harvest yield 
Revenue 
Unit 
kg/acre 
Without 
With\1 
% change 
750 
1,085 
UGX/acre 
2,100,000 
3,255,000 
45% 
55% 
Operating costs 
UGX/acre 
186,600 
495,000 
165% 
Gross margin – before labour  
UGX/acre 
1,913,400 
2,760,000 
Gross margin – after labour 
UGX/acre 
1,793,400 
2,704,000 
44% 
51% 
Source: NOSP Design Team 
\1 At full development 
  Other Household crops. As noted in the section on cropping patters above, a 
16.
range of other field crops combine with the four oilseed crops to make up the complete 
household farming system. The assumed yields and returns for maize, beans, cassava, 
sweet potato and sorghum are included in the project file. Where feasible with project 
yields of these domestic crops also reflect increases due to changing cultural practices 
and improve seed/fertilizer availability. 
C.  Illustrative Farm Models 
  The enterprise budgets described above together with the other field crops outlined 
17.
are combined to form illustrative household farm models by applying the cropping 
patterns presented above in Tables 1 to 4. At the farm level further additions and 
adjustments are made to complete the farm household configurations for financial 
analysis. Key farm budget assumptions common to all household models are described in 
Table 11.  
  Family Labour. Family labour is not entered as a cost; instead the “wages” for the 
18.
family become a part of the net benefit. Thus, as NOSP increases the net benefit, it also 
in effect increases the family's income or "wages" for its labour. A key input therefore at 
the farm level is to define the household labour availability. In order to facilitate this 
analysis (in the absence of survey information) it is assumed that there are on average 
five persons per farming household. Of these the working adult equivalent is 1.5 persons 
for both men and women. Using this logic and a assumptions on the number of working 
days per month and the availability of both men and women a monthly availability for 
both male and female labour is defined – refer to Table 10. 8 
  Farm Area Increase. Increasing farm areas upon transition to oilseed cropping is 
19.
common practise and reported by hub coordinators, PSP staff and small scale 
commercial farmers. The assumed increases are considered conservative. All increases 
are assumed to be on a rental basis. 
8 Labour availability assumptions based on discussions the VODP2 hub coordinators, service providers 
and farmers. 
12 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 10: Household Labour Availability 
Days/month 
Non-working 
Working days 
Jan   Feb  Mar  Apr  May  Jun 
Jul 
Aug  Sep  Oct  Nov  Dec 
31 
15 
16 
28 
15 
13 
31 
30 
31 
30 
31 
31 
30 
31 
8 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
8 
23 
24 
25 
24 
25 
25 
24 
23 
30 
10 
20 
31 
15 
16 
Female availability 
60%  60%  60%  50%  50%  50%  50%  50%  50%  60%  60%  60% 
Male availability 
40%  40%  40%  50%  50%  50%  50%  50%  50%  40%  40%  40% 
Female person days/month 
Male person days/month 
14 
10 
12 
8 
21 
14 
18 
18 
19 
19 
18 
18 
19 
19 
19 
19 
18 
18 
21 
14 
18 
12 
14 
10 
Source: NOSP Design Team 
20.
  The indicators of profitability and productivity developed are: 
  Farm Family Benefits After Financing  
  Returns to Family-Day of Labour 
  Ratio of Returns to Family-Day of Labour to the unskilled daily wage rate 9 
21.
  The indicators for farm investment appraisal are: 
  Financial net present value 
  Financial internal rate of return 
Table 11: Key Farm Budget Assumptions 
Parameter 
On farm use 
Where appropriate enterprise inputs that can be sourced from enterprise 
outputs are included, e.g. own production is used for seed supplies 
Description 
Seasonal credit 
All models assume variable inputs for the year are financed through short 
term borrowing. Interest is assumed at 12% per cent for 4-month period. 
Land rental 
UGX 50,000 per acre per season in With Project scenarios where additional 
land is farmed. 
Labour requirements  Labour requirements (by gender and month) for each farming activity are 
Labour availability 
estimated and compared to the household labour availability. Where 
additional labour is required it is assumed that labour would be hired at 
market rates.  
The household labour availability by month and gender is estimated. 
Households are assumed to have 1.5 male and 1.5 female able-bodied 
persons available for farm work. Availability is assumed to vary according to 
month and gender, with male availability between 40 and 50%, while female 
availability is between 50 to 60%.   On average males are assumed to be 
available 14.9 days per month while the figure for women is 17.6 person 
days per month. Refer to Table 10 above. 
Machinery costs 
Include hire of machine, fuel and labour 
Cost of hired labour  Demand for labour is first served by family labour. Where family labour is 
insufficient hired labour at UGX 4,000 per day is purchased.  
Value of urban 
UGX 8,000 per day. Used to compare with the incremental return for 
9 The ratio of the returns to day of labour to the daily wage is an important indicator of the incentive for 
labour to stay and/or return to farming. 
13 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Parameter 
Description 
unskilled  labour 
incremental day of labour 
Source: NOSP Design Team 
  Sunflower - Sesame Household Model This model examines the profitability of 
22.
moving from a beans/maize/groundnut/cassava regime to a sunflower/sesame/soy bean 
regime. The oilseed production, and financial results for this household model are shown 
in Table 12. Full details of the physical and financial modeling as provided in Appendix 3 
Tables 1 and 2 respectively. 
Table 12: Sunflower - Sesame Household Model Results 
Key features: 
Sunflower production 
Soy bean production 
Sesame production 
Financial indicators: 
1.5 acre farm (WOP) expanding to 3.8 acres (WP) 
Unit 
Without 
With \1 
kgs/year 
kgs/year 
kgs/year 
- 
- 
75 
1,873 
513 
561 
Farm Family Benefits After Financing 
UGX/year 
2,285,750 
2,735,468 
USD/year 
622 
Returns per Family-Day of Labour 
UGX/person/day 
31,099 
Ratio  to  unskilled  urban  daily  wage 
rate (UGX 8,000) 
Ratio to Unskilled 
DWR 
USD/person/day 
8.5 
3.9x 
744 
14,021 
3.8 
1.8x 
Source: NOSP Design Team 
\1 Full development 
  The annual farm family benefits after financing WP at full development are 
23.
estimated at UGX 2.74 million per year. This is equivalent to USD 744 per household per 
year. The returns per day of labour are projected at UGX 14,021 per person day. In USD 
terms, the returns per family-day of labour equate to USD 3.8 per person day. The ratio 
of the returns to labour to the minimum urban unskilled daily wage is projected at 1.8x 
indicating that an additional day of labour in the WP scenario produces twice the urban 
unskilled labour rate. While the impact of Project interventions produces 20 per 
cent increase in farm family benefits after financing, return to labour are reduced due to 
the additional labour needs.   
24.
  Sunflower - Groundnut Farm Household Model This model examines the 
profitability of moving from a beans/cassava/sweet potato and limited oilseeds to one 
system with a dominance of sunflower, groundnuts and soy bean. The key characteristics 
of, and results for this household model are shown in Table 13. 
14 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 13: Sunflower - Groundnut Farm Household Model Results 
Description 
1.5 acre (WOP) farm expanding to 3.8 acres (WP) 
Unit 
Without 
With \1 
Key features: 
Sunflower production (hybrid) 
Groundnut production 
Soy bean production 
Financial indicators: 
kgs/year 
kgs/year 
kgs/year 
- 
- 
- 
2,342 
1,031 
770 
Farm Family Benefits After Financing 
UGX/year 
2,335,750 
4,015,037 
Returns per Family-Day of Labour 
UGX/person/day 
31,779 
USD/year 
636 
Ratio  to  unskilled  urban  daily  wage 
rate (UGX 8,000) 
Source: NOSP Design Team 
\1 Full development 
USD/person/day 
Ratio to DWR 
8.6 
4.0 
1,093 
22,645 
6.2 
2.8 
  The annual farm family benefits after financing WP at full development are 
25.
estimated at UGX 4.0 million per year which represents around 72 per cent increase over 
the WOP scenario. The WP benefits is equivalent to around USD 1,093 per household per 
year. The returns per family-day of labour WP are projected at UGX 22,645 per person 
day. In USD terms, the WP returns per family-day of labour equate to USD 6.2 per 
person day. The ratio of the returns to labour to the minimum daily wage is projected at 
2.8 indicating that this cropping system can provide competitive employment 
opportunities. A detailed production and inputs schedule, as well as the financial budget 
for the rainfed paddy and upland household, are provided in Appendix 3. 
  Note that returns to labour WP in the sunflower/sesame and sunflower/groundnut 
26.
HH models indicate negative incremental results. This is due to the additional labour 
requirements and reflects actual field conditions wherein farmers see that sunflower is 
the most marginal of the oilseed crops. Further analysis would most likely reveal other 
crop combinations yielding higher returns to labour. Nevertheless, farm family benefits in 
both HH types improve and the incremental returns per incremental farm family day are 
greater than urban unskilled daily rates thus indicating a positive incentive to engage in 
agriculture. 
27.
  Sesame - Soy Bean Farm Household Model This model examines the 
profitability of moving from a beans/cassava/sorghum/sesame model to a regime 
dominated by sesame and soy bean. The key characteristics of, and results for this 
household model are shown in Table 14. 
15 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 14: Sesame - Soy Bean Farm Household Model Results 
Description 
2 acre farm expanding to 3.8 acres 
Unit 
Without 
With \1 
Key features: 
Soy bean production 
Sesame production 
Sunflower production 
Financial indicators: 
kgs/year 
kgs/year 
kgs/year 
- 
- 
1,026 
840 
468 
Farm Family Benefits After Financing 
UGX/year 
1,390,175 
4,141,413 
Returns per Family-Day of Labour 
UGX/person/day 
12,667 
USD/year 
378 
Ratio  to  unskilled  urban  daily  wage 
rate (UGX 8,000) 
Source: NOSP Design Team 
\1 Full development 
USD/person/day 
Ratio to DWR 
3.4 
1.6 
1,127 
24,368 
6.6 
3.0 
  The annual farm family benefits after financing WP at full development are 
28.
estimated at UGX 4.1 million per year which represents around 198 per cent increase 
over the WOP scenario. The WP benefits is equivalent to around USD 1,285 per 
household per year. The returns per family-day of labour WP are projected at 
UGX 24,368 per person day. In USD terms, the WP returns per family-day of labour 
equate to USD 6.6 per person day. The ratio of the returns to labour to the minimum 
daily wage is projected at 3.0. A detailed production and inputs schedule, as well as the 
financial budget for the Sesame - Soy Bean Farm Household, are provided in Appendix 3. 
  Soya Bean - Sesame Farm Household Model This model examines the 
29.
profitability of moving from a mixed farm with cassava, beans, sesame and soy beans to 
a regime that is more dominated by soya beans and sesame. The key characteristics of, 
and results for this household model are shown in Table 15. 
16 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Table 15: Soy Bean - Sesame Household Farm Model Results 
Description: 
1.5 acre farm expanding to 2.85 acres 
Unit 
Without 
With \1 
Key features: 
Sesame production 
Soy bean production 
Financial indicators: 
kgs/year 
kgs/year 
150 
150 
561 
1,283 
Farm Family Benefits After Financing 
UGX/year 
1,052,125 
2,519,423 
Returns per Family-Day of Labour 
UGX/person/day 
14,924 
USD/year 
286 
Ratio  to  unskilled  urban  daily  wage 
rate (UGX 8,000) 
Source: NOSP Design Team 
\1 Full development 
USD/person/day 
Ratio to DWR 
4.1 
1.9 
686 
20,330 
5.5 
2.5 
  The annual farm family benefits after financing WP at full development are 
30.
estimated at UGX 2.52 million per year which represents over a 140 per cent increase 
over the WOP scenario. The WP benefits is equivalent to around USD 700 per household 
per year. The returns per family-day of labour WP are projected at UGX 20,330 per 
person day. In USD terms, the WP returns per family-day of labour equate to around 
USD 5.5 per person day. The ratio of the returns to labour to the minimum daily wage is 
projected at 2.5. A detailed production and inputs schedule, as well as the financial 
budget for the rainfed paddy and upland household, are provided in Appendix 3. 
D.  Results of Financial Appraisal 
  The outcome of the farm investment appraisal for the household models described 
31.
above is shown in Table 16. The net income changes for each farm model are indicated 
and shown to be strongly positive. The financial net present value (FNPV) at 12 per cent 
discount rate of the incremental benefit stream to be greater than zero in all cases, thus 
confirming the profitability of all farm types modelled and the potential for smallholder 
oilseed commercialisation. The financial internal rate of return (FIRR) after financing is 
above the financial opportunity cost of capital at 12 per cent.  
Table 16: Key Financial Parameters by Farm Models 
Farm Type 
Net Income UGX (‘000) 
Sunflower - Sesame 
Sunflower - Groundnut 
Sesame - Soy bean 
Soy bean - Sesame 
WOP 
2,285 
2,335 
1,390 
1,052 
WP 
2,735 
4,015 
4,141 
2,519 
% 
Increase 
FNPV @ 12% 
(UGX) \1 
FIRR \2 
20% 
80% 
2,186,730 
6,404,400 
198% 
14,738,060 
140% 
7,782,360 
40% 
42% 
189% 
110% 
Source: NOSP Design Team analysis 
\1 FIRR and FNPV derived from Farmod’s cashflow see financial budgets see Appendix Tables 
\2 After financing. Models indicate very positive IRR and the need for further examination and refinement. 
Figures rounded 
17 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
II. ECONOMIC ANALYSIS 
A.  Objective and Methodology 
  The objective of the economic analysis is to evaluate the expected contribution of 
32.
the proposed project to the economic development of the project districts and the 
economy at large. The purpose of such an analysis is to determine whether the economic 
benefits sufficiently justify the use of the project resources.  
  For the purposes of the economic analysis the smallholder irrigation agriculture 
33.
output forms the focus of the benefit modelling. The four farm model types described in 
financial analysis are converted to economic models and combined with the estimate of 
the number of farms of each model type to form an aggregated economic model. The 
analysis recognises that indirect benefits will also arise to those villagers dependent 
exclusively on agricultural labour and to those fully dependent on forest-based 
production systems. Indirect benefits are foreseen in employment generation arising in 
enhanced agricultural production and processing as well as decreasing the pressure on 
natural resources through a shift towards more intensive farming on irrigated and rainfed 
lands. These benefits as well as those arising from enhancing nutritional outcomes are 
recognised but do not form part of the quantitative modelling10. 
  Approach The valuation of the incremental production at household level forms 
34.
the basis of the benefit valuation framework11. Individual crop production enterprise 
models representing the likely paddy and cash crop combinations are established. In the 
manner described in the financial analysis, crop enterprise models are combined to 
estimate incremental smallholder farming household production and cashflow. These 
representative households are then aggregated to establish a project level value of 
incremental production. This is then combined with incremental project costs to derive 
the key appraisal indicators. 
  Target population and participation. The commercialisation of the oilseed 
35.
sector covers all actors along the value chain and the supporting infrastructure required 
to ensure its success and sustainability. The primary target of the core investments is the 
smallholder farming population engaged in the production of oilseeds in the six NOSP 
hubs. These hubs cover the poorest regions of Uganda. In total, NOSP will support the 
operations of approximately 200 oilseed clusters in the six hubs covered by the project. 
The average smallholder membership per cluster is projected at 600 households, with 
the total target of reaching 120,000 smallholder households.  The NOSP support to the 
improvement of community access roads in and around the NOSP oilseed clusters is 
expected to benefit approximately 350,000 rural households. The indirect target group to 
be reached with investments in such services as agricultural demonstrations, policy work 
and presentations in radio, internet and other media is expected to be much bigger.  
  The derivations of farming household and beneficiaries driving the economic 
36.
analysis is shown below in Table 17. The theory of change describing the nature and the 
logic of the interventions is included in the Main Report and Annex 2. The process and 
the mechanisms involved to engage and support the participating households are 
presented in Annex 6 ABWP and Annex 8 Project Implementation Manual. 
  The split of the 120,000 target households into the four illustrative model types is 
37.
based on a best estimate of the prevalence of each model type across the 5 hubs. The 
10 A note on non-quantified benefits is provide below. 
11 Achieved through the application of a Without and With project analytical framework. 
18 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
adopted split is Sunflower – Sesame 20%; Sunflower / Groundnuts 15%; Sesame – Soy 
Bean 25%; and, Soy Bean Sesame 40%. 
Table 17: Household Participation Assumptions 
PY 1 
PY 2 
PY 3 
PY 4 
PY 5 
PY 6 
PY 7 
Target Households by Farm Type  
Sunflower - Sesame 
 -    
 9,000  
 6,900  
 6,600  
 1,500  
Sunflower - Groundnut 
 -    
 6,750  
 5,175  
 4,950  
 1,125  
Sesame - Soy bean 
 -      11,250  
 8,625  
 8,250  
 1,875  
Soy bean - Sesame 
 -      18,000  
 13,800  
 13,200  
 3,000  
Total – incremental 
 -      45,000  
 34,500  
 33,000  
 7,500  
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
Total – cumulative 
Household by Farm Type Adjusted for Adoption Rate \1 
-     45,000  
79,500  
112,500  120,000   120,000   120,000 
Sunflower - Sesame 
 -    
 6,750  
 5,175  
 4,950  
 1,125  
Sunflower - Groundnut 
 -    
 5,063  
 3,881  
 3,713  
 844  
Sesame - Soy bean 
 -    
 8,438  
 6,469  
 6,188  
 1,406  
Soy bean - Sesame 
 -      13,500  
 10,350  
 9,900  
 2,250  
Total – incremental 
 -      33,750  
 25,875  
 24,750  
 5,625  
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
Total – cumulative 
 -      33,750  
 59,625  
 84,375  
 90,000  
 90,000  
 90,000  
Beneficiaries by farm type 
Sunflower - Sesame 
 -      33,750  
 25,875  
 24,750  
 5,625  
Sunflower - Groundnut 
 -      25,313  
 19,406  
 18,563  
 4,219  
Sesame - Soy bean 
 -      42,188  
 32,344  
 30,938  
 7,031  
Soy bean - Sesame 
 -      67,500  
 51,750  
 49,500  
 11,250  
Total – incremental 
 -     168,750    129,375  
 123,750  
 28,125  
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
Total – cumulative 
\1 Assumes 75% adoption rate 
Source: Consultant’s estimates. 
 -     168,750    298,125  
 421,875    450,000    450,000    450,000  
  Aggregation The household farm type phasing and quantities shown in the table 
38.
above are the basis of the aggregation of the respective farm models described above 
into the discounted cashflow that forms the economic cost benefit analysis (CBA) model. 
When a farm is recruited into the CBA in, for example project year (PY) 2, that farm’s 
twenty-year projection enters the model in PY 2. Similarly, farms recruited in the PY 3 
have their twenty-year projection commencing in the CBA in PY 3. In this way all the 
farms of one type of illustrative model form a sub-project for that model type. When all 
the farm type sub-projects are aggregated a project perspective is derived. 
  The distributions of farm numbers and areas together with the resulting 
39.
aggregations in physical and financial terms for each farm type and the project are 
presented in Appendix 4. 
19 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
B.  Cost Benefit Analysis 
  Main Assumptions. The key parameters underpinning the economic analysis are 
40.
presented below12. 
Parameter 
Value  Remarks 
Official 
rate 
exchange 
3,675 
USD  1  =  UGX  3,675  Bank  of  Uganda  reference  rate  4th  Oct 
2019. 
Shadow  exchange 
rate factor 
1.02 
Project  cost  are  estimated  in  USD  and  converted  using  the 
Costab software to economic terms using the SERF all financial 
costs are converted into economic costs through the elimination 
of subsidies, duties and taxes. 
Standard 
conversion factor 
0.97 
As  commonly  applied  in  recent  projects  designs  in  Uganda.  As 
appropriate all output prices are adjusted using the SCF in lieu 
of specific adjustment factors. 
Value added tax 
13% 
Included  in  project  costs  and  eliminated  as  appropriate  for 
conversion to economic costs. 
Shadow  wage  rate 
factor (SWRF) 
85% 
Applied  to  unskilled  wage  rates  to  reflect  the  relative 
abundance  of  unskilled  labour,  though  in  some  locations  at 
sometimes of year this may undervalue unskilled labour due to 
the temporary migration  of  labour  to  other parts of  Uganda  or 
abroad. 
Economic 
opportunity  cost  of 
capital 
10% 
Hurdle rate for the economic internal rate of return 
Project life 
20 
Twenty  20  years  has  been  assumed  or  the  project  life  in  line 
with the investment lifecycle. 
Cost base 
2019 
Projections are made in July 2019 price terms. 
Source: NOSP Design Team 
  Quantified Benefits – Incremental Production. The quantified benefits assume 
41.
a phased introduction of the beneficiary household farm models. The assumed uptake in 
incremental and cumulative terms across the farm types is shown in Table 17. 
  The adoption rate assumed is 75 per cent. This rate is justified due to the nature of 
42.
the interventions under Component 1 in both supply chain facilitation and producer 
group mentoring. It is assumed that this focus on the development of the supply chain 
would mean commitment to the investments will mean fewer farmers will drop out.   
  Given this adoption rate the expected number of direct beneficiaries is reduced 
43.
from the target of 120,000 to around 90,000. This reduction allows for both non-
adoption and drop out over time. The composition of the smallholder farming models is 
described above in the financial analysis. The project’s economic incremental benefits are 
derived through the aggregation of the individual household benefits in economic terms. 
The entry of each household into the project is represented in the cashflow by the 
incremental economic net benefit stream of the related household model. 
  As noted in the financial modelling the investment in market linkage infrastructure 
44.
results in a range of benefits at the farm level which are factored into this financial and 
12 The analysis employs the function available in both Costab and Farmod to generate economic costs 
and benefits respectively. 
20 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
consequently the economic analysis. The benefits include decline in transportation costs, 
increased availability of inputs and services, decline of losses and improved access to 
markets. These aspects of the road benefits are therefore considered factored into the 
economic analysis. Refer to the note below on other impacts while not quantified, are 
also considered significant.  
  The individual contributions to the overall incremental benefit stream by the four 
45.
farm types identified is summarised in Table 18. This table restates the overall 
distribution of the 90,000 participating households across the four illustrative farm types 
and presents the annual benefit based on the farm models in economic terms for the 
WOP, WP and incremental perspectives. At full development of the technologies 
envisaged, the modelling indicates that an incremental annual value of 
UGX 167,223 million or USD 45.5 million will be generated. 
  Appendix 4 presents the implications of the phasing assumed in the form of farm 
46.
area, cropped area, production/inputs and economic returns. All are presented in 
aggregated incremental terms. 
Table 18: Incremental Benefit Aggregation - Farm Type to Project 
Farm Type 
UGX Million 
Participating 
Households 
(number) 
Aggregated annual benefit at full 
development 
WOP 
WP 
Increment 
Annual 
Increment 
USD Million 
Sunflower - Sesame 
18,000 
37,102 
46,466 
9,364 
Sunflower – Groundnut 
13,500 
28,483 
53,612 
25,128 
Sesame – Soy bean 
22,500 
24,367 
92,795 
68,428 
Soy bean – Sesame 
36,000 
30,726 
95,028 
64,302 
Project 
90,000 
120,678 
287,901 
167,223 
2.55 
6.84 
18.62 
17.50 
45.50 
Source: NOSP Design team modelling 
Refer to Appendix 4 Farm Model Aggregations for the derivation of the incremental values indicated. 
  A summary of the basis of the financial and economic pricing is show below in Table 
47.
19. 
Table 19: Economic Pricing Assumptions 
Commodity 
Financial Prices 
Traded? 
Sunflower 
UGX 800 to 1,100 
farmgate price 
Sesame 
UGX 4,250/kg 
farmgate price 
21 
Yes 
Oil both exported and used 
as domestically for CPO 
substitution. 
CPO imported to fulfil 
shortfall in requirements – 
forms the floor price for 
local milling industry 
Yes 
Seed exported in both 
organic and non-organic 
price 
Economic 
basis 
CPO import parity 
price as reflected by 
the Kalangla oil palm 
fresh fruit berry price 
determination 
adjusted to farmgate 
price. 
UGX 1,100 mill gate 
assumed. 
FOB export parity 
price. 
Unit value of trade 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Commodity 
Financial Prices 
Traded? 
forms. 
Soy bean 
UGX 1,400/kg 
farmgate price 
Yes 
Both beans and meal 
exported 
Ground nuts 
UGX 2,800 – 3000/kg 
unshelled 
Source: NOSP Design Team 
No 
price 
Economic 
basis 
over last five years 
has ranged between 
UGX 2,895 – 
4,647/kg. Current 
farmgate reflects this 
range UGX 4,250/kg 
assumed. 
FOB export parity 
price USD 480/tonne 
to the East African 
market. Current 
farmgate reflecting 
FOB plus transport 
costs 
Market price assumed. 
  Given that the aggregators and mills operate in largely competitive environment 
48.
where the prices offered to farmers closely matches the export values, this analysis 
assumes the that economic value of the sunflower, soy bean and sesame crops is 
equivalent to the market price. 
  Increment economic costs. The costs are based on the full NOSP project 
49.
costing. Costs have been adjusted to economic terms using the SERF (1.02) with taxes, 
duties and price contingencies removed.  
  Allowance have been made for the annual post-project recurrent costs to maintain 
50.
rural access roads, assumed at 20 per cent of investment costs. 
  Note that the farm models assume that the operations are their own responsibility. 
51.
None of the costs that are defined in the cost tables are elements in the farm models. 
Mechanisation for instance is included through rental costs not ownership. In this way 
double counting is avoided. 
52.
 Economic Viability Three indicators have been used to assess the overall 
performance of the project. These are: (i) the economic internal rate of return (EIRR); 
(ii) the economic net present value (ENPV) and the benefit cost ratio (BCR). These were 
estimated using cash flow of the incremental benefit and cost streams as outlined above 
(refer to Appendix 1 Table 23 for a summary discounted cash flow). The overall NOSP 
project EIRR is 17.9 per cent. The estimated ENPV at a 10 per cent discount rate is 
UGX 220,740 million (USD 61 million). The BCR of 1.44 indicates a return of USD 1.44 
for every dollar invested. These results indicate that the project is a sound investment 
yield a positive rate of return as the EIRR greater than the hurdle rate (10 per cent) and 
the ENPV is greater than zero13. 
  These returns described above are further supported by the additional non-
53.
quantified benefits derived from the establishment and/or improvement to rural access, 
market linkages across the supply chains as well as the development of agricultural 
extension services and household improvements. The later will be through the 
13 A social discount rate of 10% is assumed consistent with current IFAD practice. 
22 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
application of the Gender Action Learning System under the social mentoring program. 14 
The conclusion of this analysis is therefore is that the investment in the Project is viable 
from an economic perspective. 
  Risks The main identified risks that may affect the economic outcome of the 
54.
Project area are outlined in Table 20. A sensitivity analysis has been conducted to assess 
the potential impact of these risks resulting: in (a) reduced benefits; (b) increased costs; 
and/or, (c) delayed benefits (see Table 21). 
Table 20: Overview of Main Project Risks affecting Project Economic Outcome 
Likelihood/ 
severity 
Potential impact reflected 
in sensitivity analysis 
Reduced 
benefits 
Increased 
costs 
Delayed 
benefits 
Risk 
category 
Risk 
External shocks to macro economy. 
Economy 
and  Market 
Risks 
Increase cost of inputs. 
Reduced producer prices. 
Reduced demand. 
Changes  to  provincial  and  district  administrative 
systems  
Insufficient  cohesion  within  farmer  groups  affect 
their success potential  
coordination 
Ineffective 
provinces, 
districts  and  supply  chain  related  enterprises 
undermining implementation progress 
between 
Unsustainable  use  of  Project-financed  civil  works 
and inadequate capacity for on going maintenance. 
Institutional 
M/H 
L/H 
L/H 
L/H 
M/H 
M 
M 
Elite  capture/  disadvantaged  groups  not  able  to 
participate effectively 
L/M 
Market 
Lack  of  technical  capacity  to  respond  to  the 
identified needs 
Lower market prices for commodities 
Financial  service  providers  not  interested  to  invest 
in Project targeted initiatives 
M 
M 
M 
Policy 
Farmers  not  treated  as  clients  by  government 
agencies and supply chain entities 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Climate  change  adaptation  does  not  underpin 
agricultural  and  rural  development  policies  at 
district levels 
Poor  business  environment  does  not  provide 
incentive for supply chain investments. 
M 
X 
Others 
Natural  calamities  including  flood  and  drought 
lower output of farm production. 
Damages  to  civil  works  built  caused  by  natural 
disasters, like floods and land sliding. 
Source: NOSP Design Team 
H 
M 
XX 
X 
X 
XX 
X 
  An increase in programme costs by 10 per cent will reduce the EIRR to 
55.
15.9 per cent, while a decrease in overall programme benefits by 20 per cent will result 
in an EIRR of 14.1 per cent. A one-year delay in benefits reduces the EIRR to 
15.0 per cent and a two-year delay to 12.8 per cent. A combination of a reduction in 
14 Targeting approximately 40% of high-risk households. 
23 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
benefits of 20 per cent and an increase in costs by 20 per cent reduces the EIRR to 
9.2 per cent indicating the investment becomes unviable in the face of adverse 
circumstances of that nature. The switching values show that the programme will remain 
economically viable if benefits decreased by 31 per cent, or programme costs increased 
by 45 per cent. Table 21 below provides an overview of the various scenarios of the 
sensitivity analysis and confirms the economic viability of the Project except in the most 
adverse of circumstances. Based on these results and the non-quantified benefits 
outlined below, it is fair to conclude that the economic benefits justify the use of the 
project resources. 
Table 21: NOSP Sensitivity Analysis 
Scenario 
Base Case 
 ∆% to Base Case 
Project 
Costs       
Incr’l 
Benefits 
Benefits 
delayed 
+ 10% 
+ 20% 
- 20% 
- 40% 
+ 10% 
+ 20% 
- 10% 
- 20% 
Base 
Case 
Base Case 
Base 
case 
- 20% 
1 year 
2 years 
3 years 
1 year 
2 years 
3 years 
+ 20% 
- 20% 
2 years 
Switching Values \2 
Link to Risk Matrix Issues 
EIRR \1 
17.9%  
ENPV  
(UGX m)\2 
220,740  
Increase in the cost of inputs. 
Lower yields 
Reduced producer prices / demand. 
Infrastructure investments are not 
directed to areas of highest production 
potential. 
Technical coordination by the 
implementing agencies and service 
providers is not responsive to the group 
level needs. 
Combinations of the above 
Ineffective inter-institutional 
cooperation & dialogue on development 
issues means financing is not disbursed 
in a timely manner to support field 
implementation. 
Slower participation rates. 
Insufficient cohesion within farmer 
groups affect their success potential  
Ineffective coordination between 
districts, sub-counties, villages and 
supply chain enterprises undermining 
implementation progress 
Financial service providers not 
interested to invest in Programme-
targeted value chain 
Borrowers divert loans for other 
purpose 
Climate-change and disaster impacts. 
External shocks to macro economy. 
 15.8%  
 13.9%  
 13.0%  
 170,620  
 120,500  
 76,350  
 6.8%  
 (68,040) 
 13.5%  
 98,430  
 9.1%  
 (23,890) 
 14.9%  
 155,110  
 12.7%  
 95,440  
 11.1%  
 41,200  
 9.1%  
 (26,270) 
 7.8%  
 (74,010) 
 6.8%  
 (117,400) 
 6.4%  
 (124,130) 
Benefits 
Costs 
(31%) 
44% 
Source: NOSP economic model 
\1 Hurdle rate 10 per cent. 
\2 Discounted at 10 per cent, results rounded. 
\2 Percent change in cost and/or benefit streams to obtain an ENPV of USD 0, i.e., economic viability threshold.  
24 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
C.  Note on Non-Quantified Benefits.  
  The NOSP support to the improvement of community access roads in and around 
56.
the NOSP oilseed clusters is expected to benefit approximately 350,000 rural 
households. The indirect target group to be reached with investments in such services as 
agricultural demonstrations, rural financial services, policy work and presentations in 
radio, internet and other media is expected to be considerable 
  Rural access benefits. Benefits from rural roads are foreseen to include: (i) 
57.
changed patterns of production/increased areas; (ii) increased agricultural productivity; 
(iii) increased marketed output; (iv) increased producer prices; and (v) reduced losses 
(on-farm before transport and during transport). The impact of these outcomes is 
implicit in the farm modelling assumptions described above, for example the introduction 
of fertilisers and agro-chemicals is partially facilitated by better infrastructure links.  
  The improved roads also allow for: (a) Increased profits for transport operators; 
58.
and (b) a variety of social benefits through increased access to health, nutrition, 
education and other social services, and information. These later impacts while possibly 
considerable, are not quantified in this analysis. An overview of the benefits of rural 
roads in Provided in Appendix 2. 15 
  Market linkages benefits. The commercialisation of smallholder oilseed 
59.
agriculture is to an important degree driven by the pull of the market. The Project will 
therefore facilitate improved interaction between farmer groups and other actors in the 
value chains: buyers, processors, financial institutions, licensed farmer organisations, 
input- and equipment suppliers and service providers. It will strengthen actors in 
strategic positions of oilseed supply chains.  
  Both effects outlined above have the potential to generate substantial benefits 
60.
across the districts and throughout the economy of northern Uganda as a whole. The 
quantification of these impacts however required a larger study than the scope currently 
available. 
List of Appendices 
Appendix 1  
Appendix 2  
Appendix 3  
Appendix 4  
Appendix 5  
Appendix 6  
Financial and Economic Prices 
Oilseed Crop Production Models 
Illustrative Farm Models 
Farm Model Aggregations 
NOSP Economic Model Discounted Cashflow 
Overview or Rural Road Benefits 
15 Rural-urban Marketing Linkages. An Infrastructure Identification and Survey Guide John Tracey-
White, 2005. Rural-urban Marketing Linkages. An Infrastructure Identification and Survey Guide. FAO 
Agricultural Services Bulletin No. 161. Rome, Italy. 
http://www.fao.org/3/a0159e/A0159E00.htm#TOC Accessed 11 Oct 2019. 
25 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
III.  APPENDIX 1 – FINANCIAL AND ECONOMIC PRICES 
Appendix 1 Table 1: Financial and Economic Prices 
26 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Financial and Economic Prices (Continued) 
27 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Financial and Economic Prices (Continued) 
28 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
IV. APPENDIX 2 – OILSEED CROP PRODUCTION MODEL 
Appendix 2 Table 1: Sunflower Gross Margin - Yields and Inputs 
Appendix 2 Table 2: Sunflower Gross Margin - Financial Budget 
Appendix 2 Table 3: Soy Bean Gross Margin - Yields and Inputs 
Appendix 2 Table 4: Soya Bean Gross Margin - Financial Budget 
Appendix 2 Table 5: Sesame Gross Margin - Yields and Inputs 
Appendix 2 Table 6: Sesame Gross Margin - Financial Budget 
Appendix 2 Table 7: Groundnuts Gross Margin - Yields and Inputs 
Appendix 2 Table 8: Groundnuts Gross Margin - Financial Budget 
Page 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
Notes on Appendix 2 Tables 
1.  The production models are presented in the form of a gross margin analysis with separate 
tables for the production/inputs and financial budgets 
2.  Figures shaded in yellow are quoted in the text. 
3.  All modelling is undertaken over a 20-year projection period. 
4.  Gross margin models are presented showing the existing/new technology scenarios and the 
incremental changes. 
5.  Oilseed crops can be grown in both the first and second rains. For the purpose of this analysis 
the gross margin model for an oilseed crop is the same for both first and second rains. Only 
the first rain models are included in the Appendix  
6.  For the presentational simplicity only the first 10 years of the Farm Model Without and With 
Project projections are displayed. 
7.  The farm model cropping pattern tables (Appendix 3) present the oilseed and other household 
crops assumed in the analysis. Only the oilseed crops are included in this appendix. Gross 
margins of the household crops are included in the project file. 
8.  All Appendix 1 tables are available in the project file in Excel format.  
29 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 2 Table 1: Sunflower Gross Margin - Yields and Inputs 
30 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 2 Table 2: Sunflower Gross Margin - Financial Budget 
31 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 2 Table 3: Soy Bean Gross Margin - Yields and Inputs 
32 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 2 Table 4: Soya Bean Gross Margin - Financial Budget 
33 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 2 Table 5: Sesame Gross Margin - Yields and Inputs 
34 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 2 Table 6: Sesame Gross Margin - Financial Budget 
35 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 2 Table 7: Groundnuts Gross Margin - Yields and Inputs 
36 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 2 Table 8: Groundnuts Gross Margin - Financial Budget 
37 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
V.  APPENDIX 3 – ILLUSTRATIVE FARM MODELS 
Appendix 3 Table 1: Sunflower - Sesame Farm Model – Cropping Pattern 
Appendix 3 Table 2: Sunflower - Sesame Farm Model - Production & Inputs 
Appendix 3 Table 3: Sunflower - Sesame Farm Model - Financial Budget 
Appendix 3 Table 4: Sunflower – Groundnut Farm Model – Cropping Pattern 
Appendix 3 Table 5: Sunflower – Groundnut Farm Model - Production & Inputs 
Appendix 3 Table 6: Sunflower – Groundnut Farm Model - Financial Budget 
Appendix 3 Table 7: Sesame – Soy bean Farm Model – Cropping Pattern 
Appendix 3 Table 8: Sesame – Soy bean Farm Model - Production & Inputs 
Appendix 3 Table 9: Sesame – Soy bean Farm Model - Financial Budget 
Appendix 3 Table 10: Soy bean – Sesame Farm Model – Cropping Pattern 
Appendix 3 Table 11: Soy bean – Sesame Farm Model - Production & Inputs 
Appendix 3 Table 12: Soy bean – Sesame Farm Model - Financial Budget 
Page 
39 
40 
42 
44 
45 
47 
49 
50 
52 
54 
55 
57 
Notes on Appendix 3 Tables 
1.  Figures shaded in yellow are quoted in the text. 
2.  All modelling is undertaken over a 20-year projection period. 
3.  For the presentational simplicity only the first 10 years of the Farm Model Without and With Project projections are displayed. 
4.  All Appendix 2 tables are available in the project file in Excel format.  
38 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 3 Table 1: Sunflower - Sesame Farm Model – Cropping Pattern 
39 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 3 Table 2: Sunflower - Sesame Farm Model - Production & Inputs 
40 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Sunflower - Sesame Farm Model - Production & Inputs (continued) 
41 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 3 Table 3: Sunflower - Sesame Farm Model - Financial Budget 
42 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Sunflower - Sesame Farm Model - Financial Budget (Continued) 
43 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 3 Table 4: Sunflower – Groundnut Farm Model – Cropping Pattern 
44 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 3 Table 5: Sunflower – Groundnut Farm Model - Production & Inputs 
45 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Sunflower – Groundnut Farm Model - Production & Inputs (Continued) 
46 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 3 Table 6: Sunflower – Groundnut Farm Model - Financial Budget 
47 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Sunflower – Groundnut Farm Model - Financial Budget (Continued) 
48 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 3 Table 7: Sesame – Soy bean Farm Model – Cropping Pattern 
49 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 3 Table 8: Sesame – Soy bean Farm Model - Production & Inputs 
50 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Sesame – Soy bean Farm Model - Production & Inputs (Continued) 
51 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 3 Table 9: Sesame – Soy bean Farm Model - Financial Budget 
52 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Sesame – Soy bean Farm Model - Financial Budget (Continued) 
53 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 3 Table 10: Soy bean – Sesame Farm Model – Cropping Pattern 
54 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 3 Table 11: Soy bean – Sesame Farm Model - Production & Inputs 
55 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Soy bean – Sesame Farm Model - Production & Inputs (Continued) 
56 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 3 Table 12: Soy bean – Sesame Farm Model - Financial Budget 
57 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Soy bean – Sesame Farm Model - Financial Budget (Continued) 
58 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
VI. APPENDIX 4 – FARM MODEL AGGEGRATIONS 
Appendix 4 Table 1: Aggregated Sunflower - Sesame Farm Models – Incremental Farm Distributions 
Appendix 4 Table 2: Aggregated Sunflower - Sesame Farm Models – Incremental Production and Inputs 
Appendix 4 Table 3: Aggregated Sunflower - Sesame Farm Models – Incremental Economic Budget 
Appendix 4 Table 4: Aggregated Sunflower - Groundnut Farm Models – Incremental Farm Distributions 
Appendix 4 Table 5: Aggregated Sunflower - Groundnut Farm Models – Incremental Production and Inputs 
Appendix 4 Table 6: Aggregated Sunflower - Groundnut Farm Models – Incremental Economic Budget 
Appendix 4 Table 7: Aggregated Sesame – Soy bean Farm Models – Incremental Farm Distributions 
Appendix 4 Table 8: Aggregated Sesame – Soy bean Farm Models – Incremental Production and Inputs 
Appendix 4 Table 9: Aggregated Sesame – Soy bean Farm Models – Incremental Economic Budget 
Appendix 4 Table 10: Aggregated Soy bean – Sesame Farm Models – Incremental Farm Distributions 
Appendix 4 Table 11: Aggregated Soy bean – Sesame Farm Models – Incremental Production and Inputs 
Appendix 4 Table 12: Aggregated Soy bean – Sesame Farm Models – Incremental Economic Budget 
Appendix 4 Table 13: Overall NOSP – Incremental Farm Distributions 
Appendix 4 Table 14: Overall NOSP – Incremental Production and Inputs 
Appendix 4 Table 15: Overall NOSP – Incremental Economic Budget 
Notes on Appendix 4 Tables 
1.  All figures are presented on an incremental basis, i.e. with project minus without project  
2.  Figures shaded in yellow are quoted in the text. 
3.  All modelling is undertaken over a 20-year projection period 
4.  All Appendix 4 tables are available in the project file in Excel format.  
Page 
60 
61 
63 
65 
66 
68 
70 
71 
73 
75 
76 
78 
80 
81 
83 
59 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 4 Table 1: Aggregated Sunflower - Sesame Farm Models – Incremental Farm Distributions 
60 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 4 Table 2: Aggregated Sunflower - Sesame Farm Models – Incremental Production and Inputs 
61 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Aggregated Sunflower - Sesame Farm Models – Incremental Production and Inputs (Continued) 
62 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 4 Table 3: Aggregated Sunflower - Sesame Farm Models – Incremental Economic Budget 
63 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Aggregated Sunflower - Sesame Farm Models – Incremental Economic Budget  
64 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 4 Table 4: Aggregated Sunflower - Groundnut Farm Models – Incremental Farm Distributions 
65 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 4 Table 5: Aggregated Sunflower - Groundnut Farm Models – Incremental Production and Inputs 
66 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Aggregated Sunflower - Groundnut Farm Models – Incremental Production and Inputs (Continued) 
67 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 4 Table 6: Aggregated Sunflower - Groundnut Farm Models – Incremental Economic Budget 
68 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Aggregated Sunflower - Groundnut Farm Models – Incremental Economic Budget (Continued) 
69 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 4 Table 7: Aggregated Sesame – Soy bean Farm Models – Incremental Farm Distributions 
70 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 4 Table 8: Aggregated Sesame – Soy bean Farm Models – Incremental Production and Inputs 
71 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Aggregated Sesame – Soy bean Farm Models – Incremental Production and Inputs (Continued) 
72 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 4 Table 9: Aggregated Sesame – Soy bean Farm Models – Incremental Economic Budget 
73 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Aggregated Sesame – Soy bean Farm Models – Incremental Economic Budget (Continued) 
74 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 4 Table 10: Aggregated Soy bean – Sesame Farm Models – Incremental Farm Distributions 
75 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 4 Table 11: Aggregated Soy bean – Sesame Farm Models – Incremental Production and Inputs 
76 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Aggregated Soy bean – Sesame Farm Models – Incremental Production and Inputs (Continued) 
77 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 4 Table 12: Aggregated Soy bean – Sesame Farm Models – Incremental Economic Budget 
78 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Aggregated Soy bean – Sesame Farm Models – Incremental Economic Budget (Continued) 
79 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 4 Table 13: Overall NOSP – Incremental Farm Distributions 
80 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 4 Table 14: Overall NOSP – Incremental Production and Inputs 
81 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Overall NOSP – Incremental Production and Inputs (Continued) 
82 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Appendix 4 Table 15: Overall NOSP – Incremental Economic Budget 
83 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
Overall NOSP – Incremental Economic Budget (Continued) 
84 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
VII. APPENDIX 5 – NOSP ECONOMIC DISCOUNTED CASHFLOW 
Cost Benefit Analysis - Cashflows and Indicators 
UGX million 
Selected 
years 
Incremental 
benefits \1 
Invest Costs 
Recurrent 
Costs 
Post Rural 
Roads \2 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10… 
15… 
20… 
 -    
 26,861  
 1,488  
 (10,122) 
 58,644  
 5,746  
 (11,034) 
 60,593  
 5,939  
 206  
 124,354  
 5,866  
 40,181  
 118,258  
 5,939  
 89,900  
 63,696  
 5,866  
 128,030  
 15,434  
 5,754  
 152,729  
 162,779  
 166,178  
 167,441  
 167,223  
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
Total 
incremental 
costs 
Net incremental 
benefits 
 28,349  
 (28,349) 
 64,391  
 (74,513) 
 66,532  
 (77,566) 
 130,220  
 (130,014) 
 124,197  
 (84,016) 
 69,562  
 20,337  
 21,188  
 106,842  
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 -    
 42,805  
 42,805  
 109,924  
 42,805  
 42,805  
 119,974  
 42,805  
 42,805  
 123,373  
 42,805  
 42,805  
 125,727  
 42,805  
 42,805  
 117,870  
ENPV @ 10% UGX million 
 220,740  
ENPV @ 10% USD million 
EIRR 
BCR 
Switching value benefits 
Switching value costs 
 60.07  
 17.9%  
 1.44  
 (31%) 
 44%  
\1 Source: Appendix 4 Table 15: Overall NOSP – Incremental Economic Budget 
\2 Provision to account for ongoing rural access maintenance. 
85 
Republic of Uganda 
National Oilseeds Project 
Design Report  
Annex 4 Economic and Financial Analysis 
VIII. 
ROADS  
APPENDIX 6 – OVERVIEW OF BENEFITS FROM RURAL ACCESS 
Benefits 
Resulting from 
Changed patterns of 
production/increased area 
Increased agricultural 
productivity 
Introduction/expansion of higher value crops which 
become financially viable due to improved market access 
and reduced losses 
Increased availability and reduced cost of inputs. 
Increased access to support services, including extension. 
Increased marketed output 
Better access to markets due to improved accessibility 
throughout the year. 
Increased producer prices 
(i) Reduced transport costs; and (ii) higher quality of 
produce due to timely transportation and reduced losses 
during transport. 
Reduced losses (on-farm before 
transport and during transport) 
Reduced transport time and accessibility throughout the 
year. 
Increased profits for vehicle 
operators 
Reduction in vehicle operation and maintenance costs. 
Time savings. 
Opportunities for increased business (volumes 
transported). 
Social benefits 
Increased access to health and other social services, and 
information. 
86 
Uganda
National Oilseeds Project
Project Design Report
Annex 5: Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) Review Note
Document Date:
10/02/2020
Project No.
2000002260
Report No.
5155-UG
Loan ID
2000003281
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
PDR 
ANNEX 5 
SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT AND CLIMATE ASSESSMENT 
PROCEDURES (SECAP) REVIEW NOTE  
1 
Social, Environment and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note 
1. Introduction  
The Social Environment and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) Review Note presents 
the social and environmental and climate change context of NOSP, potential impacts of the 
activities  and  makes  specific  recommendations  on  how  the  risks  can  be  minimized.  It  also 
includes  optimization  of  the  opportunities  to  improve  environmental  and  natural  resources 
management  as  well  as  build  climate  resilience  and  improve  the  social  wellbeing  of  the 
target beneficiaries.  
The  SECAP  Review  Note  was  developed  mainly  from  secondary  data,  mostly  from  surveys 
such  as  the  Uganda  National  Household  Survey  (UNHS)  2016/2017,  the  Uganda 
Demographic  and  Health  Surveys  and  other  readily  available  studies  including  the  WEAI 
prepared  for  some  of  the  Feed  the  Future  Programme  Districts.  The  environmental  and 
climate change analysis drew on the national commitments and targets from the multilateral 
conventions and national strategies.  
The  analyses  were  complemented  by  meaningful  consultation  with  communities  and 
stakeholders  during  design.  The  stakeholder  engagement  will  be  continued  throughout  the 
project  life  cycle  to  ensure  communities  contribute  to  management  plans  that  will  be 
developed and implemented as part of NOSP. Social assessments will be undertaken in the 
initial  stages  of  the  project  implementation  as  part  of  the  cluster  identification  and 
validation.  
2. Situational analysis and potential project impacts  
2.1 Socio-economic assessment 
a. Overall poverty situation 
The poverty levels in the NOSP target areas are mostly higher than the national average in 
Uganda  (UNHS  2016/17).  Karamoja  has  the  highest  poverty  rates  both  in  terms  of 
prevalence  and  depth.  Prevalence  counts  how  many  people  under  the  poverty  line  while 
depth weights the measure by how far under the line they are.  
2 
By activity status, the results show that the self-employed (39%) and those in subsistence 
agriculture  only  (28%)  were  more  likely  to  be  poor  than  would  be  the  case  for  those 
involved  in  other  activities.  These  two  groups  account  for  a  combined  67  %  of  the  total 
contribution  to  poverty  considering  activity  status.  Poverty  among  those  involved  in  paid 
casual labour in agriculture was 42 % implying that a decline in agricultural activity would 
severely deprive such casual labourers of income. Considering educational attainment of the 
household  head,  high  poverty  incidence  was  noted  among  those  with  no  formal  education 
(43%) and some primary (35%) compared with those with degrees (1%), emphasising the 
importance of education in poverty reduction.  
b. Gender 
Agriculture  is  the  main occupation  of  women  in  Uganda—72%  of  all  employed  women  and 
90% of all rural women work in agriculture, compared to 53% of rural men (Garcia 2006). 
Women  play  a  prominent  role  in  planting,  weeding,  harvesting,  post-harvest  processing, 
storage and food preparation, while men focus on land clearing and marketing of high value 
crops.  Food  crops  (such  as  plantains  and  tubers)  are  typically  controlled  by  women  while 
men tend to have greater control over cash crops and income (Kasente et al. 2001; Garcia 
2006).  Other  studies  confirm  that  women  are  at  a  disadvantage  in  terms  of  crops  sold  in 
formal markets that generate higher revenues, while maintaining more control over lower-
revenue  crops  (Njuki  et  al.  2011).  Moreover,  Peterman  et  al  (2011)  find  persistent  lower 
productivity on female-owned plots and among female-headed households, after controlling 
for a range of socio-economic variables, agricultural inputs and crop choices with important 
differences based on crop choice, agroecological zone, and biophysical characteristics. De la 
Ocampos  et  al.  (2016)  attribute  differences  in  productivity  largely  to  differences  in  crop 
choice and factors of production, including women’s labour constraints, and lack of access to 
agricultural inputs and extension. 
Promotion  of  non-traditional  exports,  such  as  oilseeds,  is  considered  an  important 
agricultural  development  strategy  for  the  country,  given  risks  of  over-reliance  on  world 
markets  for  traditional  cash  crops  like  coffee,  tea  and  cotton  (Kasente  et  al.  2001). 
However,  investments  in  value  chains  for  non-traditional  exports,  like  oilseeds,  have 
important  gender  implications  given  women’s  more  limited  involvement  in  cash  crop 
farming.  In  particular,  there  are 
inherent  risks  to  women’s  empowerment  with 
commercialization of traditional food crops that they control, like groundnut and sesame.  
Constraints. While women are increasingly involved in the cash crop production, including 
in the oilseed sector, they lack control over income and benefits from it given men’s control 
over  marketing  activities  (Garcia  2006;  Vorley  et  al.  2015).  Other  constraints  to  women 
benefiting  from  oilseed  production  relate  to  their  lack  of  ownership  of  land,  greater  risk 
aversion,  lack  of  access  to  inputs  (like  seed),  and  labour  burden.  Production  of  certain 
crops, such as soybean, and post-harvest processing practices using traditional methods are 
particularly labour intensive (Kasente et al. 2001; Vorley et al. 2015). Women’s priorities to 
increase  their  participation  in  oilseed  value  chains  include  access  to  labour-saving 
technologies,  access  to  finance,  and  group  formation  and  strengthening  (Vorley  et  al. 
2015). Women also tend to lack access to agricultural information as well as information on 
climate change and climate-smart practices compared to men (Katungi et al. 2008; Kisauzi 
et al. 2012), which can limit their successful participation in commercial oilseed production. 
Data shows that 31 % of households across the country are female-headed and the rate is 
only  slightly  lower  in  rural  areas  at  30  %  (UNHS  2017).  Female-headed  household  often 
have  particular  vulnerabilities  related  to  lack  of  access  to  family  labour  for  agricultural 
production,  weaker  social  networks,  and  limited  access  to  resources  and  information 
3 
(Katungi, et al. 2008). Widows in Uganda are considered to be particularly vulnerable due to 
social  norms,  which  limit  their  control  over  physical  and  financial  resources  (UNHS  2017). 
Married  women  often  have  more  access  to  resources  and  family  labour  but  may  be  at  a 
greater  disadvantage  in  terms  of  other  aspects  of  empowerment  such  as  decision-making 
and mobility. 
In terms of access to and decisions on credit, 66 % of women report having access to credit 
from  any  source,  with  the  most  common  sources  being  friends  or  relatives  (41.3  %)  and 
group-based  micro-finance  (31.8  %).  Most  women  have  input  into  the  decision  to  borrow 
(69.4  %)  and  how  to  use  the  loan  funding  (73.3  %)  across  all  loan  sources.  Reasons  for 
taking loans were similar across men and women, according to UNHS data (2017). Primary 
reasons  for  both  men  and  women  include:  to  smooth  consumption  (reported  25  %  of 
women who borrowed), to pay education expenses (26 % of men and 23 % of women), and 
to  purchase  inputs/capital  for  non-farm  enterprises  (19  %  of  men  and  18  %  of  women) 
(UNHS 2017). 
Women  Empowerment  in  Agriculture  Index.  The  Feed  the  Future  baseline  survey, 
conducted  in  2012,  showed  an  overall  WEAI  score  of  0.86.  The  measure  of  individual 
empowerment  without  considering  the  gap  in  scores  between  men  and  women  (the  5DE) 
shows that 57.8 % of women achieve empowerment (5DE score of 0.80 or above). Among 
women  who  did  not  achieve  empowerment,  access  to  and  control  over  productive  and 
financial resources (credit), time burden, and community leadership appear as the domains 
where women have the lowest scores. Women are much more likely to achieve adequacy in 
the domains of production decision-making and control over income.    Sixty-one percent of 
women  achieve  gender  parity  with  the  main  adult  male  decision-maker  in  the  household. 
Baseline  WEAI  data  were  analysed  in  relation  to  other  development  outcomes.  Findings 
show that women in households with moderate to severe hunger are significantly less likely 
to achieve adequacy in autonomy in production, ownership or control of assets, control over 
the  use  of  income,  and  satisfaction  with  leisure  time,  while  women  in  households  with 
moderate to severe hunger are significantly more likely to achieve adequacy with respect to 
access  to  and  decisions  on  credit.  The  correlation  between  hunger  and  access  to  and 
decisions on credit is likely related to credit being used to smooth consumption among the 
most  vulnerable  agricultural  households  rather  than  for  productive  purposes.  Women  with 
higher decision-making scores have  statistically lower levels of wasting of children under 5 
years. 
Similarly, with respect to decisions on the use of income from these activities, results show 
that  women  that  participate  in  cash  crop  farming  report  having  input  into  most  or  all 
decisions  related  to  income  from  this  activity  (91.8  %).  These  results  suggest  that 
increasing women’s involvement in cash crop farming would lead to other gains in terms of 
decision-making over production and income. DHS data from 2016 show similar results with 
91 % of currently married women participating in decisions about the use of their earnings 
(53 % make decisions on their own, and 38 % make decisions jointly with their husband).  
In terms of specific decisions related to agricultural production and expenditures, WEAI data 
show  that  the  majority  of  women  are  involved  to  a  medium  or  high  extent  in  decisions 
related to getting inputs for agricultural production (79 %), the types of crops to grow (85 
%),  whether  to  take  crops  to  market  (75.8  %),  minor  household  expenditures  (90  %), 
major  household  expenditures  (65.6  %),  and  own  wage  or  salary  employment  (86.9  %). 
DHS  data  show  that  currently  married  women  (age  15-49)  participate  in  household 
decisions  either  alone  or  jointly  with  their  husbands  on  their  own  health  care  their  own 
health  care  (74%)  and  visits  to  their  family  or  relatives  (72%)  than  in  decisions  about 
making major household purchases (64%) (FtF FEEDBACK, 2015). 
4 
While the results for Uganda related to women’s participation in production decision-making 
and  income  decisions  are  promising,  women’s  actual  influence  in  production  and  income 
decisions may vary by crop and the level of profitability. More disaggregated analyses at the 
crop level and at various stages of commercialization are needed to understand gender roles 
in and benefit from cash crop value chains, including oilseeds. 
Given  that  there  are  various  dimensions  of  women’s  empowerment  in  agriculture, 
interventions  in  the  sector  are  likely  to  have  different  impacts  on  these  various  aspects. 
Commercialization  of  oilseeds  is  no  exception.  In  particular,  positive  and  negative  impacts 
are expected to occur. Hypotheses include: 
1) 
Commercialization  of  oilseeds  traditionally  controlled  by  women  as  food  crops  (i.e. 
groundnut and sesame) will reduce the share  of household income and assets that women 
control. 
2) 
Commercialization of oilseeds may reduce women’s involvement in decisions related 
to  production  of  and  income  received  from  these  crops.  The  use  of  the  Gender  Action 
Learning System (GALS) should mitigate this negative impact to some extent. 
3) 
New  labour-saving  technologies  and  services  introduced  by  service  providers  will 
save women’s time—particularly for those women already involved in oilseed production and 
processing.  Women  not  previously  involved  in  oilseed  production  may  see  their  labour 
burden increase if they are adding new activities to their existing workload. 
4) 
Incentives  and  capacity  building  to  increase  women’s  active  participation  in  and 
leadership  of  farmer  organizations  and  service  provision  (agronomists,  machine  operators 
etc.) will increase women’s leadership roles in the community. 
c. Youth 
Agriculture  and  related  jobs  are  likely  to  dominate  the  employment  opportunities  for  rural 
youth  for  the  foreseeable  future,  making  the  welfare  of  youth  closely  tied  to  trends  in 
agricultural development. Environmental risks related to climate change, land fragmentation 
and  degradation,  therefore,  pose  considerable  risk  to  young  people  whose  livelihoods  will 
depend  on  agriculture  (Brooks  et  al.  2019).  Investments  in  agricultural  research  and 
development and agricultural infrastructure are essential to mitigate these risks and protect 
rural livelihoods into the future (ibid). Wage labour in the agri-food system will also become 
an increasingly important source of employment for youth (Dolislager et al. 2019). 
Young  people  under  the  age  of  35  are  also  more  likely  to  migrate  for  reasons  including: 
following  family,  income,  marriage,  and  education  (UNHS  2017).  Increasing  land  scarcity 
due to high population growth will likely drive employment and migration decisions of rural 
youth into the future (Yeboah et al. 2019). Therefore, policies are needed to increase youth 
access to land and security of tenure in order to sustain agricultural productivity growth and 
drive rural transformation (ibid). 
Table 1: Status in Employment by Age 
Age groups 
14-17 
18-30 
31-59 
60-64 
Paid  employee 
casual 
(not 
labourer 
in 
agriculture) 
Paid 
(casual 
in agriculture) 
employee 
labourer 
Self 
employed 
Contributing 
family 
workers 
17.5 
36.8 
26.4 
15.6 
9.7 
8.1 
7.7 
11 
30.4 
8 
3.4 
3.1 
40.3 
46.5 
62.1 
69.9 
5 
Others 
Total 
2.2 
0.7 
0.4 
0.4 
100 
100 
100 
100 
15-24 
Source: UNHS 2017. 
34.6 
9.1 
41.3 
13.9 
1.1 
100 
Educational  attainment  is  increasing  over  time,  suggesting  that  young  people  are  being 
educated at higher rates than in the past. Between 2012/13 and 2016/17, the percentage of 
persons  aged  15  years  and  above  that  lacked  any  formal  education  dropped  by  9 
percentage points from 21% to 12% (UNHS 2017). The main reason for leaving school was 
lack of funding/not affordable (68% for boys and 65% for girls). Ten  percent  of both boys 
and girls left school because their parents decided to take them out or they had  a calamity 
at home. Four percent of girls also left due to pregnancy. Overall, only 6% of both boys and 
girls left school because they reached their desired education level (UNHS 2017). 
It  is  often  argued  that  youth  present  opportunities  for  agricultural  transformation  given 
special  characteristics,  qualities,  motivations,  and  abilities.  While  these  claims  are  widely 
made, there is currently no research to support the notion that youth are more innovative, 
creative,  and  more  likely  to  adopt  new  agricultural  technology  like  improved  seeds, 
fertilisers, irrigation and mechanisation; engage with value chains, integrate ICTs into their 
livelihood  activities,  or  seize  new  business  opportunities  as  service  or  input  providers 
(Sumberg and Hunt, forthcoming).  
Despite limited evidence about the economic or transformative benefits of investing in rural 
youth,  addressing  the  needs  of  this  large  and  growing  demographic  is  essential  from  a 
social  equity  and  long-term  sustainability  perspective.  Agricultural  value  chains  both  on-
farm  and  off-farm  could  offer  promising  career  opportunities  for  young  Ugandans,  if 
appropriate information and start-up resources were available for rural youth.  
Investment  priorities  for  rural  youth  depend  on  the  level  of  transformation  of  the  country 
and  the  existing  opportunity  structure  (Arslan  et  al.  2019).  Opportunities  for  rural  youth 
vary by local context depending on the natural resource base, market access, social norms, 
and preferences, as well as household characteristics (RDR 2019; Sumberg et al. 2019). In 
countries like Uganda, with low levels of rural transformation, investments should focus on 
building  the  capacities  of  rural  youth  through  investments  in  infrastructure  and  education 
and on increasing the productivity, connectivity,  and agency of youth in agriculture (Arslan 
et al. 2019; RDR 2019; Sumberg et al. 2019).  Commercialization should increase the rural 
from  agricultural 
to  participate 
opportunity  structure 
transformation.   
in  and  benefit 
for  youth 
Programmes targeted at increasing the opportunities for rural youth should consider gender 
differences  in  constraints  and  needs  by  young  men  and  women.  Young  women  and  men 
experience  the  transition  to  adulthood  differently  depending  on  the  level  of  structural  and 
rural  transformation  of  the  country  (Doss  et  al.  2019).  Research  using  sex-disaggregated 
data  across  42  countries  shows  young  women  are  more  likely  to  have  transitioned  into 
domestic and reproductive roles and less likely to be in school or employed, and less likely 
to own land (ibid).  
The  NOSP  offers  an  opportunity  to  assess  youth  opportunities  and  engagement  in  the 
process  of commercialization. During field visits, smallholders in the NOSP areas described 
education  as  the  most  important  thing  for  the  youth  and  were  concerned  about  consistent 
ability  to  pay  school  fees  and  disruptions  to  their  education.  Some  youth  groups  visited 
were not explicitly or predominantly made up of youth and thus did not likely address their 
particular  needs  or  priorities.  The  older  generations  were  maintained  as  group  members 
with the justification that they pass on knowledge and provide guidance to other members 
who are youth. Youth farmer groups have been formed at schools as part of GoU guidelines. 
These groups consisted of young girls and boys who were trained in agriculture and farming 
techniques and engaged in practical demonstrations and field work. VODP2 also conducted 
6 
trainings and field work as a pilot in two schools and reported generating positive results in 
informing  young  farmers  about  benefits  and  production/harvesting  techniques  of  oilseeds 
and in increasing their interest in agriculture sector.   
d. Nutrition 
The  UNHS  2016/17  Report  provides  per  capita  estimates  of  calorie  consumption  by  food 
group  based  on  household  consumption  estimates.  Figure  2  shows  that  total  calorie 
consumption and the shaded orange area of the figure shows the food energy gap for each 
sub-region,  which  is  the  gap  between  average  population  dietary  energy  requirement 
(ADER) for Uganda, which is 2091 calories per person per day, and per capita consumption 
in that sub-region. Most sub-regions face significant estimated food energy gaps. Only Teso 
and  West  Nile  are  just  above  the  cut-off,  though  it  is  likely  that  some  proportion  of  their 
populations  do  fall  below.  For  those  with  higher  calorie  consumption,  the  share  of  calories 
from staples tends to be higher. 
Figure 2: Calorie gap and share of calories from staple foods 
Source: UNHS 2016/17 Report (UBOS, 2018). Required calorie estimate is from FAO’s 2012 
SOFI estimates of Adequate Dietary Energy Requirement (ADER) for Uganda. 
Table  2  breaks  down  estimated  per  capita  calorie  consumption  by  food  group  within  each 
sub-district. Overall, staple food consumption makes up a higher than optimal share of the 
diet, and nutrient rich foods are greatly under-consumed. The Uganda Nutrition Action Plan 
2011  sets  a  target  of  75%  of  calories  coming  from  foods  other  than  staples.  Only 
Bugishu/Elgon  meets  this  target,  but  it  also  has  the  lowest  per  capita  calorie  consumption 
across  all  food  groups.  Of  interest  to  NOSP,  the  share  of  calories  from  nuts  and  pulses  is 
very  low.  For  most  sub-regions  considered,  improving  diets  will  require  increasing  the 
amounts of nutrient-rich foods while maintaining the quantities of staples consumed. While 
for Lango and Bugishu/Elgon, improving diets will require increasing consumption of all food 
groups. While increased production of nutritious foods like oilseeds may increase supply and 
decrease  prices,  participation  on  high-value  supply  chains  can  also  disincentivize 
consumption  as  people  prefer  to  sell  for  profit,  such  as  in  the  example  of  quinoa  among 
indigenous Peruvian communities (McDonell, 2016). 
7 
Table 2: Estimated per capita calorie consumption, share of calories by food group 
Source: Table created by author; data extracted from UNHS 2016/17 Report (UBOS, 2018). 
The  inadequacy  of  diets  of  children  from  six  months  to  two  years  in  Uganda  is  a  major 
challenge.  A  low  15%  of  children  overall  received  both  sufficient  diversity  and  meal 
frequency to yield a minimum acceptable diet in 2016 (UBOS & ICF, 2018). This rate falls to 
an  alarmingly  low  2.5%  of  children  under  2  years  receiving  a  minimum  acceptable  diet  in 
Acholi, where stunting is also very high. Other sub-regions with high prevalence of stunting 
and wasting also  have very low rates of adequate child feeding, except for West Nile which 
is above the national average for minimum diet adequacy but still suffers among the highest 
rates  of  stunting  and  wasting,  suggesting  that  non-diet  factors  like  health  shocks  may  be 
exacerbating child nutrition outcomes.  
Stunting  and  wasting.  Based  on  the  2016  Uganda  Demographic  and  Health  Survey 
(2018) data collected in 2016, national stunting prevalence is 29% nationwide. In Uganda, 
stunting  is  associated  with  rural  residence  and  low  levels  of  mothers’  education.  In  the 
target areas, Bugisu, Karamoja, Acholi and West Nile experience higher stunting rates than 
the national average by between 2 and 7%.  
Wasting  is  higher  than  the  national  average  in  all  NOSP  targeted  sub-regions  except  for 
Teso, by between 2 and 7%. In particular, Bugisu, Karamoja, Acholi, and West Nile all have 
wasting rates of 9-10%, which is extremely high. In Karamoja and West Nile the prevalence 
of  severe  wasting  is  nine  times  higher  than  what  would  be  expected  in  a  well-nourished 
population  (UNICEF-Uganda,  2018).  Furthermore,  in  West  Nile,  wasting  increased  from 
6.2%  to  10.4%  from  2011  to  2016,  while  in  Karamoja,  wasting  increased  from  7.1%  to 
10% (UBOS & ICF, 2012, 2018; UNICEF-Uganda, 2018).These statistics suggest that these 
areas have  experienced major population-wide health or income shocks, and national-wide 
analysis finds that wasting is correlated with poverty (UNICEF-Uganda, 2018). In Karamoja 
during  this  same  time  period  (2011-2016),  the  proportion  of  the  population  relying  on 
subsistence  agriculture  increased  from  6%  to  51%,  highlighting  the  need  to  better 
understand  the  vulnerabilities  associated  with  shifts  in  livelihoods  approaches  (UNICEF-
Uganda, 2018).  
Drivers  of  food  and  nutrition  insecurity.  Some  national  studies  provide  additional 
insights  to  the  potential  drivers  of  food  security  and  nutrition  problems  in  the  North.  In 
particular,  the  source  of  household  income  and  women’s  role  in  food  production  and 
marketing play a role in nutrition outcomes (Azzari et al., 2015; Kirk et al., 2018; Whitney 
et al., 2018). For instance,  women’s control over which crops are produced supports them 
to  deliver  diverse  diets  for  the  family  (through  own  consumption)  and  fulfil  cash  needs 
(through small-scale sales) (Whitney et al., 2018). While animal foods are an important part 
of a healthy diet, only ownership of small ruminants appears to influence nutrition outcomes 
in  Uganda  (Azzari  et  al.,  2015).  Finally,  non-agricultural  self-employment  (in  contrast  to 
wage labour) seems to support better nutrition outcomes (Kirk et al., 2018).  
8 
2.2 Environment and climate context, trends and implications 
a. Environmental assessment 
The  target  sub-regions  for  the  NOSP  present  significant  potential  for  agricultural 
development, particularly for oil seeds production. The average land holdings vary from two 
acres in sub-regions such as West Nile to over 10 acres per household in Acholi compared to 
the national average of about 5 acres per household. The soils are relatively fertile and can 
sustain  rain-fed  agriculture.  Fertilizer  use  is  relatively  low  in  most  areas.  The  sub-regions 
have good average annual amounts of bi-modal rainfall. The mostly flat topology with gentle 
rolling hills provides potential for use  of animal traction/mechanisation in land preparation, 
planting,  harvesting  and  transportation.  In  some  locations  land  is  available  for  agricultural 
expansion  and  land  holdings  are  not  fully  utilized.  However,  fallow  periods  are  decreasing 
and  in  some  cases  the  average  size  of  land  holdings  is  very  limited.  Natural  Resources 
Management Officers at Sub-county level provide some guidance in the opening up of new 
areas  though  they  are  limited  in  number  to  serve  the  population  effectively  and  have 
limitations  with  mobility.  Community  natural  resources  management  plans  can  be  useful 
tools  with  regard  to  opening  up  of  new  areas  as  well  as  land  use  planning  from  the  sub-
county level. 
Vegetation and soils. The vegetation in the NOSP target areas is predominantly savannah 
woodland. The widespread use of fuel wood and need for timber is leading to degradation of 
soil  cover  in  some  sub-regions.  This  degradation  will  have  an  impact  on  soil  fertility  and 
retention of moisture. Although the soils in the area are considered fertile, there are already 
signs  of  moderate  to  severe  erosion,  and  in  some  areas,  soil  compaction  could  prove  a 
challenge to water infiltration (CIAT, 2013). The anticipated expansion in oilseed production, 
which  may  result  in  opening  of  new  land,  could  result  in  accelerated  depletion  of  soil 
fertility.  Degradation  is  also  notable  in  some  wetlands,  which  are  used  for  off-season 
production  and  increasingly  as  rainfall  becomes  more  erratic.  The  encroachment  on 
wetlands  has  adverse  impacts  on  biodiversity  and  agro-biodiversity,  as  well  as  water 
filtration and aquifer replenishment in areas. 
Farmers indicated they use various practices to maintain soil fertility such as mulching, crop 
rotation,  cover  crop,  use  of  organic  manure  and  timely  planting.  The  practices  were 
conveyed  by  the  male  farmers,  who  seem  to  have  received  training  on  good  agricultural 
practices.  In  some  locations  the  training  was  provided  on  soil  and  water  conservation 
measures  as  part  of  the  climate  smart  agricultural  practices  under  VODP  2.  Agroforestry 
was  one  of  the  practices  that  was  promoted  through  the  training  though  the  tree  species 
include eucalyptus and pine, which may not be the most appropriate.  
The situation of low fertilizer use, which have helped maintain levels of agricultural pollution 
to a minimum, could change once oilseed productivity and production increases. Therefore, 
capacity  building  can  be  provided  to  the  smallholders  on  appropriate  agro-chemicals  use. 
The  capacity  building  should  also  include  integrated  pest  management  also  encompassing 
crops grown by the smallholders in the context of ensuring food security at household level.  
Fires.  The  opening  of  new  land  for  oilseed  production  may  also  result  in  the  increase  of 
wildfires.  Burning,  though  discouraged  in  most  communities,  is  still  common  for  land 
clearing  with  smallholders  recognizing  the  short-term  benefits  of  soil fertility  and  rapid  re-
growth  that  can  be  used  for  grazing  animals.  However,  burning  has  negative  impacts  on 
long-term  soil  fertility.  The  practice  of  catching  small  rodents  for  food,  as  well  as  for 
9 
charcoal  production  are  also  causes  of  fires.  Though  communities  do  have  by-laws  on 
natural  resources  management  including  land  clearing,  the  enforcement  needs  some 
regulatory structures to be effective. This is particularly important in the dispute and conflict 
resolution when issues escalate. 
Water  resources.  Access  to  water  for  productive  activities  is  limited  in  the  dry  seasons. 
Some  farmers  raised  concerns  on  dealing  with  late  rains  and  prolonged  dry  spells  as  they 
lacked irrigation infrastructure. Residual moisture in the soils is important for the agriculture 
production hence the need to focus more on soil and water conservation. Where available, 
streams, rivers and boreholes are accessed, including as sources of drinking water.  
b. Climate trends and impacts 
Uganda experiences relatively humid conditions and moderate temperatures throughout the 
year,  with  mean  daily  temperatures  of  28  °C  with  the  average  monthly  temperatures 
ranging from a minimum of 15 °C in July to a maximum of 30 °C in February. The highest 
temperatures  are  observed  in  the  North,  especially  in  the  North-East,  while  lower 
temperatures occur in the South.  
Historical data indicate that during the period the 1975 to 2009 average temperature during 
the  two  rainy  seasons  (March–June  and  June–September)  has  warmed  more  than  0.8  °C. 
This  transition  to  an  even  warmer  climate  is  likely  to  amplify  the  impact  of  decreasing 
rainfall and periodic droughts and will likely reduce crop harvests and pasture availability. A 
significant  warming  has  been  measured  in  Uganda  for  instance  the  Uganda’s  National 
Adaptation Programme  of Action (NAPA) cites  an average temperature increase of 0.28  °C 
per  decade  in  the  country  between  1960  and  2010,  being  January  and  February  the  most 
affected by this warming trend, averaging an increase of 0.37 °C per decade. The frequency 
of  hot  days  in the  country  has  increased  significantly  while  the  frequency  of  cold  days  has 
decreased. 
The  annual  rainfall  totals  vary  from  500  mm  to  2800  mm;  mean  annual  rainfall  ranges 
between less than 900 mm in the driest districts to an average of above 1,200 mm per year 
in the wettest districts located within the Lake Victoria Basin, eastern and the north-western 
parts of Uganda (37, 38). Precipitations have a bimodal distribution in the south to central 
parts  of  Uganda,  with  two  rainy  seasons  (March–June  and  October–January),  while 
northern-easterly  region  experiences  one  long  rainy  season.  Floods  and  droughts  are  the 
most  frequent  weather  hazards.  For  instance,  the  cattle  corridor,  located  in  the  dry-land 
region, is prone to drought, while the northern region is especially vulnerable to both floods 
and droughts. 
Time series indicate that rainfall, on average, has been decreasing. Several analyses find an 
overall decrease in average rainfall of about 12% during the past 34 years in Uganda, with 
the  greatest  decreases  in  the  regions  of  central  and  western  Uganda.  Furthermore,  during 
the  period  2000–2009  rainfall  has  been,  on  average,  about  8  percent  lower  than  rainfall 
between 1920 and 1969.  
Climate  projections  based  on  data 
from  Fifth  Assessment  Report  (AR5)  of  the 
Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change  (IPCC)  using  Representative  Concentration 
Pathway (RCP) 8.5 scenarios indicate the possibility of an increase in the country’s average 
temperature in the order of +2.5 °C in the next 50 years (Figure 3, panels e-h). Projections 
for the next 80 years point to a possible increase of 4.5 °C.  
Many climate models predict an increase in short rains (September  –  November) as global 
temperatures  rise  (Figure  3,  panels  a-d).  However,  the  Horn  of  Africa  region  has  become 
observationally  drier  during  the  20th  century.  This  drying  trend  against  the  projected 
10 
increase  in  rainfall  place  East  Africa  into  an  apparent  climate  paradox  which  is  generally 
considered  as  an  indication  that  more  accurate  model  simulations  and  an  improved 
understanding  of  the  geophysical  processes  governing  the  rainfall  over  East  Africa  is 
necessary. Given these inconsistencies and the errors in climate models’ ability to simulate 
the current climate, whether or not the future climate in East Africa will become wetter as a 
result of climate change is an open question.  
11 
Figure 3. Predicted change in rainfall and temperature based on four climate models, 2000–2050  
Yearly rainfall  
Yearly temperature  
a) 
c) 
b) 
e) 
f) 
d) 
g) 
h) 
(mm) 
                     (0C) 
Source: Authors based on Müller and Robertson (2014). 
Notes:  a  and  e)  GFDL  =  Geophysical  Fluid  Dynamics  Labouratory;  b  and  f)  HadGEM  = 
Hadley Centre Global Environmental Model; c and g) IPSL = L’Institut Pierre-Simon Laplace; 
d  and  h)  MIROC  =  Model  for  Interdisciplinary  Research  on  Climate.  Simulations  are  based 
on Representative Concentration Pathway 8.5. 
12 
Keeping  in  mind  the  existing  uncertainty  in  climate  projections,  we  analyse  the  projected 
effects of climate change on some of Uganda’s major crops. Figure 4 reports the projected 
changes in yields for eight crops and four different climate models. Even though we do not 
have  projections  for  sesame,  we  can  use  the  effects  on  millet  and  sorghum  as  rough 
proxies. According to GFDL projections sesame could be not negatively affected by climate 
change  but  all  other  climate  models  show  a  decrease  in  yields.  Groundnut  is  negatively 
affected under all climate scenario while soybean fairs better than all other crops. Given the 
climate  projections  of  GFDL  and  MIROC,  yields appear  to  increase  but  using the  other  two 
climate models (HADGEM and IPSL) yields are expected to decrease.  
Figure  4.  Percentage  change  in  yields  due  to  climate  change  based  on  four  climate  models,  2000–
2050  
Source:  Devised  by  authors  based  on  Rosenzweig  et  al.  (2014)  using  weights  from  MapSPAM 
harvested area (You et al. 2014). 
Notes:  GFDL  =  Geophysical  Fluid  Dynamics  Labouratory;  HadGEM  =  Hadley  Centre  Global 
Environmental  Model;  IPSL  =  L’Institut  Pierre-Simon  Laplace;  MIROC  =  Model  for  Interdisciplinary 
Research on Climate. Simulations are based on Representative Concentration Pathway 8.5. 
One of the main challenges being faced by the oilseed producers is the late on set of rains 
and late cessation of the first season that results in replanting in some cases or late planting 
and  harvesting  of  the  produce.  The  late  harvesting  results  in  drying  challenges  and  thus 
increased  post-harvest  losses.  Farmers  also  complained  about  the  increasing  risk  of 
droughts and prolonged dry spells that adversely impact their yields. The rainfall variability 
is  compounded  by  the  low  accuracy  of  the  climate  information  being  disseminated  to  the 
framers.  
The  priority  reflected  in  Uganda's  Nationally  Determined  Contribution  (NDC)  is  adaptation. 
The  country  aims  to  reduce  vulnerability  and  address  adaptation  in  agriculture  and 
livestock,  infrastructure  and  water  sectors,  among  others.  The  strategy  to  build  climate 
change  resilience  includes  the  scaling-up  of  sustainable  land  management  and  climate 
smart agriculture.  
Given the particularly uncertain climate outlook for this region of Africa, it is essential that 
farmers are given the necessary support and information to develop flexible adaptation and 
contingency plans. A range of technologies are already being promoted and implemented in 
the  country.  Among  these  are:  integrated  soil  fertility  management,  agro-forestry,  crop 
diversification,  conservation  agriculture  (crop  rotation,  mulching,  green  cover  crops  and 
low-  or  no-till),  intercropping  legumes  with  other  crops,  water  management  practices  and 
adaptable  planting  times.  These  practices,  which  are  climate  smart  agriculture  practices 
already  indicated  as  viable  adaptation  option  in  the  country’s  NDC,  must  be  evaluated 
13 
considering crop specific performance given soil and other local conditions. Furthermore, to 
ensure  crop  performance  and  to  protect  farmers’  livelihoods  and  the  implementation  of 
important  instruments  like  crop  insurance,  the  availability  of  climate  information  and  early 
warning systems is necessary.     
The priority actions that NOSP can contribute to in the agriculture sector include expanding 
climate information services and early warning systems, climate smart agriculture practices, 
expanding value addition and post-harvest handling and storage, encouraging agro-forestry 
and water use efficiency.  
Uganda  intends  to  follow  a  climate  resilient  and  low  carbon  development  pathway.  The 
priorities for mitigation include the forestry and wetlands sectors.  
2.3 Target group profiles 
The commercialisation of the oilseed sector under NOSP will cover all actors along the value 
chain  and  the  supporting  infrastructure  required  to  ensure  its  success  and  sustainability. 
NOSP will work directly with 120,000 households (HHs) across the six hubs.  
The  project’s  primary  beneficiary  group  is  smallholder  farmers  (women,  men  and  youth) 
engaged in the production of oilseeds. Smallholder farmers include the farmers whose farm 
size is less than one hectare (58% of the total population of smallholder farmers) and those 
whose  farm  size  is  more  than  one  hectare  but  less  than  five  hectares  (38%  of  the  total 
population of smallholder farmers)1. Other characteristics of smallholder farmers include the 
following: using traditional farming methods/low levels of mechanization, mostly depend on 
family  labour  or  may  hire  workers,  produce  relatively  small  volumes,  low  quality  and 
productivity  caused  by  low  quality  inputs,  generally  less  well-resourced  than  commercial-
scale farmers, limited business literacy skills and market orientation, may not be registered, 
have  limited  access  to  loans  and  credits,  lack  of  knowledge  on  savings  to  build  capital  for 
investment  purposes,  may  be  excluded  from  social  protection  or  labour  legislation,  have 
limited  records,  exposure  to  changing  and  unreliable  rainfall  patterns  with  poor  or  no 
mitigation measures, often the vulnerable groups in supply chain, lack aggregation/bulking 
of sufficient quantities of produce, and limited benefits for women and youth in the supply 
chain. 
The  project  will  also  specifically  target  poor  farmers  who  are  generally  associated  with: 
living  below  the  poverty  line,  landless  or  very  small  land  holdings,  female-headed 
households, illiterate,  malnourished, lack access to credit due to lack of  collateral  security, 
lack access to basic services (electricity, medical services, and education), unemployed, do 
frequent  labour  work,  socially  disadvantaged,  highly  prone  to  diseases  and  vulnerable  to 
climate change.  
The project’s targeting strategy will ensure the inclusion of smallholder farmers, poor HHs, 
women  and  youth.  All  the  120,000  HHs  targeted  under  Component  1  will  be  smallholders, 
sharing some the characteristics defined above. It is expected that the percentage of rural 
poor2  smallholder  farmers  will  be  at  least  proportional  to  the  district  poverty  rate  in  each 
district.  While  all  groups  will  undergo  GALS,  40%  of  the  high-risk  households  identified 
during the household profiling will be provided with Household Mentoring.  
1  Flower,  Martin.  "The  smallholder/large-scale  farmer  conundrum:  is  a  shift  in  focus  required?”  In 
Agriculture  Finance  Year  Book  2013/14-  new  technologies  in  financial  services  new  gains  for 
agriculture, by Animal Industry and Fisheries Bank of Uganda and Ministry of Agriculture. 
2 who live under the poverty line. International poverty line as stated by the World Bank is $1.90 per day 
14 
NOSP will have a strong focus on inclusion of women and youth in all project interventions. 
Women farmers will constitute a direct target group in each component of the project. It is 
expected that at least 60% of the project beneficiaries will be women who will be targeted 
as individual farmers as well as part of HHs. Women-led, women-only groups and FHHs will 
be  prioritized  with  at  least  30%  of  the  HHs  expected  to  be  FHHs.  NOSP  will  also  set  clear 
group  governance  guidelines  that  ensures  meaningful  participation  of  women  and  youth 
members  and  a  quota  of  at  least  40%  women  in  key  decision-making  positions  in  group 
committees through a voting system. Similarly, rural youth between the age of 18 to 35 will 
constitute  a  direct  target  group  of  NOSP  comprising  at  least  40%  of  the  beneficiaries  in 
value chain development.  
NOSP  will  also  benefit  processors,  oil  seeds  sector  input  suppliers  and  service  providers, 
agents,  traders,  transporters,  financiers,  scientific  and  academic  research  institutions  and 
the  rural  unemployed  who  will  benefit  from  employment  opportunities  at  farm  and 
processing  units  of  oilseeds  value  chains  as  a  result  of  project  support.  In  addition,  the 
NOSP  support  to  the  improvement  of  community  access  roads  in  and  around  the  NOSP 
oilseed clusters is expected to benefit approximately 350,000 rural households.  
Targeting  strategies  and  targets  for  smallholder  farmers,  women  and  youth  are  further 
detailed in PIM section A.2 Target Groups.  
3. Institutional analysis  
Social.  The  Ministry  of  Gender,  Labour  and  Social  Development  is  responsible  for  the 
promotion of gender equality in the country based the notion of equality between men and 
women  expressed  by  the  constitution  and  the  Gender  Policy  of  2007.  The  Directorate  of 
Gender  and  Community  Development  within  this  Ministry  has  the  mandate  to  empower 
communities  in  various  domains  through  its  representatives  at  District,  County  and  Sub-
county levels. 
Nutrition. The multisector Nutrition Action Plan falls under the mandate of the Office of the 
Prime  Minister.  A  Multisector  Coordination  Committee  engages  eight  implementing  line 
Ministries  as  well  as  other  non-governmental,  public  and  private  sector  stakeholders.  
Nutrition related activities are coordinated and implemented by different players within the 
various sectors in coordination with government and sector authorities at every level. 
Environment.  The  National  Environment  Management  Agency  (NEMA)  is  the  principle 
government regulatory agency in Uganda responsible for the environment, overseen by the 
Ministry  of  Water  and  Environment  (MWE)  but  directed  by  a  Policy  Committee  on  the 
Environment,  comprising  the  Prime  Minister  and  10  Ministers.  Management  of  the 
environment  is  decentralized  to  district  level,  where  environmental  issues  are  under  the 
Department of Natural Resources. The environment and natural resources sector appear to 
be  a  low  priority  for  the  Government  based  on  the  very  low  funding  levels.  As  a 
consequence,  mainstreaming  of  environmental  issues  across  sectors  is  weak.  In  addition, 
political  interference  and  corruption  undermines  local  environmental  management  (World 
Bank review, 2012). 
 Climate change. A Climate Change Department under Ministry of Water and Environment 
was  created  to  coordinate  climate  change  action  at  central  level.  A  Climate  Change  Policy 
Committee  and  an  Inter-institutional  Climate  Change  Technical  Committee  are  in  place  for 
cross-sectoral policy setting and provision of technical guidance. The Ugandan Government 
also  approved  a  Climate  Change  Policy  in  2015.  The  Nationally  Determined  Contributions 
was also articulated in 2015. Implementation of climate change action at local government 
level however remains a challenge. 
15 
4. Environmental and social category  
The environmental and social categorisation of NOSP is B. Agricultural activities, such as the 
oil seed production will have some adverse impacts on the environment. These impacts are 
expected  to  be  as  a  result  of  land  clearing  and  increased  use  of  agro-chemicals  in  some 
locations.  However,  the  impacts  are  expected  to  be  site  specific.  The  infrastructure 
development will also result in localized impacts, mostly reversible, which can be minimised 
through  appropriate  mitigation  measures.  The  measures  will  be  further  defined  in  site 
specific  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Plans  (ESMPs)  during  implementation.  An 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be elaborated during design. 
In line with the SECAP, the infrastructure development under NOSP  will be limited to non-
sensitive  areas,  road  stretches  of  10  km  or  less  and  not  involving  any  resettlement  of  20 
people  or  more.  The  screening  criteria  for  each  of  the  projects  will  be  articulated  in  the 
ESMF.  The  ESMPs  will  be  developed  as  part  of  the  environmental  impact  assessment  or 
analysis  that  will  be  conducted  during  the  feasibility  studies  for  the  infrastructure 
development.  The  assessments  and  analyses  will  have  to  be  submitted  to  NEMA  for 
approval prior to the detailed designs and commencement of any construction works.  
5. Climate risk classification  
The  smallholders  being  targeted  by  NOSP  are  dependent  on  natural  resources  that  are 
exposed  and  sensitive  to  climate  change  impacts.  The  smallholder  practice  predominantly 
rain-fed  agriculture.  Despite  having  sufficient overall  rainfall  amounts  during  the  two  rainy 
seasons (March–June and October–January) in the south to central parts and one long rainy 
season in the northern-easterly region, variability in distribution has been noted.  The main 
climate  risks  being  faced  in  the  NOSP  target  areas  are  droughts,  floods  and  increasing 
temperatures.  Agricultural  productivity  is  adversely  impacted  by  late  rains  and  late 
cessation that have been reported by smallholders. Climate variability also affects the post-
harvest handling of the agricultural produce particularly the drying and storage practices.  
Yield  projections  based  on  different  scenarios  illustrate  decreases  in  yields  for  sesame 
(using sorghum and millet as proxies) and groundnut while soybean fairs better.  Using the 
Climate  Adaptation  in  Rural  Development  Assessment  Tool,  projected  decreases  in  yield 
between 2021 and 2032 for groundnuts range from 0.93% to 5.12%, soybeans from 0.49% 
to 4.72% and for 1.54% to 5.57% in the sub-humid zones. Given the mixed projections and 
relative intensity of the extreme events, the NOSP climate risk classification is moderate. A 
climate  vulnerability  analysis  is  already  being  conducted  for  Uganda  by  the  University  of 
Cape  Town  with  financing  from  the  Adaptation  for  Smallholder  Agriculture  Programme 
(ASAP  2).  The  study  includes  the  oil  seeds  crops  targeted  by  NOSP  and  therefore,  the 
implementation  phase  will  benefit  from  recommendations  for  climate  change  adaptation 
measures that will be promoted under Component 1. 
6. Recommendations for project design and implementation  
●  Conduct  a  social  diagnostic  assessment  within  each  hub  to  identify  social  dynamics 
that  should  be  addressed  in  the  design  and  implementation  of  the  project.  Through 
this  assessment  high  risk  communities  with  a  critical  gender  imbalance  will  be 
identified and intervention approaches will be tailored to mitigate these risks. 
●  Ensure  social  inclusion  in  farmer  organizations  as  part  of  the  stakeholder  platforms 
as well as trainings, information/extension, and demonstrations to farmers. This may 
include  specific  targets  for  women-led  groups  in  areas  where  women’s  active 
16 
participation  in  mixed  groups  is  limited  and  where  women  prefer  this  approach.  All 
facilitators/brokers should be trained in gender dynamics to solicit input from women 
and youth and other marginal groups in mixed groups to ensure that their priorities 
are reflected in investment plans and selection of services. 
●  Use  of  Household  Methodologies  (GALS  and  HH  Mentoring)  to  ensure  women’s 
participation  in  household  expenditure  decisions.  The  GALS  also  includes  nutrition 
and climate change. The methodologies will enable farmers to identify common areas 
of  gender  inequality  limiting  women’s  and  youth’s  development  specifically  in  value 
chains and household/community progression. 
●  Provide  incentives  to  increase  women’s  and  young  people’s  participation  in  and 
benefit  from  service  provision,  including  mechanization.  Increasing  the  participation 
of women in the provision of the services envisaged, either as auxiliary or technical, 
will  build  the  capacity  of  women  along  the  value  chain  to  participate  in  and  benefit 
from the commercialization effort.  
●  Promote  good  agricultural  practices  and  technologies  that  are  environmentally 
sustainable,  and  nutrition-  and  gender-sensitive.  Promotion  of  renewable  energy 
such  as  dryers  that  use  crop  residues  instead  of  fuel  wood  to  avoid  deforestation, 
precision  fertilizer  application  to  increase  resource  efficiency,  integrated  soil  fertility 
management and crop rotation and diversification.  
●  Provide  equipment  and  training  to  support  greater  aflatoxin  control  and  awareness. 
In  field  practices  aflatoxin  control  measures  include  selection  of  drought  tolerant 
seed  varieties  and  good  agriculture  practices  to  reduce  crop  stress.  Managing 
moisture  levels  post-harvest  with  appropriate  drying  technology,  such  as  simple 
drying racks, and improved storage facilities would also limit further contamination. 
●  Improve  access  to  nutrition  knowledge  and  health  food  culture  through  nutrition 
trainings  and  other  awareness  raising  activities.  This  can  be  done  through 
partnerships with existing programmes to address challenges high levels of stunting, 
wasting and micro-nutrient deficiencies.  
●  Build  capacity  of 
risk  mapping/vulnerability 
assessments. Using downscaled future projections the existing adaptation strategies 
can be improved and options provided through the NOSP advisory services.  
facilitators/brokers 
in  climate 
● 
Invest  in  the  development  of  climate  information  services  and  R&D  on  drought 
tolerant  varieties.  The  project  can  also  promote  different  climate  smart  agriculture 
practices to contribute to the NDC priorities by scaling up practices such as minimum 
tillage,  mulching  and  other  soil  and  water  conservation  measures  and  improved 
water use efficiency and farm management. 
●  Ensure  the  design  and  construction  of  rural  roads  is  informed  by  climate  risk 
analyses.  The  downscaled  climate  risk  models  will  be  used  in  the  risk  mapping  and 
integrate measures such as water harvesting structures and improved drainage. 
● 
Incorporate  sites  for  the  land  degradation  surveillance  framework  and  their 
operationalization to monitor the health of the soil and land use changes.   
17 
●  Adhere  to  the  SECAP  and  national  environmental  regulations in  the  development  of 
the  roads  infrastructure.  The  impact  assessments  will  have  to  be  included  in  the 
budgets for the infrastructure development and approvals obtained from NEMA.  
●  Appoint  dedicated  staff  for  social  inclusion  and  environment  and  climate  change  at 
management as well as implementation levels.  
7. Further studies needed  
NOSP  includes  infrastructure  development  for  which  all  the  sites  are  not  known  during 
design.  Therefore,  an  Environmental  and  Social  Management  Framework  will  be  developed 
as part of the design. The Framework will guide the environmental and social risk screening 
for the NOSP activities and propose specific measures to reduce the risks.  
NOSP  will  also  be  informed  by  the  recommendations  from  the  climate  risk  analysis  being 
done for selected value chains including the four oil seeds. 
8. Monitoring and evaluation  
●  Gender and age disaggregated data. NOSP will ensure that all data collected will be 
disaggregated by gender, age and poverty and where possible by crops. The findings 
generated  will  be  regularly  analysed  and  used  to  inform  project  management  and 
implementation teams to assess and develop CGYN mainstreaming strategies.  
●  Women’s  participation  in  oilseed  value  chains.  WEAI  data  show  that  only  50  %  of 
women  participate  in  cash  crop  production.  These  results  are  not  disaggregated  by 
crop.  Baseline  participation  rates  for  each  oilseed  crop  can  be  established  at  the 
outset  and  targets  (say  a  10  %  increase  in  participation  rates)  can  be  set.  NOSP 
could collect data on input into production decisions and control over income related 
to each oilseed crop, in addition, but use participation in the value chain as the main 
indicator for the log frame. 
●  Women’s labour burden. It would also be useful to track changes in women’s labour 
burden as a result of oilseed commercialization. In order to do this, NOSP could track 
men’s and women’s labour allocation to different activities in the value chain for each 
crop. However, to get a sense for how women’s participation in oilseed value chains 
affects  women’s  overall  time  burden,  NOSP  could  collect  data  on  other  time  use 
categories (domestic work, food crop production etc.). 
●  Pro-WEAI or WEAI for Value Chains. These intra-household survey-based tools could 
be  used  as  part  of  an  impact  assessment  to  capture  changes  in  all  aspects  of 
women’s  empowerment  (production  decision-making,  control  over  productive 
resources, control over income, community leadership, time use, mobility). Changes 
in  overall  pro-WEAI  or  WEAI4VC  score  can  also  be  captured,  however,  the  overall 
scores  may  obscure  the  positive  and  negative  changes  in  the  different  aspects  or 
indicators of empowerment. 
●  Land degradation. The inclusion of the land degradation framework sites in the NOSP 
target area will enable the monitoring of soil fertility, infiltration capacity and erosion 
prevalence. Some of these parameters can be included in the M&E system to monitor 
the natural resources management.   
18 
9. References 
Brown, L.R. 2018. Aflatoxins in Food and Feed: Impacts, Risks, and Management Strategies. 
Gender,  Climate  Change,  and  Nutrition  Integration  Initiative  (GCAN)  Policy  Note  9. 
Wahsington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute. 
Feed the Future FEEDBACK. 2015. Feed the Future Uganda 2015 Zone of Influence Interim 
Assessment Report. Rockville, MD: Westat. 
Kasente, D., Lockwood, M., Vivian. J., and Whitehead, A. 2001. Gender and the expansion 
of  non-traditional  agricultural  exports  in  Uganda,  in:  S.  Razavai  (ed.)  Shifting  Burdens: 
Gender  and  Agrarian  Change  Under  Neo-liberalism  (Bloomfield,  CT:  Kumarian  Press  Inc), 
pp. 35–36. 
Katungi,  E.,  S.  Edmeades,  and  M.  Smale.  2008.  Gender,  Social  Capital  and  Information 
Exchange in Rural Uganda. Journal of International Development, 20: 35–52. 
Kisauzi,  T.,  M.N.  Mangheni,  H.  Sseguya  and  B.  Bashaasha.  2012.  Gender  Dimensions  of 
Farmers’  Perceptions  and  Knowledge  on  Climate  Change  in  Teso  Sub-Region,  Eastern 
Uganda. African Crop Science Journal, 20(s2): 275 – 286. 
Njuki,  J.,  S.  Kaaria,  A.  Chamunorwa,  and  W.  Chiuri.  Linking  Smallholder  Farmers  to 
Markets,  Gender  and  Intra-Household  Dynamics:  Does  the  Choice  of  Commodity  Matter? 
European Journal of Development Research 
Peterman,  A.,  A.  Quisumbing,  J.  Behrman  and  E.  Nkonya.  2011.  Understanding  the 
Complexities  Surrounding  Gender  Differences  in  Agricultural  Productivity  in  Nigeria  and 
Uganda, Journal of Development Studies, 47:10, 1482-1509. 
Uganda  Bureau  of  Statistics  (UBOS)  and  ICF.  2018.  Uganda  Demographic  and  Health 
Survey 2016. Kampala, Uganda and Rockville, Maryland, USA: UBOS and ICF. 
Uganda National Household Survey. 2017. 
Vorley,  W.,  E.  Lecoutere,  S.  Mubiru,  R.  Lunduka,  J.  Ubels,  B.  Conilh  de  Beyssac,  and  D. 
Ikaaba.  2015.  Growing  inclusion?  Insights  from  value  chain  development  in  Ugandan 
oilseeds, IIED, London.Arslan, A., D. E. Tschively, and E. M. Egger. 2019. Understanding the 
welfare  outcomes  of  rural  youth  through  the  "rural  opportunity  space":  Evidence  from  12 
developing  countries  around  the  world.  Background  Paper  prepared  for  the  Rural 
Development Report (RDR). 2019. Creating Opportunities for Rural Youth.  
Brooks, K., S. Dunston, K. Wiebe, C. Arndt, F. Hartley, and R. Robertson. 2019. Climate and 
jobs for rural young people. Background Paper prepared for the Rural Development Report 
(RDR). 2019. Creating Opportunities for Rural Youth. 
Dolislager, M., T. Reardon, A. Arslan, L. Fox, S. Liverpool-Tasie, C. Sauer, and D. Tschirley. 
2019. Livelihood portfolios of youth and adults: a gender-differentiated and spatial approach 
19 
to  agrifood  system  employment  in  developing  regions.  Background  Paper  prepared  for  the 
Rural Development Report (RDR). 2019. Creating Opportunities for Rural Youth.  
Doss,  C.,  J.  Heckert,  E.  Myers,  A.  Pereira,  and  A.  Quisumbing.  2019.  Gender,  rural  youth 
and  structural  transformation:  Evidence  to  inform  innovative  youth  programming. 
Background  Paper  prepared  for  the  Rural  Development  Report  (RDR).  2019.  Creating 
Opportunities for Rural Youth. 
Sumberga,  J.  and  S.  Hunt.  Forthcoming.  Are  African  rural  youth  innovative?  Claims, 
evidence and implications. Journal of Rural Studies, forthcoming. 
Sumberg,  J.,  N.  A.  Anyidoho,  J.  Leavy  D.  te  Lintelo  and  K.  Wellard.  (2012).  Introduction: 
The young people and agriculture “problem” in Africa. IDS Bulletin 43(6): 1-8. 
Uganda National Household Survey (UNHS). 2017. 
Yeboah, F. K., T.S. Jayne, M. Muyanga, and J. Chamberlin. 2019. The intersection of youth 
access to land, migration and employment opportunities: evidence from sub-Saharan Africa. 
Background  Paper  prepared  for  the  Rural  Development  Report  (RDR).  2019.  Creating 
Opportunities for Rural Youth. 
Arimond,  M.,  &  Ruel,  M.  T.  (2004).  Dietary  diversity  is  associated  with  child  nutritional 
status:  evidence  from  11  demographic  and  health  surveys.  The  Journal  of  Nutrition, 
134(10), 2579–2585. 
Azzarri, C., Zezza, A., Haile, B., & Cross, E. (2015). Does Livestock Ownership Affect Animal 
Source  Foods  Consumption  and  Child  Nutritional  Status?  Evidence  from  Rural  Uganda. 
Journal of Development Studies, 51(8). 
Benson,  T.,  Mugarura,  S.,  &  Wanda,  K.  (2008).  An  assessment  of  the  likely  impact  on 
Ugandan households of rising global food prices (USSP Background Paper No. 1). Kampala, 
Uganda and Washington DC. Retrieved from www.ifpri.org 
FANTA-2.  (2010).  The  Analysis  of  the  Nutrition  Situation  in  Uganda;  Food  and  Nutrition 
from 
7 
Technical 
https://www.fantaproject.org/sites/default/files/resources/Uganda_NSA_May2010.pdf%0A 
Assistance, 
Retrieved 
(May), 
20. 
to 
Harvey, P., Rambeloson, Z. O., & Dary, O. (2010). 2008 Uganda Food Consumption Survey: 
Determining  the  Dietary  Patterns  of  Ugandan  Women  and  Children.  THE  2008  UGANDA 
FOOD 
from 
http://www.gainhealth.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/44.-Uganda-2008-Food-
Consumption-Survey-Report.pdf 
CONSUMPTION 
Retrieved 
Kampala, 
SURVEY. 
Uganda. 
Kirk,  A.,  Kilic,  T.,  &  Carletto,  C.  (2018).  Composition  of  Household  Income  and  Child 
Nutrition  Outcomes  Evidence 
from  Uganda.  World  Development,  109,  452–469. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2017.03.023 
McDonell,  E.  (2016).  Nutrition  Politics  in  the  Quinoa  Boom:  Connecting  Consumer  and 
Producer  Nutrition  in  the  Commercialization  of  Traditional  Foods.  International  Journal  of 
Food and Nutritional Science, 3(6), 1–7. https://doi.org/10.15436/2377-0619.16.1212 
Sekabira, H., & Qaim, M. (2017). Can mobile phones improve gender equality and nutrition? 
Panel  data  evidence  from  farm  households  in  Uganda.  Food  Policy,  73(August),  95–103. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2017.10.004 
20 
UBOS. (2018). Uganda National Household Survey 2016/17. Kampala, Uganda. 
UBOS, & ICF. (2012). Uganda Demographic and Health Survey 2011. Kampala, Uganda and 
Rockville, Maryland, USA. 
UBOS,  &  ICF.  (2018).  Uganda  Demographic  and  Health  Survey.  Kampala,  Uganda  and 
Rockville, Maryland, USA. 
UNICEF-Uganda.  (2018).  Uganda  Nutrition  Situation  Analysis:  trends  in  nutritional  status, 
Uganda. 
behaviours, 
https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.10858.16322 
interventions. 
Kampala, 
and 
Whitney,  C.  W.,  Luedeling,  E.,  Tabuti,  J.  R.  S.,  Nyamukuru,  A.,  Hensel,  O.,  Gebauer,  J.,  & 
Kehlenbeck,  K.  (2018).  Crop  diversity  in  homegardens  of  southwest  Uganda  and  its 
importance  for  rural  livelihoods.  Agriculture  and  Human  Values,  35(2),  399–424. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10460-017-9835-3 
21 
Environment and Social Management Plan Matrix - NOSP 
Environmental/Social 
Impacts  
Component 1 - Support to Oilseed Value Chain Development 
Over or inadequate 
application of agrochemicals 
Potential Mitigation/Enhancement 
measures 
Conduct training in use and safe handling of 
agro-chemicals  
Responsible  
Means of Verification/ 
Indicators3 
Frequency of 
Verification 
PMU/ MAAIF Extension Services 
Exposure to Agro-chemicals 
Land degradation due to 
clearing and opening up of 
new areas under expansive 
agriculture 
Conduct training on use of agro-chemicals and 
individual protection equipment. 
Promote soil and water conservation measures 
including agro-forestry and use of cover 
crops; obtain necessary approvals for land 
clearing  
PMU/  MAAIF  Extension  Services/ 
Service Providers 
PMU/ MAAIF Extension Services/ 
Environment Officers/ Natural 
Resources Officers 
Bush fires  
Land related disputes 
Encroachment in wetlands  
Ensure environmental screening is conducted 
and monitoring of areas of cultivation  
Strengthen local conflict resolution and 
grievance redress mechanisms 
Ensure enforcement of by-laws; promote 
appropriate land clearing and preparation 
methods; include fire breaks in land use plans 
Promote use of indigenous species and 
certified varieties  
Obtain necessary approvals for land clearing 
and land use change, use expert knowledge of 
ecologists, introduction of ecosystem 
conservation activities 
Component 2 Support to Market Linkage Infrastructure Serving Oilseed Sector 
Physical resettlement or 
economic displacement  
Introduction of alien/invasive 
species 
Loss of fragile ecosystems 
and relevant biodiversity 
species 
Environment Officers/PMU 
District/ Sub-county Officials  
Environment Officers/ Natural 
Resources Officers 
PMU/ MAAIF Extension Services 
PMU/ Environment Officers/ 
Natural Resources Officers 
Apply the principles of free, prior and informed 
consent; ensure appropriate alignment of 
roads infrastructure  
Ensure careful selection of borrow pit 
locations; elaborate and monitor restoration/ 
safety measures required within the 
contractual arrangements; consider the use of 
borrow pits as alternative water harvesting 
infrastructures  
Promote innovative solutions for water 
PMU/ PICT/Contractors/ 
Environment Officers  
PMU/ PICT/Contractors/ 
Environment Officers/ Natural 
resources management officers 
Unattended borrow sites  
Poor drainage resulting in 
3 Monitoring and reporting 
Number of training sessions 
held  
Number of farmers using 
protective gear when 
handling agrochemicals 
Number  of  farmers  affected 
by agro-chemicals 
Adoption rate of soil and 
water conservation 
measures 
Area of land cultivated and 
deforested 
Size of area affected 
Bi-annually 
Annually  
Annually  
Bi-annually  
Number of disputes reported 
and resolved  
Number of bush fires 
Annually  
Annually  
Number of invasive species  
Annually  
Size of area and species 
affected 
Annually 
Number of community 
consultation sessions 
effectively documented  
Number of borrow sites 
rehabilitated 
Number of reported 
accidents 
Annually  
Annually 
PMU/ PICT/Contractors/ 
Number of sites and area of 
Annually 
22 
flooding/erosion of 
agricultural land 
Water contamination due to 
the run-off of hazardous 
elements used for 
construction works  
Loss of soil 
Loss of vegetation 
Waste generation 
Spread of HIV/AIDS and STIs 
Traffic accidents  
Potential land use conflicts 
Labour conditions; 
Work related accidents 
Air pollution, dust, noise 
disturbance  
Sexual  Harassment/  Sexual 
exploitation and Abuse4 
harvesting from roads; ensure good standards 
of feasibility studies and designs as well as 
impact assessments;  promote vegetation of 
road sides to improve infiltration capacity 
Controlled disposal of waste and effluent by 
use of appropriate disposal facilities, use of 
appropriate drainage structures, proper 
storage of materials, awareness campaigns; 
include contractual clauses for dealing with 
construction materials and avoiding spillages 
Stabilization of loose soil, controlled 
excavation, preservation of vegetation cover, 
appropriate landscaping.  
Selective clearing of project sites, 
revegetation at sites, sensitization campaigns 
Conduct awareness campaigns, assignment of 
adequate sites and equipment for waste 
collection and temporary storage, promote the 
use of organic waste as compost  
Strengthen HIV/AIDS awareness, encouraging 
participation in voluntary counselling and 
testing 
Promote road safety during and after 
construction; install adequate road signs and 
speed regulation measures 
Avoid locating interventions on sites that may 
require resettlement and/or displacement of 
other important land uses and encroachment 
on historical, cultural, traditional use areas, or 
protected areas 
Occupational and health training and 
awareness 
Codes of conduct for contractors 
Controlled operation times, use of appropriate 
equipment, proper orientation of lights, use of 
alternative materials, use water sprinklers to 
control dust, use of scrubbers 
Awareness raising and capacity building on the 
policy of no tolerance for SH/SEA 
Environment Officers 
land affected 
PMU/ PICT/Contractors/ 
Environment Officers 
Change in water quality 
Bi-annually 
Number of reported pollution 
events 
Annually  
PMU/ PICT/Contractors/ 
Environment Officers/ Natural 
resources management officers 
PMU/ PICT/Contractors/ 
Environment Officers/ Natural 
resources management officers 
PMU/ PICT/Contractors/ 
Environment Officers/ Natural 
resources management officers 
District health officers  
 PMU/ PICT/Contractors/Road 
Traffic Officers 
Area and size of gullies 
formed 
Sedimentation levels in 
watercourses 
Increase in area of land 
cultivated and deforested 
Number of campaigns 
Waste levels at sites  
Number of awareness 
sessions held 
Percentage increase in 
infections 
Number of accidents 
reported  
Monthly 
Monthly 
Quarterly  
Annually 
Annually  
PMU/PICT/ District/ Sub-county 
Officials 
Number of reported conflicts 
Number of complaints 
Bi-annually 
PMU/ PICT/Contractors 
 PMU/ PICT/Contractors/ 
Environment Officers/ Natural 
resources management officers 
PMU/  PICT/Contractors/  District 
Health Officers 
Annually 
Number of reported 
accidents 
Number of incidents reported 
N° of reported pollution 
events 
Size of area affected 
N° of reported accidents  
Number of reported incidents  Annually 
Annually  
4 Refer to IFAD Policy on Preventing and Responding To Sexual Harassment, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse; 2018; www.ifad.org/en/document-
detail/asset/40738506 
23 
Uganda
National Oilseeds Project
Project Design Report
Annex 6: First Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB)
Document Date:
10/02/2020
Project No.
2000002260
Report No.
5155-UG
Loan ID
2000003281
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
A 1. 18 months Annual Work Plan and Budget
Project Name:
Principal Recipient:
Currency:
Period
National Oil Seeds Project (NOSP)
Government of the Republic of Uganda
US$
From 01 July 2020 to 30 December 2021
Detailed Tables for Component, Expenditure 
Category and Financier
Description
# Budget line by Component, sub component 
and Activity 
  Activities 
A  COMPONENT 1: Support to Oil Seed Value 
Chain Development 
A.1 Hub and cluster operations
 MSP Hub level meetings  
 MSP cluster level meetings 
 Pre-investment support, training and 
demonstration and B2B activities 
 Hub coordination and consultative meeting  
Unit
# of units Unit rate  Total Costs
Budget Q1 
FY 20/21
Budget Q2 FY 
20/21
 Budget Q3 
FY 20/21 
 Budget Q4 
FY 20/21 
 Budget Q1 FY 
21/22 
 Budget Q2 
FY 21/22 
              -                      -                   -   
              -                      -                   -   
               -   
               -   
                   -   
                  -   
                   -                     -   
              -                      -                   -   
               -   
                   -                      -   
 meeting 
             18 
 2,500                   45               -                      -                   -   
               -   
                   23                   23 
 meeting 
           432 
 250           107 875                -                      -                   -   
               -   
            53 938 
           53 938 
 cluster 
             75 
 1,000                   75               -                      -                   -   
               -   
                   38                   38 
 meeting 
              3 
 1,000 
            3 000                0 
                    0                   0            1 000 
              1 000 
             1 000 
B. Technical Assistance
             -   
              -                      -   
International SC development specialist 
C. Oilseed Sector Development Facility
Public Fund to address specific bottlenecks to the SC 
development /k
Industry Contribution to the Public Fund 5% 
D. Vehicles and Equipment
1. PMU - Vehicles and equipment
Office furniture for PMU SCT
Tablets for PMU for M&E entry
Laptop for PMU for M&E entry
2. Hub - Vehicles and equipment
4x4 Vehicles for Hubs Supply chain team (2 per 
hub)
Motorcycles for hubs supply chain team
Office furniture for Hub SCTs
Tablets for Hub SCTs - for M&E entry
Laptop for Hub SCTs - for M&E entry
Printer/Photocopier/Scanner for Hub (1 per hub)
LCD Projector & screen for hub (1 per each office)
Dig. camera with GPS for hub (1 per each office)
E. Hub Coordination Consultancies
Supply Chain Team Leader - Hub (1 per hub) - 5 
hubs @ start, Karamoja from Yr 3 (small hub)
Snr Supply Chain Specialists - Hub (2 per hub, 1 in 
Karamoja from Yr 3)
Supply Chain Specialists - Hub (3 per hub, 1 in 
Karmoja from Yr 3)
F. Supply Chain Logistics Training
Trainer
Accommodation
DSA
A. Hub Expenses
Hub office expenses
DSA fo SC PMU & Hub staff
 Producer Group Mentoring
B. Producer Group Mentoring
 pers-month 
             12 
 20,000                 240 
               60                 60                     60                   60 
             -   
                 -                 -                      -                   -   
               -   
                   -   
                  -   
 lumpsum 
              1 
 95,000                   95               -                      -                   -   
               -   
            95 000 
 lumpsum 
              1 
 5,000                     5               -                      -                   -   
               -   
              5 000 
             -   
             -   
              -                      -                   -   
               -   
                   -   
                  -   
              -                      -                   -   
               -   
                   -   
                  -   
              3 
 400 
            1 200 
              3 
 150                 450 
              3 
 1,500                     5 
          1 200 
             450 
          4 500 
                   -   
                  -   
                   -   
                  -   
                   -   
                  -   
             -   
                 -                 -                      -                   -   
               -   
                   -   
                  -   
             10 
 42,000                 420 
       420 000 
                   -   
                  -   
             20 
 3,000                   60 
             30 
 400             12 000 
             33 
 150 
            4 950 
             30 
 1,500                   45 
              5 
 6,000                   30 
              5 
 2,000                   10 
              5 
 500 
            2 500 
         60 000 
         12 000 
          4 950 
         45 000 
         30 000 
         10 000 
          2 500 
                   -   
                  -   
                   -   
                  -   
                   -   
                  -   
                   -   
                  -   
                   -   
                  -   
                   -   
                  -   
                   -   
                  -   
 set 
 no 
 no 
 no 
 no 
 set 
 no 
 no 
 no 
 no 
 no 
              -                      -   
 pers-month 
             90 
 2,500           225 000         37 500             37 500           37 500           37 500              37 500 
           37 500 
 pers-month 
           180 
 2,000           360 000         60 000             60 000           60 000           60 000              60 000 
           60 000 
 pers-month 
           270 
 1,500           405 000         67 500             67 500           67 500           67 500              67 500 
           67 500 
              -                      -   
 pers-day 
              3 
 300                 750                -                      -                   -   
               -   
                 375                  375 
 day 
 day 
              3 
 120                 300                -                      -                   -   
               -   
                 150                  150 
              3 
 50                 125                -                      -                   -   
               -   
                   63                   63 
 office month 
             90 
 1,000             90 000         15 000             15 000           15 000           15 000              15 000 
           15 000 
 pers-year 
             51 
 500             25 500           2 125               2 125            2 125 
          2 125 
              4 250 
             4 250 
              -                      -   
              -                      -   
              -                      -   
Economic Mobilisation (existing & new groups)
 group 
           450 
 50             22 500                -                      -                   -   
               -   
            11 250 
           11 250 
B2B interaction - Village level
C. Business Skills Training
Businss Skills Training (BST) course development
ToT Training to Business Skills Mentors (BSM)
BST related printing
BST course roll-out - group level
Fee to BSMs to teach BST courses
BSM partial renumeration
Tablets for BSMs
E. Salaries - Economic Mobilizers
Economic Mobilizers 
EM Supervisors - salary
EM Managers - salary
F. VSLA mobilization
VSLA Facilitator
G. EM Capacity building
EM training on EMs and other PSP staff 
Follow up EM training on EM, MIS, VC & MSP
H. EM Equipment
Tablets for EMs
Tablets for EM Supervisors and Managers
Laptop / Desktop for EM Supervisors / Managers
I. EM Vehicles
4WD pickups - EM Hub Team 
Motorcycles - EM field team 
J. Office operating
Internet fees
K. Allowances
L. Other Hub operating costs
2. HHs Methodology & Social Mentoring
ToT costs for HHM Mentoring Field Supervisors
Training costs for HHM Mentors
Bicycles for Mentors
Materials for HHM 
Support to Young Farmer Groups 
3. Study (Mapping,  Assessments,)
HH Methodology Impact Study
 meeting 
        1 800 
 50             90 000                -                      -                   -   
               -   
            45 000 
           45 000 
             -   
              -                      -   
 month 
              6 
 25,000           150 000         25 000             25 000           25 000           25 000              25 000 
           25 000 
 event 
             12 
 10,000           120 000                -                      -                   -   
               -   
            60 000 
           60 000 
 per HH 
      22 500 
 5           112 500                -                      -                   -   
               -   
            56 250 
           56 250 
 course 
           900 
 200           180 000                -                      -                   -   
               -   
            90 000 
           90 000 
 course 
           900 
 100             90 000                -                      -                   -   
               -   
            45 000 
           45 000 
 year 
 unit 
           863 
 40             34 500                -                      -                   -   
               -   
            17 250 
           17 250 
           300 
 120             36 000                -                      -                   -   
               -   
            36 000 
              -                      -   
 pers-month 
           450 
 100             45 000                -                      -                   -   
               -   
            22 500 
           22 500 
 pers-month 
             45 
 400             18 000                -                      -                   -   
               -   
              9 000 
             9 000 
 pers-month 
             14 
 600 
            8 100               -                      -                   -   
               -   
              4 050 
             4 050 
             -   
                 -                 -                      -                   -   
               -   
                   -   
-
month
           300 
200
           60 000 
         17 500           17 500              12 500 
12 500
              4 
20,000
           70 000                -                      -                   -   
               -   
            35 000 
35 000
             -   
7,500
                 -                 -                      -                   -   
               -   
                   -   
-
              -                      -   
             -   
              -                      -   
             75 
150
           11 250                -                      -                   -   
               -   
              5 625 
              8 
150
            1 125               -                      -                   -   
               -   
                 563 
             10 
1,500
           15 000                -                      -                   -   
               -   
              7 500 
             -   
              -                      -   
             10 
42,000
               420 
             50 
3,000
               150 
       420 000 
       150 000 
                   -   
                   -   
             -   
              -                      -   
pers-year
             83 
50
            4 125               -                      -                   -   
               -   
              2 063 
pers-year
             85 
750
           63 750                -                      -                   -   
               -   
            31 875 
hub
              3 
10,000
           30 000                -                      -                   -   
               -   
            15 000 
             -   
              -                      -   
event
event
each
set
              8 
10,000
           80 000 
         40 000           40 000                     -   
             25 
5,000
         125 000 
         62 500           32 500                     -   
        2 400 
120
         288 000 
       288 000 
                   -   
        2 400 
50
         120 000 
         60 000           60 000                     -   
5 625
563
7 500
-
-
2 063
31 875
15 000
-
-
-
-
school
           120 
150
           18 000                -                      -                   -   
               -   
              9 000 
9 000
             -   
              -                      -   
study
              1  100,000
         100 000                -                      -                   -   
               -   
            50 000 
50 000
event
event
unit
unit
unit
each
each
National level Knowledge Event/Workshop of HH 
methodology
w/shop
             -   
7,000
                 -                 -                      -                   -   
               -   
                   -   
-
4. GALS salaries
HHM Senior Supervisors 
HHM Field Supervisors 
HHM Mentors
O. Improved climate information services
1. Climate data collection
b. Farmers Groups
Rain Gauges & Temperature Recording Micro 
Stations
2. Capacity Building for Climate Change and 
Environmental Management
Awareness, Knowledge and Participation of Farmers 
on CC and Weather-related Info
Build capacity of Technical Staff on Mainstreaming 
Environmental Management and CC Risk 
Build capacity of UNMA staff on weather data 
analysis, interpretation and dissemination
Annual Refresh 3-day Training on Environmental, 
Climate Change
Build capacity of Communities in the use of rain 
gauges
             -   
              -                      -   
pers-year
             12 
6,000
           72 000                -                      -                   -   
               -   
            36 000 
36 000
pers-year
           120 
3,600
         432 000                -                      -                   -   
               -   
           216 000 
216 000
pers-year
        1 200 
780
         936 000                -                      -                   -   
               -   
           468 000 
468 000
             -   
             -   
             -   
                 -                 -                      -                   -   
               -   
                   -   
                 -                 -                      -                   -   
               -   
                   -   
                 -                 -                      -                   -   
               -   
                   -   
-
-
-
unit
        1 200 
60
           72 000 
         36 000              18 000 
18 000
             -   
                 -                 -                      -                   -   
               -   
                   -   
-
session
             75 
5,000
         375 000 
       125 000         125 000              62 500 
62 500
w/shop
              8 
20,000
         150 000 
         50 000           50 000              25 000 
25 000
w/shop
              1 
50,000
           50 000 
         25 000           25 000                     -   
-
w/shop
              8 
20,000
         150 000 
         50 000           50 000              25 000 
25 000
w/shop
             75 
50
            3 750 
          1 250 
          1 250 
                 625 
625
             -   
              -                      -   
3. Climate risk and vulnerability assessment
Climate Risk and Vulnerability Assessment (District 
level)
Service provision for the risk assessment
no
no
4. Social Impact Assessments
Data collection
5. Soil health assessments
Land degradation surveillance framework sites
Capacity building for LDSF
Monitoring of the soil fertility and health
6. Environmental awareness raising
Radio progarmmes (regional level)
7. Nutrition awareness raising
Nutrition Fairs
Training on aflatoxin reduction (group level)
 Financial Services
A. VSLA Training
Training on VSLA governance, book keeping 
Training to VSLAs on governance,member 
responsibility, book keeping
B. VSLA level financial  products for oil seed 
production
Training of personnel in financial products at VSLA 
C. Training on Financial literacy including insurance 
literacy
Training of trainers on finanical literacy including 
insurance literacy
Training of VSLA members on financial literacy 
including insurance literacy
D. Training on VSLA linkage banking and other 
mainstream bank linkages
Training of trainers on VSLA linkage banking /VC 
financing
Training of VSLA members on linkage banking/ VC 
financing 
E. Engagement with banks
High level meeting with Financial instiuttions, 
Insurance companies and Bank of Uganda 
Planning and co ordination meeting at hub level with 
major financial institutions and insurance companies 
Policy briefs and other KM products
F. Technical assistance to Financial institutions
1. Tier 4 institutions
a. Agri product development - SACCOs, Agriculture 
enterprise co operatives
2. Tier 1, 2  & 3 Financial Institutions
a. TA for product development/ product 
modifications
b. Training of branch managers and credit officers 
on new products including crop insurance /n
3. Training programme on oil seed value chain 
financing for bank staff including crop insurance 
4. Exposure visit  for senior management banks and 
Government officials
G. Support to Insurance Companies
1. Training of insurance company staff in branches, 
PSP agents,
2. Piloting and scaling up of agriculture insurance 
products 
H. Training on crop insurance for PSP and mobilisers 
A. Farm Production Advisors Training
Develop course curriculum
Production of training material
Training of Trainers 
Training of FPA on the field 
Training of FPA theory classes 
B. Demonstration Plots
Inputs - seed ,fert,CPP 
Equipment and tools 
Signage
Purchase of Mechanisation services
M&E of Demo plot (inspections by PSP)
Field days for farmer groups in cluster 
Distribution and logistics
C. FPA Extension program
             30 
20,000
               600 
       100 000         300 000                   100 
100
              2 
40,000
           80 000 
         20 000           20 000              20 000 
20 000
             -   
                 -                 -                      -                   -   
               -   
                   -   
-
survey
             60 
1,000
           60 000 
         20 000           20 000              10 000 
10 000
             -   
                 -                 -                      -                   -   
               -   
                   -   
-
site
             15 
30,000
         450 000 
       150 000         150 000              75 000 
75 000
w/shop
              1 
20,000
           20 000 
         10 000           10 000                     -   
site
              8 
200
            1 500               -                      -                   -   
               -   
                 750 
             -   
                 -                 -                      -                   -   
               -   
                   -   
-
750
-
sessions
             23 
400
            9 000 
          3 000 
          3 000 
              1 500 
1 500
             -   
                 -                 -                      -                   -   
               -   
                   -   
-
no
           150 
500
           75 000 
         25 000           25 000              12 500 
session
           900 
500
         450 000 
       150 000         150 000              75 000 
             -   
-
-
              -                      -   
batches
              9 
3,000
27 000
         18 000                4 500 
days
        6 650 
20
133 000
       130 000                1 500 
             -   
              -                      -   
12 500
75 000
4 500
1 500
batch
16
1,500
24 000
         15 000                4 500 
4 500
batch
day
batch
VSLA
meeting
meeting
per brief
0
-
              -                      -                   -   
               -   
                   -   
-
26
3,000
78 000
         48 000              15 000 
15 000
11790
20
235 800
       109 200              63 300 
63 300
0
-
              -                      -                   -   
               -   
                   -   
15
2,000
30
              -   
         20 000                       5 
-
5
910
10
9 100
          5 200 
              1 950 
1 950
0
3
15
1
0
0
-
1 500
3 000
500
200
               -   
               -   
                   -   
          1 000 
                 250 
-
250
          1 000 
              1 000 
1 000
1,000
1
              -                      -                   -   
               -   
                     0 
0
              -                      -   
              -                      -   
SACCO
38
6,000
225 000
       150 000              38 000 
38 000
0
pers-day
150
400
60 000
         24 000              18 000 
18 000
batch
batch
batch
batch
annual contract
training
manual
units
trainers
persons
persons
input packs
pack
signs
acres
inspection
field days
plots
10
6,000
60 000
         12 000              23 000 
23 000
1
1
0
4
1
5
7,500
7 500
              -                      -                   -   
               -   
              3 250 
3 250
75,000
38 000
              -                      -                   -   
               -   
            19 000 
19 000
-
              -                      -                   -   
               -   
                   -   
-
1,000
4 000
          2 000 
              1 000 
1 000
50,000
50 000
              -                      -                   -   
               -   
            50 000 
2,000
10 000
              -                      -                   -   
               -   
              5 000 
5 000
4
15,000
5 000
10
12
5,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
60 000
50 000
60 000
70 750
70 750
-
14 150
10 613
3 538
8 490
14 150
28 250
60 000
50 000
60 000
37 500
37 500
-
3 750
2 813
938
2 250
3 750
7 500
-
3 750
2 813
938
2 250
3 750
7 500
-
-
-
16 625
16 625
-
3 325
2 494
831
1 995
3 325
6 625
-
-
-
16 625
16 625
-
3 325
2 494
831
1 995
3 325
6 625
113 000
30 000
30 000
26 500
26 500
500
500
100
75
25
60
100
50
200
Development of audio visual extension material 
programs
Portable Audio visual equipment for extension
Tablet for M&E
Soft ware for M&E
IT tech support from systems service provider
kits
unit
unit
day
7,500
90 000
750
150
50
100
112 500
22 500
15 000
73 050
45 000
37 500
7 500
5 000
45 000
37 500
7 500
5 000
27 400
27 400
-
-
18 750
18 750
3 750
2 500
9 125
3 750
2 500
9 125
141.5
141.5
0
141.5
141.5
141.5
141.5
141.5
565
565
0
12
150
150
300
730.5
Training of FPA's on extension service provision
Transport allowance for extension
D. General Support to FPAS
M&E : production and trade data  from groups
Logistics support 
Program review
each
days
farmers
seasons
review
141.5
5085
0
250
5
84750
0.55
3
12,000
1.5
22,500
A. Scheme Design and Supervision
1. Mechanization Business Training Course Set-up
Develop curriculum & materials for training program module
ToT Mech Bus. training of hub implementers (PSP)
implementer
Monitoring & Mentoring of Hub Implementers 
implementer
2. Machinery packages for Hub Implementers usage
10,000
40,000
10,000
6
6
0
0
Small scale thresher package for Hub training
package
10
5,000
Small scale mechanization package for Hub training package
Medium scale mechanization package for Hub 
training
package
Large scale mechanization package for Hub training package
5
5
5
8,400
38,800
55,800
35 375
25 425
46 613
36 000
34 000
60 000
240 000
-
50 000
42 000
194 000
280 000
B. Mechanization Business Training
Tractor operator training 
Mechanic training course
Field Visits and mentoring of operators
Monitoring of extensions
C. Mechanization Business Financing Round 1 - First 
movers
1. Small-scale mech package (USD 11,200 each)
Investment incentive - NOSP
Beneficary contribution
b. Investor - SME (incentive = 35% w/ women 
bonus)
Investment incentive - NOSP
Beneficary contribution
2. Medium-scale mech package (USD 44,310 each, 
incl taxes)
Investment incentive - NOSP
Beneficary contribution
b. Investor  - SME (incentive = 35% w/ women 
bonus)
Investment incentive - NOSP
Beneficary contribution
 Quality Declared Seed Production Scheme
A. Local Seed Business Training
each
man
each
session
package
package
package
package
package
package
package
package
105
1,250
131 250
9
53
53
-
-
-
25
25
-
13
13
-
-
8
8
8
8
2,400
500
100
21 600
26 500
5 300
-
-
5,600
140 000
5,600
140 000
3,920
50 960
7,280
95 000
-
22,155
177 240
22,155
177 240
-
15,508
116 000
28,802
216 000
Develop and implement QMS documentation 
manual
1
25,000
Production of training material and documentation
copies
PSP training LSB 
B. Local Seed Business Plots
pers-day
Inputs - seed, fertilizer, crop protection products 
packs
Equipment and tools 
Signage /e
Purchase of mechanisation services 
Certification and inspection
Tablets for M&E 
Software and reg 
M&E : productionand trade data  from groups 
M&E: Data management and processing
C. Supply Chain Development
D. Training of Seed Inspectors 
no
no
acres
no
no
no
LSB
pers-day
no
Seed inspectors training by PSP
inspectors
Equiping seed inspectors
E. Supporting Seed Production Systems
1. Soy Seed- Increase  Genetic yield potentail of 
local varieties
set
trial
2. Build Capacity of plant breeders
scholarships
3. Increasing capacity for foundation seed supply
Develop a sustainble business model and Supply 
chain to provide LSB with foundation seed
Irrigation system for foundation seed production
Training on irrigation system operation and 
maintenance
4. Support to National Soy Bean Seed Production
4WD Pickup
F. Innoculant Supply Chain
Develop capacity of private sector labs to produce 
innoculant
Innoculant storage /o
plan
acres
session
no
labs
no
Capacity building  - production of innoculant
course
G. Research and Development
Scholarships MSc
Scholarships PhD
Workshops
Supporting institutons on oil seed research
Component 2: Public Infrastructure Serving 
Oilseed Sector
A. Vehicles
4WD Pickups
Office car
B. Office equipment
Destop computers
Laptops
Printers
students
students
w/shop
programs
no
no
no
no
no
25 000
12 500
27 000
-
9 750
1 625
650
5 525
3 250
4 875
2 125
1 625
7 500
8 000
-
19 000
9 500
-
25 000
25 000
-
500
1 350
-
33
33
33
65
163
33
43
33
150
25
20
300
50
20
85
20
150
50
50
50
5
1,500
1,000
500
25,000
25,000
-
19
19
1
1
1
5
1
-
-
-
-
10,000
10 000
5,000
25 000
2,500
2 500
-
1
42,000
42 000
-
1
120,000
120 000
60
1
-
5
3
1
1
5
1
-
15
15
15
1,000
10,000
6,000
12,000
10,000
25,000
60 000
5 000
-
30 000
36 000
5 000
25 000
42,000
50,000
210 000
50 000
1,000
1,500
500
15 000
30 000
7 500
9 375
6 750
11 653
12 000
11 000
-
30 000
80 000
-
25 000
21 000
9 375
6 750
11 653
12 000
11 000
-
30 000
80 000
-
25 000
21 000
97 000
97 000
140 000
140 000
-
-
7 000
7 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
8 313
5 963
8 313
5 963
11 653
11 654
6 000
6 000
6 000
6 000
-
-
-
-
40 000
40 000
-
-
-
-
-
66
3 800
13 125
2 625
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
66
3 800
13 125
2 625
-
-
-
70 000
70 000
70 000
70 000
-
-
25 000
25 960
47 500
47 500
-
-
88 620
88 620
88 620
88 620
-
-
58 000
58 000
108 000
#######
12 500
12 500
6 250
9 000
-
6 250
9 000
-
-
-
-
-
4 500
4 500
-
-
3 000
3 000
1 875
1 875
500
200
1 700
1 000
1 500
500
500
500
200
1 700
1 000
1 500
500
500
2 500
2 500
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
42 000
-
-
40 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
313
125
313
125
1 063
1 063
625
938
563
313
1 250
4 000
-
10 000
4 750
-
25 000
25 000
-
10 000
625
938
563
313
1 250
4 000
-
9 000
4 750
-
-
12 500
12 500
2 500
-
-
-
10 000
2 500
-
15 000
18 000
2 500
12 500
-
-
-
#######
10 000
2 500
-
15 000
18 000
2 500
12 500
-
-
210 000
50 000
15 000
30 000
7 500
National M&E, KM and Communication Specialist 
pers-month
6
8,000
48 000
8 000
8 000
8 000
8 000
8 000
8 000
1
11
6
1
0
500
500
12,000
2,000
1,000
500
12 000
22 000
6 000
500
600,000
300 000
1,000
500 000
600
300 000
lumpsum
-
269,400
-
-
-
1
50,000
50 000
-
-
-
-
13
18
12
26
6
-
-
-
8
9
12
16
6
60 000
48 000
72 000
36 000
36 000
18 000
18 000
13
12
1
13
6
1,000
1,500
12,000
2,000
1,000
-
-
-
-
-
8
6
1
8
6
1,000
1,500
12,000
2,000
1,000
12
12
24
12
12
6
6
18
6
12
12
6
6
12
54
-
150
1 110
-
-
5,000
4,000
3,000
3,000
3,000
3,000
3,000
3,000
3,000
2,000
1,500
1,000
1,000
500
500
50
5
20,000
Multifunctional Printer/Scanner
Office furniture
GPS and Tablet equiment
Software
no
set
no
no
C. Community awareness and social mobilisation
lumpsum
kms
kms
D. Feasibility studies and engineering designs
E. Environmental and Social Impact Assessments 
F. ESMP implementation - Restoration of water 
supply
Component 3: Project Coordination and 
Management
A. MAAIF PCU
1. Technical Assistance
2. Vehicles
4WD Pickups
Office car (Station wagon)
3. Office equipment
Desktop computer
Laptops
Mutifunctional printer/scanner
Office furniture
GPS and tablet equipment
B. MoLG PCU
1. Vehicles
4WD Pickups
Office car (Station wagon)
2. Office equipment
Desktop computer
Laptops
Mutifunctional printer/scanner
Office furniture
GPS and tablet equipment
A. MAAIF PCU
1. Staff Salaries
Project Coordinator
Supply Chain Team Leader
Supply Chain Deputy Team Leader
Financial Controller
Procurement Specialist
Social Inclusion Specialist
Environment and Climate Specialist
M&E and KM Specialist
Rural Finance Advisor
Accountant
Account Assistant
Data Management Assistant
Office Administrator
Office Attendants
Drivers
3. Staff Allowances
Per diem for national travel
Tele and internet subs
4. Operation and maintenance
Operation and maintenance - Bi Annual
Operation and maintenance - Regular
B. MoLG NOSP Implementation Support Team
1. Staff Salaries
Project Coordinator
no
no
unit
unit
unit
set
unit
no
unit
unit
unit
set
unit
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
day
month
bi-annual
day
pers-month
Infrastructure Engineering Advisor (from MoWT)
pers-month
Infrastructure Engineers
Project Accountant
Procurement Specialist
Accounts Assistant
Office Administrator
Drivers
Per diem for national travel
Tele and internet subs
 Knowledge Management and Monitoring & 
Evaluation
A. M&E System 
Baseline survey
SC annual tracking survey 
C. Equipment
GSM-enabled tablet 
GPS units
Desktop computer
Digital Camera professional
A. Staff allowances
M&E and KM Specialist
PMU Data Management Assistant
Hub M&E Assistant
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
pers-month
day
month
survey
survey
unit
unit
unit
unit
pers-day
pers-day
pers-day
54 000
#####
9 000
9 000
9 000
18 000
24 000
18 000
6 000
6 000
6 000
27 000
7 500
5 550
-
-
-
6 000
4 500
-
6 000
4 500
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
20
250
5 000
2 500
2 500
-
-
6
6
30
12
12
12
6
42
150
1 110
0
1
2
-
1 345
25
10
7
-
45
53
375
2,000
1,500
3,000
2,000
3,000
1,500
1,000
500
35
5
-
-
12 000
9 000
90 000
24 000
36 000
18 000
6 000
21 000
5 250
5 550
-
150,000
150 000
50,000
100 000
75 000
50 000
140
500
1,500
1,000
40
40
40
-
188 300
12 500
15 000
7 000
1 800
2 100
15 000
300
300
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
6 000
9 000
4 500
6 000
9 000
4 500
-
-
-
-
-
-
188 300
12 500
15 000
7 000
-
300
700
-
-
-
-
-
75 000
50 000
-
-
300
700
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
12 000
22 000
6 000
500
150 000
#######
250 000
#######
150 000
#######
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
50 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
15 000
12 000
18 000
9 000
9 000
-
-
15 000
12 000
18 000
9 000
9 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
13 000
18 000
12 000
26 000
6 000
-
-
-
8 000
9 000
12 000
16 000
6 000
15 000
12 000
18 000
9 000
9 000
9 000
9 000
9 000
9 000
6 000
4 500
3 000
3 000
3 000
-
-
-
-
-
-
15 000
12 000
18 000
9 000
9 000
9 000
9 000
9 000
9 000
6 000
4 500
3 000
3 000
3 000
13 500
13 500
3 750
2 775
3 750
2 775
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
6 000
4 500
6 000
4 500
45 000
45 000
6 000
9 000
4 500
3 000
6 000
9 000
4 500
3 000
10 500
10 500
2 625
2 775
2 625
2 775
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
300
350
300
350
Total
  13 926 224      224 425          349 425 
  3 569 663    3 142 663 
      4 429 691       3 822 152 
5 000
5 000
2 500
2 500
Uganda
National Oilseeds Project
Project Design Report
Annex 7: Procurement Plan for first 18 months
Document Date:
10/02/2020
Project No.
2000002260
Report No.
5155-UG
Loan ID
2000003281
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
GOODS
Country/Organization: Uganda
Project/Programme: National Oil Seed Project
Loan #:
Drafter of this PP: Mr. John XYZ, MORAP
Procurement Method
ICB and LIB (Goods): USD 200,000
ICB (Works): USD 700,000
ICB (Non-Consultancy Services): USD 100,000
NCB and LNB (Goods): USD 35,000-USD 200,000
NCB (Works): USD 100,000-USD 700,000
NCB (Non-Consultancy Services): USD 10,000-USD 100,000
IFAD prior review is required for Goods procurement value with more than USD 50,000
BASIC DATA
Bid Documents
Bidding Period
Bid evaluation report
Contract finalization 
Description
AWPB Ref.
Lot 
Number
Issue # of 
invitation for bids
Procuring Entity
Estimated Amount in 
US$
Procurement Method
Pre- or post- 
review
Procurement of 22 4WD Pickups Vehicles and 1 Station Wagon  Vehicle
Procurement of 33 Office furniture sets for PCU and Hubs
Procurement of Office equipment including desktops, laptops, tablets, 
Multifunctional Printer/Scanner, GPS and digital cameras
Procurement of 70 Motorcycles for hubs supply chain team and EM field team
Procurement of 2400 Bicycles for Mentors
Procurement of Rain Gauges & Temperature Recording Micro Stations
Procurement of Office equipment for EM field team including desktops, laptops, 
tablets
Procurement of 5 4WD Pickups Vehicles and 1 Station Wagon  Vehicle
Broadcasting of Radio Progarmmes (one contract for each region)
2
1
4
1
1
1
2
2
1
MAAIF-PCU
             1 040 000 
MAAIF-PCU
                  13 200 
MAAIF-PCU
                390 000 
MAAIF-PCU
                210 000 
MAAIF-PCU
                288 000 
MAAIF-PCU
                  36 000 
MAAIF-PCU
                  50 000 
MAAIF-PCU
                260 000 
ICB
NS
ICB
ICB
ICB
NCB
NCB
ICB
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
MAAIF-PCU
                    6 000 
NS
Prior
Non-Consultancy Services
Date Proposed
Date No- 
Objection
Bid invitation date
Bid closing/opening
Bid evaluation report
No-Objection
Contract 
amount in US$
Date Contract 
Award
Date Contract 
Signature
01-Oct-20
11-Oct-20
16-Oct-20
27-Nov-20
27-Dec-20
11-Jan-21
31-Jan-21
20-Feb-21
01-Aug-20
06-Aug-20
09-Aug-20
19-Aug-20
24-Aug-20
29-Aug-20
18-Sep-20
20-Sep-20
01-Nov-20
11-Nov-20
16-Nov-20
28-Dec-20
27-Jan-21
06-Feb-21
26-Feb-21
18-Mar-21
01-Oct-20
11-Oct-20
16-Oct-20
27-Nov-20
27-Dec-20
11-Jan-21
31-Jan-21
20-Feb-21
01-Nov-20
11-Nov-20
16-Nov-20
28-Dec-20
27-Jan-21
11-Feb-21
03-Mar-21
23-Mar-21
01-Dec-20
11-Dec-20
16-Dec-20
15-Jan-21
04-Feb-21
14-Feb-21
06-Mar-21
16-Mar-21
01-Aug-21
11-Aug-21
16-Aug-21
15-Sep-21
05-Oct-21
15-Oct-21
04-Nov-21
14-Nov-21
15-Jul-21
25-Jul-21
30-Jul-21
10-Sep-21
10-Oct-21
20-Oct-21
09-Nov-21
29-Nov-21
01-Nov-20
06-Nov-20
09-Nov-20
19-Nov-20
24-Nov-20
29-Nov-20
19-Dec-20
21-Dec-20
Plan vs.
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
CONSULTANTS
Country/Organization: Uganda
Project/Programme: National Oil Seed Project
Loan #:
Assumptions:
It is expected that most of the TORs will be ready by the start-up of the project, otherwise a delay in the whole process for each transaction will happen.
For Consultancy Services Contracts with implementation period over one year, the contracts will be awarded and signed based on one-year contract with provision for possible 
extension for further years subject to performance satisfaction. The only exception will be the contracts for conducting Roads Construction Feasibility studies and engineering designs
Drafter of this PP: 
Procurement Method
QCBS
QBS
FBS
LCS
CQS
SSS
SIC
ICB (Consultancy Services): USD 100,000
IFAD prior review is required for Consultancy Services procurement value with more than USD 50,000
Description
AWPB Ref.
Procuring Entity
Selection method
Lump-sum or 
time-based
Estimated amount in 
US$
Pre/Post- review
Plan vs. Actual
Date published
Closing date
Date proposed
Date no-objection 
Date proposed 
Date no-objection  Plan vs. Actual
Date prepared
Date no-
objection
Invitation date
Submission/opening 
date
Submission evaluation 
report (T)
no-objection 
evaluation report (T)
Opening Financial 
Proposal
Submission eval. 
Report (T) and (F)
no-objection 
eval. Report (T) 
and (F) 
Plan vs. Actual
Contract amount 
in US$
Contract 
award
Contract 
signature
Request for expression of interest
Terms of Reference 
Shortlist
Request for Proposal
Bid Proposal
Bid evaluations technical (T) and financial (F) 
Contract Finalisation 
Recruitment of Indivadual Consultant to provide TA to strengthen the 
Procurement Functions
 Recruitment of International SC development specialist
Recruitment of Consulting Firm to carry out Procurement Capacity Building 
Programme 
Recruitment of Consulting Firms to carry out HHs Methodology & 
Social Mentoring (one contract per each Hub)
Recruitment of Consulting Firm to provide Capacity Building for 
Climate Change and Environmental Management
Recruitment of Consulting Firm to carry out Climate Risk and 
Vulnerability Assessment (District level)
Recruitment of Consulting Firm to carry out Social Impact 
Assessments
Recruitment of Consulting Firm Soil Health Assessments
Recruitment of Consulting Firms to provide Nutrition awareness 
raising (one Contract per each Hub)
Recruitment of Consulting Firm to provide VSLA Training
 Recruitment of Consulting Firm to provide Training on Financial literacy 
including insurance literacy 
 Recruitment of Consulting Firms to provide Technical assistance to Financial 
institutions (one Contract per each Financial institution) 
 Recruitment of Consulting Firm to Develop course curriculum, Production of 
training material and carry outTraining of Trainers for Farm Production 
Advisors 
 Recruitment of Consulting Firms to carry out Training for Farm Production 
Advisors (one Contract per each Hub) 
 Recruitment of Consulting Firm to provide Mechanization Business Training 
Course Set-up 
 Recruitment of Consulting Firm to provide Farm Production Advisors Training 
 Recruitment of Consulting Firm to carry out Project Baseline survey 
 Recruitment of Consulting Firm to Establish MIS 
 Recruitment of Consulting Firms to carry out Roads Construction  Feasibility 
studies and engineering designs (Contract for each Hub) 
 Recruitment of Consulting Firms to carry out Roads Construction 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (Contract for each Hub) 
 Recruitment of Consulting Firms to provide Business Skills Training (Contract 
for each Hub) 
 Recruitment of Consulting Firms to provide Economic Mobilization (Contract 
for each Hub) 
 Recruitment of Consulting Firms to provide Economic Mobilization Capacity 
building (Contract for each Hub) 
 Recruitment of Consulting Firms to provide Mechanization Business Training 
(Contract for each Hub) 
 Recruitment of Consulting Firm to provide Training of Seed Inspectors 
 Recruitment of Consulting Firm to provide TA for Foundation Seed Supply 
MAAIF-PCU
MAAIF-PCU
MAAIF-PCU
MAAIF-PCU
MAAIF-PCU
MAAIF-PCU
MAAIF-PCU
MAAIF-PCU
MAAIF-PCU
MAAIF-PCU
MAAIF-PCU
MAAIF-PCU
MAAIF-PCU
MAAIF-PCU
MAAIF-PCU
MAAIF-PCU
MAAIF-PCU
MAAIF-PCU
MOLG-PICT
SIC
SIC
CQS
QCBS
QCBS
QCBS
QCBS
QCBS
QCBS
QCBS
QCBS
QCBS
QCBS
QCBS
QCBS
QCBS
QCBS
QCBS
QCBS
MOLG-PICT
QCBS
MAAIF-PCU
MAAIF-PCU
MAAIF-PCU
MAAIF-PCU
MAAIF-PCU
MAAIF-PCU
QCBS
QCBS
QCBS
QCBS
QCBS
QCBS
Lump-sum
15 000
Lump-sum
120 000
Lump-sum
25 000
Lump-sum
3 500 000
Lump-sum
508 000
Lump-sum
440 000
Lump-sum
140 000
Lump-sum
320 000
Lump-sum
350 000
Lump-sum
140 000
Lump-sum
159 000
Lump-sum
185 000
Lump-sum
170 000
Lump-sum
70 000
Lump-sum
230 000
Lump-sum
56 000
Lump-sum
150 000
Lump-sum
100 000
Lump-sum
2 500 000
Lump-sum
1 500 000
Lump-sum
1 290 000
Lump-sum
140 000
Lump-sum
140 000
Lump-sum
165 000
Lump-sum
Lump-sum
55 000
60 000
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Prior
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
01-Aug-20
11-Aug-20
01-Aug-20
06-Aug-20
16-Aug-20
21-Aug-20
01-Sep-20
21-Sep-20
01-Sep-20
11-Sep-20
01-Oct-20
11-Oct-20
01-Oct-20
16-Oct-20
01-Oct-20
08-Oct-20
26-Oct-20
02-Nov-20
01-Sep-20
21-Sep-20
01-Sep-20
11-Sep-20
11-Oct-20
21-Oct-20
01-Aug-20
21-Aug-20
01-Aug-20
11-Aug-20
10-Sep-20
20-Sep-20
15-Aug-20
04-Sep-20
15-Aug-20
25-Aug-20
24-Sep-20
04-Oct-20
01-Sep-20
21-Sep-20
01-Sep-20
11-Sep-20
06-Oct-20
16-Oct-20
15-Sep-20
05-Oct-20
15-Sep-20
25-Sep-20
20-Oct-20
30-Oct-20
15-Sep-20
30-Sep-20
15-Sep-20
22-Sep-20
15-Oct-20
25-Oct-20
01-Oct-20
21-Oct-20
01-Oct-20
11-Oct-20
05-Nov-20
15-Nov-20
01-Oct-20
21-Oct-20
01-Oct-20
11-Oct-20
05-Nov-20
15-Nov-20
15-Oct-20
30-Oct-20
15-Oct-20
25-Oct-20
14-Nov-20
24-Nov-20
01-Oct-20
21-Oct-20
01-Oct-20
11-Oct-20
05-Nov-20
15-Nov-20
01-Sep-20
16-Sep-20
01-Sep-20
11-Sep-20
01-Oct-20
11-Oct-20
01-Oct-20
21-Oct-20
01-Oct-20
11-Oct-20
05-Nov-20
15-Nov-20
15-Sep-20
30-Sep-20
15-Sep-20
25-Sep-20
15-Oct-20
25-Oct-20
01-Aug-20
21-Aug-20
01-Aug-20
11-Aug-20
05-Sep-20
15-Sep-20
01-Oct-20
21-Oct-20
01-Oct-20
11-Oct-20
05-Nov-20
15-Nov-20
01-Oct-20
21-Oct-20
01-Oct-20
11-Oct-20
10-Nov-20
20-Nov-20
15-Jan-21
04-Feb-21
15-Jan-21
25-Jan-21
24-Feb-21
06-Mar-21
01-Apr-21
21-Apr-21
01-Apr-21
11-Apr-21
11-May-21
21-May-21
01-May-21
16-May-21
01-May-21
11-May-21
31-May-21
10-Jun-21
01-May-21
16-May-21
01-May-21
11-May-21
31-May-21
10-Jun-21
01-Jun-21
16-Jun-21
01-Jun-21
11-Jun-21
01-Jul-21
11-Jul-21
15-Jul-21
30-Jul-21
15-Jul-21
25-Jul-21
14-Aug-21
24-Aug-21
15-Jul-21
30-Jul-21
15-Jul-21
25-Jul-21
14-Aug-21
24-Aug-21
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
12-Nov-20
19-Nov-20
20-Nov-20
11-Dec-20
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
26-Aug-20
31-Aug-20
21-Oct-20
31-Oct-20
21-Dec-20
28-Dec-20
05-Nov-20
15-Nov-20
18-Nov-20
30-Dec-20
29-Jan-21
08-Feb-21
18-Feb-21
23-Feb-21
05-Mar-21
05-Oct-20
15-Oct-20
18-Oct-20
29-Nov-20
29-Dec-20
08-Jan-21
18-Jan-21
23-Jan-21
02-Feb-21
19-Oct-20
29-Oct-20
01-Nov-20
13-Dec-20
12-Jan-21
22-Jan-21
01-Feb-21
06-Feb-21
16-Feb-21
26-Oct-20
05-Nov-20
08-Nov-20
20-Dec-20
09-Jan-21
19-Jan-21
29-Jan-21
03-Feb-21
08-Feb-21
14-Nov-20
24-Nov-20
27-Nov-20
08-Jan-21
02-Feb-21
12-Feb-21
22-Feb-21
27-Feb-21
04-Mar-21
04-Nov-20
11-Nov-20
14-Nov-20
14-Dec-20
13-Jan-21
23-Jan-21
30-Jan-21
04-Feb-21
09-Feb-21
25-Nov-20
05-Dec-20
08-Dec-20
19-Jan-21
08-Feb-21
18-Feb-21
28-Feb-21
05-Mar-21
10-Mar-21
25-Nov-20
05-Dec-20
08-Dec-20
19-Jan-21
08-Feb-21
18-Feb-21
28-Feb-21
05-Mar-21
10-Mar-21
04-Dec-20
14-Dec-20
17-Dec-20
16-Jan-21
05-Feb-21
15-Feb-21
22-Feb-21
27-Feb-21
04-Mar-21
25-Nov-20
05-Dec-20
08-Dec-20
19-Jan-21
08-Feb-21
18-Feb-21
28-Feb-21
05-Mar-21
10-Mar-21
21-Oct-20
31-Oct-20
03-Nov-20
03-Dec-20
23-Dec-20
02-Jan-21
09-Jan-21
14-Jan-21
19-Jan-21
25-Nov-20
05-Dec-20
08-Dec-20
19-Jan-21
08-Feb-21
18-Feb-21
28-Feb-21
05-Mar-21
10-Mar-21
04-Nov-20
14-Nov-20
17-Nov-20
17-Dec-20
06-Jan-21
16-Jan-21
23-Jan-21
28-Jan-21
02-Feb-21
25-Sep-20
05-Oct-20
08-Oct-20
19-Nov-20
09-Dec-20
19-Dec-20
29-Dec-20
03-Jan-21
08-Jan-21
25-Nov-20
05-Dec-20
08-Dec-20
19-Jan-21
08-Feb-21
18-Feb-21
28-Feb-21
05-Mar-21
10-Mar-21
10-Dec-20
20-Dec-20
23-Dec-20
03-Feb-21
15-Mar-21
25-Mar-21
04-Apr-21
14-Apr-21
24-Apr-21
26-Mar-21
05-Apr-21
08-Apr-21
20-May-21
29-Jun-21
09-Jul-21
19-Jul-21
29-Jul-21
08-Aug-21
10-Jun-21
20-Jun-21
23-Jun-21
04-Aug-21
13-Sep-21
23-Sep-21
03-Oct-21
13-Oct-21
23-Oct-21
20-Jun-21
30-Jun-21
03-Jul-21
02-Aug-21
22-Aug-21
01-Sep-21
08-Sep-21
13-Sep-21
18-Sep-21
20-Jun-21
30-Jun-21
03-Jul-21
02-Aug-21
22-Aug-21
01-Sep-21
08-Sep-21
13-Sep-21
18-Sep-21
21-Jul-21
31-Jul-21
03-Aug-21
02-Sep-21
22-Sep-21
02-Oct-21
09-Oct-21
14-Oct-21
19-Oct-21
03-Sep-21
13-Sep-21
16-Sep-21
16-Oct-21
05-Nov-21
15-Nov-21
22-Nov-21
27-Nov-21
02-Dec-21
03-Sep-21
13-Sep-21
16-Sep-21
16-Oct-21
05-Nov-21
15-Nov-21
22-Nov-21
27-Nov-21
02-Dec-21
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
20-Sep-20
20-Sep-20
20-Nov-20
30-Nov-20
17-Jan-21
27-Jan-21
25-Mar-21
14-Apr-21
22-Feb-21
14-Mar-21
08-Mar-21
28-Mar-21
28-Feb-21
20-Mar-21
24-Mar-21
13-Apr-21
01-Mar-21
11-Mar-21
30-Mar-21
19-Apr-21
30-Mar-21
19-Apr-21
24-Mar-21
03-Apr-21
30-Mar-21
19-Apr-21
08-Feb-21
18-Feb-21
30-Mar-21
19-Apr-21
22-Feb-21
04-Mar-21
28-Jan-21
17-Feb-21
30-Mar-21
19-Apr-21
14-May-21
03-Jun-21
28-Aug-21
17-Sep-21
12-Nov-21
02-Dec-21
08-Oct-21
18-Oct-21
08-Oct-21
18-Oct-21
08-Nov-21
18-Nov-21
22-Dec-21
01-Jan-22
22-Dec-21
01-Jan-22
Uganda
National Oilseeds Project
Project Design Report
Annex 8: Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
Document Date:
10/02/2020
Project No.
2000002260
Report No.
5155-UG
Loan ID
2000003281
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
REPUBLIC OF UGANDA 
NATIONAL OILSEEDS PROJECT (NOSP) 
PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION MANUAL 
1 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
PROJECT PURPOSE, OPERATIONAL AREA AND TARGETING ................................................. 1 
A. 
B. 
C. 
NOSP Rationale, Objectives and Structure ......................................................... 1 
Operational Area ............................................................................................ 2 
Target Groups and Targeting Strategy .............................................................. 3 
NOSP INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES ...................................... 12 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
Project Governance Structures ....................................................................... 12 
Lead Agencies and Project Coordination and Management Arrangements ............ 13 
Implementing Agencies ................................................................................. 15 
Partnerships ................................................................................................ 15 
DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES ..................................................................... 37 
COMPONENT 1: OILSEED VALUED CHAIN DEVELOPMENT ................................................. 37 
A. 
B. 
Component Objective and Overall Implementation Approach ............................. 37 
Cluster Development .................................................................................... 38 
Support Production, Productivity and Market Development: Objective and Activity 
C. 
Structure .............................................................................................................. 50 
D. 
NOSP Support to Financial Services ................................................................ 50 
E.  Farm Production Advisors Scheme ..................................................................... 72 
F.  Auxiliary Farm Services Promotion Scheme ........................................................ 76 
G. 
Quality Declared Seed Production Scheme ....................................................... 90 
DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES: COMPONENT 2: MARKET LINKAGE 
INFRASTRUCTURE SERVING OILSEEDS SECTOR .............................................................. 92 
KEY PROJECT PROCEDURES .......................................................................................... 98 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
Planning and AWPB Process ........................................................................... 98 
M&E, Knowledge Management and Communications ......................................... 98 
Financial Management ................................................................................. 113 
Procurement ............................................................................................... 132 
E.  Environmental, social and climate change management procedures ...................... 159 
i 
National Oilseeds Project 
Project Implementation Manual 
PROJECT PURPOSE, OPERATIONAL AREA AND TARGETING 
A.  NOSP Rationale, Objectives and Structure  
1.  Project rationale. Under NOSP, the previous IFAD support to the oilseeds sector will be 
scaled up and made more systematic and sustainable through a market-led approach. This 
approach  is  expected  to  capacitate  and  empower  the  farmers  to  collectively  harness 
bargaining power that will bring the power parity to the sector.  It is also expected that the 
supply  chains  will  result  in  higher  incomes  to  the  smallholder  farmers  through  the 
production,  marketing  and  processing  of  the  by-products  of  the  sector,  through  the 
development of the animal feed industry. This selected NOSP approach is fully in line with 
the  shared  GoU  national  priorities  and  IFAD’s  strategic  focus,  both  aiming  to  reduce 
economic  disparity,  promote  food  security  and  nutrition,  and  to  commercialise  the 
smallholder agriculture in the NOSP area which covers the poorest regions of the country. 
2.  Goal  and  development  objective.  The  project  goal  of  NOSP  is  ”inclusive  rural 
transformation through sustainable development of the  oilseeds sector”. The Programme 
Development Objective is to “to accelerate commercialisation in key oilseeds value chains 
and thereby improve the livelihoods and resilience of the smallholders engaged in oilseed 
production and marketing”. 
3.  Project  Structure.  The  activities  of  the  proposed  NOSP  are  organised  in  two  mutually  
interdependent  components:  (a)  Component  1:  Support  to  Oilseed  Value  Chain 
Development  and  (b)  Component  2:  Support  to  Market  Linkage  Infrastructure  Serving 
Oilseed  Sector.  The  objective  of  Component  1  is  to  facilitate  the  growth  of  competitive, 
inclusive value chains for priority oilseeds and their associated support markets. NOSP will 
accelerate the growth of competitive clusters and value chains for oilseeds and pro-actively 
develop opportunities for further private sector investments in oilseed-related by-products, 
especially to establish a competitive animal feed industry in Uganda. Component 1 consists 
of  two  sub-components:  (a)  Sub-Component  1.1:  Cluster  Development  –  covering  the 
primary  supply  chains  through  an  inclusive  cluster  development  approach  in  each  of  the 
hubs  and  (b)  Sub-Component  1.2:  Support  Production,  Productivity  and  Market 
Development – covering the supply of essential financial and technical services and inputs. 
4.  The objective of Component 2 is to improve market linkage infrastructure to facilitate the 
commercialisation  of  the  oilseed  sector.  The  implementation  of  activities  under  this 
component will facilitate private sector investments in the sector, promote the production 
and marketing of good  quality oilseeds and  reduce the time and  cost  of transport to the 
markets. The component will reduce transaction costs and increase farmers' income through 
improved community access road (CAR) networks. The target is to construct or rehabilitate 
approximately 2,500 km of CARs serving the NOSP clusters. The successful implementation 
of Component 2 is a key prerequisite for the reaching of the productivity, production, and 
household income growth targets of Component 1. 
5.  In addition to these two operational components, the NOSP budget includes allocations for 
the  required  investments  in  project  management  and  coordination,  monitoring  and 
evaluation and knowledge management. 
1 
B.  Operational Area 
6.  NOSP  is  implemented  across  six  area-based  hubs    in  the  agro-ecological  areas  that  are 
optimal  to  support  the  development  of  the  oilseeds  sector  in  Uganda.  The  direct  field 
implementation of NOSP is planned to take place in four existing hubs and two new hubs: 
West Nile, Northern, Mid-Northern, Eastern, Mid-Western, and Karamoja (four of these are 
part of VODP2).  
7.  The  hub  selection  for  NOSP  was  based  on  agro-ecological,  social,  demographic  and 
economic factors including oilseeds production potential, existence of emerging processing 
facilities, entrepreneurial potential among the target groups, the share of the poor in the 
population and the earlier VODP2 activities and their results in the area. These hubs cover 
the poorest regions of Uganda. As per the 2017 data from the National Statistics Bureau, 
the average incidence of poverty1 is highest in the Eastern region at 36%, followed by the 
northern region at 33%, which is considerably higher than the national average of 21.4%2. 
Similarly, households in Uganda’s Northern, Eastern, and Western regions have much lower 
levels  of  human  capital,  fewer  assets,  and  more  limited  access  to  services  and 
infrastructure. 
8.  Within the selected Hubs, the project will be implemented in 75 districts, out of which 49 
participated in VODP2 operations. The districts included in the operational area of the six 
NOSP hubs are listed in Table 1 below. 
Table 1. NOSP Hubs and Districts 
NOSP Hubs 
Districts 
Eastern Uganda 
(23) Kapchorwa, Kween, Manafwa, Namisindwa, Mbale, Sironko, 
Tororo, Kamuli, Iganga, Jinja, Namutumba, Mayuge, Kaliro, 
Palisa,, Bugiri, Busia, Bukwo, Bulambuli, Namayingo, Bugweri, 
Budaka, Buyende and Kibuku 
Gulu 
Lira 
(8) Lamwo, Pader, Kitgum, Gulu, Amuru, Nwoya, Omoro, and 
Agago 
(19) Oyam, Lira, Apac, Kaberamaido, Serere, Katakwi, Alebtong, 
Amolatar, Otuke, Kole, Dokolo, Ngora, Amuria, Soroti,  Kwania, 
Kapelebyong, Kalaki, Bukedea and Kumi. 
Mid-Western 
Uganda 
(9) Masindi,, , Hoima, Kiryandongo, Kikube, Luwero, Nakaseke, 
Kyankwanzi, Kiboga and Nakasongola. 
1 People living below the poverty line of $1.25 (about UGX 4,500) a day. 
2 Uganda National Household Survey 2016/17. 
2 
West Nile  
(10) Adjumani, Arua, Koboko, Maracha, Moyo, Nebbi,  
Yumbe, Zombo, Obongi and Madi-okoro 
Karamoja 
(6) Nakapiripirit, Nabilatuk, Napak, Abim, Amudat and Kabong 
C.  Target Groups and Targeting Strategy 
9. 
Target  Groups.  The  commercialisation  of  the  oilseed  sector  covers  all  actors  along  the 
value  chain  and  the  supporting  infrastructure  required  to  ensure  its  success  and 
sustainability.  NOSP  will  benefit  farmers,  processors,  oilseeds  sector  input  suppliers  and 
service  providers,  agents,  traders,  transporters,  financiers,  and  scientific  and  academic 
research institutions. Among these stakeholders of the sector, the project’s primary target 
and  beneficiary  group  is  smallholder  farmers  (women,  men  and  youth)  engaged  in  the 
production of oilseeds. Smallholder farmers include the farmers whose farm size is less than 
one  hectare  (58%  of  the  total  population  of  smallholder  farmers)  and  those  whose  farm 
size is more than one hectare but less than five hectares (38% of the total population of 
smallholder farmers). 
10.  NOSP will work directly with approximately 120,000 oilseed farming households across the 
six hubs. They can be generally characterised as follows: 
low quality and productivity caused by low quantity and quality inputs  
less well-resourced than commercial-scale farmers  
limited business literacy skills and market orientation 
●  use traditional farming methods/low levels of mechanization 
●  mostly depend on family labour or may hire daily labour  
●  produce relatively small volumes for the market 
● 
● 
● 
●  have limited access to loans and credit 
● 
●  may be excluded from social protection or labour legislation  
●  keep limited records regarding their farms or the economy associated with it 
●  are  exposed  to  changing  and  unreliable  rainfall  patterns  with  poor  or  no  mitigation 
lack knowledge on savings to build capital for investment purposes 
measures 
●  are often the most vulnerable stakeholder in the supply chain  
● 
lack capacity for aggregation/bulking of larger quantities of produce. 
11. 
The  project  will  also  specifically  target  poor  farmers  who  share  many  of  the  following 
characteristics: 
live below the poverty line 
landless or very small land holdings  
female headed households 
illiterate 
● 
● 
● 
● 
●  malnourished  
● 
● 
●  unemployed  
●  earn additional money as casual labourers 
lack access to credit due to lack of collateral security 
lack access to basic services (electricity, medical services, and education) 
3 
●  socially disadvantaged 
●  highly prone to diseases 
●  highly vulnerable to impacts of climate change.  
12.  Among smallholder farming populations, NOSP will, following the key development priorities 
of both the GoU and IFAD, have a strong focus on the inclusion of women and youth in all 
project interventions, and women and youth between 18 and 35 years of age will constitute 
a  direct  target  group  in  each  component  of  the  project.  Their  active  participation  will  be 
ensured through NOPS’s targeting strategies. 
13.  Targeting Strategies. Within the six hubs, the selection and grouping of farmer groups to 
form  the  200  NOSP  clusters  will  be  finalised  during  the  participatory  mapping  at  project 
inception,  which  will  also  define  the  sub-county  and  parish  coverage  within  the  districts. 
NOSP will also conduct a social diagnostic assessment as part of the mapping exercise at 
the  cluster  level  before  the  development  of  the  clusters  and  stakeholder  platforms.  This 
assessment  will  identify  (i) opportunities  for  and  constraints  to  women’s  and  youth’s 
engagement in commercialisation of oilseeds, (ii) potential negative impacts on women and 
other  social  groups  due  to  commercialization,  and  (iii)  approaches  and  interventions  to 
mitigate  these  potential  negative  impacts.  Through  these  assessments,  high  risk 
communities  with  a  critical  gender  imbalance  will  be  identified  and  interventions  will  be 
tailored to mitigate these risks. 
The table below demonstrates the Targeting and Gender Matrix for NOSP: 
Targeting 
Mechanism 
Geographical 
targeting 
Enabling 
measures 
Empowering 
measures 
Self-targeting 
Direct targeting 
Procedural 
measures 
TARGETING AND GENDER MATRIX FOR NOSP 
Elements 
  Districts and sub-counties selected for oilseed crop production 
based on agro-climatic suitability, geographical concentration 
and incidence of poverty. 
  Awareness raising about NOSP commitment to pro-poor growth 
and gender and youth mainstreaming amongst government 
elected representatives and civil society through national, 
district and sub-county project launches. 
  Understanding of the gender and youth issues in the context of 
oilseeds value chain development integrated into capacity 
building for staff at PCU, Hubs, Districts and service providers. 
  Empowering rural poor, specifically women and youth, to 
participate through community sensitisation and mobilisation 
activities and through a targeted communications strategy. 
  Forming and strengthening of farmer groups and clusters in e.g. 
business literacy skills; production; mechanization; access to 
finance and negotiation skills. 
  Household mentoring through the Gender Action Learning 
Systems methodology. 
  Extension and skills development in oilseed crop production. 
  Capacity building for farmer organizations. 
  Quotas for minimum levels of women and youth participation in 
all activities and representation in decision making bodies. 
  PCU responsible for overall NOSP targeting, gender and youth 
mainstreaming. 
4 
  PCU, Hub staff and District administration and leadership 
oriented to poverty targeting and gender and youth 
mainstreaming. 
  Ensuring that service providers and contractors are committed 
to the NOSP poverty targeting, women’s empowerment and 
youth inclusion. 
M&E 
  Collection and reporting on poverty, sex and age disaggregated 
indicators. 
  Poverty, gender and youth issues reflected in baseline, mid-
term review, and all monitoring and impact assessment studies. 
14. 
The clustering will be carried out with a set of criteria including: 
 
concentration and commitment of farmers engaged in the production and marketing 
of oilseeds 
  proximity to each other for clustering to ensure they are not widely scattered across 
the districts 
  proximity to installed oil seeds processing/value addition infrastructure 
  potential for commercialisation and expansion of production of oilseeds 
  poverty and inclusion targets set by the project. 
15. 
The project’s targeting strategy will ensure the inclusion of smallholder farmers, poor and 
marginalized  HHs  who  meet  the  project  selection  criteria,  sharing  many  of  the 
characteristics listed above. It is expected that the percentage of rural poor households will 
be at least proportional to the district poverty rate in each district.  
16.  NOSP  will  specifically  target  women  and  youth  farmers  as  key  producers,  entrepreneurs 
and small-scale processors by providing them with agricultural/business knowledge, skills, 
and  facilitating  their  access  to  labour  saving  machinery.  Likewise,  they  will  also  be 
encouraged to become facilitators in Business Skills and Household Mentoring, in gathering 
market intelligence and in the operation and  maintenance of agricultural machinery. The 
NOSP gender and youth strategy will involve systematic identification of opportunities for 
their  involvement  in  the  supply  chain.  In  each  of  the  supported  supply  chain,  the  entry 
points and opportunities available for women and youth will be identified and priority will 
be given to support the women and young people to take advantage of these opportunities.                                        
17. 
The  inclusion  of  women  and  youth  in  the  project  will  be  further  ensured  through  setting 
clear  participation  targets.  Considering  the  pivotal  role  that  women  play  in  farming  and 
household economy, at least 60% of the project beneficiaries are expected to be women, 
who  will  be  targeted  as  individual  farmers,  active  members  of  farmer  groups  and  as 
processors. At least 30% of the project-supported HHs are expected to be FHHs. NOSP will 
also set clear group governance guidelines that aim to ensure meaningful participation of 
women  and  youth  members  in  key  decision-making  positions  in  group  committees. 
Similarly, in the light of the GoU’s vision and strategy to attract, retain and support youth 
and their employment in the agriculture value chains, youth will be a core target group of 
NOSP comprising at least 40% of the beneficiaries in value chain development. 
18. 
In  Table  2  below,  the  various  targets  groups  of  NOSP  are  presented,  together  with  the 
constraints  they  are  facing  in  their  operations  and  the  support  interventions  included  in 
NOPS to help them tackle their challenges and improve their positions in the oilseed values 
chains.  
5 
Table 2. NOSP Target Groups, Identified Constraints and NOSP Support Provided  
Target groups 
Constraints  
Project Support/Activities 
Smallholder 
farmers growing 
oilseeds  
● poor group organisation and self- 
● 120,000 smallholder farmer HHs 
governance  
● poor management in produce 
collection and bulking  
● limited land to grow oilseeds 
● low yield and quality 
● lack of modern/labour saving 
equipment and technologies  
● inadequate input supply, 
particularly quality seeds 
● lack of access to credit  
● lack of assets for collateral 
● lack of policy-related information 
● poor farm management, 
will be targeted for oilseeds supply 
chain development 
● the percentage of participating poor 
smallholder farmers living under 
the poverty line will be at least 
proportional to the district poverty 
rate in each district 
● formation of farmer groups 
● clustering of producer groups 
● establishment of linkages to 
traders, processors, buyers, FIs 
through facilitation of multi-
stakeholder platforms 
production and post-harvesting 
skills 
● lack of business development 
● capacity-building trainings  
● investment facilitation for private 
and public goods investments 
skills 
● business skills training focusing on 
● lack of access to market 
farming-as-a-business skills 
channels 
● price fluctuations  
● production and harvest affected 
by climate change and 
environment risks 
● financial literacy training 
● availability of avenues with input 
supply, especially quality seeds 
● crop insurance schemes will be in 
place with selected FIs. 
Approximately 30% of the farmers 
are expected to benefit from crop 
insurance. 
● training on nutritious diet and 
innovative uses of oilseeds in the 
diet  
● select farmer groups will be 
supported to become local seed 
businesses/LSBs  
● LSBs will be trained in seed 
production quality management 
systems 
● availability of farm mechanization 
and auxiliary farm service providers  
● development of a national 
curriculum for agricultural service 
provision that focuses on good 
agricultural practices including 
agronomic practices for production, 
post-harvest handling etc. 
6 
New entrant and 
more remote 
oilseeds 
smallholders 
Semi-commercial 
and commercial 
smallholders in 
oilseeds 
concentration 
areas (no more 
than 20% of the 
beneficiaries) 
Women  
  key characteristics: Cash crops 
(cassava, maize, groundnuts), 
cultivate 0.6 - 2 acres, able to 
hire oxen and farm labour;  
  production – limited by lack of 
access to finance; 
mechanization; extension and 
quality inputs 
  post harvest handling and issues 
with aflatoxins 
  lack of transport and lack of 
roads as access to market 
infrastructure 
  key characteristics: Cash 
income from employment, 
pensions, remittances, crops 
(cassava, maize, groundnuts), 
cultivate more than 2 acres, own 
own 1-2 cows, 2-3 goats, several 
chicken; hire labour, own a 
bicycle 
  need for technical production and 
marketing knowledge; 
● limited by access to finance and 
mechanization 
  promotion of high-quality OPV seed 
  promotion of climate smart 
agricultural practices 
  promotion of mechanization and 
use of legume seed inoculants 
● clustering for improved market 
access, bulking and off-take 
services 
  promotion of high-quality OPV 
seed, with move to purchase of 
hybrid seed 
  clustering for improved market 
access, bulking and off-take 
services 
  explore potential of running the 
mechanisation services 
  can be part of farmer group but will 
receive no funds directly from NOSP 
● limited access to capacity 
building opportunities  
● lack of asset/properties for 
collateral  
● at least 60% of the project 
beneficiaries are expected to be 
women 
● at least 30% of project supported 
● limited access to land and 
HHs are expected to be FHHs 
security of tenure 
● at least 40% women are expected 
● lack of access to credit 
● gender discrimination within and 
beyond household 
● use traditional methods are 
particularly labour intensive 
● disproportionate household and 
farm work burden  
● lack of control over income and 
benefits from cash crop 
production 
to be in key decision-making 
positions in farmer group 
committees 
● implementation of Household 
Methodologies (HHMs) 
● training on nutritious diet and 
innovative uses of oilseeds in the 
diet  
● appointment of women Business 
Skills mentors  
● lack of access to inputs, including 
quality seed 
● lack access to agricultural 
● appointment of women HHM/GALS 
mentors (at least 80% women) 
● business skills training focusing on 
information and information on 
climate change and climate-
smart practices  
farming-as-a-business 
● financial literacy training 
● availability of labour saving and 
● vulnerable to climate change and 
environmental risks  
environmentally friendly 
technologies and equipment 
7 
● affected by agricultural 
● participation in sessions on 
expansion activities, increased 
use of agro-chemicals in some 
locations and the road 
infrastructure development 
women’s leadership and negotiation 
capacity 
● women will be encouraged and 
prioritised to become farm 
production advisors and local seed 
business owners (out of around 400 
advisors, at least 50% are expected 
to be women) 
● NOSP-related information will be 
provided widely through various 
media including community radios 
and ensured that women in the 
community receive it 
● MSPs to voice concerns and 
interests of women farmers 
● ESMPs will be developed for the 
road infrastructure development 
● lack of decent employment 
● at least 40% of the project 
Rural youth 
opportunities  
● low interest in agriculture 
● limited opportunities in oilseeds 
supply chains 
● lack of skills/qualifications  
● limited access to land and 
security of tenure 
● vulnerable to climate change and 
environmental risks (agricultural 
expansion activities, increased 
use of agro-chemicals in some 
locations and the road 
infrastructure development) 
Processors/ 
traders/service 
providers 
●  poor quality of produce (high 
aflatoxins) 
●  poor linkages with oilseed 
producers 
●  high transportation costs 
●  lack of platforms to interact and 
maintain relationships with 
oilseeds producers 
8 
beneficiaries are expected to be 
youth 
● jobs created in farming and 
processing units 
● scholarships will be awarded to 60 
postgraduate students to support 
the capacity of existing oil seed 
research programmes  
● youth will be encouraged to 
become business skills mentors  
● youth will be prioritized to become 
farm production advisors and local 
seeds business owners.  
● GALS sessions will focus on specific 
issues of youth and their 
constraints in joining oilseeds 
supply chains 
● ESMPs will be developed for the 
road infrastructure development.  
● MSPs to voice concerns and 
interests of youth in oilseeds supply 
chains 
● MSPs for establishment of linkages 
to smallholder farmers and local 
agro-enterprises 
● community access roads will be 
constructed resulting in reduced 
transportation costs and time  
●  lack of modern equipment and 
technologies 
●  lack of enabling policies 
● investment incentives for auxiliary 
farm services and mechanisation  
Input Suppliers 
●  lack of knowledge of type and 
● NOSP-aggregated information of 
volume of inputs demanded by 
smallholders 
●  poor linkages with oilseed 
types and volumes of inputs 
demanded in project-supported 
clusters 
producers 
●  lack of platforms to interact and 
maintain relationships with 
oilseeds producers 
●  Poor roads and high 
transportation costs 
Transporters 
●  Poor roads and high 
transportation costs 
● MSPs for establishment of business 
linkages to smallholder farmers and 
local agro-enterprises 
● community access roads will be 
constructed resulting in reduced 
transportation costs and time  
● community access roads will be 
constructed resulting in reduced 
transportation costs and time  
Scientific and 
Academic 
Institutions 
●  Lack of linkages and platforms 
to interact with oilseeds sector 
actors 
● MSPs for establishment of business 
linkages to smallholder farmers and 
local agro-enterprises 
●  Poor linkages to smallholder 
producers in different oilseed 
crops 
● Direct NOSP support to carry out 
focused, practical research on 
appropriate inputs, especially 
planting seeds 
●  Lack of funds to conduct result-
oriented research 
● Opportunities to participate in hub 
●  Lack of cooperation with agro-
companies on high quality seeds 
development  
and cluster-level MSPs for 
establishment of linkages to 
smallholder farmers and local agro-
enterprises 
Financial 
institutions  
● limited schemes and services to 
attract smallholder farmers 
clientele 
● 60% of VSLAs are expected to be 
credit-linked with SACCOs and 
other FIs 
● limited capacity to develop 
● technical assistance in product 
innovative products/schemes for 
agricultural development  
development  
● FIs are linked to insurance 
companies for crop insurance 
development schemes  
● training for FI and insurance 
company staff and agents on crop 
insurance and innovative products 
9 
Mainstreaming in NOSP 
10 
11 
NOSP INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
A.  Project Governance Structures 
19. 
20. 
21. 
The project management and implementation structures  will cover the national, hub and 
local government levels. In line with their respective mandates, the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Animal  Industry  and  Fisheries  (MAAIF)  will  be  responsible  for  overseeing  Component  1 
activities,  i.e.  Support  to  Oil  Seeds  Value  Chain  Development.  The  Ministry  of  Local 
Government  (MoLG)  will  oversee  activities  under  Complement  2,  i.e.  Support  to  Market 
Linkage Infrastructure Serving Oil Seed Sector, focusing on community access roads whose 
construction and or rehabilitation is undertaken by District Local Governments. 
The Programme Steering Committee (PSC) will be constituted to provide strategic guidance 
to  programme  implementation,  oversee  programme  planning,  endorse  the  Annual  Work 
Plans and Budgets (AWPB) prior to submission to IFAD, and review implementation progress 
and  impact.  It  will  also  provide  high  level  advice  and  address  key  issues  raised  by 
programme management on which it requires guidance. The PSC shall meet two times in a 
year and on an ad-hoc basis as required. 
The  PSC,  which  will  be  chaired  by  the  PS  MAAIF,  will  be  comprised  of  representatives  of 
public sector and other selected agencies that are actively engaged in the development of 
the oilseeds sector. These will include: MAAIF, MoFPED, MoLG, Ministry of Trade, Industry 
and  Cooperatives  (MTIC);  Ministry  of  Works  and  Transport  (MoWT),  Ministry  of  Gender, 
Labour  and  Social  Development  (MGLSD);  National  Agricultural  Research  Organisation 
(NARO); National Environment Management Authority (NEMA); Uganda National Agro-input 
Dealers Association (UNADA) and Uganda Oil Seeds Producers and Processors Association 
(UOSPA).  In  addition,  IFAD  as  the  lead  funding  agency  will  be  invited  to  attend  the  PSC 
meetings as an observer, when needed. The Projector Coordinator in the PCU (in MAAIF), 
will be the Secretary  of the PSC.  Figure 1 below presents the organisational structure  of 
NOSP. 
22. 
The  Technical  Steering  Committee  (TSC)  will  be  constituted  to  provide  coordination  and 
implementation  support  to  the  two  implementing  Ministries,  and  will  include  members 
directly  involved  with  implemenation.  The  key  role  of  the  TSC  will  be  to:  (i)  coordinate 
implementation  between  the  two  Ministries,  (ii)  monitor  and  guide  implementation  on  a 
regular basis, and (iii) review the Annul Work Plans and Budgets prior to endorsement by 
the PSC.  It is expected that the TSC will meet at least every quarter. The role of the TSC 
will be further defined at start-up. 
12 
Figure 1: NOSP Organisational Structure 
B.  Lead Agencies and Project Coordination and Management Arrangements  
23. 
The lead agencies at national level will be MAAIF and MoLG. MAAIF will establish a Project 
Coordination Unit (PCU), to be responsible for managing the implementation of the Project, 
with  emphasis  on  Component  1.  The  PCU  would  have  a  small  Liaison  Office  in  MAAIF, 
Kampala. The responsibilities of the PCU in MAAIF will include the following core tasks: (i) 
manage effectively project activities and finances, with emphasis on Component 1; (ii) liaise 
with  line  ministries  and  other  agencies  to  ensure  smooth  project  implementation;  (iii) 
procure,  contract,  manage  and  supervise  performance-based  contracts  with  service 
providers as required for different NOSP activities; (iv) prepare project AWPBs for the PSC 
and  IFAD  approval;  (v)  control  the  flow  of  NOSP  funds;  (vi)  develop  and  implement  a 
knowledge management and communication strategy; (vii) report through a participatory 
13 
M&E system to be developed for NOSP; and (viii) submit required project implementation 
progress  and  financial  reports  to  GoU,  IFAD  and  other  stakeholders.    It  will  be  led  by  a 
Project  Manager  and  include  Financial  Controller;  Procurement  Specialist;  M&E  Manager.  
The Mid-Northern Hub, located centrally in the project area, to facilitate close supervision, 
coordination  and  technical  support  of  the  NOSP  field  activities.  will  include  key  positions 
that serve all 6 hubs i.e. Value Chain Leader  and Deputy Manager; Specialists for Social 
Inclusion; Environment and Climate;  KM; Rural Finance; and supporting staff. Draft terms 
of reference for core positions are presented at the end of this section. Support staff will 
include a Secretary, an Administrative Assistant, an M&E assistant, an Assistant Accountant, 
and drivers.  
24.  MoLG  will  establish  a  small  NOSP  Project  Implementation  Coordination  Team  (PICT)  to 
coordinate the market linkage infrastructure component of the project.  As this component 
largely is about delivery of public goods (i.e. community access roads) with implementation 
involving  many  and  different  DLG  staff,  MoLG  is  best  positioned  to  coordinate  its 
implementation.  The  PICT  will  be  comprised  of  a  Coordinator  (seconded  by  MoLG),  an 
Infrastructure  Engineering  Advisor  (seconded  by  MoWT),  a  Financial  Controller;  an 
Environment  and  Social  Specialist;  an  M&E  officer;  a  Procurement  Specialist  and  an 
Accountant. The support staff will include an Accounts Assistant, an Office Attendant and 
two drivers. In addition, five Infrastructure Engineers (one for each hub) and five drivers 
will be recruited and be based in selected hubs, sharing same office premises with the ones 
under  the  PCU  in  MAAIF,  to  support  DLG  technical  teams.  Specific  responsibilities  of  the 
PICT in MoLG will be: (i) manage project activities under Component 2 and IFAD and OFID 
loan funds; (ii) procure, contract, manage and supervise design contracts for CARs in liaison 
with DLGs; (iii) support DLGs in procurement and management of contractors of CAR; (iv) 
liaise with the MAAIF PCU to prepare project AWPBs for PSC and IFAD approval; (v) disburse 
and control the flow of funds for Component 2 activities; (vi) manage for performance all 
activities  under  the  project  Component  2;  (vii)  contribute  to  reporting  through  a 
participatory M&E system; and, (viii) work with the MAAIF PCU to consolidate and submit 
required  project  implementation  progress  and  financial  reports  to  GoU,  IFAD  and  other 
stakeholders. 
25. 
The PCU in MAAIF and PICT in MoLG will be conducting joint planning and review sessions 
to ensure clear harmonisation of their respective components' activities.  
The Project will institute a Project Contracts Committee with fully delegated powers from 
MAAIF and MoLG, and will continue operations until the closure of the Project. 
26.  Hub-level. In each hub, a technical  implementation team of consultants will be hired  to 
lead front-line implementation of  project activities, especially under Component 1.The team 
will  be  comprised  of  the  following  consultants:  (i)  Hub  Coordinator  who  will  be  a  supply 
chain  team  leader,  (ii)  two  Senior  Supply  Chain  Specialists;  (iii)  three  Supply  Chain 
Specialists,  plus  support  staff.  The  responsibilities  of  the  hub-team  will,  among  other 
activities,  include  the  following  key  operations:  supply  chain  brokering,  investment 
facilitation,  producer  group  mentoring  including  business  skills  training,  farm  production 
advisory services and auxiliary farm services. The MSPs in different clusters and hubs will 
be the platform facilitating NOSP activity selection and in the selection process of CARs for 
construction/rehabilitation, together with local governments. 
14 
C.  Implementing Agencies  
27. 
28. 
29. 
Local  Governments.  At  the  district  level,  the  DLGs  will  ensure  that  NOSP  activities  are 
coordinated  within  the  District  Development  Plans  (DDPs)  through  the  District  Technical 
Planning  Committees  (DTPC).  For  Component  2,  implementation  will  take  place 
simultaneously at the  District and Sub-County Local Governments under the guidance  of 
the PICT. Each district will assign a Programme Support Officer (PSO) who will coordinate 
the implementation and technical supervision of the project, including gender sensitization, 
training  and  monitoring  and  evaluation  in  the  respective  districts.  It  will  also  assign  a 
Financial  Officer  who  will  ensure  that  ledgers  are  kept  up  to  date  at  district  level, 
reconciliations are regularly done for audit purposes and funds are properly accounted for.  
The district local governments will: (i) work with MSPs to select locations and beneficiaries 
of projects activities in accordance with the set criteria, with the PCU and PICT assistance; 
(ii) prepare district AWPBs, linked to district development plans (DDP), for consolidation by 
the PCU and PICT; (iii) implement project activities included in the AWPBs; (iv) evaluate 
bidding  documents  for  CARs  and  submit  to  the  PICT  for  review  and  consolidation;(v) 
prepare  district  quarterly  progress  reports  and  consolidated  annual  progress  reports  and 
financial  statements  (where  necessary)  for  the  PICT  and  PCU;  and,  (vi)  monitor  project 
performance and participate in the mid-term and project completion reviews. 
Private service providers (PSPs), which play a key role in NOSP field implementation, will 
be  contracted  to  perform,  among  other  activities,  the  following  tasks:  producer  group 
mentoring  and  graduation  (including  VSLA  development);  business  skills  training,  social 
mentoring,  farm  production  advisory  services,  and  auxiliary  farm  services.  Their 
procurement guidelines are included in the draft NOSP Procurement Manual included in this 
PIM. 
D.  Partnerships 
30.  NOSP  will  develop  synergies  with  the  other  programmes  in  Uganda  to  avoid  duplications 
and enhance the overall impact of the portfolio. It will link with PROFIRA to improve access 
to financial services for NOSP beneficiaries and builds on the PROFIRA’s results to develop 
the  VSLA  model  to  better  serve  the  needs  of  the  smallholder  oilseed  producers. 
Furthermore, the community access roads operations of NOSP benefit from the models and 
results of PRELNOR on infrastructure development in the northern areas of Uganda.  With 
some  overlap  between  PRELNOR  and  NOSP,  the  two  projects  will  work  together  to  have 
ensure that there is clear targeting, and approaches to the way the development of CARs 
are done. IFAD/EU-supported Yield Uganda Investment Fund activities target, among other 
agro-firms,  companies  investing  in  processing  facilities  in  then  oilseeds  industry  and  the 
related animal feed industry with its equity and semi-equity financing products. Key private 
sector  players  are  considering  expansion  to  the  oilseeds  sector  and  NOSP  will  continue 
discussions with them in this respect.NOSP will build strategic and operational partnerships 
with other on-going and pipeline projects funded by GoU and other development partners 
such  GIZ/KfW,  Danida,  DfID,  the  EU  and  USAID  in  the  oilseeds  sub-sector,  especially  in 
overlapping geographic location (see the list a key potential partnership in Table 3 below). 
The  PCU  and  PICT,  together  with  the  hub  implementation  teams  (including  local 
governments),  will  identify  the  potential  partners  in  the  respective  hubs  and  establish 
linkages and modalities of how to complement each other. Where necessary, Memoranda 
of Understanding will be entered into, or some of these partners will be incorporated in the 
MSPs activities at the hub and cluster levels.  
15 
1 
Total 
projec
t 
budge
t 
(US$) 
12.4M 
Annual 
estimate
d budget 
(2019) 
in US$ 
4.8M 
Districts/R
egions   Cov
ered 
Project 
period 
National wide 
(except 
Northeast, 
central) 
Oct 2016 
– 
Dec 
2020 
$25.4 
million 
Arua, 
Zombo, 
Nebbi, 
Kitgum, 
Lamwo, 
Agago  
Table 3: Potential Partners for NOSP 
Fundin
g 
Agency 
RNE 
Danida 
Project 
Main Objectives/ Areas of 
focus 
Implementin
g partners 
Integrated 
Seed Sector 
Developme
nt 
Plus 
(ISSD Plus) 
in 
Recovery 
and 
Developme
nt 
Northern 
Uganda 
Component 
U-
of 
II 
Growth 
(RALNUC) 
security 
Contribute to increased food, 
nutrition 
- 
development  of  a  vibrant, 
pluralistic 
and  market-
oriented seed 
sector. 
To  increase  resilience  and 
create 
equitable 
participation  of  Northern 
Uganda 
the  economic 
development of the country 
  To  increase  agricultural 
production 
and 
marketing for small-scale 
farmers. 
in 
  To 
improve 
the 
agriculturally 
related 
rural infrastructure using 
labour-intensive 
a 
approach. 
  To  build  the  capacity  of 
District 
Local 
Governments to improve 
service delivery. 
WUR-CDI 
  Arua 
District 
Farmers 
Associatio
n (DFA); 
  Zombo 
District 
Farmers 
Associatio
n (DFA) 
  Agency  for 
Accelerate
d  Regional 
Developm
ent 
(AFARD); 
  RALNUC 
Agricultura
l 
Unit 
Agago; 
  RALNUC 
Agricultura
l 
Unit 
Kitgum-
Lamwo; 
1 
  Uganda 
National 
Agro-input 
Dealers 
Associatio
n 
(UNADA); 
  Danish 
Refugee 
Council 
(DRC)  
  Arua 
District 
Farmers 
Associatio
n (DFA),  
  Agency  for 
Accelerate
d  Regional 
Developm
ent 
(AFARD), 
  CARE 
Internation
al,  
  Resilience 
Agricultura
l 
Units 
(RAUs),  
  Danish 
Refugee 
Council 
(DRC) 
  Partners  in 
Value 
Chain 
2 
To  enhance  resilience  and 
equitable 
economic 
development  in  supported 
areas  of  Northern  Uganda, 
including  for  refugees  and 
host communities  
  Promote  climate  smart 
agriculture 
(increase 
agric.  output  for  small 
scale farmers),  
  Construct/rehabilitate 
agriculturally 
rural infrastructure,  
related 
  Construct/rehabilitate 
related 
agriculturally 
physical 
natural 
and 
water  infrastructure  (i.e. 
water 
integrated 
resources  management 
for 
change 
resilience).  
climate 
  Support 
Uganda’s 
progressive 
refugee 
policy  and  the  nexus 
between 
development 
and humanitarian action. 
Improved 
profitability, 
income  and  employment  of 
Danida 
Northern 
Uganda 
Resilience 
Initiative 
(NURI) 
Danida  Support  to 
the 
business 
$43.2 
million 
$7.1 
million 
January 
2018  – 
Decemb
er 2022 
Arua,  Nebbi, 
Zombo, 
Packwach, 
Moyo, 
Adjumani, 
Kitgum, 
Lamwo and 
Agago 
(i.e. 
West 
Nile 
Acholi 
and 
sub regions) 
$34.9 
million 
$6.2 
million 
Whole 
of 
Uganda, with 
special 
a 
2019 
2022 
- 
plan 
of 
Agricultural 
Business 
Initiative 
(aBi) 
UKAID  NU-TEC 
farmers 
and 
Ugandan 
agribusinesses 
  Smallholder 
farmers' 
sustainable  production, 
productivity  and  market 
integration increased 
  Beneficiary 
agribusinesses  business 
performance 
and 
sustainability improved 
  Smallholder  farmers  and 
agribusiness  access  to 
financial 
serviceable 
services increased 
To increase the incomes and 
climate  resilience  of  poor 
men and women in northern 
Uganda by: 
 
 
stimulating 
sustainable,  pro-poor 
growth 
in  selected 
agricultural  markets 
and 
the 
improving 
position  of  poor  men 
and  women  within 
these 
market 
to  make 
systems, 
them  more  inclusive 
for poor people. 
Focus areas: 
  Commodity  markets 
soya 
(sunflower, 
beans and sesame) 
  Agricultural 
inputs 
(seeds and fertiliser) 
on 
focus 
Northern 
Uganda 
Developm
ent (VCD)  
  Partners  in 
Financial 
Services 
Developm
ent (FSD)  
  Financial 
Institution
s 
  Non-
Financial 
Institution
s  
Palladium 
£44.85 
million  
- 
Northern 
Uganda 
May 
2015  – 
April 
2019 
3 
  Storage  and  post- 
harvest handling 
  Mechanisation 
EU 
DINU 
Infrastructure development 
UNCDF 
€150 
million 
- 
Northern 
Uganda 
2018-
2024 
  Food 
security, 
and 
Nutrition 
livelihoods;  
Infrastructures 
(transport, 
water and energy)  
logistics, 
 
  Good governance. 
Infrastructure development 
tbc 
tbc 
tbc 
Northern 
Uganda 
tbc 
GIZ/Kf
W 
Climate 
Adaptation 
Project 
(pipeline) 
4 
1 
TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR KEY NOSP STAFF (in MAAIF) 
Appendix 1: Project Manager 
Reporting  to  the  Permanent  Secretary,  MAAIF,  the  Programme  Coordinator,  will  have  overall 
responsibility  for  ensuring  that  the  Project  achieves  its  expected  outcomes  and  development 
objective, with focus on Component 1.  He/she will lead the management team and staff of the PCU, 
and will be responsible for the effective planning, management, reporting and communication of all 
Project activities. He/she will also ensure compliance with all fiduciary requirements of the Project. 
These  include  Work  Plans  and  Budgets,  Disbursement  of  Funds,  Progress  Reports,  Project  Audit 
Reports, and Withdrawal Applications.   
Specific responsibilities will include the following: 
a)  Lead all key processes of (a) project planning, both through the Annual Work Plan and Budget 
(AWPB) process and on a day-to-do basis; (b) the management of Project implementation; 
and (c) monitoring and reporting on physical and financial progress. 
b)  Directly supervise and support the work of section managers/specialists, ensure that they are 
effectively leading their respective teams, and carry out their annual performance evaluations. 
c)  Ensure  that:  (i)  the  Project  is  implemented  in  accordance  with  the  AWPBs  and  the  Project 
Implementation and Financial Management Manuals; (ii) Project funds flow efficiently and are 
properly  utilized;  (iii)  goods  and  services  are  procured  quickly  and  in  conformity  with  all 
GoU/IFAD  requirements;  and  (iv)  progress  reports  and  audit  reports  are  prepared  and 
submitted to GoU/IFAD in accordance with the prescribed timeliness. 
d)  Identify and guide implementation of training programmes for PCU staff, including technical 
and management aspects and equipment/technology packages; 
e)  Liaise with the Human Resource Department of MAAIF to coordinate the recruitment of Project 
administrative  and  support  staff  in  accordance  with  procedures  detailed  in  the  Project 
guidelines. 
f)  Facilitate  Project  evaluations,  supervision  and  reviews  in  accordance  with  the  Loan 
Agreement,  and  ensure  that  all  recommendations  from  supervision  and  implementation 
support missions are effected and adhered to as agreed. 
g)  Act as the principal spokesperson for the Project and disseminate its objectives, activities and 
achievements, as authorized by MAAIF. 
h)  Collaborate and network with relevant organizations for effective Project implementation. 
i)  Coordinate  and  facilitate  networking  and  liaison  with  other  stakeholders  that  provide 
complementarity and synergy to the Project activities, aims and objectives. 
j)  Act as the link between the private sector partners and Government/MAAIF. 
k)  Act  as  the  Secretary  to  the  Project  Steering  Committee  and  ensure  implementation  of  the 
recommendations of the committees. 
2 
Specific Qualifications 
The candidate should have a solid understanding and experience of the oilseed subsector and be able 
to  provide  visionary  leadership  to  stakeholders  and  PCU  staff.  In  addition  to  these  general 
qualifications, the following specific qualifications are required: 
a)  A Bachelor’s degree in Agriculture, Rural Development, or related field, a Master’s degree in 
Business  Administration,  Agribusiness,  Agricultural  Economics  or  related  field  from  a 
recognized University.   
b)  A  minimum  of  15  years’  experience,  five  of  which  should  have  been  in  the  management, 
financed  agricultural  and  rural 
administration  and 
development projects and five years of experience working with   the private sector. 
implementation  of  public-donor 
c)  Experience of at least five years working on linkages between small-scale farmers and private 
sector actors and practice. 
d)  Demonstrable knowledge of participatory approaches to community development. 
e)  A professional of high standing with strong leadership and management skills. 
f)  Strong negotiation skills 
g)  Knowledge and experience of Government planning and reporting procedures  
h)  Demonstrated experience in networking and policy development. 
Other Essential Attributes: 
a)  Knowledge and experience of Government planning and reporting procedures  
b)  Ability to communicate efficiently and effectively 
c)  Lead teams and demonstrated experience in working with persons of varying professions and 
backgrounds 
d)  Computer literate with very good reporting and presentation skills 
e)  Excellent spoken and written English skills.  
3 
Appendix 2: Financial Controller 
The  Financial  Controller  reports  directly  to  the  Project  Manager  and  is  responsible  for  financial 
management of the project and for maintaining all project accounts in good order.  As head of the 
finance unit, the financial controller will be in charge of all matters in the project accounting cycle. 
The project accounting cycle to be overseen by the Financial Controller starts from financial-related 
inputs  in  AWPB  preparation  and  budget  control,  committing  funds,  disbursements  and  cash  flow 
management in an effective and efficient manner, financial reporting to ensuring smooth audits and 
facilitation for supervision missions on all financial management aspects. The position is based in the 
Lira project office, with frequent travels to the field. 
The  Financial  controller  will  be  responsible  for  expediting  all  loan  management  and  disbursement 
activities through MAAIF systems. Specific responsibilities include but are not limited to the following: 
 
Installation of appropriate accounting/reporting systems to ensure that the PCU and especially 
the Project Manager are regularly informed of on-going financial status and transactions.  
  Ensure timely capture  of  NOSP in the GoU budget  IFMS as  required  by the  GoU budgeting 
processes and calendars to be able to access counterpart funding. 
  Communicate  to  all  implementing  partner  institutions,  service  providers  and  districts  their 
financial responsibilities, the funds available and how to access them, and the requirements 
of reporting and record keeping in accordance with prevailing government practices which are 
acceptable to IFAD. 
  Ensure  that  all  project  funds  are  used  in  accordance  with  the  conditions  of  the  financing 
agreements,  with  due  attention  to  economy  and  efficiency,  and  only  for  the  purposes  for 
which the funds were provided. 
  Ensure that all necessary supporting documents, records and accounts are kept in respect of 
all  project  activities,  with  clear  linkages  between  the  books  of  account  and  the  financial 
statements presented to the financiers. 
  Ensure that designated account and operational accounts are maintained in accordance with 
the  provisions  of  the  financing  agreement  and  in  accordance  with  the  financier’s  rules  and 
procedures. 
  Contribute to the preparation of the Project Implementation and Financial Manuals. 
  Ensure  the  Project’s  Financial  Procedures  as  detailed  in  the  Project  Implementation  and 
Financial  Manuals  are  strictly  adhered  to  by  all  Project  staff  and  executing  agencies  at  the 
national and local levels. 
  Ensure  that  the  financial  statements  are  prepared  in  accordance  with  International  Public 
Sector Accounting Standards as adopted in Uganda. 
  Liaise with external auditors to audit the project accounts to meet the required submission 
dates by both GoU and IFAD. 
  Liaise with the District Accountants from the Project districts and the lead Project agency to 
ensure  that  SOEs  are  prepared  in  timely  manner  and  forwarded  to  Ministry  of  Finance, 
Economic Planning and Development. 
  Process  documentation  and  follow  up  on  disbursements  from  the  government  and  IFAD  to 
ensure  that  releases  are  not  delayed.  Ensure  that  funds  for  project  implementation  are 
disbursed in a timely manner to enable project interventions to be carried out on time. 
4 
Qualifications  and  Experience:  The  candidate  should  have  a  Master’s  degree  in  economics, 
finance, or accounting, and must be a certified public accountant, duly registered with the Institute 
of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda (ICPAU). In addition, he/she should have: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
At least eight years of relevant work experience, including at least four years as a financial 
manager or accountant in government/donor programmes or large institutions; 
Strong managerial skills and demonstrated capacity to manage people and interact with a 
wide range of private sector partners and government representatives; 
Knowledge of work planning, budgeting and reporting; 
Knowledge of IFMS desired;  
Excellent quantitative and analytical skills; 
Computer-literate including accounting packages and well-versed in the use of Excel, Word 
and basic data base set-ups. 
Contract:  Two-year contract, with six months’ probation period, renewable based on performance 
against agreed targets and deliverables. 
5 
Appendix 3: Project Accountant 
The Project Accountant will report to the Project Financial Controller.  
Specific responsibilities include but are not limited to the following: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Follow-up the districts and other implementing agencies for expenditure justifications 
Review eligibility of expenditure in accordance with the financing agreement 
Report on the operation of internal control including budget controls and report any 
deviations 
Prepare project reports to enable the withdrawal of funds from financers and manage the 
overall treasury/ cash flow planning aspects of the project. 
Assess  compliance  with  Uganda  laws  and  regulations  governing  the  operation  of  the 
implementing institutions including accountancy standards and the requirements for audits 
and financial reporting.  
Review external auditor’s reports (Audit Opinions and Management Letters), including any 
qualifications and whether any concerns raised by auditors have been adequately addressed. 
Review  reports  of  IFAD/GoU  supervision  or  review  missions  and  follow-up  on  the 
implementation of agreed to actions. 
Examine  the  financial  management  information  provided  to  Project  Manager,  MAAIF  and 
IFAD, in terms of its adequacy and timeliness.  
Evaluate  programme/project  accounting  procedures  including  the  adequacy  of  financial 
reports in terms of accountability to multiple funding sources.  
Evaluate systems for asset management, provision for asset maintenance and replacement. 
Review  documented  accounting  procedures  and  accounting  manuals  in  terms  of  their 
adequacy, and correspondence between actual and documented procedures. 
Evaluate  annual  work  plan  and  budgeting  procedures,  and  budgetary  control  systems 
applied  to  monitor  actual  expenditures  versus  budget  including  commitment  controls  to 
avoid commitments beyond available resources. 
Review  other  aspects  of  the  accounting  and  financial  control  systems  including:  cash 
management  and  banking;  procurement  of  goods  and  services;  advances  and  acquittals; 
authorisation of expenditure and budget/actual comparisons. 
Qualifications and Experience: The candidate should have a Bachelor’s degree in accounting and 
at least Part II of CPA-U or its equivalent or be a qualified accountant. Other skills and experience 
should include: 
  At least five years of relevant work experience; 
  Knowledge of work planning, budgeting and reporting; 
  Excellent quantitative and analytical skills; 
  Computer-literate including accounting packages and well-versed in the use of Excel, Word 
and basic data base set-ups; 
  Knowledge of IFMS and mapping of the system desirable. 
6 
Appendix 4: Assistant Accountant 
The assistant accountant reports to the Financial Controller and is responsible for ensuring a proper 
accounting filing system for NOSP. He/she will follow up of accountabilities from districts, staff and 
other implementers, as well as appropriate data entry and reconciliations.  
Specific responsibilities include but are not limited to the following: 
  Preparation of source documents, e.g. payment vouchers, journal vouchers; 
  Chronological filing of documents with adequate cross reference to ensure ease of retrieval; 
  Follow up of accountabilities, maintaining a detailed log of outstanding accountabilities; 
  Data entry into the accounting system; 
  Preparation of reconciliations for review by the financial controller; 
  Facilitate both internal and external audits on project’s financial transactions and oversee that 
reports meet the required submission dates by IFAD; 
  Provide support to the Financial Controller in preparation of reports to enable the withdrawal 
of funds from IFAD and GoU; 
  Proactive support to the district designated project support accountants; 
  Maintain key registers such as fixed assets, inputs into the contracts register, and contract 
monitoring forms; 
  Support the Financial Controller in the preparation of informative management accounts in 
the form of monthly, quarterly, semi-annual and annual reports regarding aspects of project 
financial  monitoring,  bringing  out  variances  and  advising  implementers  as  to  the  limits  of 
expenditure; 
  Carry out any other activities that are assigned by the Financial Controller. 
Qualifications and experience: The candidate should have a Bachelor’s degree in accounting 
and at least Part II of CPA-U or its equivalent. Other skills and experience should include:  
 
 
 
At least two years of relevant work experience 
Excellent quantitative and analytical skills; 
Computer-literate including accounting packages and well-versed in the use of Excel, Word 
and basic data base set-ups. 
Contract: 
Two-year contract, with six months’ probation period, renewable based on 
performance against agreed targets and deliverables 
7 
Appendix 5: Rural Finance Manager 
Scope of Work 
The Rural Finance Manager (RFM) is responsible for the Rural Financial Services activities of NOSP. 
The scope of works includes technical assistance for product innovation for VSLA linkage banking for 
agriculture,  value  chain  financing  and  loan  risk  management  for    financial  institutions,  technical 
assistance to SACCOs and other co-operatives, and working with insurance companies for piloting 
and scaling-up crop insurance and facilitate bundled crop insurance products access to the project 
target  groups.  The  RFM  needs  to  work  closely  with  the  formal  financial  institutions,  insurance 
companies and the Agriculture Insurance Consortium at the national, regional and hub level as well 
as with Tier 4 financial institutions from the project area particularly focussing on the linking of VSLAs 
with the formal financial institutions, insurance companies and other service providers in the oil seed 
crop value chain.  
The RFM Specialist works closely with all the Project staff, service providers and related institutions, 
and reports directly to the Project Manager. 
Main tasks and Responsibilities; 
  To take overall responsibility and leadership on the planning, implementation and monitoring 
of the Rural Financial Services activities of NOSP. This involves the preparation and monitoring 
of Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPB), progress reports and analytical reports; 
  Manage  the  rural  finance  activities  in  accordance  with  the  approved  annual  work  plans, 
coordinate and ensure complementarities with Oil Seed Value Chain Development activities; 
  Participate in multi-stakeholder platforms and address issues related to credit and agriculture 
crop insurance; 
  Develop TORs and selection criteria for contracting national technical assistance consultants, 
ensuring quality of their work and providing advisory support as required; 
  Carry  out  due  diligence  of  interested  financing  institutions,  prepare  the  ToRs  for  technical 
assistance  and  develop  partnership  with  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  Agricultural  Credit  Facility, 
financing banks and project to facilitate affordable credit for target groups.  
  Develop  MOUs  with  the  Agriculture  Insurance  Consortium  (AIC),  individual  insurance 
companies, financing institutions, other significant players in the oil seed value chain and the 
project to facilitate crop insurance services.  
  Ensure an assessment of seasonal credit requirement plans for the VSLA members and agri 
businesses and facilitate and monitor flow of credit for financing production; 
  Participate in evaluation committees for selection of co-financing applicants for mechanisation 
and post harvest cleaning equipment and ensure financial services for co financing; 
  Maintain close coordination with implementation partners (banking and financial institutions, 
insurance  companies,  private  service  providers,  NGOs  and  other  stakeholders)  and  ensure 
satisfactory results; 
In close coordination with hub-level agriculture finance consultants, ensure that all policy and 
operational issues are sorted out in a timely manner for flow of financial services; 
 
  Plan, supervise and monitor the trainings on financial literacy trainings for effective results; 
  Assume  a  lead  responsibility  for  the  organisation  of  rural  finance-related  trainings,  study 
tours, conferences and workshops; 
  Provide support and guidance for the gathering of data and information needed to undertake 
an effective monitoring and evaluation of all the rural finance activities; 
  Oversee  the  design  and  establishment  of  channels  for  regular  information  dissemination, 
sharing, and networking among stakeholders including VC members. 
8 
Qualification, Experience and Competence 
Education: University degree in economics, business administration, agri business,  or in a  related 
field. Masters’ degree will be preferred. A certificate in insurance would be an added advantage. 
Experience:  
  Work experience in banking for 15 years out of which at least seven years in agri-banking 
and small farmer and agri-business credit; 
  Experience on implementation of internationally financed projects will be an added 
advantage; 
  Good knowledge of the different national banking and financial institutions, insurance 
companies, concerned with agriculture finance and insurance strong ability and readiness to 
communicate, and work with them; 
Competence 
  Strong communication skills, especially written communications; group facilitation skills; 
  Gender sensitivity in working with both men and women understanding and addressing their 
needs; 
  Team player with ability to work with different stakeholders and programme team; 
  Fluent written and spoken English and national local language. 
  Creative and pragmatic approach to problem solving;  well-organised and well oriented to 
details. 
9 
Appendix 6: Value Chain Team Leader  
Reporting to the Project Manager, the Value Chain Team Leader (VCTL) will lead the delivery of all 
aspects of Component 1 and ensure close coordination between Component 1 and 2 teams and 
activities. The SCTL will manage the Component 1 teams within scope, budget and timeline along 
the commitments specified in the contract signed with IFAD, under the guidance of the Project 
Manager, to achieve high quality and timely results and deliverables agreed for the project. 
Main responsibilities 
  Overall  management,  facilitation  and  supervision  of  Component  1  implementation,  under  the 
guidance of the Project Steering Committee (PSC) through the Project Manager 
  Ensure full integration of Components 1 and 2 activities 
  Provide guidance and leadership to establish and setting up the PCU in MAAIF and respective Hub 
Offices, putting in place the appropriate management, financial and operational procedures for 
project implementation 
  Coordinate and supervise the selection/hiring of competent key project personnel 
  Provide overall guidance and support to PCU in periodically ensuring that the relevant aspects of 
the Project Implementation Manual are adhered to 
  Organise the coordination of IFAD Supervision and Implementation Support missions on Project 
progress  and  ensure  timely  submission  of  AWPBs  and  withdrawal  applications  for  timely 
disbursement 
  Supervise  and  monitor  all  Component  1  activities  and  the  timely  reporting  on  Component  1 
performance and impact to MAAIF, MoLG, MoFPED and IFAD. 
Inclusions aspects 
  Take overall responsibility of project performance on raising smallholder incomes, by including 
poor and near-poor farmers in the NOSP activities. 
  Develop a relevant corporate approach into which both the inclusion and market aspects of the 
Project are integrated.  
 
Inform about the project’s approach to social and economic inclusion in the Ugandan policy and 
development arena.  
Ensure that evidence-based analysis from Project interventions inform IFAD policy and support and 
extend the agenda for inclusive market development for oilseeds in Uganda. 
Experience & qualifications 
At least 10 years work experience in both developmental and private sectors, with emphasis on the 
oilseeds sector, of which at least six years of experience in promotion of Value chain and private 
sector development with demonstrable evidence of the results achieved. 
  Knowledge  and  experience  in  building  capacity  of  stakeholders  and  in  facilitation  of  multi-
stakeholder consultation processes.  
  Experiences that demonstrate creativeness, innovativeness and entrepreneurial skills;  
  Possesses high quality attributes on leadership, facilitations and coaching. 
10 
  Excellent spoken and written English.  
  Proven skills in staff and budget management, networking and external communication.  
  Good interpersonal skills and capacity to work effectively as part of a team.  
  Master’s Degree in Business Administration, Agribusiness Development, Marketing or equivalent 
field.  
11 
Appendix 7: International Value Chain Specialist 
Position: 
International Value Chain Specialist (IVCS) – 1 position (phases out in 
Year 3) 
Reports to: 
Project Manager 
Duty station: 
PCU 
Summary of 
role: 
Mode of 
contract: 
Main 
responsibilities 
The  ISCS  is  the  overall  technical  lead  in  planning,  implementation, 
monitoring and reporting of activities under Component 1 (Support to 
Oilseed  Value  Chain  Development)  and  ensure  effective  coordination, 
management and capacity building of project staff for effective planning 
and timely implementation of activities within Component 1. The ISCS 
is also responsible for the professional development and coaching of the 
national team so that they can run all project activities without external 
support by MTR. The ISCS will also act as a senior advisor to the Project 
Director  and  Value  Chain  Team  Leader  in  the  overall  direction  of  the 
project. 
Rolling  annual  contract  with  a  probation  period  of  six  months.  The 
annual  contract  will  be  extendable  up  to  end  Year  3  based  on 
satisfactory  performance  in  the  preceding  contract  assessed  by  the 
Project Manager and the Steering Committee. 
  Coordinate, coach and mentor the PCU and Hub Value Chain Senior 
Specialists,  Hub  Value  Chain  Specialists  and  other  project 
staff/consultants  on  Value  chain  development  (SCD)  practices  and 
processes  identifying  constraints/opportunities,  developing  visions 
and  strategies,  critical  interventions  for  investments,  relationships 
enhancement,  development  of  enabling  institutions/services  and 
stimulating actual scaling up activities as part of a focused facilitation 
for  specific  Value  chains  in  continuous  multi-stakeholder  platform 
process (MSP). 
  Develop,  with 
training 
the  Management  Team, 
modules/manuals  on  SCD  and  MSPs  and  conduct  training  and 
capacity building activities on Value chain development and market 
system facilitation to project staff at various level. 
specific 
  Support  staff  to  identify  specific  potential  investment  areas  within 
specific  Value  chains  and  facilitate  farmers,  farmers'  organisations, 
processors,  aggregators  and  service  providers  in  jointly  developing 
concept notes and investment/business plans addressing critical SC 
constraints/opportunities. 
  Strengthen capacities of project staff in enhancing service capacities 
of  agribusiness/traders,  producer  groups  and  service  providers, 
within informal and formal contract arrangements. 
  Support staff for brokering “win-win”, trust-based business or service 
relationships among Value chain actors. 
  Support project Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) team to establish 
Value chain baselines for the M&E system and result measurement. 
12 
Experience & 
qualifications 
  Provide  strategic  support  to  hub  teams  for  the  inclusion  of  poorer 
households in developing Value chains investment proposals.  
  Contribute  to  the  knowledge  development  by  generating  lessons 
learnt/cases  in  respective  Value  chains  and  facilitate  knowledge 
exchanges between regions and value chains. 
 Inclusion aspects 
  Develop the results chain for each  Value chain and advise on early 
indications and implications for inclusion objectives.  
  Facilitate  communication  between  regional  hubs  on  inclusion  and 
social mobilisation. 
  Lead  an  induction  workshop  with  key  project  management  staff  to 
support the development of a corporate approach to inclusive market 
development.  
  At  least  15  years  work  experience  in  development  and  private 
sectors, of which at least seven years of experience in promotion of 
Value  chain  and  private  sector  development  with  demonstrable 
evidence of the results achieved 
  Knowledge and experience in building capacity of stakeholders and 
facilitation of multi-stakeholder consultation processes.  
  Performance  record  that  demonstrate  creativeness,  innovativeness 
and entrepreneurial skills.  
  High quality skills on leadership, process facilitation and coaching. 
  Excellent spoken and written English.  
  Proven  skills  in  staff  and  budget  management,  networking  and 
external communication.  
  Good interpersonal skills and capacity to work effectively as part of a 
team.  
  Master’s  Degree 
in  Business  Administration,  Agribusiness 
Development, Marketing or equivalent.  
13 
Appendix 8: Value Chain Deputy Team Leader (SCDTL) 
Based at PCU Lira 
Position: 
Value Chain Deputy Team Leader (VCDTL) – 2 positions  
Reports to: 
NOSP Value Chain Team Leader 
Duty station: 
NOSP Hubs 
Summary of 
role: 
Mode of 
contract: 
The SCDTL will assist the Value Chain Team Leader and the IVCS in the 
overall  technical  leadership  in  planning,  implementation,  monitoring 
and reporting of activities under Component 1 (Support to Oilseed Value 
Chain  Development)  and  ensure  effective  coordination,  management 
and capacity building of project staff for effective planning and timely 
implementation  of  activities  within  Component  1.  The  VCDTL  is  also 
responsible  for  the  professional  development  and  coaching  of  the 
project  team  so  that  they  can  run  all  Component  1  activities  without 
external support by MTR. A critical part of the his/her work is to ensure 
full and active participation of the hub team members from the different 
implementing partners  and to build and maintain strong relationships 
with the parent implementing agencies.  
Rolling  annual  contract  with  a  probation  period  of  six  months.  The 
annual  contract  will  be  extendable  up  to  end  of  project  based  on 
satisfactory performance against agreed performance targets. 
Experience & 
qualifications 
  At least 10 years work experience in the development and/or private 
sectors, including a minimum of:  
i.  five years’ experience in promotion of Value chains and private 
sector development with demonstrable evidence of the results 
achieved 
ii.  five years management experience leading small teams 
  Knowledge  and  experience  in  building  capacity  of  stakeholders  in 
value chains.  
  Experiences  with  MSME  investment  proposal/plan  development, 
appraisal, monitoring and evaluation, and feasibility analysis.  
  Work  record  that  demonstrates  creativeness,  innovativeness  and 
entrepreneurial skills. 
  Demonstrated skills in leadership, facilitations and coaching. 
  Proven  skills  in  staff  and  budget  management,  networking  and 
external communication.  
  Good interpersonal skills and capacity to work effectively as part of a 
team.  
  Good spoken and written English.  
  Master’s  Degree 
in  Business  Administration,  Agribusiness 
Development, Marketing or equivalent.  
14 
Appendix 9: Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Specialist  
Reporting to the Project Manager, the M&E and Learning Specialist will have overall responsibility for 
the coordination of the timely establishment, operation and maintenance of the Project M&E system; 
for  the  generation  of  knowledge  and  evidence  of  the  NOSP  performance  and  results;  and  for  the 
communication of Project activities, achievements and lessons learned. Specific tasks of the M&E and 
Learning Manager will include: 
a)  Consolidate  the  learnings  from  prior  interventions  in  oil  seeds  development  towards  the 
actions that enhance policy development within the sector, specifically assisting the GoU to 
establish enabling conditions for the long-term sectoral development 
b)  Ensure the building of a monitoring and evaluation system that lends towards efficient and 
effective management of the project 
c)   Working in collaboration with other PCU members, oversee the design and development of 
the Project M&E system, its knowledge management agenda, and its communication strategy; 
and ensure that these are coherent and synergistic and support the objectives of the Project, 
and that they are effectively planned and implemented. 
d)  Guide, support, supervise and monitor the work of the M&E Officer, KM and Communication 
Officer and M&E Assistant. 
e)  Be in charge of designing of the central M&E system that will serve the NOSP needs during 
the Project implementation.  
f)  Work in close coordination with all stakeholders to assess the data and information needs for 
the national oilseeds sector database, for Project management and for IFAD’s requirements, 
ensuring that the M&E system is designed in a way that responds to these needs and that 
makes it possible to produce reliable M&E data in timely manner. 
g)  Plan  and  execute  and  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  Surveys  with  a  view  of  informing  NOSP 
management on the progress and areas that require improvement to ensure achievement of 
project objectives 
h)  Planning  and  the  execution  of  Baselines  Studies,  Impact  and  Outcome  Studies  and  Project 
Completion  Studies  in  line  with  the  timelines  of  the  project.    Ensure  that  these  facilitate 
management decision making and progress tracking for the project.  
i)  Work closely with the Finance Unit to ensure that project outputs and outcomes are closely 
linked with project financials to ensure value for money. 
j)  Support  the  KM  and  Communication  Officer  to  develop  an  approach  for  prioritizing  and 
implementing  Knowledge  Management  activities,  and  developing  and  disseminating 
knowledge tools and products. 
k)  Support  the  KM  and  Communication  Officer  to  develop  a  Project  communication  strategy, 
geared towards Project implementers, the target group and stakeholders, and others, both 
within Uganda and outside. 
l)  Lead,  through  interactions  with  different  stakeholders,  in  the  establishment  of  a  conducive 
framework for sustainable scaling–up of oilseed investments. 
m) Lead, guide and coordinate the Project AWPB and budgeting process.  
n)  Oversee timely preparation of quarterly, bi-annual and annual project progress reports, their 
analysis  and  identification  of  lessons  learned  and  potential  bottlenecks  for  Project 
implementation, if/when relevant, and inform the Project management accordingly. 
15 
Qualifications and experience 
(a) Bachelor’s  degree  in  Agriculture,  Economics,  Statistics,  Development  Studies,  Rural 
Development, Planning or related field  
(b) Master’s degree in Agriculture, Agricultural Economics, Economics, or equivalent field. 
(c) Minimum of 10 years’ experience of working at a Senior Position in the field of development, 
planning and ME&L 
(d) A post graduate diploma in M&E will be an added advantage 
(e) Solid knowledge of participatory M&E approaches and techniques. 
(f)  Good knowledge in the development of performance-based indicators. 
(g) Evidence of hands–on experience in data management and analysis 
(h) Demonstrated experience in the techniques of data collection, data entry, data analysis and 
design  of  management  information  systems  to  facilitate  the  planning  and  decision-making 
processes within the institutions 
(i)  Evidence of reporting and report writing skills will be an added advantage 
(j)  Good  knowledge  of  computer  applications  (particularly  MS  Excel,  Word,  Access  and  Power 
point, STATA) will be an added advantage. 
16 
Appendix 10: Communication and Knowledge Management Officer 
Reporting to the M&E and Learning Specialist and working closely with the Monitoring and Evaluation 
Officer,  the  Communications  and  Knowledge  Management  Officer  will  lead  the  development, 
implementation,  evaluation  and  continued  improvement  of  communication  and  knowledge 
management initiatives during the implementation of the Project. 
The Communication and Knowledge Management Officer’s duties and responsibilities will include the 
following: 
a)  Conduct  the  research,  including  stakeholder  analysis  and  needs  assessment,  and  use  the 
survey results to develop and implement creative communication strategy for NOSP. 
b)  Prepare the Knowledge Management Strategy for NOSP. 
c)  Continuously  review  and  improve  the  Project  communication  strategies  and  materials  to 
ensure effectiveness. 
d)  Develop  and  manage  an  annual  production  cycle  of  communication  materials  including 
campaigns  and  information  materials  to  support  awareness  raising,  sensitization  and  key 
messages  (stories,  videos,  photos  etc.)  about  the  Project  and  articulate  them  in  ways 
appropriate to the key stakeholders’ target audiences. 
e)  Provide functional direction to special events in particular with reference to activities in the 
oilseeds sector, such as product launch, the commissioning of works with special emphasis 
on effective use of the media. 
f)  Prepare  user-friendly  information  sheets  that  detail  key  facts  and  figures  about  oil  seeds 
development. 
g)  Liaise with MAAIF communication unit staff and advise PCU staff on media engagement. 
h)  Synthesize  reports  and  write  thematic  case  studies,  lessons  learned  and  stories  about 
successes  emerging  from  NOSP  implementation;  package  them  and  ensure  that  they  are 
shared within the country, with Government and other development partners in and outside 
Uganda.  
i)  Support  the  oil  seeds  policy  development  process,  develop  and  package  targeted  policy 
products as required, and ensure that key stakeholders at different levels are fully informed 
as to the issues in question.   
j)  Ensure that systematic learning and knowledge management are fully embedded in Project 
management and implementation. 
k)  Design  and  implement  training  activities  for  Project  staff,  government  partners  and  other 
project stakeholders, as required, on KM and communication approaches, methods and tools. 
l)  Develop and implement mechanisms to encourage individuals, organizations and functional 
networks to share their experiences for mutual learning. 
m) Carry out other duties related to the Project’s activities, as may be assigned by the M&E and 
Learning Specialist. 
17 
Qualifications and experience 
a)  University  degree  in  mass  communication,  marketing,  journalism  or  a  related  discipline. 
Experience in agriculture and rural development an advantage. 
b)  Minimum of five years of experience in communications in the rural development sector. 
c)  Proven experience in designing and implementing successful communication for sustainable 
development;  
d)  Experience in the sphere of rural development project management and implementation, in 
particular a good basic knowledge of project M&E systems, will be a distinct advantage;  
e)  Experience  in,  or  solid  understanding  of,  use  of  modern  information  and  communication 
technology;  print,  broadcast  media/interactive  digital  media  in  agriculture  and  rural 
development;  
f)  Experience in building relationships with journalists, handling enquiries, pitching features and 
conducting interviews; 
g)  Ability  to  translate  agriculture  and  rural  development  work  into  compelling  stories  using 
excellent editing and copyright skills;  
h)  Ability to draft clear and concise ideas and concepts in written and verbal form with special 
skills in writing press releases, articles, stories for traditional and electronic media; 
i)  Excellent design and production skills; 
j)  Knowledge of current practices in communication research and role of mass media.   
18 
Appendix 11: Procurement and Contracts Manager 
Reporting to the Project Manager, the Procurement and Contracts Manager will have responsibility 
for coordinating and supervising procurement of goods and services for the Project. 
The Procurement and Contracts Manager’s duties and responsibilities will include the following: 
a)  Ensuring the timely planning, controlling and delivery of procurement activities of the Project. 
b)  Liaising with other staff of the PCU and compile all procurement requirements of the Project. 
c)  Preparing periodic reports to Contracts Committee, PPDA and other stakeholders, as required. 
d)  Ensuring  compliance  and  conformity  with  legal  and  regulatory  framework  governing  public 
procurements. 
e)  Providing timely advice to the Project, contracts committee and other stakeholders on matters 
relating to procurement and disposal. 
f)  Preparing  and  updating  the  procurement  plan  and  ensuring  availability  of  funds  for 
procurements and timely payment for procurement commitments. 
g)  Preparing solicitation/bidding documents for procurements and participation in evaluations. 
h)  Providing secretariat services for the contracts committee. 
i)  Guiding suppliers on procurement procedures. 
j)  Give  technical  backstopping  to  Project  implementers  at  different  levels  on  procurement 
matters. 
k)  Prepare advertisements for Project procurements. 
l)  Carry out any other duties related to the Project’s activities as may be assigned.  
Specific Qualifications 
In  addition  to  the  general  qualifications  detailed  above,  the  following  specific  qualifications  are 
required. 
a)  A  University  degree  in  procurement  and  supply  chain  or  procurement  and  logistics 
management or commerce or business administration or economics or an equivalent 
b)  Professional qualifications in purchasing and supply chain management from MCIPS/ISM. 
c)  A Master’s Degree in related field is an added advantage 
d)  10 years’ procurement management experience in a donor-funded projects 
e)  Demonstrated knowledge of the Public Procurement and Disposal processes a requirement. 
f)  Good  knowledge  of  computer  applications  (particularly  MS  Excel,  Word,  Access  and  Power 
point, STATA) will be an added advantage. 
19 
Appendix 12: Environment and Climate Change Specialist 
The  Environment  and  Climate  Change  (ECC)  Specialist  will  lead  the  work  on  environmental 
management, compliance with the Social, Environment and Climate assessment Procedure (SECAP) 
and the climate change adaptation-related activities in the project. The Specialist will also support 
policy  dialogue,  institutional  coordination  and  local  level  capacity  building.  S/he  will  work  in  close 
collaboration with the other members of the  PCU, the designated field officers at district and sub-
county  level  and  any  technical  assistants  recruited  to  support  the  implementation  of  the  relevant 
activities in NOSP.   
Duties and Responsibilities 
The ECC Specialist will be responsible for providing technical expertise in environment and natural 
resources management and climate change adaptation within the context of NOSP. More specifically, 
the ECC Specialist will perform the following tasks: 
a)  Provide technical inputs and guidance in the implementation of the environment and natural 
resources management and climate change adaptation activities under NOSP; 
b)  Provide  inputs  for  measuring  climate  change  resilience  and  improved  natural  resources 
management  among  the  target  beneficiaries  of  NOSP  within  the  project’s  Monitoring  and 
Evaluation system, in close consultation with the M&E staff;  
c)  Ensure the inclusion of climate resilience and environmental management data collection in 
the baseline studies to be undertaken as part of NOSP; 
d)  Coordinate  the  SECAP  related  studies  particularly  for  the  infrastructure  development  and 
agricultural activities and ensure the reviews and approval by NEMA;  
e)  Coordinate  the  development  and  implementation  of  the  Environmental  and  Social 
Management Plans; 
f)  Liaise with the Ministry of Water and Environment counterparts and with the Project Manager, 
engage in ongoing national and regional level policy dialogue; 
g)  Undertake the technical review of environmental management and climate change adaptation 
case studies, maps and technical papers being produced under NOSP; 
h)  Identify the appropriate dissemination channels for the case studies, vulnerability maps and 
other publications to be produced as part of the NOSP; 
i)  Provide training to fill the knowledge and capacity gaps of the various project stakeholders 
including  service  providers  and  the  project  team  in  the  understanding,  planning  and 
implementation of environmental management and climate change adaptation measures; 
j)  Provide  strategic  orientation  in  planning,  implementation  and  monitoring  stages  through 
periodic field visits to project intervention areas; 
k)  Contribute to the preparation of the AWPB; 
l)  Contribute to reporting structures as laid out in the NOSP documentation; 
m) In collaboration with the other Project Management Team members, ensure the recruitment 
for  all  the  national  and  international  technical  assistance  required  for  the  studies  and 
implementation  of  the  environmental  management  and  climate  change  adaptation  related 
activities,  including the  development  of  specific  terms  of  reference,  preparation  of  detailed 
work plans, as well as defining and agreeing on the exact nature and timing of the deliverables 
with each technical assistant;  
n)  Undertake any other duties (related to NOSP activities) as may be assigned by the Project 
Coordinator. 
20 
Qualifications and Experience 
  A  Master’s  degree  in  natural  resource  or  environmental  management,  agriculture  or  rural 
development.  
  At least six years of experience in the field of Climate Change Adaptation or Environment and 
Natural Resource Management with strong knowledge of climate change adaptation. 
  Thorough knowledge of the institutional setting in Uganda with a specific reference to climate 
change  adaptation  and  environmental  management  as  well  as  familiarity  with  all  the 
governmental and non-governmental actors and stakeholders involved in the policy dialogue 
on climate change adaptation at the national level. 
  Thorough  knowledge  of  the  legislative  and  regulatory  framework  on  climate  change, 
environmental  management  and  agriculture  as  well  as  ongoing  projects  and  initiatives 
focusing on climate change adaptation in Uganda. 
  Good knowledge of GIS systems with relevant spatial skills for mapping project areas. 
  Excellent and proven presentation, facilitation and negotiation skills. 
  Good knowledge of communication tools and technologies (internet, Microsoft office packages 
etc). 
  Fluency in oral and written English is essential. 
21 
Appendix 13: Social Inclusion Specialist  
Reporting to the Project Coordinator, specific duties of the Social Inclusion Specialist include: 
a)  Under  the  guidance  of  the  Project  Manager,  serve  as  focal  point  and  advocate  for 
mainstreaming of poverty, gender and youth targeting throughout project activities 
b)  Ensure  that  the  project  activities  are  implemented  in  an  integrated  manner  and  take  into 
account the needs of the local communities and the poor households  
c)  Support local governments and other implementing partners to integrate cross cutting issues 
into project activities to ensure that correct targeting is done  
d)  Assist  the  DCDOs  in  each  district  to  plan  and  undertake  community  mobilization, 
sensitization, community entry, situation analysis, social and institutional mapping, wealth 
ranking, and assessment of existing community groups as a basis for beneficiary selection 
e)  Take  responsibility  for  identification  and  overseeing  the  contracting  of  ToT  for  roll-out  of 
training  for  implementing  partners  and  farmer  groups  in  Gender  Action  Learning  Systems 
(GALS) for oil seeds value chains 
f)  Take  responsibility  for  overseeing  and  back-stopping  the  task  of  Poor  Households'  (HH) 
Support, including but not limited to technical support for contracting of a service provider 
for update of the HH mentoring guide and trainer’s manual including mainstreaming of GALs 
visioning and PRA tools and direct training of district CDO staff and HH mentors.  
g)  Monitor  the  implementation  of  the  services  and  the  outcomes  achieved  by  the  service 
providers  with  regard  to  farmer  group  composition,  social  inclusiveness,  internal  cohesion 
and reciprocal trust 
h)  Maintain working relationships with the GoU ministry(s) responsible for gender, community 
development and youth affairs 
i)  Assist  the  MEL  specialist  to  monitor  the  effectiveness  of  poverty,  gender,  youth  and 
vulnerable group targeting and to draw lessons 
j)  Any other relevant duties as may be assigned by the project coordinator. 
Qualifications and experience:  
He/she should have at least a Master's degree in social science or a field related to rural community 
development. A minimum of 10 years of experience in community development and applied gender 
mainstreaming at project or institutional level. Experience with poverty, gender and youth targeting 
in  agriculture-based  rural  development  programmes.  Mastery  of  Participatory  Rural  Appraisal, 
experience in designing and implementing successful communication and knowledge management 
strategies for sustainable development.  An additional desirable qualification is the familiarity with 
household mentoring approaches and GALS. Other qualifications and experience should include: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rural development project management and implementation 
Good computer skills  
Strong inter-personal skills 
Strong analytical skills 
Self-motivated and creative thinker 
Proven ability to work in teams 
Strong social skills and open-minded personality 
Ability  to  work  independently  and  with  limited  supervision  and  to  deliver  work  under 
pressure. 
22 
Appendix 14: Terms of Reference NOSP Agronomist 
The agronomist will work in close collaboration with the Supply Chain Leader, the Climate 
Change/Environmental Specialist and the Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Specialist to provide 
advice and support to NOSP implementation, to ensure that market-led interventions to enhance 
crop production and productivity are implemented and monitored.  
The Agronomist will provide leadership and technical guidance to support the Farm Production 
Advisor, the Auxiliary Farm Services Promotion and the Quality Declared Seed Production schemes 
under Sub-component 1.2. The Agronomist will coordinate the recruitment of national and hub-
based PSPs and the identification and management of frontline Farmer Production Advisors.   
S/he will coordinate and build strong working relationships between the National Agricultural 
Research Organisation (NARO), the Zonal Agricultural Research and Development Institutes 
(ZARDIs), financial institutions, market actors and PSPs, as well as with the decentralized 
structures of MoA in the hubs.  She/he will contribute to building the capacity of the Service 
Providers (SPs) to deliver better quality services to farmers more efficiently and effectively.  
The agronomist will be based in Lira and reporting directly to the Project Manager.  Specific duties 
of the Agronomist include, but are not limited to the following:  
Project Implementation 
  Provide  overall  strategic  guidance  on  agronomic,  farming  systems,  seed  systems, 
mechanization and demonstration practices to achieve the market development objectives 
  Assist in the preparation of the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) 
 
In  collaboration  with  NARO,  ZARDIs  and  the  Climate  Change/Environmental  Specialist 
evaluate new varieties and climate resilient agricultural practices  
  Support NARO, ZARDI and Makerere university seed support activities 
  Develop the MoU, recruit and supervise  the National and Hub based PSPs in achieving their 
agreed results-based activities  
  Participate in the coordination workshops and meetings at PMU and hub levels 
  Work closely with relevant staff and promote nutrition, gender, HIV/AIDS and environment 
mainstreaming in extension approaches; 
Capacity Strengthening 
  Supervise the National PSP in the development of a training curriculum to ensure it is relevant 
and appropriately written for oilseed producing smallholder farmers.  
  Supervise training of the Farm Production Advisors (FPA) in required extension methodologies 
and technical innovations. 
  Coordinate capacity building initiatives between the financial services, mechanization, seed 
services and FPA schemes. 
  Provide support for the harmonization of the various existing participatory extension delivery 
services being used in the target hubs; 
  Assist  MoA  staff  in  improving  their  capacity  of  information  and  knowledge  sharing  and 
documentation; 
23 
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning: 
 
In coordination with the PMU Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning specialist, provide guidance 
to  NOSP  and  partners  in  the  design  and/or  enhancement  of  participatory  M&E  tools  and 
protocols to strengthen data collection, analysis and reporting. 
  Assist  in  the  design  and  implementation  of  baseline,  mid-term  and  final  evaluations  and 
ensure follow-up of findings/recommendations to improve program quality 
  Prepare contributions to progress reports; 
Qualifications and experience: She/he should hold at least a Master’s degree in agricultural 
sciences with particular emphasis on extension, agronomy and/or soil science. Other attributes / 
experience should include: 
 
Innovative,  energetic  individual  with  demonstrated  contributions  to  the  field  of  agriculture 
and committed to seeing measurable impacts at farm level.  
  5 to 10 years  of working experience with participatory extension approaches in technology 
transfer in the Ugandan context. 
  Demonstrated  capacity  to  take  on  a  leadership  position  with  strong  managerial  skills  and 
capacity to manage people and interact with a wide range of private sector partners and public 
sector  representatives,  as  well  as  managers  and  implementers  of  large-scale  rural  / 
community / SME development programmes. 
  Competency in field data collection, monitoring, analysis and reporting. 
  Working experience in private sector engagement.  
  Excellent communication skills - including fluency in English. 
The position is based in Lira with frequent technical support and supervision visits to other hubs in 
Lira, Gulu, Eastern, Mid-western Uganda, Bunyoro and Karamoja 
Contract: Two-year contract, with six months’ probation period, renewable based on agreed 
performance targets and deliverables 
24 
Appendix 15: Office Administrator 
Reporting to the Financial Controller, the Office Administrator will provide administrative support to 
the project. 
Duties and responsibilities of the Office Administrator will include;  
a)  Manage the front office and operate the telephone exchange of the PCU  
b)  Project a good image of the project by courteously and expeditiously responding to inquiries 
and queries from visitors. 
c)  Ensure appropriate faxing, mailing, filing, compiling, transcribing and making project meeting 
appointments with relevant stakeholders. 
d)  Maintain hard copy and electronic filing system for the Project. 
e)  Coordinate and maintain records for PCU staff, office space, phones and office keys. 
f)  Maintain and distribute PCU staff weekly travel schedules and coordinate travel itineraries for 
visitors to the project including those of mission members. 
g)  Be responsible for logistics including booking of accommodation in Kampala and in the Project 
area and allocation of the travel vehicles and drivers. 
h)  Schedule meetings/events and remind the relevant persons on the meetings. 
i)  Open, sort and distribute incoming correspondence, including faxes and emails. 
j)  File and retrieve organizational documents, records and reports. 
k)  Arrange for the repair and maintenance of office equipment. 
l)  In liaison with Communications Department, assist in special events, commissioning of works, 
product launch, and annual review workshops etc. 
m) Oversee all aspects of general office coordination and guide visitors and interns to responsible 
offices. 
n)  Supervise the project drivers and Office Attendants. 
o)  Carry out other duties as may be assigned by the NOSP management. 
Specific Qualifications 
The following specific qualifications are required: 
a)  An honours degree in Business Administration, Administration Studies or a related field 
b)  Demonstrated training and/or experience in performing secretarial and administration work 
is required 
c)  At least five (5) years’ experience in general office responsibilities and procedures 
d)  Knowledge  of  principles  and  practices  of  organizing,  planning,  records  management  and 
general administration 
e)  Ability  to  operate  standard  office  equipment,  including  but  not  limited  to,  computers, 
telephone systems, copiers and facsimile machines.  
25 
TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR KEY STAFF OF PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION COORDINATION 
TEAM (PICT) IN MOLG 
Appendix 16: Project Coordinator 
Reporting  to  the  Permanent  Secretary,  MoLG,  the  Project  Coordinator  (seconded  by  MoLG)  in  the 
PICT will have overall responsibility for ensuring that the Project achieves its expected outcomes and 
development objective, with focus on Component 2.  He/she will lead the management team in PICT, 
and will be responsible for the effective planning, management, reporting and communication of all 
Component 2 project activities. He/she will also ensure compliance with all fiduciary requirements of 
the Project. These include AWPBs, Disbursement of Funds, Progress Reports, Project Audit Reports, 
and Withdrawal Applications.   
Specific responsibilities will include the following: 
l)  Lead all key processes of project planning, both through the AWPB process and on a day-to-
do basis; management of Project implementation; and monitoring and reporting on physical 
and financial progress. 
m) Ensure  that  (i)  the  Project  is  implemented  in  accordance  with  the  Annual  Work  Plan  and 
Budgets  (AWPBs)  and  the  Project  Implementation  and  Financial  Management  Manuals;  (ii) 
Project  funds  flow  efficiently  and  are  properly  utilized;  (iii)  goods,  works  and  services  are 
procured quickly and in conformity with all GoU/IFAD requirements; and (iv) progress reports 
and audit reports are prepared and submitted to GoU/IFAD in accordance with the prescribed 
timeliness. 
n)  Liaise with the Human Resource Department of MoLG to coordinate the recruitment of PICT 
technical and support staff in accordance with procedures detailed in the Project Guidelines. 
o)  Facilitate  project  evaluations,  supervision  and  reviews  in  accordance  with  the  Loan 
Agreement,  and  ensure  that  all  recommendations  (pertaining  to  Component 2)  from 
supervision and implementation support missions are effected and adhered to as agreed. 
p)  Collaborate  and  liaise  regularly  with  his/her  counterpart  in  PCU  in  MAAIF  to  ensure 
harmonisation  of  both  project  components  and  consolidation  of  the  AWPBs  and  periodic 
reports.  
q)  Coordinate and facilitate networking and liaison with other stakeholders/ projects that provide 
complementarity and synergy to the Project activities, aims and objectives. 
Other requirements: At least 7 years’ experience in practical project management, in the managing 
and or supervising similar donor-funded projects. 
26 
Appendix 17: Infrastructure Adviser 
Reporting to the Programme Coordinator in the PICT, the Infrastructure Adviser will be a senior civil 
engineer,  nominated  by  MoWT  to  support  implementation  of  CARs  under  NOSP.  He/she  will  be 
responsible  for  all  technical  aspects  of  the  programme  infrastructures.  He  will  be  responsible  for 
technical  assurance  during  the  design,  construction  and  early  operational  phase  (defects  liability 
period), field supervision during execution phase and ongoing support to the beneficiary districts and 
other project needs. The main duties and responsibilities will include: 
a)  Oversee  and  lead  the  production  of  engineering  designs,  including  the  verification  and 
checking of  calculations, specifications, scheme designs and Project Reports for CARs  from 
beneficiary Local Government and ensure that they are carried out as per Ministry of Works 
and Transport Standards.  
b)  Lead the supervision of the team of Infrastructure Engineers and District Technical Staff for 
the successful delivery of sub-projects to meet the targets and time deadlines. 
c)  Provide  technical  backstopping  and  advice  to  District  Works  Departments  through  out  the 
planning, budgeting and implementation phases of infrastructure developments. 
d)  Support 
the 
rehabilitation/construction of selected rural infrastructures sponsored under the programme.  
the  districts 
supervision 
contractors 
involved 
the 
of 
in 
in 
e)  Provide  technical  backstopping  to  Districts  in  the  procurement  of  contractors  for 
rehabilitation/ construction  of  CARs, ensuring adherance to established donor procurement 
guidelines and the PPDA Act.  
f)  Any other duties as assigned from time to time by the Project Coordinator in the PICT.  
Other requirements: At least seven years’ experience in managing and or supervising donor-
funded infrastructure works. 
27 
Appendix 18: Civil Engineers (5 vacancies, 1 for each hub) 
Under the direct supervision of the Infrastructure Advisor, the Engineers (to be based in each hub 
office)  will  be  responsible  for  overall  guidance  and  management  of  the  community  access  roads 
investment-related  activities  under  NOSP  in  accordance  with  GoU  regulations  and  approved 
procedures  for  supervision  of  design  and  civil  works.  The  civil  engineers  will  be  responsible  for 
supervising and guiding activities of contractors that due regard is given to the quality and quantity 
of  works  to  be  implemented  throughout  project  operations.  Within  this  overall  role,  the  following 
tasks will be the specific responsibility of the Civil Engineers: 
 
In cooperation with the PICT and PCU (in MAAIF) relevant staff, review and assess proposals 
from  the  local  governments  for  community  access  roads  (CAR)  works  with  regard  to  their 
technical feasibility and preliminary cost estimation, and agreed selection criteria; 
  Assist the LGs to set up and train road and market construction committees in their roles and 
responsibilities; 
  Assess the appropriateness of proposed structures; 
  Develop  ToR  for  design  works  for  selected  access  roads  and  for  independent  reviewers  of 
design documents; 
  Participate in MoLG/DLG bid opening and evaluation committees for evaluation of all bids for 
design services and construction contracts; 
  Review and comment on Evaluation Reports provided by the District Contracts Committees 
for  civil  works  implementation  and  develop  consolidated  Bid  Evaluation  Reports  and 
recommendations for contracts award for IFAD review and no-objection; 
  Supervise  design  works  and  review  detailed  design  solutions  in  terms  of  sound  technical 
solutions, quality and identified scope and volumes of works; 
  Participate and contribute in discussions with District Engineers, Design Contractors and other 
interested parties in decision making during design stage and review detailed design solutions 
in terms of feasibility; 
  Supervise the implementation of civil works to ensure quality and timeliness, and accordingly 
endorse certificates of satisfactory work completed, for payment. 
  Participate in the development of AWPBs, provide reports and information on infrastructure 
investment  operations  as  necessary  to  the  PICT  and  PCU  M&E  specialist  and  project 
coordinators, and contribute to progress reports. 
Qualifications and experience: 
(a) A higher degree or an equivalent qualification in Civil Engineering with sound 
knowledge of contemporary issues in the rural infrastructure of Uganda. 
(b) A minimum of seven years working experience with projects for infrastructure 
rehabilitation  including  design  and  construction  supervision  with  proven 
ability  to  work  in  a  multidisciplinary  team  and  with  rural  population. 
Familiarity  with  engineering  design 
requirements  and  construction 
supervision  procedures  of  Uganda,  as  well  as  with  the  procurement 
procedures  applicable  under  the  legislation  of  Uganda  and  foreign  donors’ 
funded programmes. Computer literate. 
(c) A  pragmatic,  creative  and  energetic  approach  to  problem  solving  and 
decision-making and the capacity to operate effectively with contractors and 
rural populations. 
Contract:  Two  years  contract,  with  six  months’  probation  period,  renewable  based  on  agreed 
performance targets and deliverables. 
28 
Appendix 19: Project Accountant 
The  Project  Accountant  in  the  PCIT  reports  directly  to  the  Project  Coordinator  of  the  PICT  and  is 
responsible  for  financial  management  of  Component  2  and  for  maintaining  all  project  accounts  in 
good order. As head of the finance unit, the financial controller will take charge of all matters in the 
project accounting cycle, related to Component 2. The project accounting cycle to be overseen by 
the financial controller starts from finance-related inputs in AWPB preparation and budget control, 
committing funds, disbursements and cash flow management in an effective and efficient manner, 
financial reporting to ensuring smooth audits and facilitation for supervision missions on all financial 
management aspects.  
The  Project  Accountant  will  be  responsible  for  expediting  all  loan  management  and  disbursement 
activities through GoU systems. Specific responsibilities include but are not limited to the following: 
 
Installation  of  appropriate  accounting/reporting  systems  to  ensure  that  the  PICT  and 
especially  the  Project  Coordinator  are  regularly  informed  of  on-going  financial  status  and 
transactions.  
  Ensure timely capture of NOSP's  Component 2  in the GoU budget  IFMS as required by the 
GoU budgeting processes and calendars to be able to access counterpart funding. 
  Communicate to DLGs their financial responsibilities, the funds available and how to access 
these  funds,  and  the  requirements  of  reporting  and  record  keeping  in  accordance  with 
prevailing government practices which are acceptable to IFAD. 
  Ensure  that  all  project  funds  are  used  in  accordance  with  the  conditions  of  the  financing 
agreements,  with  due  attention  to  economy  and  efficiency,  and  only  for  the  purposes  for 
which the funds were provided; 
  Ensure that all necessary supporting documents, records and accounts are kept in respect of 
all  project  activities,  with  clear  linkages  between  the  books  of  account  and  the  financial 
statements presented to the financiers; 
  Ensure that designated account and operational accounts are maintained in accordance with 
the  provisions  of  the  financing  agreement  and  in  accordance  with  the  financier’s  rules  and 
procedures; 
  Contribute to the preparation of the Project Implementation and Financial Manuals; 
  Ensure  the  Project’s  Financial  Procedures  as  detailed  in  the  Project  Implementation  and 
Financial  Manuals  are  strictly  adhered  to  by  all  Project  staff  and  executing  agencies  at  the 
national and local levels; 
  Ensure  that  the  financial  statements  are  prepared  in  accordance  with  International  Public 
Sector Accounting Standards as adopted in Uganda; 
  Follow-up the districts and other implementing agencies for expenditure justifications 
  Review eligibility of expenditure in accordance with the financing agreement 
  Report on the operation of internal control including budget controls and report any deviations 
  Prepare  project  reports  to  enable  the  withdrawal  of  funds  from  financers  and  manage  the 
overall treasury/cash flow planning aspects of the project. 
  Assess  compliance  with  the  Uganda  laws  and  regulations  governing  the  operation  of  the 
implementing institutions  including  accountancy  standards  and  the  requirements  for  audits 
and financial reporting.  
29 
  Review external auditor’s reports (Audit Opinions and Management Letters), and ensure that 
any qualifications and concerns raised by auditors have been adequately addressed. 
  Review  reports  of  IFAD/GoU  supervision  or  review  missions  and  follow-up  on  the 
implementation of agreed actions. 
  Liaise with external auditors to audit the project accounts to meet the required submission 
dates by both GoU and IFAD; 
  Liaise with the District Accountants from the Project districts to ensure that SOEs are prepared 
in timely manner and forwarded to Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and Development; 
  Process documentation and follow up on disbursements from the government and IFAD/OFID 
to  ensure  that  releases  are  not  delayed.  Ensure  that  funds  for  project  implementation  are 
disbursed in a timely manner to enable project interventions to be carried out on time 
Qualifications  and  Experience:  The  candidate  should  have  a  Master’s  degree  in  economics, 
finance, or accounting, and must be a certified public accountant, duly registered with the Institute 
of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda (ICPAU). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
At  least  eight  years  of  relevant  work  experience,  including  at  least  four  as  a  Financial 
Manager or Accountant in government/donor programmes or large institutions. 
Strong managerial skills and demonstrated capacity to manage people and interact with a 
wide range of private sector partners and government representatives; 
Knowledge of work planning, budgeting and reporting; 
Knowledge of IFMS is an advantage;  
Excellent quantitative and analytical skills; 
Computer-literate including accounting packages and well-versed in the use of Excel, Word 
and basic data base set-ups. 
Contract:  Two-year  contract,  with  six  months’  probation  period,  renewable  based  on  agreed 
performance targets and deliverables 
30 
Appendix 20:  Environment and Social Specialist 
The  Environment  and  Social  (ESS)  Specialist  will  lead  the  work  on  environmental  and  social 
management, compliance with the Social, Environment and Climate assessment Procedure (SECAP) 
and the climate change adaptation-related activities in the project. The Specialist will also support 
policy  dialogue,  institutional  coordination  and  local  level  capacity  building.  S/he  will  work  in  close 
collaboration with the other members of the PICT and PCU, the designated field officers at district 
and  sub-county  level  and  any  technical  assistants  recruited  to  support  the  implementation  of  the 
relevant activities in NOSP.   
Duties and Responsibilities 
The ESS will be responsible for providing supportive technical expertise in environment and natural 
resources management and climate change adaptation within the context of NOSP. He/she will also 
be  responsible  for  establishment  and  compliance  of  the  social  safeguards  as  prescribed  for  NOSP 
interventions:  More specifically, the ESS will perform the following tasks specific to Component 2: 
a)  Support technical inputs and guidance in the implementation of the environment and natural 
resources management and climate change adaptation activities under NOSP; 
b)  Support  in  providing  inputs  for  measuring  climate  change  resilience  and  improved  natural 
resources management for Component 2, in close consultation with the M&E staff;  
c)  Ensure the inclusion of climate resilience and environmental management data collection in 
the baseline studies to be undertaken as part of NOSP; 
d)  Coordinate  the  SECAP  related  studies  particularly  for  the  infrastructure  development  and 
agricultural activities and ensure the reviews and approval by NEMA;  
e)  Coordinate  the  development  and  implementation  of  the  Environmental  and  Social 
Management Plans; 
f)  Liaise with the Ministry of Water and Environment counterparts and with the Project Manager, 
engage in ongoing national and regional level policy dialogue; 
g)  Identify the appropriate dissemination channels for the case studies, vulnerability maps and 
other publications to be produced as part of the NOSP; 
h)  Contribute to the preparation of the AWPB; Under the guidance of the Project Manager, serve 
as  focal  point  and  advocate  for  mainstreaming  of  poverty,  gender  and  youth  targeting 
throughout project activities 
i)  Ensure  that  the  project  activities  are  implemented  in  an  integrated  manner  and  take  into 
account the needs of the local communities and the poor households  
j)  Assist the DCDOs in each district to plan and undertake community mobilization, sensitization, 
community  entry,  situation  analysis,  social  and  institutional  mapping,  wealth  ranking,  and 
assessment of existing community groups as a basis for beneficiary selection 
k)  Assist the MEL specialist to monitor the effectiveness of poverty, gender, youth and vulnerable 
group targeting and to draw lessons 
l)  Facilitate  measures  to  ensure  the  role  of  women  as  decision  makers,  implementers  and 
leaders in infrastructure development in addressing local content in the Oil seed production is 
realised. 
m) Supporting  community-based  initiatives  for  sustainable  rehabilitation,  management  and 
operation of basic Community access roads infrastructure; 
n)  Faciliate  the  implementation  of  the  project  and  Support  community  development  Officers, 
environment officers in implementing their functions through out the project life cycle; 
o)  Preparing  reference  materials  for  training  of  the  community  based  Project  Management 
Committees  such  as  the  Infrastructure  Management  Committees,  and  other  stakeholders 
involved in implementation of programme  activities at District, Sub-county and community 
level. 
31 
p)  Monitor  prepararions  and  implementation  of  contracts  social  management  Plan  including 
among others prevention of Gender based violence against children, compliance t labour laws, 
STDs and HIV Prevention and mitigation Plans. 
q)  Facilitate  the  district  Local  Governmets  in  developing  and  supervising  the  community 
developent Action plans and review prgress reports by Local Governments. 
r)  Sensitize  staff  and  other  stakeholders  including  cotractors  and  communities  on  safeguards 
requirements for NOSP infrastructure projects including rights and Obligations of all parties 
involved. 
s)  Prepare regular and adhoc social reports for management action.  
t)  Undertake any other duties (related to NOSP activities) as may be assigned by the Project 
Coordinator. 
Qualifications and Experience 
  A Master’s degree in environmental and community development.  
  At least three years of experience in the field of Climate Change Adaptation or Environment 
and Natural Resource Management with strong knowledge of climate change adaptation, and 
at least five years of community development experience.   
  Experience with poverty, gender and youth targeting in agriculture-based rural development 
programmes is preferred.  
  Good computer skills  
  Strong inter-personal skills 
  Strong analytical skills 
  Self-motivated and creative thinker 
  Proven ability to work in teams 
  Strong social skills and open-minded personality 
  Ability to work independently and with limited supervision and to deliver work under pressure. 
  High degree of honesty and integrity with no criminal record, result oriented and proactive.  
  Experience  and  skills  in  undertaking  social  assessments,  developing  plans  and  supporting 
social action plan implementation.  
  Thorough knowledge of the institutional setting in Uganda with a specific reference to climate 
change  adaptation  and  environmental  management  as  well  as  familiarity  with  all  the 
governmental and non-governmental actors and stakeholders involved in the policy dialogue 
on climate change adaptation at the national level. 
  Basic knowledge of GIS systems with relevant spatial skills for mapping project areas. 
  Excellent and proven presentation, facilitation and negotiation skills. 
  Good knowledge of communication tools and technologies (internet, Microsoft office packages 
etc). 
  Knowledge and experience in stakeholder analysis, engagement and managing conflicts. 
  Fluency in oral and written English is essential. 
32 
Appendix 21: Monitoring and Evaluation Officer 
Reporting to the Project Coordinator in PICT and assisting the M&E and Learning Specialist in the 
coordination  of  the  timely  establishment,  operation  and  maintenance  of  the  Project  M&E  system 
under the Infrastructure development Component in  generation of knowledge and evidence of the 
NOSP performance and results; and for the communication of Project activities, achievements and 
lessons learned. Specific tasks of the M&E Officer will include: 
a)  Consolidate  the  learnings  from  prior  interventions  in  oil  seeds  development  towards  the 
actions that enhance policy development within the sector and draw lessons from previous 
project that linked Agricultural Value chain to  road access and marketability of agricultural 
produce for the long-term sectoral development 
b)  Identify  and  formulate  lessons  learned  from  NOSP,  document  and  share  best  practices  for 
scaling up, replication or integration into future projects 
c)  Ensure the building of a monitoring and evaluation system that lends towards efficient and 
effective management of the project 
d)  Working in collaboration with other PCU members, oversee the design and development of 
the Project M&E system, its knowledge management agenda, and its communication strategy; 
and ensure that these are coherent and synergistic and support the objectives of the Project, 
and that they are effectively planned and implemented. 
e)  Work in close coordination with all stakeholders to assess the data and information needs for 
the national oilseeds sector database, for Project management and for IFAD’s requirements, 
ensuring that the M&E system is designed in a way that responds to these needs and that 
makes it possible to produce reliable M&E data in timely manner. 
f)  Plan  and  execute  and  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  Surveys  with  a  view  of  informing  NOSP 
management on the progress and areas that require improvement to ensure achievement of 
project objectives 
g)  Coordinate  with  the  Monitoring,  Evaluation  and  Learning  specialist  in  the  Planning  and  the 
execution of Baselines Studies, Impact and Outcome Studies and Project Completion Studies 
in line with the timelines of the project.   Ensure that these facilitate management decision 
making and progress tracking for the project.  
h)  Work  closely  with  the  Finance  Unit  at  PICT  and  PCU  to  ensure  that  project  outputs  and 
outcomes are closely linked with project financials to ensure value for money. 
i)  Participate in the coordination of the Project AWPB and budgeting process.  
j)  Oversee timely preparation of quarterly, bi-annual and annual project progress reports, their 
analysis  and  identification  of  lessons  learned  and  potential  bottlenecks  for  Project 
implementation, if/when relevant, at PICT and inform the Project management accordingly. 
k)  Organise and coordinate project/component reviews and periodic meeting, 
l)  Coordinate Project Mission activities 
Specific Qualifications and Experience 
  A minimum of a Master’s degree in Economics,social Sciences, development studies, 
project management or related discipline and extensive training, and solid experience 
in Monitoring and Evaluation functions; 
  Minimum of 6 Years experience of working in the fied of Monitring and Evaluation of 
Government Projects/Programs. 
33 
  A post graduate diploma in M&E will be an added advantage 
  Solid knowledge of participatory M&E approaches and techniques. 
  Good knowledge in the development of performance-based indicators. 
  Evidence of hands–on experience in data management and analysis 
  Demonstrated experience in the techniques of data collection, data entry, data analysis 
and design of management information systems to facilitate the planning and decision-
making processes within the institutions. 
  Evidence of reporting and report writing skills will be an added advantage 
  Good  knowledge  of  computer  applications  (particularly  MS  Excel  Advanced,  Word, 
Access and Power point,) will be an added advantage. 
34 
Appendix 22: Accounts Assistant 
The Account Assistant reports to the Financial Controller in the PICT and is responsible for ensuring 
that  a  proper  accounting  and  filing  system  operates  for  Component 2.  He/she  will  follow  up  of 
accountabilities  from  districts,  staff,  and  other  implementers,  as  well  as  data  entry  and 
reconciliations.  
Specific responsibilities include but are not limited to the following: 
  Preparation of source documents, e.g. payment vouchers, journal vouchers 
  Chronological filing of documents with adequate cross reference to ensure ease of retrieval 
  Follow up of accountabilities, maintaining a detailed log of outstanding accountabilities 
  Data entry into the accounting system 
  Preparation of reconciliations for review by the Financial Controller 
  Facilitate both internal and external auditors to audit the project’s financial transactions and 
reports to meet the required submission dates by IFAD 
  Support the Financial Controller in preparation of reports to enable the withdrawal of funds 
from IFAD/OFID and GoU 
  Proactive support to the district designated project support accountants; 
  Maintain key registers such as fixed assets, inputs into the contracts register, and contract 
monitoring forms 
  Support the Financial Controller in the preparation of informative management accounts in 
the form of monthly, quarterly, semi-annual and annual reports regarding aspects of project 
financial  monitoring  bringing  out  variances  and  advising  implementers  as  to  the  limits  of 
expenditure 
  Carry out any other activities that are assigned by the Financial Controller. 
Qualifications and experience: The candidate should have a Bachelor’s degree in accounting 
and at least Part II of CPA-U or its equivalent. Other skills and experience should include:  
 
 
 
At least two years of relevant work experience 
Excellent quantitative and analytical skills 
Computer-literate including accounting packages and well-versed in the use of Excel, Word 
and basic data base set-ups. 
Contract: 
Two-year contract, with six months’ probation period, renewable based on agreed 
performance targets and deliverables 
35 
Appendix 23: Procurement Specialist 
Reporting to the Project Coordinator in the PCIT, he/she will have responsibility for coordinating and 
guiding DLGs in procurement of contractors for community access roads. 
The Procurement Specialist's duties and responsibilities will include the following: 
a)  Ensuring the timely planning, controlling and delivery of procurement activities of the Project. 
b)  Liaising  with  other  staff  of  the  PICT  and  consolidating  all  DLG  works  procurement 
requirements of the Project. 
c)  Preparing periodic reports to Contracts Committee, PPDA and other stakeholders, as required. 
d)  Ensuring  compliance  and  conformity  with  legal  and  regulatory  framework  governing  public 
procurements. 
e)  Providing  timely  advice  to  the  PICT,  DLGs,  contracts  committees  on  matters  relating  to 
procurement and disposal. 
f)  Preparing  and  updating  the  Procurement  Plan  and  ensuring  availability  of  funds  for 
procurements and timely payment for procurement commitments. 
g)  Preparing solicitation/bidding documents for procurements and participation in evaluations. 
h)  Guiding potential bidders for civil works and suppliers on procurement procedures. 
i)  Prepare advertisements for NOSP procurements under Component 2. 
j)  Carry out any other duties related to the project’s activities as may be assigned.  
Specific Qualifications 
In  addition  to  the  general  qualifications  detailed  above,  the  following  specific  qualifications  are 
required. 
g)  A  University  degree  in  procurement  and  supply  chain  or  procurement  and  logistics 
management or an equivalent 
h)  Professional qualifications in purchasing and supply chain management from MCIPS/ISM 
i)  A Master’s Degree in related field is an added advantage 
j)  10 years’ procurement management experience in a donor-funded projects 
k)  Demonstrated knowledge of the Public Procurement and Disposal processes a requirement. 
l)  Good  knowledge  of  computer  applications  (particularly  MS  Excel,  Word,  Access  and  Power 
point, STATA) will be an added advantage. 
36 
DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES  
COMPONENT 1: OILSEED VALUED CHAIN DEVELOPMENT 
A.  Component Objective and Overall Implementation Approach  
30. The  objective  of  Component  1  is  to  facilitate  the  growth  of  competitive,  inclusive  value 
chains for priority oilseeds and their associated support markets. NOSP will accelerate the 
growth  of  competitive  clusters  and  value  chains  for  oilseeds  and  pro-actively  develop 
opportunities  for  further  private  sector  investments  in  oilseed-related  by-products, 
especially to establish a competitive animal feed industry in Uganda. To be truly sustainable, 
the  commodities  and  production  practices  must  be  well-suited  to  local  agro-climatic 
condition, both now and in the future as the climate changes (see Figure 1). The clusters 
for NOSP support will be selected based on the criteria outlined in this PIM. A critical part 
of the selection process is the detailed analysis of each of the proposed commodities and 
associated small-scale production systems to establish that there are viable and affordable 
investment pathways that are accessible to the target group. 
Figure 1: NOSP’s Nexus of Opportunity 
Sustainable  
production viable 
 in local agro-ecological 
conditions (current and 
future) 
NOSP 
Market  
demand  
is credible  
and buyers  
are interested 
Small  
farmers  
can compete 
and make  
a good living,incl. 
women  
and youth 
31. In addition, NOSP will support a small number of  ‘demonstration’ clusters in downstream 
supply chains that add value to the primary supply chain, especially related to soy, such as 
animal  feed  and  smallholder  commercial  livestock.  Performance  of  these  demonstration 
clusters will be reviewed at MTR to assess if they are an effective mechanism for further 
contributing to the development objectives or can be scaled up in a subsequent investment. 
32. This  component  consists  of  two  sub-components  designed  to  invest  in  the  pro-active 
development of mutually beneficial commercial linkages of smallholders in NOSP-supported 
oilseeds value chains, in the enhancement of the market-orientation and business skills in 
the producer groups, and in the development of the productive potential and resilience of 
farming  households  in  oilseed  producing  areas.  The  two  sub-components  are  (i)  Cluster 
Development, covering the primary supply chains through an inclusive cluster development 
approach  in  each  of  the  hubs  and  (ii)  Support  Production,  Productivity  and  Market 
Development, covering supply of essential financial and technical services and inputs. The 
activities of Component 1 will be implemented jointly by the NOSP supply chain staff and 
37 
experts,  contracted  private  service  providers  and  the  key  stakeholders  in  the  oilseed 
industry. 
33. The  NOSP  activities  under  Sub-component  1.1  fall  into  two  categories:  (a)  supply  chain 
brokering and investment facilitation and (b) producer group mentoring. 
B.  Cluster Development  
(a) Supply Chain Brokering and Investment Facilitation 
Cluster selection and verification 
34. Cluster  selection  and  validation.  For  each  supported  commodity,  the  potential  for  local 
cluster development will be re-confirmed by an initial rapid scan in Year 1. This will evaluate 
buyers' demand, analysis of the cluster primary actors and supporters, and attractiveness 
of opportunities to smallholders, especially the next generation of younger farmers and to 
women and men – each of whom may have differing interests and constraints.  The agro-
climatic suitability of the crop to the local area will also be reconfirmed, given future climate 
projections. An opportunity verification workshop will be held for each oilseed crop in each 
cluster. The findings and evidence from the rapid scans will be presented to representatives 
of the primary actors (producers, buyers, suppliers) to validate the conclusions and confirm 
if  there  are  credible  opportunities  and  commitments  sufficient  to  justify  the  programme 
proceeding with the specific commodity or cluster. 
35. Social  Diagnostic  Assessment.  NOSP  will  appoint  social  inclusion  and  climate/adaptation 
specialists  at  PCU  to  ensure  social  inclusion  and  climate  related  issues  are  taken  into 
consideration  and  associated  strategies  are  thoroughly  implemented.  For  mainstreaming 
purposes,  their  inputs  in  group  and  cluster  formation  and  member  selection  is  critically 
important. As part of the mapping exercise at the cluster level before the development of 
the clusters and stakeholder platforms, NOSP will conduct a social diagnostic assessment 
within each hub at the cluster level to identify social dynamics that should be addressed in 
the  design  and  implementation  of  the  project.  Through  this  assessment  high  risk 
communities with a critical gender imbalance will be identified and intervention approaches 
will  be  tailored  to  mitigate  these  risks.  The  assessment  will  analyse  important  gender 
differences in agricultural roles in the production, processing, marketing and sale of oilseeds 
across  the  hubs  in  a  systematic  way  to  identify:  i)  opportunities  for  and  constraints  to 
women’s  and  youth  engagement  in  commercialization  of  oilseeds,  ii)  potential  negative 
impacts on women and other social groups due to commercialization, and iii) approaches 
and interventions to mitigate these potential negative impacts. Based on this assessment 
intervention  approaches  will  be  tailored  to  mitigate  these  risks.  The  assessment  will  be 
conducted by the service providers in each Hub, accessing any additional expertise for the 
analytical aspects as may be required. 
36. Gender and youth mainstreaming during producer group and cluster development. Social 
norms and practices may limit women’s ability to substantively participate in and benefit 
from male-led clusters. Cluster facilitators who are not cognisant of these limitations may 
not know how to support their inclusion. Therefore, during the cluster development stage, 
mobilization  of  new  producer  groups  will include  hub  staff  trained  in  social inclusion  and 
gender dynamics who will support women to form women’s groups (which could be women-
only or women-led, i.e., all leadership are women) and facilitate their formation. Discussion 
about the implications of gendered decisions about membership and leadership will also be 
facilitated with producers. Depending on the prevalence of women’s producer groups in a 
locality  focusing  on  the  same  crop,  women-led  clusters  will  also  be  formed.  Similarly, 
discussions  about  the  youth-focused  or  youth-led  producer  groups  will  be  held.  For  all 
38 
producer groups (new and existing), support for creation of women’s VSLAs as part of group 
activities will be offered. 
37. Given the group-based approach and facilitated stakeholder dialogues, special consideration 
will be given to gender and other social dynamics, particularly age, in the organization and 
management  of  farmer  groups  to  ensure  the  active  participation  of  women  and  other 
marginal groups so that their priorities and concerns are reflected in the development of 
the cluster and hub plans.  This will include specific targets for women-led groups in areas 
where women’s active participation in mixed groups is limited and where women prefer this 
approach.  Such  groups  do  not  necessarily  need  to  exclude  men  as  members,  but 
membership should be majority women with women leadership. All facilitators/brokers will 
be trained in gender dynamics to solicit input from women and youth and other marginal 
groups in mixed groups to ensure that their priorities are reflected in investment plans and 
selection of services. 
Multi-stakeholder platforms (MSP) 
38. Clusters  and  MSPs.  The  core  of  the  supply  chain  and  cluster  development  approach  is  a 
rolling process of action-oriented brokering, dialogue and investment facilitation among the 
key actors in each cluster/hub to catalyse investments and remove bottlenecks to increase 
trading and profits and make the most of practical opportunities for growth. MSPs will be 
conducted by commodity at two levels, cluster and hub. 
39. MSP meetings will be held regularly (initially at least 2 times per year) at the cluster and 
hub level in each cluster, initially facilitated by the programme team but later jointly by the 
producers  and  businesses  themselves.  NOSP  will  invite  interested  stakeholders  from 
commercial  service  providers  and  suppliers  (of  technical  or  financial  services  or  inputs), 
government departments, research institutions, insurance companies etc to be members of 
the MSP and to attend the meetings. As the supply chain and cluster growth becomes more 
mature the frequency of MSP may be adjusted as required but should be at least once per 
year in all cases. The MSP meetings will identify practical opportunities and bottlenecks for 
developing  their  cluster  and  corresponding  priorities  for  individual  or  joint  actions.  The 
meetings  foster  trust  among  the  different  stakeholders  and  creates  greater  common 
understanding  of  the  opportunities  and  challenges.    MSPs  are  the  perfect  conduit  for  an 
enhancing a sense of ownership, developing knowledge, creating linkages between different 
governance levels and a wide variety of actors (including policymakers and scientists), and, 
most  significantly,  improved  policy  formulation.  Therefore,  NOSP  MSPs  are  expected  to 
enhance an enabling policy environment at the national and regional levels by the use of 
the  evidence  that  is  being  derived  from  and  driven  by  the  stakeholders.    Policy  related 
issues emerging from the MSPs will be captured by supply chain specialists and the M&E&L 
specialist to feed into enhancement of exisitng policies supporting the oilseeds sub-sector 
(responsibility of the Project Coordinator).   
40. Investment  planning.  The  result  of  the  MSP  meeting  is  a  non-binding  cluster  action  plan 
that identifies investment priorities for private and public investments3 and follow-up actions 
by  the  programme  and  other  stakeholders.  The  rolling  cycle  of  MSP  meetings  creates  a 
practical mechanism to locally coordinate the support of the various government and non-
government initiatives that are relevant and active in the local area. 
41. Business-to-business (B2B) follow-up. Shortly after the MSPs (normally within 1-2 weeks), 
bilateral follow-up meetings should take place, typically between a business (either a buyer 
or supplier) and a set of producers who met during the MSP and who have identified specific 
opportunities to do business together. The B2B follow-up meetings will focus on developing 
3 Including investment for community access roads in Component 2 
39 
and  negotiating  practical  trading  plans  between  producers  and  buyers/businesses. 
Experience  suggests  that  it  may  take  three  or  more  follow-up  meetings  before  a  final 
agreement  is  negotiated  depending  of  the  scale  and  complexity  of  the  proposed 
deal/arrangement.  In turn, the agreed trading plans will often lead to the need for specific 
actions  or  investments  to  be  made  by  the  producers,  buyer/business  or  both.  The 
investments and actions may be taken individually or jointly, depending on what has been 
agreed.  Similarly,  follow  up  meetings/interactions  will  also  take  place  between  service 
providers  (financial,  technical,  business)  and  producers/traders  in  utilizing  the  available 
services and products. 
42. The diagram on the next page presents the key features of the cluster/MSP-based processes 
of  NOSP  and  identifies  the  participants  in  this  market-based  value  chain  development 
process.   
40 
41 
Investment facilitation 
43. Private investment facilitation. The MSP and B2B meetings will identify areas where 
investment plans are needed. These should be prepared by the producers and SMEs.  
It  is  important  that  such  plans  are  well informed,  credible,  realistic  and  based  on 
sound technical and business analysis without being unduly complicated. In many 
cases, small producers and SMEs may require specific technical support to prepare 
well-informed  investment  plans  that  can  be  presented  to  financial  institutions  for 
financing.  NOSP  will  facilitate  those  requiring  support  to  acquire  it  from  suitably 
experienced  service  providers,  with  a  strong  preference  for  commercial  service 
providers.  Businesses  requiring  additional  technical  support  in  developing  their 
detailed investment plans will also be supported by NOSP to identify and buy-in the 
necessary  advice.  Where  the  investments  are  expected  to  require  additional 
technical or business advice during implementation, the costs of such advice must 
be  included  in  the  investment  plans  themselves.  Such  advice  may  be  in  terms  of 
better understanding climate risks to the proposed investment, but also to identify 
technologies or strategies that can help mitigate those risks. 
44. Loan financing. Where required, the programme will facilitate cluster participants to 
link to partner FIs to apply for loan finance if needed for their investments. Bank, 
MFI  and  savings  and  credit  co-operative  officers  are  expected  to  already  be 
participating in the MSPs and cluster process, and therefore should be increasingly 
familiar  with  the  market  opportunities  and  risks  by  the  time  the  loans  application 
begin  to  be  received.  The  expected  sources  of  finance  for  different  types  if 
investment is outlined in Sub-comp 1.2, but can be summarized below: 
Loan size 
Investor 
Likely source of loan finance (if required) 
<US$1,000 
$1,000 
- $15,000 
$15,000 
 - $100,000 
individual farmers/ 
individual service provider 
individual farmers or 
producer groups 
VSLAs – either from its own lending capital or with 
additional funds via linkage banking 
Mature VSLA - either from its own lending capital or 
with additional funds via linkage banking 
Commercial banks, including project partner banks 
SME/mature producer group  Commercial banks, including project partner banks 
  SME 
45. Public investment facilitation. A variety of public goods investments are anticipated 
to  be  needed  to  help  grow  competitive  and  inclusive  clusters.  These  may  include 
hardware  (e.g.  upgrading  of  testing  facilities,  infrastructure)  and  software 
investments (e.g. market research of new markets or action research on improved 
varieties or production technologies to improve resilience in specific AEZs. There are 
already numerous ongoing government and non-government support initiatives that 
need to be linked to NOSP. NOSP will actively encourage them to participate in the 
MSP processes at either hub or cluster level and help develop a more coordinated 
support  response.  The  MSP  process  will  create  a  common  understanding  of  the 
opportunities and constraints in the clusters and the relative roles that each can play 
in addressing these with their resources.    
46. For  the  NOSP-supported  six  MSPs  operating  at  the  hub  level  in  the  main  oilseed 
production  regions,  a  key  target  is  to  pro-actively  facilitate  private  sector 
investments in value addition operations with the oilseed cake. It is expected that 
as  a  result  of  NOSP  activities,  the  volumes  of  oilseed  procured  by  the  processors 
from smallholders will rapidly increase. This will create a basis for the establishment 
of viable large-scale processing facilities for animal feeds. NOSP-supported hub-level 
MSPs  will  be  used  as  platforms  to  inform  agro-enterprises  of  improved  business 
42 
opportunities in this sub-sector as the volume of available seed cake grows. For the 
interested  firms,  NOSP  will  provide  projections  of  future  oilseed  processing  levels 
and offer targeted support for nsility studies aiming at the establishment of animal 
feed  plants.  NOSP  will  also  liaise  with  the  EU/IFAD-supported  Yield  Uganda 
Investment  Fund  to  link  companies  interested  in  animal  feed  production  to  the 
financing and business development services of this Kampala-based development-
oriented equity fund. 
(b) Producer Group Mentoring 
47. Group formation and mobilisation. The NOSP target is that all producer groups   
(whether  formally  registered  or  not)  should  graduate  to  being  fully  independent, 
financially robust and self-managing within four years of project engagement, with 
a majority of group members and their households having the skills and confidence 
to grow their farm enterprise, managing climate risks and with fewer social barriers 
to  their  development.  Mobilization  of  individuals  and  households  into  clusters  and 
programme activities will be led by a team of market-oriented Economic Mobilizers 
(EM) in each hub, with support from the hub Supply Chain teams. In working with 
small producers in supply chains, including smallholder farmers, the programme will 
be free to work with existing producer groups and organizations, and mobilize new 
producer groups to create a critical mass of 500-600 households in a cluster, who 
can  engage  with  input  and  output  market  service  providers.  As  a  general  guide, 
based on past experience, existing groups should only be used as the entry point if 
a majority of their members want to join the specific commodity cluster concerned. 
If not, new producer groups should be mobilized. 
48. It is expected that the starting point for each commodity in each community may 
fall into one of three categories and the detailed mobilization process may be fine-
tuned to accommodate these different starting points: 
  Existing active producer group focused on the target commodity, many of whom will 
have been supported by VODP2 
  Existing production of the target commodity by many farmers but not organized in 
a producer group 
  Minimal  current  production  of  target  commodity  by  farmers  and  no  organized 
producer groups 
49. Where production of the commodity is new to the local area or only very traditional 
production  practice  are  applied,  the  mobilization  process  is  expected  to  include 
additional steps to either demonstrate the intended production system in the local 
setting or exposure visits to other producers in similar conditions for the producers 
interested. 
50. Activities under the sub-component will focus on three areas: 
a)  Producer groups mentoring and graduation, including operation of a VLSA in all 
groups 
b)  Business skills training to all group members 
c)  Social mentoring of group members and their households, based on the GALS 
approach 
51. Related to NOSP group formations and selection, women and youth often lack access 
to information on agriculture, climate change and other development opportunities. 
Many  factors,  including  women’s  time  burden  and  social  norms  around  who  gets 
invited  to  trainings  and  limited  mobility,  may  hinder  women’s  participation  in 
43 
trainings, meetings, and agricultural demonstrations. Understanding and addressing 
the constraints to women’s participation in group trainings or demonstrations at the 
local  level  can  help  identify  strategies  for  increasing  women’s  involvement. 
Therefore, with the aim to reduce gender-based barriers to participation, NOSP will 
schedule meetings at safe and convenient times and locations, providing childcare 
or allowing children to participate wherever possible.  
52. Similarly,  group  composition  also  matters—whether  husbands  and  wives  attend 
meetings jointly or women attend in single sex groups depends on the social context. 
When  women-only  groups  or  events  are  initiated  it  may  be  necessary  to  provide 
men and/or community leaders with information about the purpose of these groups 
so that they support women’s attendance. In addition, the call for bids for various 
services/training as outlined in the cluster investment plans will require applicants 
to  provide  a  description  of  their  approach  to  ensure  social  inclusion  and  mitigate 
social and environmental risks. 
53. Producer  groups  mentoring  and  graduation.  This  will  be  delivered  through 
coaching  of  the  group  in-line  with  the  natural  stage  of  development  of  the  group 
itself and its next target level of development given its own plans in the cluster and 
beyond. This coaching also involves the use of self-diagnostic and self-improvements 
tools, so each group can “own” its development process and regularly benchmark its 
strengths  and  weakness  against  objective  measures.  Mentoring  is  expected  to  be 
provided for approximately 4 years for newly mobilized groups, on a reducing basis. 
For  more  mature  groups,  such  as  some  from  VODP2,  approximately  2-3  years  of 
mentoring under NOSP are envisaged while they increasingly commercialize. 
54. Where sufficient numbers of women are motivated to do so, NOSP will support them 
to mobilize their own producer groups, not to the exclusion of men as members but, 
where women want to ensure they hold the leadership roles in their own group. All 
supported producer groups will be offered the  opportunity to set-up and run their 
own VLSA if they wish to (see VSLA section below). 
55. Business skills training. Skills training for farmers are vital if they are to succeed 
in the supported clusters. Being better able to assess the likely cost and benefits of 
investing  in  their  farming  enterprise  will  equip  rural  households  to  make  more 
informed  choices  as  to  the  real  affordability  of  finance  and  loans  to  support  their 
farm investments. It is especially important that young women and men gain these 
business skills and so will be prioritized for these activities. 
56. Business  skills  training,  focused  on  farming  as  a  business,  will  be  provided  to  all 
interested  individuals  in  a  cluster  through  a  peer-to-peer  process.  Business  Skills 
Mentors (BSMs) will be nominated by each group from among their peers and will 
then be trained to provide business skills in their local community. They will be paid 
by  the  programme  for  delivering  training  sessions  and  are  expected  to  gain  high 
levels of skill and confidence, contributing increasingly to supporting the preparation 
of  farm  investment  plans  and  helping  with  collective  negotiations  between  their 
group and traders / buyers. As residents in their community, these skills will remain 
after the programme and continue to be available to support their peers in the future 
in  preparing  investment  plans,  loan  applications  or  joint  negotiations  with  new 
buyers  and  so  enabling  easy  replication  and  scaling-up  of  successful  models.  The 
scope of the business skills training will focus on:  
  Financial literacy and household economy; 
  The importance of saving and how to do it; 
  Farming  as  a  household  business,  including  record  keeping  and  climate 
resilience considerations (similarly for other non-farm household enterprises); 
44 
  The changing climate and how to factor it in to your business decisions; 
  Group management and governance for business purposes; 
  Commercialization, marketing and negotiation – becoming a reliable player in 
the market. 
57. On climate resilience, the producers will be guided through a facilitated process to 
re-confirm  that  the  product  for  the  cluster  they  have  chosen  to  join  is  a  sensible 
choice for them individually given the local agro-ecological conditions and expected 
local impact of climate change. The process will also help farmers to consider if there 
are  specific  ‘no  regrets’  adaptation  or  investments  to  their  intended  production 
practices  and  investment  plans  that  would  increase  the  climate  resilience  of  their 
farm investments, thereby reducing the chances of failure. 
58. A  lead  technical  service  provider  will  be  procured  to  upgrade/design  the  business 
skills training materials to be used by the Business Skills Trainer as we as the ToT 
for the cascade training down via the Economic Mobilization teams in each hub. The 
lead technical service provider will work closely with the PCU M&E team and Supply 
Chain teams to design appropriate farm business diaries to be used in the business 
skills  training  and  integrated  into  the  MIS  system.  The  lead  service  provider  will 
deliver ToT to the Master trainers working for the Private Service Providers (PSP) in 
each hub. They will also provide ongoing supervision and quality assurance of the 
delivery of the training by the different PSP. Teams of Economic Mobilizers in each 
hub, contracted by the PSPs, will deliver ToT training to the Business Skills Mentors 
and  provide  on-going  backstopping  and  follow-up.  They  will  also  administer  all 
payments and support to the BSMs for their activities. 
59. Social Mentoring. To improve the chances of reaching its development and impact 
targets, NOSP activities will include the implementation of Household Methodologies 
(HHM)  that  encourage  participatory  household  visioning,  livelihood  planning,  and 
promote gender-sensitive farm business development to ensure that households are 
able  to  maximize  their  socio-economic  progress.  The  HHMs  are  participatory 
methodologies  that  enable  family  members  to  work  together  to  improve  relations 
and decision-making, and to achieve more equitable workloads.  
60. NOSP  will  roll  out  HHMs  through  group-based  implementation  and  individual 
household mentoring by trained mentors. The methodologies will enable farmers to 
identify  common  areas  of  gender  inequality  limiting  women’s  and  youth’s 
development specifically in value chains and household/community progression. The 
roll-out of HHMs will be coordinated by the Social Inclusion Specialist in the PCU.  
61. At  group  level  mentoring,  Gender  Action  Learning  System  (GALS)  participatory 
visioning and action planning tools such as road journeys/calendars, concept trees, 
circle maps and diamonds will be introduced. These tools have strong gender-justice 
focus and activities are supported by peer learning structures for group development 
and  business  planning,  discussing  opportunities  to  assist  women  and  youth  in 
effectively  engaging  in  oil  seeds  value  chains,  identifying  and  improving  common 
areas  of  gender  inequalities,  gender-equitable  representation  in  group  leadership 
and decision-making, and opportunities for improving food security and nutrition.  
62. The issues to be focused during group discussions will be confirmed at the start of 
the project and together with group members. However, the key issues identified 
during VODP2 and during project design field visits include the following: 
45 
i.  development  of  group  and  household  vision  to  achieve  increased  benefits  along 
oilseeds value chains 
ii.  women’s and youth’s meaningful representation in group leadership and decision 
making 
iii.  women’s  and  youth’s  access 
to  and 
control  over 
resources  and 
iv. 
benefits/expenditure  
joint decision making of group and household resources and opportunities at all 
levels of value chain- planning, production, harvesting, marketing and investment 
of profits 
v.  understanding  of  requirements  for  nutritious  diets  for  children  and  adults  and 
innovative uses of oilseeds in the diet  
vi.  equitable  workload  distribution  and  use  of  labour-saving  technologies  to  reduce 
women’s drudgery 
vii.  gender-based violence and alcoholism 
63. High risk families within the groups will be identified based on lower income, lower 
levels  of  production,  poor  nutrition,  prevalence  of  gender  discrimination,  lack  of 
saving  and  borrowing  practices  and  high  vulnerability  to  economic  and 
environmental shocks. All household members (women and men, youth, the elderly 
and children) from these select families will receive individual household mentoring 
to address specific gender equality issues such as household decision-making and 
control  over  productive  resources,  domestic  violence  and  poor  nutrition.  The 
household  members  will  go  through  a  four-step  process  (see  diagram  below)  to 
ensure that the collective vision reflects their different interests and priorities, and 
identifies their roles in implementing the action plan. Detailed processes within each 
step is given in Toolkit: household methodologies. The revised manuals for the GALS 
that incorporate nutrition and climate change will be utilised for the NOSP.  
64. For  about  1200  farmer  groups  with  20,000  households  identified  as  high-risk 
families, approximately 2600 mentors will be trained in HHMs, two for each farmer 
group. The two mentors can work together to conduct group sessions and to divide 
households  for  individual  household  mentoring  (but  focusing  on  the  same 
households they decide to choose throughout the process). At group level, 2-3-hour 
sessions  will  be  conducted  every  week  for  each  group  over  a  period  of  1  year. 
Similarly,  each  mentor  can  be  responsible  for  mentoring  eight  to  ten  households 
with one visit every two to four weeks over a period of 1 to 2 years. The frequency 
of these visits may be reduced over time as the households become accustomed to 
the  methodology  and  show  positive  changes.  Many  household  members  from  the 
graduate  households  also  share  the  methodologies  with  others  and  become  peer 
trainers.  HH  mentors  will  receive  training  from  equally  trained  Field  Supervisors 
contracted by the service provider responsible for this activity. One Field Supervisor 
will provide technical support and oversight to 10 mentors. Mentors will also receive 
a  bicycle  to  support  their  daily  commute  to  groups  and  individual  households  for 
mentoring. The project  will complete the implementation of HHMs by  mid-term of 
the project cycle. 
65. Monitoring progress towards the group and household vision through the HHMs is 
necessary  to  maintain  momentum  among  group  and  household  members  and  to 
keep  activities  on  track.  Group  and  household  members  will  be  oriented  to  hold 
regular meetings to review, reflect and document their progress. Meetings will also 
be held with other groups and households undergoing the same process, together 
with  facilitators  and  peer  supporters.  This  will  help  farmers  to  learn  from  one 
another. Reporting will be on indicators identified by group and household members 
46 
gathered during discussions, group and household profiling, situational analysis. The 
indicators will also be in line with project logframe. Special attention will be paid to 
key issues identified above, particularly with regard to decision-making processes in 
the group and household, workload distribution, group governance, benefits sharing 
etc.  
66. Farmer  groups  and  households  will  be  oriented  to  document  their  progress  in  a 
standard format in their record books. In addition, NOSP will set up periodic follow 
ups  by  mentors  and  field  supervisors  to  check  on  the  status  of  both  groups  and 
ongoing and graduate  households. A short  survey will be developed by the Social 
Inclusion  Specialist  together  with  M&E  Specialist  to  help  the  mentors  and  field 
supervisors capture information on uptake of the methodology.  
67. Overall in NOPS activities, women and youth will be prioritised for leadership roles 
in groups and clusters. In HHM, for both group and individual mentoring, having a 
female mentor can be more comfortable for women and girls to open up, particularly 
in a society where there is high prevalence of gender discrimination and persistent 
patriarchal  attitudes.  Therefore,  NOSP  will  hire  at  least  80%  female  mentors  and 
ensure  female  mentors  are  assigned  to  proportionately  match  female  headed 
households and groups that are women-led and have more women members. Similar 
to mentors for HHMs/GALS, female and youth Business Skills Mentors (BSMs) will 
also be prioritized. BSMs are residents of the communities they work in, nominated 
by each group from among their peers and then trained to provide business skills in 
their local community. Incentives will encourage groups to identify female and young 
group  members  through  additional  financial  support  via  a  subsidy  to  the  service 
provider. In addition, access courses that provide basic knowledge such as numeric 
literacy will be provided to women and youth who are motivated to become BSMs 
but lack some basic skills. 
68. Environmental  Approach  in  NOSP  Group  Training.  In  all  its  capacity  building 
activities with oilseed producers, NOSP will pro-actively promote climate smart and 
otherwise  environmentally  healthy  agricultural  practices  and  investments  To 
increase environmental sustainability, the project will select and promote renewable 
or other environmentally-friendly technologies, such as dryers that use crop residues 
instead  of  fuel  wood,  to  avoid  deforestation.  Agricultural  machinery,  such  as 
minimum  tillage  planters  will  be  subsidized.  Environmental  assessments  need  will 
be  conducted  before  the  development  of  practices  that  have  environmental 
implications such as small-scale irrigation so that these interventions are rolled out 
in areas with good potential for irrigation. Water saving irrigation technologies, like 
drip  or  micro-jet  irrigation,  will  be  used  where  feasible.  Other  technologies  like 
irrigation scheduling tools that monitor soil moisture levels to prevent over-watering 
may also be used. Other precision agriculture practices, such as precision fertilizer 
application, will be promoted to increase resource efficiency. In general, integrated 
soil fertility management (the combination of organic and inorganic fertilizers), will 
be needed to sustainably intensify agricultural production and increase resilience to 
climate  changes.  Such  practices  may  also  relieve  pressure  to  expand  agricultural 
lands by increasing the intensity if agricultural production. 
69. While the focus of NOSP is on commercialization of selected oilseed crops, the project 
will promote diversification of production to mitigate climate risks, improve nutrition, 
and  ensure  women  retain  control  over  and  benefit  from  crop  production  after 
commercialization. Agroforestry will also be promoted as a practice for diversification 
and soil fertility management. The species promoted will be carefully selected with 
47 
the priority given to indigenous and fertility enhancing species and fruit trees that 
have economic and nutrition benefits for the smallholders.  
70. NOSP  Groups  will  be  trained  on  the  use  of  climate  information,  how  to  deal  with 
climate  risk  and  the  design  of  contingency  plans.  Climate  change  generates 
significant  risks  to  a  reliable  supply  of  oilseeds  and  sufficient  information  will  be 
made available to calibrate appropriate responses and contingency plans. There is a 
significant  amount  of  uncertainty  on  the  effects  of  climate  change  on  oilseed 
production  in  Uganda.  It  is  essential  that  as  the  new  climate  regime  for  this  area 
takes  hold  farmers  have  sufficient  information  to  choose  the  most  appropriate 
responses.  Smallholders in the NOSP target area expressed concern regarding the 
accuracy  and  reliability  of  the  weather  information  they  receive,  which  hinders 
effective planning at the farm level.   
71. NOSP will provide extensive training and technical support to targeted smallholders 
through  SPs  and  the  hub-level  project  staff  to  better  interpret  weather/climate 
information and integrate it with indigenous practices to strengthen their adaptive 
practices.  This  will,  in  essence,  promote  the  use  of  the  weather  and  agricultural 
advisories  in  farming  decisions  to  strengthen  resilience.  Climate  risk  vulnerability 
assessments,  downscaled  to  sub-county  level,  will  be  undertaken  by  a  service 
provider.  The  SP  will  apply  the  Participatory  Integrated  Climate  Services  for 
Agriculture (PICSA) approach, or another similar method, once they have received 
training  of  trainers  (ToTs).  PICSA  uses  historic  climate  trends  to  develop  tailored 
farmer groups support and to improve their capacity to use such data for improved 
risk management in cropping activities  
72. The sub-county level assessments will involve several steps: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
map  the  historic  climate  trends  based  on  experiences  of  the  smallholders 
(representatives from the clusters) within the sub-county and compare these 
with existing records;  
identify impacts of previous climatic events on livelihoods;  
analyse  existing  coping  strategies  and  factors  that  lead  to  smallholder 
vulnerability;  
use climate projections based on the downscaled models to develop scenarios 
and identify options to reduce smallholder's vulnerability and to manage climate 
risks; and  
prioritise the risk management options and inform the  farm level investment 
decisions, cluster plans and Hub plans. 
73. These  activities  will  support  monitoring  and  modelling  of  current  and  changing 
conditions related to crops and water management, and develop tailored advisories 
drawing on weather and seasonal forecasts, crop modelling, fertilizer application and 
irrigation scheduling for target sub-counties. The climate information system will be 
based on Earth Observation and existing weather stations if data is available. NOSP 
will  promote  the  dissemination  and  use  of  client-tailored  weather/climate-based 
agricultural advisories to ensure smallholders receive the information they need for 
planning  and  decision-making.  The  information  will  be  disseminated  in  local 
languages  through  voice  messages  or  SMS  based  on  the  preference  of  the 
smallholders in each cluster.  
74. The availability and use of locally specific climate information will reduce uncertainty 
and support farmers to make better informed decisions, e.g. on which crop to plant 
48 
depending on the coming season, which variety to plant, if and when to invest in 
fertiliser applications etc.  
75. NOSP will provide all targeted clusters with rain gauges and temperature recording 
equipment  to  collect  accurate  field  data.  In  addition,  train  the  farmers  to  analyse 
and use this data for adaptation in their farming practices within the context of the 
participatory approach to climate information services. 
76. Access to improved crop varieties with characteristics suitable for different locations 
and  new  growing  conditions  (including  prolonged  droughts,  heatwaves,  and  even 
more frequent and longer flooding) is essential to the long-term engagement with 
oilseed markets. NOSP will promote different climate smart agriculture practices to 
contribute  to  the  Nationally  Determined  Contribution  priorities  by  scaling  up 
practices such as minimum tillage, mulching and other soil and water conservation 
measures  and  improved  water  use  efficiency  and  farm  management.  New  and 
promising genome  editing techniques are producing genetic material that address 
new and adverse growing conditions.  
77. Drought tolerant varieties particularly for soya beans can also be promoted through 
NOSP  using  existing  varieties  demonstrated  at  the  local  level.  This  would  involve 
adaptive  trials  to  inform  the  sub-county  specific  varieties  to  be  promoted.  Most 
smallholders conveyed the performance of sunflower during dry spells was relatively 
better than soya beans.  
78. Building on the ongoing (and continuing) mapping of agro-ecological conditions, soil 
characteristics and climate risks, facilitators/brokers will be briefed on the findings 
and trained to solicit additional input from farmers through the farmer organizations 
and other actors within the stakeholder platforms on local environmental changes 
and  challenges  as  well  as  ongoing  coping  and  adaptation  strategies  and  desired 
interventions to address climate and environmental risks. Further, NOSP will build 
capacity of MAAIF and UNMA technical staff in the interpretation and use of available 
downscaled climate models and earth observation systems generated information. 
Training  activities  will  include:  climate  data  interpretation  and  use  of  historical 
climate  trends  and  future  climate  change  projections,  seasonal  and  short  term 
forecasts,  in  decision  making  and  planning  at  sub-county  level;  dissemination  of 
information for use by sub-county staff and SPs; processes to incorporate climate 
information and environmental management into farm-level planning; participatory 
vulnerability assessments and monitoring approaches on environment and climate 
change.   
79. Finally, NOSP will also promote natural resources management through the network 
of land health sites that will be established in select locations. The sites will enable 
the  spatially  explicit  monitoring  and  modelling  of  land  health  and  agronomic 
suitability. Land health surveys will be undertaken to establish baseline conditions 
of soil constraints (including soil fertility assessments), as well as land use and land 
cover,  assessment  of  farming  practices,  assessment  of  tree  and  shrub  densities, 
infiltration capacity and erosion prevalence. Data from these surveys will be used to 
conduct spatially explicit crop modelling exercises and trade-off analysis. The data 
will also enable the analysis of proper current and future land management actions 
in the catchment areas in order to reduce runoff and erosion in the farming areas.   
49 
C.  Support Production, Productivity and Market Development: Objective and 
Activity Structure  
80. Service  market  development  forms  a  vital  part  of  the  supply  chains  development 
process.  Vibrant  support  markets,  including  commercial  supply  of  inputs  and 
services are essential for sustaining competitive clusters and also for enabling other 
clusters to emerge to copy the initial successes. Within profitable clusters and supply 
chains,  the  costs  of  such  services  and  inputs  should  be  an  affordable  standard 
business cost for producers and businesses and should not require external subsidy. 
NOSP  will  therefore  focus  on  facilitating  investments  that  develop,  in  a  broadly 
harmonised  manner,  the  demand  and  supply  of  these  market-based  services  and 
inputs in the clusters. The objective of Sub-component 1.2 is therefore that there 
are  active  and  vibrant  market-based  providers  for  these  critical  services  in  all 
project-supported  clusters.  The  approach  to  achieve  this  will  be  to  promote  both 
supply and demand for these services in tandem. NOSP will focus on two critical type 
of services markets: (a) financial services and (b) technical support services, which 
will include three main interventions: Farm Production Advisors Scheme, Auxiliary 
Farm Services Promotion Scheme and Quality Declared Seed Production Scheme. 
D.  NOSP Support to Financial Services  
NOSP Rural Finance Approach 
81. NOSP investments in rural financial services aim at increasing the investments by 
financial  institutions  (FI)  in  the  oil  seed  value  chains.  They  will  largely  focus  on 
improving the access of smallholder farmers to financial services as other value chain 
actors  (processors,  traders)  have  easier  access  to  these  services.  The  project’s 
strategy  of  de-risking  smallholder  production  and  building  resilience  in  farming 
households  will  improve  farmers’  negotiation  position  with  FIs.  At  the  same  time 
business and financial literacy training and crop insurance will facilitate greater flow 
of  financial  services  to  the  producers.  All  TOR  for  rural  finance-related  posts  and 
tasks are at the end of this Chapter of the PIM.  
82. The project will adopt a three-pronged approach aiming to ensure access to timely 
and adequate financial services of the oilseed farmers and other actors in the value 
chain. It will consist of the following interventions:  
a)  Strengthen  and  build  capacity  of  the  Village  Savings  and  Loan  Associations 
operating within the oilseed farmers’ groups and clusters and proactively link 
them to financial cooperatives (SACCOs) and regulated financial institutions   
b)  Build capacity of well established SACCOs and producer co-operatives that offer 
production and marketing credit to farmers either individually or through the 
VSLAs  
c)  Co-operate  with  and  build  capacity  of  regulated  financial  institutions  in 
developing  innovative  and  appropriate  financial  products  for  actors  in  the 
oilseed supply chains, from linkage banking with smallholders to more develop 
value chain financing products. 
50 
Implementation of Rural Finance Activities Supported under NOSP 
(a)  VSLA Support 
Identification and Mobilisation of VSLAs 
83. The  contracted  PSPs  will  first  map  and  ascertain  within  the  selected  clusters  the 
presence and position of the VSLAs in the producer groups. Working with existing 
producer  groups  without  VSLA,  the  PSPs  will  sensitise  the  farmers  to  the  VSLA 
concept  and  the  benefits  that  belonging  to  a  VSLA  can  bring  to  the  farming 
households. The interested farmers will then be grouped into VSLAs of an average 
25 members. 
84. Working  with  farmer  groups  with  existing  VSLAs,  the  PSPs  will  need  ascertain 
whether the members want to continue with their existing VSLAs or join a new one 
consisting solely of oilseed farmers. Some producers are likely to be members of two 
different VSLA, if that serves best the economic needs of their household economy.  
85. Because of the positive economic and social impact of the VSLAs on their members 
and because of their importance to the financing of the smallholder oilseed activities, 
all the active participants in the NOSP clusters and farmer groups are by the mid-
term  of  the  project  expected  to  be  members  of  a  VSLA.  The  target  is  that  NOSP 
supports at the end of PY1 around 2,600 VSLAs. This number would grow to 3,800 
by  the  end  of  PY2  and  to  the  final  target  of  4,600  VSLA  by  the  end  of  PY3.  This 
number would in practice cover all the 100,000 smallholder households that NOSP 
aims to reach with the Component 1 support. 
Basic Training of VSLAs 
86. With  NOSP  support,  the  key  staff  of  the  contracted  PSPs  (EM  managers,  EM 
supervisors and VSLA facilitators) will undergo a five-day training on VSLA concept, 
governance,  duties  of  members,  basic  savings  and  credit  operations  and 
bookkeeping. These trainings will be arranged at the hub level by the PCU through 
trainers from VODP2/PROFIRA.  The trained VSLA facilitators in turn  will train new 
VSLAs and also those old VSLAs that need refresher trainings. The trainings to VSLAs 
will be conducted as a part of VSLA group meetings using the standard participatory 
VSLA training methods. 
Financial Product Development in VSLAs 
87. There are clear opportunities to develop VSLA products to better fit the needs of the 
oilseed  farmers.  VSLA  Facilitators  and  Economic  Mobilisers  (EM)  will  facilitate 
discussions on savings, credit and insurance needs of VSLA members as part of their 
business plans and support the development of new products for the VSLAs. NOSP 
will support the groups to operationalise the products after they are approved in the 
VSLA meetings. Particularly promising new products and innovations VSLA method 
include  partial  rolling  over  of  savings  capital  to  the  cycle  to  allow  bigger  loans; 
specific  “agricultural  savings  accounts”  to  ensure  capital  for  next  season’s  inputs 
especially planting seeds; innovative interest rate structures to allow lower rates and 
growing season-related repayment schedules for agricultural loans; and insurance 
premium saving funds. The NOSP target is that by the end of project period, 60% 
of  supported  VSLAs  roll  over  savings  to  the  next  cycle  and  90%  of  them  have 
introduced innovative savings and loans products.    
51 
Financial and Insurance Literacy Training 
88. Training material modifications. The project will identify a reputed and experienced 
trainer/training  agency  which  has  capability  to  study  and  modify  the  existing 
financial literacy training materials being used for training VSLA members. Service 
providers  of  PROFIRA  and  VODP  have  been  using  financial  literacy  modules 
developed  by  the  Bank  of  Uganda  and  making  suitable  modifications  as  per 
beneficiaries’ needs. The BoU has developed financial literacy module for smallholder 
farmers  with  support  from  GIZ.  The  contracted  training  agency  will  fine  tune  the 
materials  to  suit  the  needs  of  the  oilseed  farmers.  Insurance  literacy  materials, 
especially crop insurance, will also be developed/modified. The insurance section will 
look at (i) agriculture as a business, (ii) risks involved in crop production, (iii) risk 
transfer mechanisms and (iv) agricultural insurance product literacy.  The modules 
will  include  responsible  financing  practices  and  customer  protection  aspects  to 
ensure that target groups understand the terms and benefits of the products as well 
as know the right questions to ask before purchasing the products.  
89. The materials developed will be vetted and finalised by a small advisory group to be 
constituted by the PCU (the advisory group will be 2 to 3 members who will have 
virtual meetings when necessary and also vet the material electronically). INSURED, 
working  to  develop  crop  insurance  products  for  Uganda,  with  a  grant  facility 
implemented by IFAD, will be part of the advisory group to improve the insurance 
content  in  the  insurance  literacy  material.  Where  necessary  the  materials  will  be 
translated in local languages. The training materials will be oilseed farmer-friendly, 
following adult learning principles and participatory training methodologies and will 
have short case studies, role plays and stories for discussions for easy absorption of 
lessons. 
90. Training  of  trainers  on  financial  literacy.  EM  Managers,  EM  Supervisors,  Economic 
Mobilisers  and  VSLA  Facilitators  will  undergo  training  of  trainers  programme  for  5 
days  with  hands  on  training  on  the  financial  literacy  materials  developed.  The 
training will be conducted by the trainer/training agency which modified the training 
materials,  with  support  from  other  trainers  where  necessary.  For  example,  for 
insurance related training, trainers from agri-insurance consortium can be invited. 
Some of the PSPs will have in-house trainers and depending on area of expertise, 
will also be involved in delivery of the training.  
91. Training of VSLAs on financial literacy. VSLA Facilitators will primarily be responsible 
for delivery of the trainings on financial and insurance literacy to VSLAs. The trainers 
will  carry  out  an  assessment  of  how  many  on  which  type  of  modules  each  VSLA 
needs  since  some  of  them  might  have  undergone  such  trainings  under 
VODP/PROFIRA  or  other  projects.  A  schedule  will  be  prepared  for  each  VSLA 
Facilitator  for  delivery  of  training.  During  group  meetings,  after  the  financial 
transactions are completed, the VSLA Facilitator will deliver one to two-hour modules 
of financial literacy training. Following adult learning principles, participatory training 
methods will be used.   
92. VSLA Facilitator will deliver two to three trainings per day as part of group meetings. 
S/he  will  be  supported  by  EM  Mobiliser  but  also  EM  Manager/Supervisor,  where 
needed. The NOSP target is that 70% of old and new VSLAs will under the project 
undergo complete financial and insurance literacy modules and 100% of VSLAs will 
undergo the insurance literacy modules. 
52 
VSLA – Financial Institution Linkage Banking 
93. VSLAs will be savings and credit-linked with SACCOs and financial institutions based 
on the need in each VSLA. Some banks offer special savings accounts to VSLAs like 
Post Bank, Centenary Bank and Opportunity Bank. Very few banks have robust credit 
portfolios of the VSLAs.  
94. Savings  linkages.  For  safekeeping  of  VSLA  savings,  special  products  will  be 
developed  by  which  VSLAs  that  will  earn  interest  on  the  savings.  These  savings 
products can be offered through nearby agent banking outlets for easy operations 
or by using mobile applications. 
95. Credit  linkages.  Based  on  individual  credit  needs  and  limited  funds  available  with 
VSLAs, the credit gap will be assessed that can be met through well designed credit 
linkage  products.  The  PCU  will  sign  an  MoU  with  few  interested  banks  and  also 
SACCOs and provide them technical assistance to design new product or modify their 
existing VSLA loan products, to suit production credit and equipment and irrigation 
financing needs of the VSLA members.  
96. Since the branches of financial institutions are at regional level or at best at district 
headquarters,  the  Hub  Coordinators  will  negotiate  with  the  branch  managers 
regarding the loan application and disbursement processes to ensure low transaction 
costs to the VSLA members. To ensure adequate business for the bank branch and 
also optimising the transaction costs, the loan  applications in a cluster covering a 
number of VSLAs will be submitted at least two months before the season to ensure 
timely disbursement of loans. The following two options will be explored based on 
location of branch and location of VSLAs: 
  VSLAs submit papers to an agent of the financial institution locally. Credit Officer 
visits  the  VSLAs,  completes  loan  appraisal  and  the  loan  is  sanctioned  and 
disbursed through the branch. The repayments are made through the agent.  
  VSLAs  in  a  cluster,  facilitated  by  VSLA  Facilitator,  approach  the  bank  branch. 
Loans  are  appraised,  sanctioned  and  disbursed  through  the  branch  and  the 
repayments are to be made to the branch through the account or through mobile 
wallets.  
97. Training of hub and PSP staff in VSLA bank linkages. Training will be organised at the 
hub  level  for  key  hub  staff  and  PSP  EM  Managers,  EM  Supervisors,  Economic 
Mobilisers, VSLA Facilitators on VSLA–SACCO/bank linkages. Resource persons from 
the banks’ Head Offices, bank branches, Rural Finance Manager of NOSP (see TOR 
of Rural Finance Manager above under the PCU) and technical assistance provider to 
the  product  development  will  provide  two-day  trainings.  The  topics  to  be  covered 
include the key features of the VSLA savings product, VSLA credit linkage product, 
documentation requirements, loan processing and disbursement procedures and the 
monitoring of the loans. Bundled insurance with credit product will also be detailed 
during training in cases this product is offered.  
98. Training to VSLAs. VSLA Facilitators, with support from EM Supervisors, will provide 
training to VSLAs on the VSLA savings and credit linkage aspects. Such training will 
be given to those VSLAs that are to be savings/credit linked. The NOSP target is that 
3,000 VSLAs are  expected to have a VSLA savings account and that 2,600 VSLAs 
(60%)  are  expected  to  be  credit-linked  at  least  once  with  formal  financial 
institutions/SACCOs. 
99. Monitoring  of  VSLA  level  interventions.  Hub  Coordinators  will  be  responsible  to 
ensure  that  VSLAs  are  formed  and  capacitated  well.  The  PSP  EM  Supervisors  and 
53 
Managers will oversee the work of VSLA Facilitators to ensure all the trainings are 
well delivered. VSLA reports on membership, savings, loans (internal and external) 
and portfolio quality will be collected and analysed every month by PSPs and Hub 
Coordinators to take corrective action. The EM Supervisors and Managers will ensure 
that cluster-wise credit need assessments are carried out at least two months before 
each season so that credit linkages with financial institutions will be forged to bridge 
gaps.  
(b) Support to SACCOs and Other Cooperatives 
100.  Selection of SACOs/cooperatives. As a first step in this activity, the project will 
coordinate  with  PROFIRA  to  identify  the  SACCOs  working  in  the  project  area. 
Discussions  with  service  providers  of  PROFIRA  reveal  that  SACCOs  do  not  have 
specific products for agri lending. Two kind of cooperative organisation can benefit 
from NOSP rural finance support: 
  A  and  B-graded  SACCOs,  being  strengthened  by  PROFIRA,  based  on  their 
interest, will be provided technical assistance to develop products for agriculture 
lending in the oilseeds sector. 
  Agricultural cooperatives in the project area, being formed by VODP2 and already 
operating financial services as their function, can qualify for technical assistance 
after due diligence, if they fulfil the following criteria: (i) good governance with 
Board  meeting  attendance  of  more  than  80%;  (ii) 65%  members  saving 
regularly;  (iii) at  least  40%  members  have  availed  loans  in  the  last  year; 
(iv) repayment  rate  of  more  than  85%  during  last  year;  and  (v) operate  a 
functional MIS system with data accuracy.   
101.  Technical  Service  Provider.  Technical  Service  Provider  (TSP),  based  on  past 
proven  record  of  developing  agri-lending  products  for  cooperatives  and  other 
financial institutions, will be chosen one each for each hub. The Hub Coordinators 
will  oversee  this  technical  assistance.  The  TSP  will  work  with  on  an  average  20 
SACCOs/other  cooperatives (see TOR at the end of this Section). The  project and 
each  SACCO/cooperative  would  enter  into  an  MoU  specifying  the  nature  of  the 
project support and its expected outputs.  
102.  TSPs will study the demand for different agri-ending with the oilseed farmers. 
The risk profiling of the farmers in the area will be carried out and the measures to 
de-risk agri-lending products will be defined. The loan products would include loans 
for crop production costs, tools and equipment and small-scale irrigation. 
103.  TSPs  will  work  with  the  management/Credit  Officers  to  define  the  product 
features  and  make  suggestions  for  any  changes  in  loan  appraisal  and  monitoring 
systems.  TSP  will  train  the  Board  and  management  on  the  proposed  products, 
facilitate  roll  out  of  the  products,  mentor  the  Credit  Officers  in  appraisal  and 
monitoring of the loans and assess the results of the products before facilitating a 
full roll out. TSPs will also aim to facilitate wholesale loans to the cooperatives from 
lenders  such  as  MFSC  and  aBiTrust  to  expand  the  outreach  and  portfolios  of 
cooperative  financiers  among  oilseed  farmers.  Each  SACCO/cooperative  will  be 
supported by NOSP for about 30 technical assistance days, spread over 18 months. 
104.  The target of NOSP is that about 75 SACCOs/other cooperatives will receive TA 
during the initial four years of implementation. Furthermore,  on an average  some 
300 smallholder farmers either individually or through their VSLAs are expected to 
avail agri-loans from each of the supported cooperative. 
54 
105.  Monitoring. Rural Finance Manager of NOSP and the Hub Coordinator will directly 
monitor the progress in this technical assistance to ensure smooth implementation. 
TA  providers  will  submit  a  detailed  report  on  the  specific  inputs  provided  to  each 
SACCO/cooperative  and  the  outcome  achieved  by  the  end  of  the  support  period. 
SACCO/cooperatives  will  provide  monthly  progress  reports  to  Hub  Coordinator  on 
the performance of developed loan products.  
(c) Engagement with Formal Financial Institutions 
Pro-active Advocacy to Engage Banks and Insurance Companies  
106.  The  NOSP  Project  Director  (PD),  supported  by  Rural  Finance  Manager,  will 
arrange  high  level  meetings  with  the  senior  management  of  the  BoU  and  those 
formal financial institutions that show interest in the provision of financial services 
to  the  oilseed  value  chain.  Representatives  of  senior  management  of  insurance 
companies offering crop insurance will also invited to these discussions.  The main 
objective will be to make these services available to smallholder farmers and other 
actors of the value chains, preferably at affordable interest rates with the support of 
the Agricultural Credit Facility (ACF) of the BoU. These discussions will be held bi- 
annually in Kampala, in the initial two years to build understanding on the needs of 
the project and to facilitate formal agreements between the ACF, the BoU and the 
participating  banks.  IFAD  will  field  an  Implementation  Support  Mission  once  the 
project  management  team,  especially  the  Rural  Finance  Manager,  has  been 
recruited, to facilitate a better understanding of the project design among the banks 
and to participate  with the PD and RFM in first round of discussions with the BoU, 
the ACF and key financial institutions.  
107.  These initial meetings will be followed up with one-to-one meetings with senior 
management  of  the  interested  financial  institutions  with  the  aim  of  signing  a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for the co-operation between NOSP, the ACF 
and  the  financial  institution.  The  MoU  would  include  the  description  of  the  NOSP 
support  to  each  financing  partnership.  Similarly,  the  project  will  sign  MOUs  with 
insurance companies offering crop insurance in the project area as well as tri-partite 
agreements between insurance companies, financing institutions and NOSP to offer 
bundled insurance products.  
Hub-Level Planning and Coordination Meetings 
108.  Hub Coordinators will convene quarterly meeting between the project, local bank 
branches and SACCOs interested in lending to the oil seed value chain. Institutions 
receiving technical assistance will attend. PSPs will inform the meetings about the 
credit needs of different VSLAs and discuss the plan on financial linkages for the next 
quarter.  Any  operational  issues  can  also  be  discussed  and  sorted  out.  Quarterly 
meetings will be convened in the initial three years, after which the frequency will 
be reduced to semi-annual meetings. 
Policy and Knowledge Management Briefs 
109.  The project will produce policy and knowledge management briefs based on its 
experiences in rural finance product development and implementation, especially on 
innovative  credit  instruments  and  crop  insurance  piloting  with  oilseed  producers. 
Technical  assistance  providers  will  prepare  briefs  based  on  their  field  experiences 
which will then be edited by contracted professionals and disseminated to a wider 
public.  The  NOSP  aims  at  signing  MoUs  with  at  least  four  financial institutions  for 
financial  services  to  oilseed  farmers  under  innovative  financing  instruments, 
55 
including  equipment  financing  for  entrepreneurs.  Further,  it  aims  at  signing  MoUs 
with  at  least  two  insurance  companies  and  four  financial  institutions  to  offer  crop 
insurance.  From  these  partnerships,  NOSP  would  produce  at  least  five  knowledge 
management products  and share them in Agriculture Finance Platforms and other 
rural finance channels. 
Technical Assistance to Formal Financial Institutions 
110.  Technical  Assistance,  partnerships  and  the  ACF.  At  the  NOSP  start-up, 
Hubb Coordinators will carry out mapping of bank branches and their agent network. 
Based  on  this  mapping,  the  Rural  Finance  Manager  (RFM)  of  NOSP  will  hold 
discussions with senior management of financial institutions, to support the selection 
of appropriate FIs for the NOSP technical support. Key criteria for this support will 
include (a) strategic intent to finance agriculture especially in the oilseed value chain, 
(b) appropriate branch and agent network for easy access, (c) availability of products 
for  agriculture  lending  and  readiness  to  modify/develop  new  innovative  products,  
and  (d)  credit  staff  with  skills  in  agri-  lending.  The  NOSP  design  findings  indicate 
that a substantial number  of BoU-regulated FIs are interested in cooperation with 
NOSP  in  rural  finance  operations,  including  banks,  insurance  companies  and 
regulated deposit-taking MFIs.  
111.  The  Rural  Finance  Manager,  with  the  support  of  agri-finance  consultants,  will 
conduct  a  quick  due  diligence  on  the  candidate  financial  institution’s  strategy, 
capacities and performance in agricultural financing. Based on an adequate strategic 
fit  to  project’s  requirements,  the  NOSP  management  will  agree  with  Board  of 
Directors/Senior  management  of  the  financial  institution  on  the  required  scope  of 
technical assistance needed by the bank to achieve the agreed performance targets 
in  the  oilseed  value  chain.  Thereafter  the  PCU  will  enter  into  an  MoU  with  the 
participating banks, which includes the details of the NOSP support and specifies the 
outcomes to be achieved from each partnership.  
112. 
If the oilseed production loans are developed by the bank into a separate, clearly 
defined  loan  product,  the  financial  institution  can  apply  for  refinancing  from  the 
Agricultural  Credit  Fund  (ACF)  of  the  BoU.  The  RFM  will  work  with  financial 
institutions and ACF to achieve this result. That would be beneficial for all partners 
in this type of co-operation: (a) smallholder farmers will be able to get loans at 12 
% rate of interest declining balance, (b) banks will be able to source loans at 0 % 
from ACF and lend at 12%, and (c) ACF will increase its currently low disbursement 
rate and will have access to large numbers of smallholder farmers. 
VSLA Linkage Banking for Agriculture 
113.  Few  banks,  mainly  Post  Bank  and  Opportunity  Bank,  offer  wholesale  lending 
products to VSLAs for the VSLAs to on-lend to their members. Other banks tend to 
offer individual group members, using the VSLA as a guarantor for individual loans. 
There is substantial potential develop the wholesale linkage model through the VSLA 
mechanism, adapted to the production and marketing cycles  of the  oilseed  crops. 
Based  on  individual  member  demand  for  credit,  availability  of  funds  at  VSLA  and 
assessment  of  the  credit  gap,  NOSP-supported  VSLAs  could  be  financed  in  much 
larger  numbers  through  wholesale  loans  by  the  financial  institutions.  NOSP  will 
support  the  wider  application  of  this  lending  model  in  the  project  hubs.  Crop 
insurance bundling with these credits will also be piloted and scaled up. 
56 
Support to Value Chain Financing in Oilseed Sector 
114.  The Project’s a multi stakeholder platform for each oil seed cluster consisting of 
major stakeholders including input suppliers, producers, research/extension service 
providers, aggregators, millers and financial institutions. This would help develop a 
common  understanding  among  the  stakeholders  on  the  financial  requirements  of 
each value chain. Through the MSPs and the related NOSP interventions, value chain 
agreements  would  be  forged  between  agribusinesses  and  farmers  with  clearly 
established relationships, contracts and formal agreements. These would form the 
basis  of  value  chain  financing.  The  likely  value  chain  financing  arrangements  for 
producers  include:  (i) agro  supplier  input  financing  (for  seeds  and  inputs); 
(ii) processor/miller financing; and (iii) trader financing. Possibilities of bundling crop 
insurance with credit will be explored, piloted and rolled out. 
115.  The  NOSP  rural  finance  experts  and  TA  would  study  the  existing  relationships 
and  value  chain  mechanisms  between  farmers  and  agri  businesses.  The  TA  along 
with Hub Coordinators and Agri-Finance Consultants would identify agribusinesses 
with clear intention of increasing their business through VCF arrangements. Various 
options of financing including requirements of farmers would be initially discussed 
with agribusinesses. Joint consultations among agri-businesses, farmer groups and 
FIs  would  be  held  to  work  out  the  terms  of  partnerships.  Thereafter,  Tripartite 
Agreement  between  banks,  agribusinesses  and  farmers  organisations  would  be 
entered spelling out the detailed terms of financing. TA from NOSP would seek to 
design repayment mechanisms around value chain cash flows to ensure full recovery 
of loans provided to the value chain actors. 
116.  Once the Agreement with an FI are signed, NOSP would provide the bank staff 
in-depth  training  on  the  relevant  aspects  of  financing  in  the  oilseed  value  chain. 
Senior managers, Branch Managers, Credit managers and other key staff of branches 
would be trained by the project. The TA will be primarily responsible for the training 
and where necessary, additional trainers will be hired. Technical assistance will be 
provided to about four to five financing institutions with strategic fit to the project. 
At  least  six  to  eight  agri-financing  products  would  be  modified/developed,  piloted 
and rolled out with NOSP support in the project. At least ten value chain financing 
agreements would be reached serving the NOSP clusters. 
Exposure Visits 
117.  The  project  will  facilitate  three  study  tours  to  visit  financial  institutions  in 
countries  where  value  chain  financing  and  other  innovative  financing mechanisms 
have been adopted in large scale. These countries can include Ghana, Kenya, India 
and Netherlands. Relevant senior officials of MFPED,  MAAIF, BoU and  participating 
financial institutions will take part in these exposure visits.  
Course for Bank Staff of Value Chain Financing  
118.  The Uganda Institute of Banking and Financial Services has developed 3-month 
certificate  course  for  value  chain  financing  for  the  frontline  staff  of  the  financing 
institutions. The certificate course has been developed with technical assistance from 
GIZ  and  a  group  of  15  certified  trainers  in  VC  financing  in  the  institute  offer  the 
course  which,  in  addition  to  classroom  work,  will  include  field-based  working 
assignments.  
119.  NOSP  will  work  with  the  Institute  to  offer  a  3-week  training  course  in  oilseed 
value chain financing to the key agricultural staff of banks participating in NOSP and 
offering  services  to  the  NOSP  clusters.  Out  of  15  days  of  training,  6  days  will  be 
57 
classroom-based and the rest will be field-based. An agricultural insurance training 
module, already developed by AIC, will be updated and delivered by the AIC as a 
part of this course targeting the key branch staff and Credit Officers of the banks. 
(d) Agricultural Insurance-Specific Interventions 
120.  Training  on  crop  insurance  for  hubs  and  PSPs.  The  PCU  will  arrange  hub 
level  trainings  for  key  hub  staff  and  PSP  staff  including  VSLA  Facilitators.  AIC 
resource persons will carry out the trainings covering topics such as the importance 
of agriculture insurance as a risk management tool in agriculture production, product 
literacy, marketing of products, and ways to get product feedback from the farmers 
for product modification to increase the benefits of insurance for producers in the 
oilseed value chain. 
121.  Training to front line staff in branches of insurance companies. The PCU, 
in partnership with AIC and Insurance Institute of Uganda (IIU), will provide training 
to  the  staff  and  claims  agents  at  the  branches  of  insurance  companies  within  the 
NOSP hubs to improve their communications with smallholder farmers on awareness 
on available products, product features, claim lodging and settlement processes. The 
training  will  also  focus  on  collection  of  information  from  the  targeted  farmers  on 
what other risks/needs may be insured for developing or improving products. 
122.  Technical  assistance  for  product  development.  A  specialised  service 
provider  (ToR  in  Appendix  6  below)  will  be  recruited  by  the  PCU  for  Technical 
Assistance for product and/or scheme development to build on the work of the SIDA-
financed, IFAD-implemented INSURED programme. The TA will carry out FGDs with 
oilseed crop smallholder farmers and interviews with various stakeholders along the 
oilseed value chain to determine opportunities and needs.4  The focus of the TA will 
be  on developing digital or non-digital delivery channels and bundling for  existing 
products,  making  product  adjustments  where  necessary  and  improving  speed  of 
claims processing. TA will aim to create a sustainable market and to keep products 
affordable and reliable for the future.  
4 Until October 2021, INSURED is supporting assessment and implementation of a new agricultural 
insurance  product  and/or  efficient  delivery  mechanisms  to  help  scale-up  coverage  for  oilseed 
smallholder farming. This will be done in collaboration with the insurance sector. 
58 
Appendix 1: TOR of Agriculture Finance Consultants  
Location: Five hub offices in the NOSP project area 
Number of posts: Five 
Term: Part-time consultants; 10 days a month per hub for first 3 years and 5 days a month 
thereafter. 
Educational  Background:  University  degree  in  economics,  business  administration,  agri-
business, or similar field.  
Job Requirements & Experience: 
The candidate should have the following experience, skills and knowledge mix:   
  Work experience in banking for 10 years out of which at least 5 years in agri banking 
and smallholder and agribusiness credit; 
  Good working knowledge of the different national banking and financial institutions, 
insurance companies, concerned with agriculture finance and insurance, strong 
ability and readiness to communicate, and work with them;  
  Gender sensitivity in working with rural men and women understanding and 
addressing their needs; 
  Strong communication skills, especially group facilitation skills and communication 
skills with farmers; 
  Team player with ability to work with different stakeholders and programme team; 
  Fluent written and spoken English and one of the languages spoken in the hub; 
  Creative and pragmatic approach to problem solving. 
Duties and Responsibilities; 
  Responsible for the planning, implementation and monitoring of the rural finance 
activities in the hub. This involves providing inputs on the preparation and 
monitoring of Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPB), data collection for progress 
reports and analytical reports; 
Implement the rural finance activities in accordance with the approved annual work 
plans, coordinate and ensure complementarities with Value Chain Development 
activities in the field; 
 
  Work with contracted national consultants, providing implementation support as 
required especially in field level data collection; 
  Work with agreed partners in the field (banking and financial institutions, insurance 
companies, technical assistance providers and training institutions) to ensure that 
need based financial services are provided to the value chain members; 
  Carry out an assessment, with the support of VSLA facilitators and Economic social 
mobilisers, of the seasonal/annual credit requirement plans for the VSLAs, agri 
businesses and facilitate and monitor flow of credit in the field; 
  Sort out policy and operational issues in flow of credit. Smoothen the processes for 
credit and insurance and ensure these financial services;  co-ordinate with 
insurance companies for timely settlement of insurance claims; 
  Maintain close coordination with implementation partners at field level (banking and 
financial institutions, insurance companies, private service providers, and other 
stakeholders) and ensure satisfactory results; 
  Participate in multi-stakeholder platforms and address issues related to credit and 
agriculture crop insurance; 
59 
  Supervise and monitor the trainings on business and financial literacy trainings at 
field level for effective results; 
  Provide support for the gathering of data and information needed to undertake an 
effective monitoring and evaluation of all the activities included in the rural finance 
activities. 
60 
Appendix 2: TOR of VSLA Facilitator 
1. 
2. 
Hiring Terms: Local Youths, preferably women  
Location: Respective District/sub county 
Experience and qualification: 
  Upper  Secondary  Certificate.  Preference  would  be  given  to  women,  and  those  with 
Undergraduate Degree (preferably in Social Work or Rural Development). 
  At  least  5  years’  experience  in  social  mobilisation/VSLA  promotion/Cooperative 
promotion  or  other  rural  development  work  requiring  extensive  mobilization  and 
organization  of  village  communities.  Prior  experience  in  gender  development  and 
household nutrition would be an advantage.  
  gender sensitivity in working with rural men and women understanding and addressing 
their needs.   
Duties and Responsibilities: 
  Mobilisation of oilseed farmers especially women and youth, organizing farmers into 
VSLAs,  facilitating  group  meetings,  facilitating  restructuring  and  consolidation  of 
groups. 
  Attend the weekly meetings of VSLAs.  
  Train  new  VSLAs  on  group  governance,  member  and  leader  responsibilities, 
bookkeeping etc. 
  Attend training of trainers’ programme on financial and insurance literacy and deliver 
effective trainings to VSLA members during groups meetings. 
  Facilitating savings products within VSLA for production inputs and crop insurance. 
  Facilitate production credit for oil seeds within VSLAs at affordable rates of interest. 
  Facilitate partial accumulation of funds to enable VSLAs to lend larger loans needed by 
members. 
  Enable the management committee to develop production plan of individual members, 
assess  credit  gaps  and  facilitate  VSLA  linkage  banking  with  SACCOs/financial 
institutions. 
  Enable uptake of crop insurance products by VSLA members. 
  Provide feedback to EM supervisors and manager on any policy and operational issues 
in adequate and timely flow of credit and insurance.  
  Assist  the  EM  manager  and  supervisor  in  collecting  data  regarding  VSLAs,  member 
level data etc. 
  Assisting  the  EM  and  supervisors  to  collect  periodic  data  about  VSLAs  and  their 
functioning. 
  Assist in all baseline and impact assessment studies. 
61 
Annex 3:  TOR of Technical Assistance to Financial Institutions for Financial 
Product Development/Modifications for Oilseed Production/Marketing Finance 
Hiring  terms:  Technical  assistance  will  include  national  experts  and  where  necessary, 
international TA. The TA will be need-based and hiring on monthly or daily basis. 
Location: Kampala, to  work with head offices  of banking and financial institutions and also 
select branches in project area.  
Job Requirements and Experience 
The candidate should have following experience, skills and knowledge mix:  
  work  experience in rural financial  services for at least 10 years in small farmer and 
 
agri business credit in Uganda/ east Africa region; 
sound knowledge and prior experience in value chain financing – VSLA linkage banking 
for agriculture, agri-equipment financing, receivable financing, agri-dealer/processor 
financing for input credit, innovative collaterals etc. is critical for TA; 
  good  working  knowledge  of  the  different  national  banking  and  financial  institutions, 
insurance companies, concerned with agriculture finance and insurance in Uganda and 
strong ability and readiness to communicate, and work with them; 
  gender sensitivity in working with rural men and women understanding and addressing 
their needs;  
strong group facilitation skills and communication skills with farmers; 
fluent written and spoken English and one of the national languages; 
creative approach to problem solving.  
 
 
 
Duties and Responsibilities 
 
responsibility for development, roll out and scaling up of innovative financial products 
including value chain financing products by financial institutions; One or more of the 
following products as well as other need-based products will be developed:  
a) VSLA Linkage banking for agriculture; 
  Based on the credit gaps at VSLA level, for seasonal credit, estimate marketing 
period and facilitate VSLA linkage banking with appropriate production cum 
marketing credit and crop insurance. 
  Evaluate existing products and make suitable modifications in the features.  Develop 
new products where necessary. Facilitate risk assessment and improve loan 
appraisal, early warning systems and monitoring systems to ensure excellent 
portfolio quality.  
  Train the branch staff in new products/product modifications. 
b) Value chain financing: 
  work in close co-ordination with partner banks in developing Value Chain financing 
 
 
 
instruments; 
study the existing relationships and internal value chain mechanisms between 
farmers and agri businesses; 
select potential clusters and oilseed crops; 
in consultation with interested banks, ensure adequate data collection on producers. 
Devise data formats along with PSPs, train VSLA facilitators in data collection, 
supervise data collection on sample basis; 
62 
 
 
 
identify agri businesses with good reputation in dealing with farmers; 
select agribusinesses with clear intention of increasing their business through VCF 
arrangement; 
carry out a risk assessment of the VCF along with the banking personnel in 
understanding the VCF risks and devising the product; 
  hold joint consultations among agri businesses, farmer groups and bank to work out 
the contours of financing and ensuring repayments of bank loans; 
  discuss with the banks on cash flow-based lending mechanisms and new forms of 
collaterals such as first loss default guarantee (to be provided by the client and 
producers); 
  devise tri partite agreement among bank, agri business and farmers spelling out the 
 
 
terms of financing – amount, rate of interest, repayment period etc.; 
facilitate bundling of crop insurance with credit; 
facilitate development of banks’ credit policies towards VCF including risk assessment 
tools, due diligence exercise, loan monitoring and early warning systems; 
  draw up the protocols of pilot to scaling up; 
 
facilitate monitoring formats and tools for the banks and programme management to 
monitor the roll out of the VCF; 
  make necessary adjustments for the product for scaling up; 
 
  Train the branch staff in new products/product modifications. 
facilitate development of training material for training bank staff in VCF; 
c) Other products such as equipment financing 
  Financing of both producers and equipment contractors and monitoring usage 
through digital means. 
  “Uberisation” of tractor hiring services. 
63 
Appendix 4: TOR of Technical Assistance to SACCOs for Financial Product 
Development/Modifications for Oilseed Production/Marketing Finance 
Technical  assistance  will  include  national  experts.  Each  hub  will  select  SACCOs/other 
cooperatives to be supported. The TA providing institution/individual consultant will work with 
all SACCOs in a hub. The TA will be need-based and hiring on monthly or daily basis. 
Location – On site and off-site support to each SACCO selected.  
Job Requirements & Experience  
The institution/candidate should have following experience, skills and knowledge mix:   
  work  experience in rural financial services for at least 10 years in small farmer and 
 
agri business credit in Uganda/East Africa region; 
sound  knowledge  and  prior  experience  in  agri  financing  –  VSLA  linkage  banking  for 
agriculture,  agri  equipment  financing,  receivable  financing,  agri  dealer/processor 
financing for input credit, innovative collaterals etc. is critical for TA; 
  good  working  knowledge  of  the  SACCOs,  and  financial  institutions,  insurance 
companies,  concerned  with  agriculture  finance  and  insurance  in  Uganda  and  strong 
ability and readiness to communicate, and work with SACCOs; 
  gender sensitivity in working with rural men and women understanding and addressing 
their needs;   
strong group facilitation skills and communication skills with farmers; 
fluent written and spoken English and one of the national languages; 
creative approach to problem solving.  
 
 
 
Duties and Responsibilities 
 
responsibility for development, roll out and scaling-up of agri-financial products 
including value chain financing products; One or more of the following products and 
also other need-based products will be developed.  
a) Financing farmers VSLA Linkage banking for agriculture either individually or 
VSLA wholesale lending; 
  Estimate credit need for individual farmers. 
  Based on the credit gaps at VSLA level, for seasonal credit, estimate marketing period 
and facilitate VSLA linkage banking with appropriate production cum marketing credit 
and crop insurance. 
  Evaluate existing products and make suitable modifications in the features.  Develop 
new products where necessary. Facilitate risk assessment and improve loan appraisal, 
early warning systems and monitoring systems to ensure excellent portfolio quality.  
  Train the SACCO Head office and branch staff in new products/product modifications. 
b) Value chain financing: 
  work in close co-ordination with SACCOs in developing Value Chain financing 
 
instruments; 
study the existing relationships and internal value chain mechanisms between 
farmers and agri businesses; 
select potential clusters and oilseeds; 
 
  ensure adequate data collection on producers. Devise data formats along with PSPs, 
train VSLA facilitators in data collection, supervise data collection on sample basis; 
64 
 
 
 
identify agri businesses with good reputation in dealing with farmers; 
select agribusinesses with clear intention of increasing their business through VCF 
arrangement; 
carry out a risk assessment of the VCF along with the banking personnel in 
understanding the VCF risks and devising the product; 
  hold joint consultations among agri businesses, farmer groups and bank to work out 
the contours of financing and ensuring repayments of bank loans; 
  discuss with the banks on cash flow-based lending mechanisms and new forms of 
collaterals such as first loss default guarantee (to be provided by the client and 
producers); 
  devise tri partite agreement among bank, agri business and farmers spelling out the 
 
 
terms of financing – amount, rate of interest, repayment period etc.; 
facilitate bundling of crop insurance with credit; 
facilitate development of SACCO’s credit policies towards VCF including risk 
assessment tools, due diligence exercise, loan monitoring and early warning 
systems; 
  draw up the protocols of pilot to scaling up; 
 
facilitate monitoring formats and tools for the banks and programme management to 
monitor the roll out of the VCF; 
  make necessary adjustments for the product for scaling up; 
 
  Train the SACCO staff in new products/product modifications. 
facilitate development of training material for training SACCO staff in VCF; and 
65 
Appendix 5: TOR of Service Provider for Technical Assistance for Oilseed Insurance 
Scheme Development 
1. Background to the assignment  
1.1  National Oil Seeds Project background  
The goal of the National Oil Seeds Project (NOSP) is inclusive rural transformation through 
sustainable development of the oilseeds sector. Specifically, the development objective of the 
project  seeks  to  facilitate  the  growth  of  competitive  inclusive  supply  chains  for  priority  oil 
seeds and their associated support markets in project locations. 
The  project  operates  in  6  hubs  located  in  Northern  and  Eastern  Uganda.  NOSP  expects  to 
reach at least 120,000 households. The main direct beneficiary group will be located in the 
poorest sub-counties and parishes in the target districts. Of this, 30% should be reached with 
agricultural insurance activities supported by NOSP. 
One of the activities of the project is to pilot and scale-up insurance amongst the smallholder 
oilseed agricultural sector. 
1.2 Overview of the assignment 
The  service  provider  will  provide  technical  assistance  to  relevant  institution(s)  in  order  to 
increase  access  of  smallholders  to  crop  insurance  for  oilseeds  across  NOSP  hubs  within 
Northern  and  Eastern  Uganda.  The  oilseed  crop  of  focus  within  NOSP  are  sunflower, 
groundnut, soybean, and sesame.  
Whilst  there  are  existing  insurance  products  on  the  market,  not  all  of  them  are  reaching 
smallholder  oilseed  farmers  within  NOSP.  Working  with  aggregators  such  as  MFIs,  banks, 
VSLAs, input providers, and digital service providers could help improve access to insurance 
and scale-up the market in order to become more sustainable. It can also help the aggregators 
improve the services offered to smallholders.  
The  service  provider  would  be  expected  to  build  on  the  work  of  the  Sida-financed,  IFAD-
implemented  INSURED  programme  and  other  sector  developments,  particularly  of  the 
Ugandan Agricultural Insurance Scheme (UAIS). The particular focus of the assignment is on 
developing  new  or  existing  delivery  channels  for  improving  access  to  existing  oilseed 
insurance  products  for  smallholders.  In  case  there  is  a  need  identified,  but  no  suitable 
products 
product 
development/adjustments instead.  
provider  may 
service 
choose 
exist, 
focus 
the 
on 
to 
It  is  within  this  context  that  a  specialized  service  provider  or  consultants  is  sought  to 
implement technical assistance activities relating to scaling-up of oilseed crop insurance for 
NOSP beneficiaries in Northern and Eastern Uganda. 
There are two main activities underpinning the technical assistance: 
1.  Feasibility study; and 
2.  Implementation support 
The  work  will  seek  to  collaborate  with  and  build  on  that  of  others  working  to  improve 
agricultural insurance products and services for oilseed smallholders, in particular that of the 
INSURED  technical  assistance  programme  which  is  financed  by  the  Swedish  International 
Development  Cooperation  Agency  (Sida)  and  implemented  by  IFAD,  in  addition  to  work 
66 
undertaken  by  the  Ugandan  Agricultural  Insurance  Scheme  (UAIS)  by  the  Agricultural 
Insurance Consortium (AIC).  
It is expected that as a result of this technical assistance, existing product(s) will be scaled-
up  within  hubs  where  agricultural  insurance  penetration  is  lower  than  average  amongst 
oilseed smallholder farmers.  At least one aggregator/delivery channel and one insurer would 
receive technical assistance, on a cost-share basis.  
2. Scope of work 
The service provider shall carry out the following key activities: 
2.1 
Feasibility assessment 
The objectives of the feasibility assessment will be to determine which NOSP hubs to target 
with implementation support, and what is required to improve access to oil seed agricultural 
insurance for smallholders in those hubs, in terms of delivery channels, bundling of insurance 
with other products/services, or if necessary, product development/adjustments. 
It  should  be  comprised  of  desk  research,  and  field  visits  to  conduct  focused  group  and  in-
depth interviews within the project areas with target farmers, value chain operators, financial 
institutions, and partner organizations, as well as interviews with project staff and partners. 
The  studies  will  focus  on  supply  and  demand  opportunities  and  constraints  relative  to 
improving access to agricultural insurance for oilseed smallholder farmers targeted by NOSP. 
Particular  consideration  should  be  given  to  sustainability  and  scalability  of  agricultural 
insurance  within  the  market  and  governmental  context.  It  should  be  carried  about  in 
consultation with NOSP, AIC, the identified individual insurance company, and the INSURED-
programme. 
The study should analyse aspects including: 
  Production characteristics, including: 
o  Risks: main production risks and constraints within the relevant value chain(s), 
relevant  geographical  areas,  and  amongst  target  groups/partners  of  the 
project/programme  
o  Production  features:  type  of  production,  average  level  of  production,  inputs 
(what, where purchased, how financed, level of quality) 
  Demand and need of different target group(s) and partners, including: 
o  Farmers and their cooperatives/groups, financial service providers, value chain 
actors like input suppliers, buyers etc. Include analysis of digital and non-digital 
services. 
o  Access  to  finance:  access  to  formal  financial  institutions  (MFIs,  banks, 
SACCOs); membership of informal financial service providers (VSLAs); Include 
analysis of digital and non-digital services. 
o  Access  to  agricultural  insurance:  whether  or  not  they  have  access,  where 
purchased, or what is preventing access 
o  Trusted rural service providers used for production and/or financing needs 
o 
Income characteristics and cycles of the target group(s)/value chain(s) and any 
links to markets etc. 
  Supply side, including: 
o  Analysis  of  the  existing  agricultural  insurance  provision  in  Uganda.  Identify 
potential insurers  for  technical  assistance  during  the  implementation  support 
step; 
67 
o 
and 
distribution 
different 
Intermediaries 
intermediaries/distribution channels have with the target group and potential 
interest and capacity in playing a role in insurance scheme delivery; possible 
opportunities for bundling of insurance with other  services.  Identify potential 
delivery channel(s) for technical assistance during the implementation support 
step; 
channels: 
links 
the 
o  Government:  relevant  enabling/restrictive  policies;  legal  and  regulatory 
frameworks; role and needs of UAIS and AIC in terms of delivery mechanisms 
o  Development  initiatives:  other  relevant  existing  or  upcoming  development 
INSURED 
the  Sida-financed, 
IFAD-implemented 
including 
initiatives, 
programme 
The study should highlight conclusions and proposed next steps for implementation support, 
including identification of partner(s) invested in receiving technical assistance to support their 
implementation.  
2.2 Implementation support 
Based on the needs identified in the feasibility assessment, alternative bundling and delivery 
of products, and if needed, product adjustments will be carried out by the service provider. 
Technical  assistance  shall  be  provided  to  one  or  more  delivery  channels  in  with  relevant 
insurer(s).  The  purpose  is  to  scale-up  existing  product(s)  within  hubs  where  agricultural 
insurance penetration is lower than average amongst oilseed smallholder farmers. 
The  focus  of  NOSP’s  support  is  on  developing  digital  or  non-digital  delivery  channels  and 
bundling  for  existing  products,  such  as  with  credit,  input  providers,  or  VSLAs.  Particular 
emphasis  should  be  on  partnering  with  financial  or  non-financial  service  providers  already 
reaching  the  NOSP  target  group.  Alternatively,  if  necessary  for  scaling-up,  product 
adjustments may be carried out to cover farmers in additional sub-counties or improve level 
of coverage, or speed of claims processing. This will improve access to agricultural insurance 
products on the market, but not currently reaching people in need, and will increase the value 
clients get from insurance by improving access to other useful products and services. These 
are important aspects to help create a sustainable market and to keep products affordable 
and reliable for the future.  
The focus for implementation support should be agreed in consultation with AIC, NOSP and 
the INSURED programme. 
The key implementation support steps should include: 
  Seek partner insurer(s). Determine interest and cost-sharing of insurer(s) wanting 
to  scale-up  an  existing  product  through  alternative  delivery  channels.  Create  a 
tripartite Memorandum of Understanding; 
  Technical assistance to delivery channel development. Activities should include 
support to the delivery channel(s) and the insurer(s) in: 
  Designing  improvement(s)  in  the  distribution  and  administration  model  for  the 
project target group(s) to lower costs and improve access, describing the consumer 
journey; 
  Set-up  administrative  processes  and  procedures  to  implement  the  new  delivery 
aspect(s) of the insurance scheme; 
  Build capacity of insurer(s) and delivery channels in specific skills as required 
  Build  awareness  and  capacity  of  farmers  to  access  insurance  through  the  new 
distribution channel 
68 
  After the first year of implementation, based on client feedback and data, analyse 
results and adjust insurance scheme and processes as necessary; 
  Work closely with the Ugandan insurance sector and other relevant stakeholders 
in Uganda; 
  Liaise and cooperate closely with NOSP, INSURED, the AIC; 
  Document, report and disseminate information and lessons. 
In the event product development/adjustments are to be prioritized over developing delivery 
mechanisms  to  reach  NOSP  smallholder  farmers,  the  following  activities  are  required  for 
technical assistance to product development/adjustments: 
  Collect and analysing data/information and create loss functions  
  Model the impact of risk on household income and expenditures, analyse ability of 
smallholders to withstand smaller and larger shocks, and derive protection needs 
of oilseed smallholder farmers 
  Develop  a  business  case  for  an  oilseed  insurance  scheme  linked  to  the  project 
target  group(s),  develop  market  projections  and  financials,  and  design  growth 
strategy for insurance scheme; 
  Design (or adapting existing) insurance products, outlining terms and premiums of 
the insurance policy;  
  Support reinsurance negotiation 
  Analyse  product  performance  after  one-year,  providing  support  to  product 
adjustments as needed 
  Liaise  with  the  Ugandan  insurance  sector  and  other  relevant  stakeholders  in 
Uganda and involve key partners in the product development process; 
  Liaise and cooperate closely with NOSP, INSURED, the AIC; 
  Document, report and disseminate information and lessons. 
Timeline and Deliverables 
DELIVERABLE 
DEADLINE 
ESTIMATED 
DAYS 
TOTAL 
on 
(Dependent 
available  budget, 
location 
of 
expertise etc.) 
Feasibility study 
To include: 
o  Study outline 
o  Mission ToR 
o  Draft feasibility study 
o  Final  feasibility  study  incorporating 
comments and feedback 
Implementation support 
Seek  partner 
channel(s) 
Technical  assistance  to  delivery  channel 
development, including: 
insurer(s)  and  delivery 
Project Year 2 
30  days  over  2 
months 
Project Year 2 
5  
Project Year 2 and 3 
65 over 2 years 
  Designing 
improvement(s) 
in 
the 
and 
distribution 
administration  model  for  the 
69 
project target group(s) to lower 
improve  access, 
costs  and 
describing 
consumer 
the 
journey; 
  Set-up administrative processes 
and  procedures  to  implement 
the  new  delivery  aspect(s)  of 
the insurance scheme; 
  Build  capacity  of  insurer(s)  and 
in  specific 
delivery  channels 
skills as required 
  Build awareness and capacity of 
insurance 
farmers  to  access 
through  the  new  distribution 
channel 
  After 
the 
year 
of 
first 
implementation, based on client 
feedback  and  data,  analyse 
results  and  adjust  insurance 
scheme  and  processes  as 
necessary; 
  Work  closely  with  the  Ugandan 
insurance  sector  and  other 
relevant 
in 
Uganda; 
stakeholders 
  Liaise  and  cooperate  closely 
with NOSP, INSURED, the AIC; 
  Document, 
disseminate 
lessons 
report 
and 
information  and 
Service provider profile  
The service provider or consultants shall propose a team of at least two experts. The Team 
Leader should be a specialist in agricultural insurance. The team should further be composed 
of  relevant  expertise  which  should  include  one  or  more  of  the  following  specialisms: 
agricultural  insurance;  consumer  technology;  rural/agricultural  finance;  value  chain 
development. 
The Team Leader should possess the following expertise: 
  At least eight-years working in agricultural insurance in oil seeds, or similar 
smallholder crops 
  Based in or experience working in Uganda, or a similar context 
  Previous experience with agricultural insurance assessments 
  Experience in formulation, operation and management of agricultural insurance 
systems; 
  Ability to develop sustainable business cases for agricultural insurance; 
  Demonstrated capacity to develop insurance schemes based on clients’ needs and 
demands; 
  Capacity to design customer journeys suited to rural settings and the living 
circumstances of smallholder farmers; 
70 
  Ability to form partnerships with insurance, reinsurance companies, and distribution 
channels, and to create a collaborative working environment in partnerships. 
  Professional knowledge of English. 
71 
E.  Farm Production Advisors Scheme  
123.  To  provide  appropriate  technical  advice  and  support  to  oilseed  smallholder 
producers, NOSP will develop an FPA scheme. The objective is within the first three 
years  to  train  400  FPAs,  and  recruit  200  of  them  to  support  200  clusters  across 
project hubs.  These FPAs will be embedded in the NOSP clusters and sponsored by 
farmers groups, clusters, agro-dealers, agents and/or millers. FPAs will be expected 
to: 
  Provide essential production and business advice to farmers in the clusters in which 
they are based to enable farmers to adopt the improved production practices necessary 
for smallholder commercialisation of their oil seed crops. 
  Set-up and operate demonstrations displaying best practice production techniques for 
oilseed crops, along with the use of small-scale mechanization and equipment. 
  Complete  an  approved  training  programme  covering  both  technical  and  business 
aspects of approximately 12 months, covering two seasons. This will include an initial 
2-week residential training, three contact sessions per season (planting, mid-season 
and harvesting) plus on-the-job coaching by the training provider. 
124.  The extension services will be structured as follows:  
Recruitment of service providers at national 
and hub level, overall supervision of the 
service provdiers  at national and hub level 
by the PCU focal person
Recruited on a competitive basis
Develop training curriculm , trains  & 
supervises hub based PSPs
PCU Agronomist
National Level Service provider
Six hub-based PSPs selected on a 
competitive basis by PCU
Train field based extension officers  and 
monitoring
Hub based 
service 
providers
Hub based 
service 
provider
Hub based 
service 
provider
Hub based 
service 
providers
Hub based 
service 
providers
Hub based 
service 
providers
200 PFAs  will be recurited  to support 
farmers in production through 
training, demonstration, organize field 
days, monitoring farmers
Timely reports
FPA
FPA
FPA
FPA
FPA
FPA
20 groups of 
25-30  
members
20 groups of 
25-30 
members
20 groups of 
25-30 
members
20 groups of 
25-30 
members
20 groups of 
25-30 
members
20 groups of 
25-30 
members
125.  Contracting of service providers will be done in the first year of the project whilst 
actual farm advisory services will commence in the second year when all relevant 
stakeholders have been recruited and received training. Contracts for National and 
Hub-based PSPs will be initially for 3 years while the FPAs are expected to support 
farmers  for  two  years  after  which  sponsoring  organizations  will  fund  the  FPAs 
completely.  
72 
126.  NOSP  will  procure  through  competitive  tender  (see  Procurement  Plan  for 
process)  one  lead  national  PSP  for  extension  service  provision.  They  will  be 
responsible  for  the  overall  leadership  and  performance  of  the  scheme.  They  will 
design and set-up all aspects of the scheme, including design of the ToT training and 
materials  to  be  used  for  farm  training.  The  lead  service  provider  will  also  be 
responsible for supervising and quality assurance of the performance of the scheme 
implementers. 
127.  The lead service provider will be identified through a competitive bidding method 
that  will  be  advertised  in  national  newspapers.  The  lead  PSP  should  meet  the 
following criteria: 
  10 years' experience in providing agricultural extension/community 
development services 
  Experience in curriculum development for agriculture projects 
  Experience working in the oilseed sector 
  Knowledge of the project area.  
128.  Key activities of the lead service provider are: 
  Review existing extension curricula used in VODP2 and other projects, and 
develop a curriculum for agricultural service provision that focuses on 
promoting sustainable, climate smart good agricultural practices and farming 
as a business for profitable oilseeds production.  Suggested topics are:  
Agriculture extension  
Production and post-harvest 
management  
Oilseed crop specific agronomic practices   Group dynamics 
Integrated soil fertility management 
Integrated pest management 
Climate smart technologies such as 
minimum tillage, intercropping, improved 
crop varieties 
Post-harvest handling and processing 
Farming as a business 
Participatory extension methods 
How to set up demonstration plots 
How to conduct field days 
  Produce simple technical guides and videos on good agronomic practices, cost 
benefit analysis and farming as a business for the target oilseed crops in 
English and translated into local languages. Technical guides should be 
pictorial to cater for illiterate farmers.  
  Conduct a ToT for the six hub-based PSPs using the developed curriculum. The 
first training will be a residential two-week course covering all the topics in the 
curriculum.  Three  follow-up  3-day  training  workshops  will  be  run  at  the  hub 
level to further build the capacity of the hub-based officers.  
  Provide within season mentoring to the hub-based PSPs 
  Develop the FPA scheme to provide sustainable and private sector-led extension 
services (see full details below). 
129.  An  expression  of  interest  will  be  advertised  for  interested  organizations, 
individuals and groups to identify and co-finance FPAs. The sponsoring organization 
can  either  be  an  input  supplier,  farmer  group,  HLFO,  or  a  miller.  Sponsoring 
organizations will nominate at least three candidates (<35 years old) based on a set 
of  criteria  (described  in  the  contracting  section),  from  which  the  two  best  will  be 
73 
accepted to the training programme. The position will be appointed to the highest 
performing candidate from the training, with the second trainee acting as a stand-
by  FPA,  in  case  the  first  FPA  leaves  the  position  or  fails  to  do  perform  well.  Co-
financing of the FPA will be on a reducing scale. If the sponsor is an individual, FG 
or HLFO, it will have to pay 20% in Year 1 towards a female FPA and 30% towards 
a male FPA. In Year 2, this increases to 40% and 60%, respectively.  Traders, off-
takers and millers will have pay 30% in Year 1 30% towards a female FPA and 50% 
towards  a  male  FPA.  In  Year  2  this  increases  to  50%  and  70%  respectively.  The 
programme  ends  after  two  years  (four  seasons).  After  that,  if  the  sponsoring 
organisation sees value in the services of the FPA, they will have to cover 100% of 
their costs. 
130.  The following characteristics are expected of the FPAs: 
  Should be resident in the community 
  Should have access to at least one acre of farming land (which should be verified 
by the sponsoring organization and hub-based PSP) to carry out demonstrations of 
improved technologies 
  Should demonstrate an interest in farming 
  Good relationship with and accepted by the local community 
  Honest, dependable and committed 
  Willing to participate in training within and outside the community 
  Must be literate. 
The FPA activities include: 
  Participate in the training programmes conducted by the hub-based PSPs on extension 
approaches and farming as a business 
  Train the cluster of 500-600 farmers organized into groups of 25 to 30 on farming as 
a  business,  agronomic  practices,  post-harvest  management  and  marketing  for  the 
oilseed crops grown by farmers. Farmer training should be done in a field and should 
coincide  with  the  cropping  calendar  to  allow  demonstration  of  activities  such  as 
planting, fertilizer application, weed management and harvesting. 
In  existing  hubs,  the  FPA  should  work  with  existing  groups  instead  of  forming  new 
ones and identify contact farmers for ease of mobilization 
 
  Establish  a  demonstration  field  to  demonstrate  techniques  on  e.g.  drought  tolerant 
varieties,  efficient  use  of  fertilizers  (organic  and  inorganic),  pest/disease  resistant 
crops, mechanisation, and use of inoculant for soybean.  
  Organize field days and exchange visits. Field days and exchange visits are meant to 
share experiences and show-case the performance of new technologies to wider group 
of farmers and can be organized at planting, at the vegetative stage of the crop or at 
harvesting. 
  Support farmers in input and output marketing by linking farmers to off takers 
  Produce periodic reports on activities done, including uptake of new technologies by 
farmers and farmer successes and challenges faced during the cropping season 
131.  To be able to establish a demonstration field, the FPA will be supplied with an 
extension kit containing vouchers for purchasing of inputs from local agro-dealers 
for  conducting  demonstration  plots,  a  soil  test  kit,  knapsack  sprayer,  printed  and 
audio-visual communication materials. The voucher inputs will include seed for an 
acre (25kg for soybean, 3kg for sesame, 2kg for sunflower), 50kg of fertilizer, and a 
pack  of  rhizobia  inoculant  per  season.  The  supply  of  inputs  will  be  done  for  four 
74 
seasons.  The FPA will also receive a travel allowance to enable them to move to and 
between farmers groups within the cluster. 
132. 
In  addition,  links  will  be  made  by  the  PCU  agronomist  with  other  agricultural 
productivity activities such as the GoU PlantWise program, the International Fertiliser 
Development  Corporation  (IFDC)  managed  CATALIST  project  and  the  Integrated 
Seed  Sector  Development  (ISSD)  project  which  all  work  in  the  programme  area. 
Where seed companies are interested in demonstrating their varieties, they will fund 
their  demos  established  at  the  FPA's  field.  In  areas  where  farmer  groups  are 
dispersed and it is not feasible to have one demo, two demonstration fields should 
be established and inputs supplied by the project. 
Expected outputs of the FPAs work include: 
  At least 500 farmers receive training on agriculture and farming as a business 
  50 farmer field visits per year (farm visits once a week) 
  One demonstration field established per season per FPO 
  Two field days are held per season per FPO (either for showing land preparation, 
crop establishment or harvesting)  
  Two exchange visits to best performing farmers per season per FPA.  
133.  Hub based PSPs will be allowed to bid for more than one hub but can  only be 
selected for not more than two hubs. If one bidder scores highest in more than two 
hubs, two winning contracts will be awarded for those two sub-regions in which the 
bidder wins by the largest scoring point margin. If the same bidder scores highest 
also in other hubs, the contracts in these hubs will be awarded to the bidder that 
scores  the  second  highest  points  by  the  evaluation  committee.  They  should  meet 
the following criteria: 
  Have experience in agriculture extension and the oilseed sector in particular 
  Experience in capacity building 
  Knowledgeable of the project area 
  Preference will be given to locally based PSP. 
134.  Key activities of the hub-based service provider are: 
  Receive training from the National PSP 
 
Implement the FPA scheme to select and train 400 FPAs (200 are needed by NOSP 
but training more allows for dropouts and for selection of the best FPA candidate). 
  Conduct an FPA training programme consisting of an initial residential two-week 
course covering all the topics in the curriculum. Three follow-up three-day training 
workshops per season will be run to further build the capacity of the FPAs.  
  Training  will  be  complemented  by 
field-based  mentoring  with  practical 
demonstrations  of  farm  activities  such  as  planting,  land  preparation,  fertilizer 
application, etc. Post-harvest training will be done towards the end of the cropping 
season. 
  Attend at least three training sessions conducted by the FPAs in the first season 
to support and identify gaps. In subsequent years, follow up could be reduced to 
attending one training in a season. Hub-based PSPs will organize end of season 
meetings to review implementation and to address any challenges faced by FPOs 
135.  The farm advisory services scheme will be coordinated by the  PCU agronomist 
working together with the National and Hub-based PSPs. The agronomist will also 
coordinate FPA activities with seed and mechanization schemes. End of season Sub-
75 
County  field  days  to  review  activities  and  share  experiences  will  be  organized  by 
hub-based PSPs with participation of National PSP and the Agronomist. This will be 
complemented  by  Annual  Outcome  Surveys  done  by  M&E.    Experiences  from 
successful interventions will then be built into the planned activities for the following 
season.  
Sequencing of activities for the farm advisory services scheme 
Tasks 
Task lead 
Year 
1 
Year 
2 
Year 
3 
Year 
4 
Recruitment of an agronomist 
 PCU 
Identification of national PSP 
PCU Agronomist 
Identification  of  hub-based 
PSPs 
Development and technical 
review of a curriculum 
Training of hub level PSPs 
Identification of FPOs 
PCU Agronomist 
National PSP + 2 technical 
reviewers 
Lead National PSP 
Sponsoring organisations  
Training of FPO 
hub based PSP 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Farmer training 
Setting up of demonstration 
field 
Conduct field days 
FPA 
FPA 
FPA 
Monitoring and evaluation 
FPA,  Hub  and  National 
PSP 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
136. 
F.  Auxiliary Farm Services Promotion Scheme 
NOSP will establish an Auxiliary Farm Services Promotion scheme to increase the 
availability of powered tillage, spraying, planting, harvesting and threshing 
services. To stimulate investment, the scheme will provide partial subsidies and 
assist in arranging affordable financing for the purchase of tractors and 
implements.  The scheme will be promoted through the MSP’s and be open to 
cooperatives, commercial tillage service providers and other actors embedded in 
the oilseed value chain such as PGs or input suppliers. The scheme will provide 
training for the operators of the tractors and implements and will demonstrate the 
advantages of the equipment to smallholder farmers on the FPA’s demo plots and 
at the ZARDIs. Through the MSP’s, NOSP will link up the new providers of these 
services with clustered groups of smallholder farmers. All equipment will be fitted 
with telematics to allow the owners of the equipment to optimise the deployment 
of the tractors and enable them to manage the service and operators. The scheme 
will train up mechanics in each of the hubs to ensure the expertise for routine 
maintenance and repairs is available to the keep the tractors and implements in 
good running condition. Once these services are established, they are expected to 
run on a fully commercial basis without any ongoing public subsidy.  
137. 
The scheme aims to facilitate the private sector investment into 450 twenty HP two-
wheel tractors, 150 Sixty HP 2wd tractors and 55 eighty HP 4wd tractors. This will 
76 
create a phased in seasonal tillage capacity of just under 20,000 acres in PY 2, 
ending with a capacity for 120,000 acres in PY 7 if the scheme is fully utilized. 
138. 
Recruitment of lead service provider. A lead technical service provider will be 
competitively procured and be responsible for the overall leadership and 
performance of the scheme. They will design and set-up all aspects of the scheme, 
including design of the graduated equipment packages and associated business 
models as well as ToT training materials and operations and maintenance guides to 
be used by the auxiliary service providers.  
139. 
The lead service provider will be identified through a competitive bidding method 
that will be advertised in national newspapers. The lead PSP is be expected to 
drive and lead the set-up of the scheme. For this the PSP must be able to 
demonstrate their capacity for the following capabilities: 
  Demonstrated  capacity  to  supply  the  equipment  specified  in  the  scheme  for  the 
small, medium and large size mechanisation packages. They should have an official 
agency for reputable brands of all tractors and implements as specified in Table 1. 
This  must  be  verified  by  an  official  agreement  with  the  manufacturers  of  the 
tractors and implements  
  Access to a fully equipped workshop 
  A permanent workshop and parts store in one of the hubs so that major repairs 
can be undertaken 
  A field service team and vehicle 
  Truck for the delivery of assembled tractors and implements to the beneficiaries 
  An established presence in Uganda and registered company in operation for no less 
than 10 years. 
  Relationships  with  financial  institutions  and  banks  in  Uganda  that  qualify  to  co 
finance the incentive scheme 
  years audited accounts. 
Table 1: Key Tractor and Equipment Types and Related Training Modules 
Module 
Walk behind 
tractor20 hp 
Sections 
Introduction 
Safety 
Instruments 
and Controls 
Operations 
Operating 
The tractor 
Content 
I. 
Uses of a tractor and its implements 
I. 
II. 
III. 
I. 
Tractor and Implement Safety 
Safety Symbols 
PPE 
Instrument Panel – comprehension of 
gauges, lights, switches and levers 
II.  Operating Controls –function and use 
I. 
II. 
III. 
Engine run in 
Starting the engine 
Trouble shooting and jump starting 
I.  Gear change 
II. 
III. 
IV. 
V. 
VI. 
VII.  Detaching and implement 
Using the clutch 
Brakes 
Power Take off shaft 
Control lever settings 
Attaching an implement 
77 
VIII. 
Towing the tractor 
IX.  Draw bar 
Lubricants 
I.  Maintenance chart 
II. 
III.  General maintenance 
IV. 
Service and access 
V.  Grease lubrication 
VI. 
VII. 
VIII. 
IX. 
X. 
XI. 
I. 
II. 
III. 
Engine 
Clutch 
Brakes 
Transmission and hydraulics 
Tires 
Electrical components 
Fuel quality 
Contamination 
Hazards 
I.  General 
Maintenance 
and 
Adjustments 
Fuel 
handling and 
Storage 
Service 
Records 
Introduction  Uses of a tractor and its implements 
Two-wheel 
drive 60 hp 
and 4-wheel 
80 hp tractor 
Safety 
Instruments 
and Controls 
Operations 
IV. 
V. 
PPE 
III. 
Tractor and Implement Safety 
Safety Symbols 
Instrument Panel – comprehension of 
gauges, lights, switches and levers 
Operating Controls –function and use 
IV. 
V. 
Engine run in 
Starting the engine 
Trouble shooting and jump starting 
Operating 
The tractor 
X.  Gear change, Ranges and drive options 
XI. 
XII. 
XIII. 
XIV. 
XV. 
XVI. 
XVII. 
XVIII.  Detaching and implement 
Using the clutch 
Brakes 
Power Take off shaft 
Hydraulic system 
Control lever settings 
Auxiliary Hydraulic system 
Attaching an implement 
Towing the tractor 
XIX. 
XX.  Differential lock 
XXI.  Draw bar 
XXII. 
XXIII. 
PTO 
Speed charts 
Maintenance 
and 
Adjustments 
XII.  Maintenance chart 
XIII. 
Lubricants 
XIV.  General maintenance 
Service and access 
XV. 
XVI.  Grease lubrication 
XVII. 
Engine 
78 
Chisel Plow 
Disc harrow 
Trailer 
Boom 
Sprayers 
XVIII. 
XIX. 
XX. 
XXI. 
XXII. 
XXIII. 
Clutch 
Brakes 
Transmission and hydraulics 
Hydrostatic steering 
Front Wheel Hub alignments 
Tires 
Fuel 
handling and 
Storage 
Service 
Records 
Electrical components 
IV. 
V. 
Fuel quality 
Contamination 
Hazards 
General 
Components and their function 
Introduction  Use and purpose 
Safety 
Operation 
General and field use 
Maintenance 
and repairs 
Hitching the chisel plow 
Setting the chisel plow depth 
I. 
II. 
I.  General maintenance 
II. 
Changing, shoes, shanks and shear 
bolts 
Introduction  Use and purpose 
Safety 
Operation 
I.  General safety during use 
I. 
II. 
III. 
Hitching the disc harrow 
Setting the harrow geometry 
Transporting the Disc Harrow 
Maintenance 
and repairs 
Introduction 
Operating 
with a trailer 
Maintenance 
Introduction 
Safety 
Components 
and controls 
Operation 
I.  General maintenance 
Changing discs 
II. 
III.  Oiling and greasing gangs 
Parts and function 
Hitching 
Load distribution and securing loads 
Tire pressures 
Control under load 
Hydraulics (if fitted) 
Reversing 
I. 
I. 
II. 
III. 
IV. 
V. 
VI. 
I.  Wheels 
II. 
III. 
I. 
Hydraulics (if fitted) 
Jack 
Use of the boom sprayer 
PPE 
Pesticides and labels 
II. 
III. 
IV.  Mixing 
V.  Drift 
VI. 
VII. 
I. 
II. 
III. 
IV. 
I. 
79 
Tank rinsing 
Cardan Shaft 
Pump 
Boom 
Nozzles 
Pressure gauges 
Adjuvants, surfactants and buffers 
II.  Water quality 
Filling 
III. 
Tank mixes 
IV. 
Calibration 
V. 
Nozzles types and pressure (Fan, cone, 
VI. 
induction) 
PTO RPM 
Fitting Cardan Shaft 
Transporting the sprayer 
Flushing and cleaning 
Filters and nozzles 
Pump 
Cardan Shaft 
Parts of the planter 
How a planter works 
VII. 
VIII. 
IX. 
I. 
II. 
III. 
IV. 
I. 
II. 
Maintenance 
Row Planters 
and seed 
drills 
Introduction 
Safety 
I.  General safety guidelines when using 
Components 
and controls 
Operation 
Hoppers 
the planter 
Transporting the implement 
Cardan Shaft (if fitted) 
II. 
I. 
II.  Mechanical drives 
III. 
IV.  Metering devices 
V. 
VI. 
I. 
II. 
III. 
IV. 
V. 
VI. 
VII. 
Coulter wheels 
Press wheels 
Calibration 
Planting depth 
Pressure and depth on coulters  
Pressure on press wheels 
Filling with seed and fertilizer 
Transporting the planter 
Trouble shooting 
Tractor 
mounted 
Harvesters 
Maintenance 
Introduction 
I.  Greasing and lubrication 
II. 
I. 
II. 
Cleaning and off-season maintenance 
Parts of a harvester 
How a harvester works 
Safety 
I.  General Safety Guidelines when using a 
tractor mounted harvester 
Components 
and controls 
Operation 
PTO and cardan drive 
Belts and pulleys 
Augers 
Cutter bar 
II. 
I. 
II.  Gearbox 
III. 
IV. 
V. 
VI.  Drum rotor and concave 
VII. 
VIII. 
I. 
II. 
III. 
Sieves 
Leavers and hydraulics 
Setting the concave and sieves 
Trouble shooting 
Maintenance 
I.  Greasing and lubrication 
80 
II. 
Adjusting and replacing pulleys and 
belts 
III.  Gathering chains, sprockets,  
IV. 
V. 
VI. 
VII. 
VIII. 
I. 
II. 
Adjustment of width of stripper plates. 
Adjust drive chains.  
Sickle blades and guards 
Chains and bearings for wear; 
Cleaning and off-season maintenance 
Parts of a thresher  
How a thresher works 
Tractor 
powered 
Threshers 
Introduction 
Safety 
I.  General safety when using the thresher 
Components 
and controls 
Operation 
Maintenance 
(feeding crop into thresher NB) 
II.  Gearbox and pulleys 
III. 
IV. 
I. 
II. 
III. 
IV. 
V. 
VI. 
VII. 
Concave and drum 
Sieves 
Fitting the cardan shaft 
Setting the RPM on the PTO 
Adjusting the concave and sieves 
Tensioning the belts and pulleys 
Un jamming the thresher 
Fan speed and airflow 
Feeding the thresher 
I.  Greasing  
II. 
III. 
IV. 
Tensioning belts 
Tire’s and wheels (if equipped) 
Basic repairs 
140. 
Key activities of the lead service provider are: 
  Development of a curriculum for the training on operation and maintenance  of 
the selected equipment within the scheme. There should be one module for each 
piece of equipment as per the table below. Each module must cover all aspects 
of operating and maintain the equipment for efficient use without damage and 
breakage.  An  emphasis  must  be  placed  on  delivering  a  good  service  to  the 
farmers and adjusting the use of the machinery to suite the local conditions. 
  Support PCU procurement for the selection of appropriate tractors, implements 
and equipment. 
  Advise  the  PCU  on  the  selection  and  procurement  of  the  equipment  so  that 
suitable equipment is selected. It is important that the tractors and implements 
are compatible and specified for the local soil conditions. 
  The PSP will conduct a technical due diligence on all applicants to the scheme to 
assess  their  requirements  for  equipment  and  make  a  recommendation  to  the 
PCU. 
  Verify that the trainees that have been on the training course with the hub-based 
PSP’s  have  passed  the  course  and  that  they  be  issued  with  a  certificate  of 
competency for the respective course 
  Provide comprehensive operator training to the six hub-based service providers 
for  this  scheme  on  the  tractors  and  implements  covered  by  the  scheme,  and 
covering the following modules: 
81 
Module 
1 Theory 
2 Tractors 
(2-wheel 
walking and 
4-wheel) 
3 Trailer 
Days 
requir
ed 
10 
days 
6 days 
Machine 
hours 
required 
under 
training 
0 
48 hrs. 
6 days 
48hrs. 
4 Tillage 
6 days 
6 days 
5 Planting 
2 days 
6 days 
6 Spraying 
2 days 
6 day 
7 harvesting 
2 day 
6 days 
8 threshing 
2 days 
6 days 
8 hrs. 
40hrs. 
8 hrs. 
40hrs. 
4 hrs. 
8 hrs. 
4 hrs. 
48 hrs. 
4hrs. 
8 hrs. 
4 hrs. 
48 hrs. 
2 hrs. 
6 hrs. 
2 hrs. 
48 hrs. 
4 hrs. 
8 hrs. 
4 hrs. 
48 hrs. 
Total 
60 
days 
480 hrs. 
Content 
Theory of all tractors and equipment 
Driving Tractor, hill start, reversing, 
emergency braking, steep decent and 
ascent, river crossings 
Hitching and maneuvering tractor with 
trailer 
Hitching, setting & maintenance of chisel 
plow 
Using the chisel plow in the field 
Hitching, setting & maintenance of disc 
harrow 
Using the disc harrow in the field 
Hitching and Cardan Shaft 
Calibration of planter/drill (Seed and 
fertilizer) 
Maintaining the planter 
Using the planter/drill in the fields 
Hitching and Cardan Shaft 
Filling and calibration of sprayer  
Maintaining and cleaning the sprayer 
Using the sprayer in the fields  
Hitching and Cardan Shaft 
Setting the harvester – cutter bar  
Maintaining and cleaning the combine 
Using the combine in the fields  
Hitching and Cardan Shaft 
Setting the thresher - drum speed and 
concave 
Maintaining and cleaning the combine 
Using the combine in the fields  
  Organise trainers’ course on an annual basis for a period of three years. 
  Carry out maintenance and repairs of the tractors and implements on an ongoing 
basis 
  Determine that the operators have successfully completed the training program at 
the Hub level PSP and are able to use the equipment. 
82 
Table 2: Performance-based milestones and payment schedules 
141. 
Recruitment of hub-based PSPs. NOSP will procure through competitive tender 
(see Procurement Plan for process) six hub-based PSPs for delivery of the 
commercial Auxiliary Farm Services provider scheme. They will be responsible for 
the overall delivery and implementation of the scheme. They will be trained and 
supported by the lead service provider. The qualifications for the hub-based PSP for 
Auxiliary Farmer Services include: 
A registered entity in Uganda 
2 years audited accounts and tax clearance certificate 
I. 
II. 
III.  Demonstrated experience of operating with agricultural equipment 
IV. 
A premise that is equipped with a basic workshop and tools for service and 
repairs. The workshop should have a roof and concrete floor with a service 
bay for at least 1 tractor 
Full time access to a field of a minimum of 5 acres for training purposes 
A room with desks, chairs and white board/chalk board for training 
Ability to provide a minimum of a 4-year work contract to trainers that have 
been trained under NOSP program. 
V. 
VI. 
VII. 
142.  Following training by the national service provider, the key activities of the hub-    
based service provider are: 
  Review  and  approve  the  candidates  put  forward  and  assure  they  have  the 
following minimum criteria: 
I.  Must be Ugandan 
II. 
III. 
IV. 
V. 
VI. 
Less than 35 years old 
Present a medical certificate 
Able and willing to work away from home.  
Completed primary education 
Have a work contract with the PSP for a minimum of a 2-year period  
  Provide  comprehensive  operator  training  (Table  3)  to  the  recipients  of  the 
scheme  on  the  use  of  the  tractors  and  implements  provided  for  as  per  the 
modules below. 
  Report monthly on progress to the PCU.  
83 
Develop curriculum & materials for modules6 training modules$60,000-----$0ToT Mech Bus. training of hub implementers (PSP)implementer4 trainers complete course$160,0004 trainers complete course$160,000----$0Monitoring & Mentoring of Hub Implementers /bimplementer-8 site visits to all hubs$80,0008 site visits to all hubs$80,0008 site visits to all hubs$80,0008 site visits to all hubs$80,000Total Mechanization Business Training Course Set-up$700,000$220,000 $160,000 $80,000 $80,000 $80,000 $80,000 Mile Stone and payments1. Mechanization Business Training Course Set-upAuxilary Services Scheme Design and SupervisionYr1Yr2Yr3Yr4Yr5Yr6 
Table 3: Training Course Schedule 
Module 
Days   Machine 
Content 
hours 
required 
under 
training 
0 
16 hrs. 
1 Theory 
2 Tractor 
3 days 
2 days 
3 Trailer 
2 days 
12hrs. 
4 Tillage 
1 day 
1 day 
5 Planting 
1 day 
1 day 
6 Spraying 
1 day 
7 
Harvesting 
8 Threshing 
1 day 
1 day 
1 day 
1 day 
1 day 
2 hrs. 
6 hrs. 
2 hrs. 
6 hrs. 
2 hrs. 
4 hrs. 
2 hrs. 
8 hrs. 
2 hrs. 
2 hrs. 
2 hrs. 
8 hrs. 
2 hrs. 
6 hrs. 
2 hrs. 
8 hrs. 
2 hrs. 
6 hrs. 
2 hrs. 
8 hrs. 
Theory of all tractors and equipment 
Driving Tractor, hill start, reversing, 
emergency braking, steep decent and 
ascent, river crossings 
Hitching and maneuvering tractor with 
trailer 
Hitching, setting & maintenance of 
chisel plow 
Using the chisel plow in the field 
Hitching, setting & maintenance of disc 
harrow 
Using the disc harrow in the field 
Hitching and Cardan Shaft 
Calibration of planter/drill (Seed and 
fertilizer) 
Maintaining the planter 
Using the planter/drill in the fields 
Hitching and Cardan Shaft 
Filling and calibration of sprayer  
Maintaining and cleaning the sprayer 
Using the sprayer in the fields  
Hitching and Cardan Shaft 
Setting the harvester – cutter bar  
Maintaining and cleaning the combine 
Using the combine in the fields  
Hitching and Cardan Shaft 
Setting the thresher - drum speed and 
concave 
Maintaining and cleaning the combine 
Using the combine in the fields  
143.  Custody of training equipment. The hub-based PSP will be supplied with a full 
set of equipment by the PCU for carrying out the above duties. The equipment will 
be under the jurisdiction of the National PSP who will allocate it to the hub-based 
PSP’s but will remain the property of the PCU. If these hub-based PSP’s do not fulfil 
the contractual obligations and deliverables, the equipment will be withdrawn and 
kept at the NOSP hub office or at the National PSP premises until another hub PSP 
is identified. 
84 
Table 4: Performance-based Milestones and Payment Schedules 
144.  Application  process  will  be  open  to  PGs,  private  companies  and  other 
organizations involved in the value chain. The scheme is thus open to commercial 
farmers,  input  providers,  aggregators  and  processors  in  the  value  chain.  The  key 
objective  is  that  the  scheme  supports  service  providers  that  have  a  link  to  the 
farmers  within  the  cluster  under  NOSP.  Recipients  and  their  affiliated  businesses 
may apply for a maximum of one complete package in each round of the scheme. 
Applicants should apply to the scheme through the PCU offices or at MSP meetings.  
The processing for pre-approval of all applications must be done at the PCU. Once 
applicants  have  become  beneficiaries  of  the  scheme  they  will  be  referred  to  as 
mechanization service providers. 
145.  Below,  the  guidelines  for  selecting  beneficiaries  and  allocation  of  the 
mechanization packages across the hubs are presented: 
  NOSP  should  strive  towards  an  equitable  distribution  of  the  mechanization 
 
 
packages across the hubs, but still be led by the market 
In  principal,  no  hub  should  receive  more  than  50%  of  the  pro  rata  allocated 
packages 
If  not  all  the  packages  were  taken  up  in  the  allocated  time,  these  will  be  made 
available in the following year at the same incentive level 
  The targeting of the scheme will be done by the PCU at the hub level MSP meetings. 
For  effective implementation, the allocation of equipment will be targeted at the 
clusters. It is vital that service providers of these mechanization services are linked 
to the farm clusters 
  The  Supervision  Missions  should  review  the  scheme  on  an  annual  basis.  Any 
bottlenecks  identified  should  be  dealt  with  by  the  PCU  as  efficiently  as  possible. 
The PCU should supply timely and accurate information from the telematics data 
base to the team for an accurate analysis. 
146.  The  PCU  must  ensure 
incentive 
agreement/contract  for  mechanization”  agreement  is  set  up  between  NOSP  and 
beneficiaries of the investment incentive to ensure entities do not take advantage of 
the scheme and that the scheme fulfils its purpose to increase the availability of farm 
legally  binding  “investment 
that  a 
85 
Tractor operator training modules44 training modules$22,00044 training modules$22,00044 training modules$22,00044 training modules$22,00044 training modules$22,000follow up trainig and mentoring of trained  operatorsimplementer21 sessions $10,50021 sessions $10,50021 sessions $10,50021 sessions $10,50021 sessions $10,500Monitoring of implementation on FPA's demo implementer21 site visits$2,10021 site visits$2,10021 site visits$2,10021 site visits$2,10021 site visits$2,100Total Mechanization Business Training Course Set-up$173,000$0 $34,600 $34,600 $34,600 $34,600 $34,600 Total for 5 hubs$865,000$173,000 $173,000 $173,000 $173,000 $173,000 Yr5Yr6B. Mechanization Business TrainingMile Stone and Payments for Hub PSP'sYr1Yr2Yr3Yr4 
I. 
II. 
III. 
IV. 
V. 
VI. 
VII. 
mechanization  services  to  the  oil  seed  sector  in  Uganda.  The  following  principals 
should be included in the contract 
Beneficiaries of the scheme must be made explicitly aware that they should make 
their services available to the farmers in the hubs.  
This will be enforced in the in agreement and monitored through the telematics.  
The telematics system may not be removed, and the beneficiary grants the NOSP 
full access to the information from the system  
The tractors and implements may be moved to another hub under the NOSP.  
The tractors and implements may not be moved out of the hubs for the first three 
years.   
If the beneficiary wishes to relocate the equipment, then 100% of the investment 
subsidy must be refunded to NOSP.  
In  the  event  there  is  a  default  in  payments  to  the  financial  institution,  the 
equipment will be re possessed and made available at cost to other applicants in 
the scheme. 
147.  Financing to the Scheme will be made available through commercial banks and 
other  financial  institutions.    Financial  institutions  will  be  supported  with  technical 
assistance  to  develop/modify  their  products  to  manage  their  risks  and  lend  on 
affordable  terms  to  finance  the  Scheme-related  investments.  Post  Bank  and 
Opportunity Bank have linkages with Mascor (John Deer) and Engineering Solutions 
(Tafe),  to  offer  loans  for  equipment  financing.  Its  foreseen  that  through  the 
Agricultural Credit Facility of the Bank of Uganda the banks will be able to offer credit 
with an interest rate of 12% per annum on terms that match the seasonal income 
flows of farmers and service providers.  
148.  The project will offer partial investment incentives to absorb some of the risk for 
the early adopters and then gradually reduce these incentives in subsequent rounds 
to  return  to  market-based  financing.  In  the  initial  rounds  of  the  scheme,  loan 
financing of at least 30% from a partner bank will be mandatory. The prospective 
Auxiliary Farm Service Providers must contribute at least 30% from own resources. 
The rest will be from the project contribution and credit from financial institutions. 
The scheme offers investment incentives ranging from 25-40% in round one (PY 2-
3), 15-25% in round two (PY 4-5) and 10% in round three (PY 6-7). The scheme 
aims  to  incentivise  more  women  to  become  involved  in  the  Scheme,  and  an 
additional 10 % subsidy is available on all packages and in all rounds if the applicant 
or the institution majority owned by females, or uses female operators.  
149.  The  Rural  Finance  Manager  in  the  NOSP  PCU  and  hub-based  technical  service 
providers will assist VSLAs, producer groups and other applicants of the scheme to 
arrange finance with the financial institutions participating in the scheme. The MSPs 
will be used to facilitate the engagement between the banks and scheme applicants. 
150.  Type of Equipment.  There will be three types of equipment packages available 
in  the  Scheme.  The  small  package,  based  around  a  20hp  walk-behind  tractor,  is 
targeted  at  producer  groups.  The  medium  and  large-scale  packages  are  for  2wd 
60hp  and  4wd  80  hp  tractors  is  aimed  at  cooperatives  and  commercial  service 
providers. The larger package is aimed at contractors. All packages are open to any 
applicant  within  the  value  chain.  The  National  PSP  will  assist  applicants  in 
determining  the  most  feasible  option.  The  scheme  should  be  driven  by  and  be 
adaptive to private sector demands. There will be annual reviews to assess the needs 
of the private sector and adjust the scheme to cater for these if necessary. 
86 
Round 1 – first movers Yr2-3 
Round 2 – early expanders Yr3-4 
87 
 Units  allocation guidelines for hubs   Contributions Total ValueC. Mechanization Business Financing Round 1 - First movers Yr 2-31. Small-scale mech package (US$8400 each, incl taxes)a. Investor = Producer group (incentive = 50% w/ women bonus)Investment incentive - NOSP4,200420,000       Beneficary contribution4,200420,000       Subtotal Investor = Producer group (incentive = 50% w/ women bonus)b. Investor = SME (incentive = 35% w/ women bonus)Investment incentive - NOSP2,940147,000       Beneficary contribution5,460273,000       Total units150                2. Medium-scale mech package (US$38800 each, incl taxes)a. Investor = Producer group (incentive = 50% w/ women bonus)Investment incentive - NOSP19,400582,000       Beneficary contribution19,400582,000       Subtotal Investor = Producer group (incentive = 50% w/ women bonus)b. Investor = SME (incentive = 35% w/ women bonus)Investment incentive - NOSP13,580407,400       Beneficary contribution25,220756,600       Total units60                  100                50                  20-2510-1530                  6-830                  6-8Auxilary(cid:9)Farm(cid:9)Service(cid:9)Scheme(cid:9)Schedule Units  allocation guidelines for hubs   Contributions Total ValueD. Mechanization Business Financing Round 2 - Early expanders Yr 4-51. Small-scale mech package (US$8400 each, incl taxes)a. Investor = Producer group (incentive = 35% w/ women bonus)Investment incentive - NOSP3,360336,000       Beneficary contribution5,040504,000       Subtotal Investor = Producer group (incentive = 35% w/ women bonus)b. Investor = SME (incentive = 25% w/ women bonus)Investment incentive - NOSP2,100105,000       Beneficary contribution6,300315,000       Total units150                2. Medium-scale mech package (US$38800 each, incl taxes)a. Investor = Producer group (incentive = 35% w/ women bonus)Investment incentive - NOSP15,520388,000       Beneficary contribution23,280582,000       Subtotal Investor = Producer group (incentive = 35% w/ women bonus)b. Investor = SME (incentive = 25% w/ women bonus)Investment incentive - NOSP9,700242,500       Beneficary contribution29,100727,500       Total units50                  3. Large-scale mech package (US$473300 each, incl taxes)a. Investor = Producer group (incentive = 35% w/ women bonus)Investment incentive - NOSP18,932189,320       Beneficary contribution28,398283,980       Subtotal Investor = Producer group (incentive = 35% w/ women bonus)b. Investor = SME (incentive = 25% w/ women bonus)Investment incentive - NOSP13,950209,250       Beneficary contribution41,850627,750       Total units25                  4-625                  3-410                  2-325                  4-620-3050                  8-12Auxilary(cid:9)Farm(cid:9)Service(cid:9)Scheme(cid:9)Schedule100                15                   
Round 3 Main Adopters Yr6-7 
151.  Telematics System. To develop the demand and supply linkages in the supply 
chain  an  “uber-type”  telematics  platform  will  be  piloted.  The  system  connects 
farmers, tractor operators and intermediaries and allows farmers to order and pay 
for the services on a mobile app. This platform also allows tractor owners to monitor 
movement and work progress of their equipment. The data from the system must 
be made available to the PCU  so that NOSP can analyse the when and where the 
tractors  are  working.  This  will  help  identify  bottlenecks  and  areas  of  low  uptake 
within the hubs so that the team can take timely action to address these issues and 
refocus resources as required. It will also allow the PCU to verify that the tractors 
are being used in accordance with the terms laid out in the beneficiary contracts. 
152.  Management and Implementation. In NOSP, the Scheme will be coordinated 
by the PCU Agronomist working together with the National and Hub-based PSPs. End 
of  season  hub  meetings  to  review  activities  and  share  the  experiences  will  be 
organized with participation of National PSP and the PCU  Agronomist.  This will be 
complemented  by  Annual  Outcome  Surveys  done  by  M&E  team  and  using  the 
telematics  data.    The  experiences  from  successful  interventions  will  then  be  built 
into the planned activities for the following season.  
88 
 Units  allocation guidelines for hubs   Contributions Total ValueMechanization Business Financing Round 3 - Main adopters Yr 6-71. Small-scale mech package (US$8400 each, incl taxes)a. Investor = Producer group (incentive = 20% w/ women bonus)Investment incentive - NOSP2,520252,000       Beneficary contribution5,880588,000       Subtotal Investor = Producer group (incentive = 20% w/ women bonus)b. Investor = SME (incentive = 20% w/ women bonus)Investment incentive - NOSP1,68084,000         Business contribution6,720336,000       Total units150                2. Medium-scale mech package (US$38800 each, incl taxes)a. Investor = Producer group (incentive = 20% w/ women bonus)Investment incentive - NOSP11,640232,800       Beneficary contribution27,160543,200       Subtotal Investor = Producer group (incentive = 20% w/ women bonus)b. Investor = SME (incentive = 20% w/ women bonus)Investment incentive - NOSP7,760155,200       Business contribution31,040620,800       Total units40                  -                       1,552,000    3. Large-scale mech package (US$473300 each, incl taxes)a. Investor = Producer group (incentive = 20% w/ women bonus)Investment incentive - NOSP14,199141,990       Beneficary contribution33,131331,310       Subtotal Investor = Producer group (incentive = 20% w/ women bonus)b. Investor = SME (incentive = 20% w/ women bonus)Investment incentive - NOSP11,160223,200       Business contribution44,640892,800       Total units30                  -                       696,500       3-550                  10-15100                20-303-510                  2-320                  3-5Auxilary(cid:9)Farm(cid:9)Service(cid:9)Scheme(cid:9)Schedule20                  20                   
Table 4:  Tractors and Equipment in the Farm Mechanization Packages to Be 
Supplied by the PSP under the Auxiliary Farm Services Scheme 
Small scale mechanization 
package (PG with minimum 
50 acres per season  
2-wheel walk-behind tractor 
20hp 
Tillage Implement attachments  Two tine chisel plow and 
Specification 
20hp diesel 
Trailer 
power tiller 
Pay load 1 ton 
Threshers – multi crop* 
Powered by tractor 
Harvester* 
Fleet management system 
Total 
Medium Size mechanization 
package for Coops with 
minimum of 300 
acres/season 
Tractor 
Sub soiler three tines 
Disc harrow 
Boom Sprayer 
Planter or Drill 
Tractor drawn and powered 
thresher * 
Tractor mounted and powered 
harvester* 
Trailer for implements 
Fleet management system 
Total 
Large size mechanization 
package for minimum of 
400 acres per season 
(commercial contractors) 
Tractors 
Powered by tractor -
mounted 
Telematics 
2-wheel drive 60hp 
Offset mounted disc 
harrow (LD) 20-disc x 
22” 
600L 12m boom 
Mounted Mechanical 4 
row planter or Mounted 
21 row disc drill 
NA 
NA 
5-ton multipurpose flat 
bed 
Telematics 
80 Hp 4x4 
Rippers/Subsoiler for 80Hp 
Tractor or similar 
Offset mounted disc harrow 
5 tine 400mm working 
depth 
26 x 22” discs 
89 
Price 
(USD) 
4,000 
2,000 
2,000 
3,000 
3000 
200 
11,200 
18,700 
1,980 
3,710 
1,590 
8,000 
6,000 
4,130 
200 
44,310 
25,500 
2,360 
5,550 
Boom Sprayers 
Planters or Drill 
Tractor drawn & powered 
thresher* 
Tractor mounted and powered 
harvester* 
Fleet management system 
Trailer for implements 
Total 
600L 12 m boom 
Mounted Mechanical 6 
row or Mounted 29 row 
disc drill 
na 
na 
Telematics 
5-ton multipurpose flat 
bed 
1,590 
8,000 
9,000 
200 
4,130 
56,330 
G.  Quality Declared Seed Production Scheme  
153.  Support  to  NARI  in-breeder  and  foundation  seed  production.  The 
production of sufficient quantity and quality breeder seed to meet the demand for 
production of subsequent seed classes (foundation and certified seeds) is critical for 
seed value chain development. The National Agricultural Research Institutes (NARIs, 
i.e. six national commodity-based research institutes under the NARO secretariat) 
have  the  mandate  to  produce  breeder  seed  of  public  varieties.  NOSP  will  support 
these  NARIs  for  breeder  seed  production  and  the  ZARDIs  for  foundation  seed 
production to ensure a consistent supply of early generation seed of public varieties 
for  groundnut,  sesame  and  sunflower.  Makerere  University  will  be  supported  to 
develop new varieties of soybean, along with increased innoculant production and 
innoculant  supply  chain  development.  Options  for  sub-contracting  the  foundation 
seed  production  by  ZARDIs  to  local  seed  businesses  will  also  be  pursued.  NOSP 
activities will include: 
  Year  1:  conduct  an  inventory  of  existing  NARI  and  Makerere  University  breeder 
and foundation seed production capacity 
  Year 1: conduct a seed demand survey for breeder and foundation seed by local 
seed businesses (LSBs) 
  Years 1-4: develop an annual groundnut, sesame and sunflower seed production 
plan and budget for NARI  
  Years  1-4:  develop  a  soybean  breeding  program  and  budget  for  Makerere 
University 
  Years  1-4:  develop  an  annual  soybean  seed  production  plan  and  budget  for 
Makerere University 
  Year 3: develop an exit strategy for NARIs and Makerere University for sustainable 
seed production on a commercial basis. 
154.  Zonal agro-ecological testing by ZARDIs. The sustainability and resilience 
of local seed systems has been shown to be directly linked to timely supply of 
quality foundation seed and access to new varieties that suit smallholder farming 
systems. NOSP will work with the ZARDIs to evaluate new crop varieties that are 
pest/disease resistant, drought tolerant and market preferred and asses the 
associated production technologies. These evaluations will be conducted in all six 
hubs. Promising interventions will be tested on-farm, technically supervised by 
ZARDI staff and the FPAs. The technologies to be demonstrated/evaluated will be 
determined during the hub MSP meetings and during cluster planning. Each 
90 
demonstration will continue for four seasons to capture any impact due to seasonal 
variations in rainfall, temperature and pest attack. The ZARDIs and FPAs will 
organise field days at planting, mid-season and at harvest. New demonstrations 
should be added if new varieties or production technologies become available. 
155.  NOSP-supported activities will include: 
  Each  ZARDI  should  host  production  demonstration  trials  of  new  seed  varieties 
released  by  NARO  and/or  commercial  seed  companies  or  imported  varieties  by 
commercial seed companies 
  Each  ZARDI  should  establish  each  season  demonstrations  of  mechanisation  and 
climate smart production technologies  
  For Years 2-6: develop an annual multi-locational district level trial workplan and 
budget 
  Collect, collate, analyse and publish seasonal data in reports, technical papers and 
extension leaflets. 
156.  Local seed business development. Farmer group seed production and 
delivery activities will be linked to the LSB programme operated through ZARDIs. 
The LSB programme has been working successfully with farmer groups in the 
northern region for the last 10 years. NOSP will build on this scheme and avoid 
duplication of efforts between different programmes. NOSP-supported activities will 
include: 
  Conduct  a  capacity  needs  assessment  of  existing  LSBs  detailing,  among  other 
things, the years of experience, location, farm group size, seed production capacity, 
seed crops grown, and the capacity development needed 
  Conduct an assessment of seed demand from existing FGs and map to existing LSB 
capacity 
  Produce  an  inventory  of  registered  LSBs,  their  QDS  varieties  and  volumes  and 
publish via FPAs, DLG etc 
  Develop, where needed, new LSBs, build their capacity and link to clusters where 
there is demand for QDS 
  Develop  a  certification  verification  plan  with  NSCI  to  ensure  that  only  QDS  is 
produced for the NOSP clusters. 
91 
DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES: COMPONENT 2: MARKET LINKAGE 
INFRASTRUCTURE SERVING OILSEEDS SECTOR 
157.  The  objective  of  Component  2  is  to  improve  local  level  market  linkage 
transportation  infrastructure  services  to  facilitate  the  commercialisation  of  the 
oilseed sector in selected sub-counties and districts.  
158.  The implementation of activities under this component will facilitate the private 
sector to increase investments that promote the production and marketing of good 
quality  oilseeds  in  the  selected  sub-counties  and  reduce  the  time  and  cost  of 
transport  to  the  market.  The  component  will  improve  access  to  markets,  reduce 
transaction costs and increase farmers' income through improved community access 
road networks. 
159.  The component will be implemented lead by the Ministry of Local Government 
(MoLG) and their District and Sub-county local governments, in close collaboration 
with  MAAIF,  building  on  the  lessons  learned  from  CAAIP1,  CAAIP2,  CAAIP3, 
PRELNOR and other projects financed under the two ministries. 
160. 
Implementation  arrangements.  The  implementation  arrangements  for  the 
construction and rehabilitation of all CARs under the project will follow the already 
successfully used processes and procedures by MoLG. The lead implementing agency 
for the component is MoLG. MoLG will establish a small NOSP Project Implementation 
Coordination Team (PICT) to  coordinate the rural infrastructure component of the 
project  (Component  2).  The  PICT  will  comprise  of  a  Coordinator;  Infrastructure 
Engineering Advisor (seconded by MoWT); Financial Controller; Procurement Officer 
and Accountant. In addition, five Infrastructure Engineers will be recruited and based 
in  selected  hubs.  Specific  responsibilities  of  the  PICT  in  MoLG  will  be:  (i)  manage 
project activities under Component 2 and the related IFAD and OFID loan funds; (ii) 
procure, contract, manage and supervise design contracts for CARs in liaison with 
DLGs; (iii) support DLGs in procurement and management of contractors of CARs; 
(iv) liaise with the MAAIF PCU to prepare project AWPBs for PSC and IFAD approval; 
(v) disburse and control the flow of funds for Component 2 activities; and (vi) work 
with  the  MAAIF  PCU  to  submit  and  consolidate  required  project  implementation 
progress and financial reports to GoU, IFAD and other stakeholders. 
161.  The  roads to be developed with the  support  of Component 2  will be identified 
through  a  process  led  by  Component  1  activities,  prioritising  CARs  that  serve  the 
oilseed clusters. The oilseed sector players will agree on the location of clusters of 
oilseed production and priority roads for improvement. The PCU will submit a list of 
the priority CARs to the Component2 PICT for the feasibility studies. After completion 
of  the  feasibility  studies,  the  PCU  will  make  the  final  selection  of  the  roads  to  be 
developed. The CARS selected will proceed to have ESIAs and detailed engineering 
designs prepared, and construction undertaken as described below. 
92 
Implementation schedule 
and 
studies 
Community  awareness  and 
social mobilisation  
Procurement of consultants 
Feasibility 
engineering designs 
Environmental  and  Social 
Impact Assessments 
ESMP implementation 
Procurement of contractors 
Road construction works 
Construction supervision 
Quantity  Yr1  Yr2  Yr 3 
Yr 4 
Yr 5 
Yr 6 
Yr 7 
1,000 
km 
-    
-    
-    
-    
-    
1,000   1,500     
1,000   1,500     
-    
-    
-    
-    
1,000  
                     1,000   1,500    
1,000   1,500    
the 
162.  Tripartite  Implementation  agreements.  During 
first  year  of 
implementation, the selected district local governments, MoLG and MAAIF will sign 
an MoU that outlines the roles and responsibilities for each party. The articles of the 
MoU will include : a) district confirms that it has adequate staff, with the requisite 
competency  to  undertake  the  work  as  required;  b)  the  need  for  the  district  to 
conduct  the  procurement  process  in  an  impartial  and  transparent  manner;  c)  the 
role of MoLG PICT in quality assurance of all work done at district level; d) training 
to be provided to district and sub-county staff; e) commitment of the district and 
sub-county to allocate resources for maintenance of the roads; and f) the support 
to be expected from the project and to be provided by the district and sub-county 
to facilitate the execution of all activities.    
163. 
Identification and Selection of community access roads. The selection of 
roads will be carried out through a consultative and participatory process at the sub-
county and multiple stakeholder platforms at the cluster levels. The selection will be 
initiated by mapping of priority oilseed production areas (current and potential) and 
status of CARs in these areas by the MSPs, during the first year of implementation. 
Community access road improvement efforts will rehabilitate and open new roads 
serving priority oilseed production areas. The criteria for selection of the CAR would 
be: (i) high concentration of poverty; (ii) the district and main roads connecting to 
the CAR are in good condition and there is no need for major investments for their 
upstream improvements; (iii) high production levels for oilseeds in the target areas; 
(iv) there are no major social and environmental problems that require mitigation 
by the project; (v) there is willingness by farmers served by the road to participate 
in the project; and vi) the area is not served by CARs improved by another in the 
last 10 years. Annex 1 presents a detailed flowchart for the CARs selection process 
under NOSP. 
164.  Districts  with  selected  sub-counties  will  prepare  a  map  of  the  sub-counties 
growing oilseed that includes the following: a) indicating areas growing oilseeds by 
crop; b) acreage of oilseeds by type; and c) network of CARs serving the area and 
their  condition,  clearly  indicating  the  main  bottleneck.  Using  the  map,  the  district 
road engineers and crop production officers, assisted by the MSPs, will compile a list 
of priority roads for each sub-county to be submitted to the PCU. The PCU will further 
prioritise  CARs  across  the  districts  and  allocate  funding  per  district  to  undertake 
93 
feasibility  studies.  The  final  list  of  roads  selected  for  feasibility  studies  will  be 
submitted  to  the  PICT  and  each  district  will  be  notified  of  the  selected  CARS.  An 
estimated  2,500  km  of  CARs  will  be  upgraded  or  developed,  benefiting  about 
350,000 households. 
165.  Community  awareness  and  social  mobilization.  When  the  road  to  be 
improved are identified, the district and sub-county local governments, supported 
by the PICT, will hold community meetings in all villages where the road will pass 
through make the population aware of the upcoming project, get their consent on 
land  acquisition  through  the  area  (as  necessary),  make  them  aware  of  possible 
negative and positive impacts of the road and get acceptance of the road.    
166.  Establishment  and  strengthening  of  road  committees.  The  project  will 
facilitate  the  establishment  of  road  committees  to  facilitate  interaction  with  the 
communities  during  road  design  and  construction  activities.  The  committee  will 
assist in community consultation process during feasibility studies and construction, 
monitoring  construction  activities  and  their  impacts,  advising  on  mitigation 
measures and organizing road maintenance groups. The committee will also assist 
in mobilizing labour during construction. The members of the road committees will 
be drawn from the villages through which the road passes. 
167.  The  road  committee  will  participate  in  the  site  meetings  and  endorse  the 
payment  certificates  for  contractors,  to  express  satisfaction  with  the  way  the 
contractor worked with the community. 
168.  Feasibility  studies  and  detailed  designs  of  CARs.  Feasibility  studies  and 
detailed designs will be done by contracted consulting companies. The consultants 
will  be  selected  through  a  competitive  procurement  process  by  the  PICT.  Work 
packages will be organised for efficiency and cost effectiveness in procurement. The 
procurement process will be managed by the Component 2 PICT in MoLG and the 
contracts  signed  by  the  PS  of  MoLG.  It  is  expected  that  the  procurement  process 
may take up to 12 months to be finalised, hence special attention needs to be made 
to facilitate this process. The tripartite agreement will include a requirement for the 
Component  2  PICT  to  give  a  no  objection  on  the  selection  of  contractors  for  road 
construction by the district local government.  
169.  A socio-economic baseline study will be undertaken in the road zone of influence 
(2  km  each  side  of  the  road).  The  baseline  survey  will  identify  areas  opened  for 
agriculture  and  types  and  quantities  of  crops  being  grown,  estimate  usage  of  the 
exiting road/track by type of vehicles, and estimate the time and cost to get produce 
to  the  market.  This  data  will  be  used  to  estimate  the  cost  effectiveness  of  the 
selected option of road construction. 
94 
170.  Detailed engineering designs will be carried out for roads that have been selected 
after feasibility studies and approval by NEMA. The detailed studies will be done by 
the same consultants that will have undertaken the feasibility studies. The contracts 
for the consultants will include a condition for possible termination, if the road is not 
found to be feasible for the NOSP support. 
171.  Specification of CARs. Existing community access roads to be upgraded or new 
roads  constructed  in  underserviced  areas  will  be  constructed  with  standards 
consistent  with  climate  change  resilient norms,  including  all  the  required  ancillary 
structures  as  per  the  requirements  of  the  District  Class  III  roads  standard  of  the 
Ministry of Works and Transport (MoWT).  
172.  Climate  resilience.  Projections  based  on  Global  Climate  Models  indicate 
potential 10-20% increase in run-off for the whole country, hence the use of District 
Class  III  road  specifications  for  the  CARs  is  a  way  to  ensure  that  the  roads  are 
climate  proofed.  However,  the  road  design  shall  use  hydrological  models  that 
consider the future climate scenarios to confirm the adequacy of hydraulic structures 
to extreme climate events, commensurate with the expected life of the road.  
173.  Road  water  harvesting.  In  addition  to  integrating  emerging  climate 
parameters  and  projections  into  road  design,  the  design  of  roads  will  incorporate 
road water harvesting in all roads where the  opportunities are available and does 
not  lead  to  excessive  increase  in  construction  costs.  The  water  harvested  can  be 
used for livestock watering and irrigating small gardens. The placement of the ponds 
to  harvest  the  water  should  be  either  in  sub-county-owned  land  (if  for  communal 
use  by  communities)  or  as  consented  by  a  landowner  for  private  use.  The  water 
harvesting  structures  for  community  use  will  be  fully  financed  by  the  project  and 
those for private use will be financed by the landowners. The project will learn from 
the experience of PRELNOR on incorporating rainwater harvesting in  road designs. 
The  terms  of  reference  of  the  road  design  consultancy  will  include  investigating 
opportunities for rainwater harvesting at the design stage. 
174.  Road designs will be specific to the specific conditions of each road. While it is 
expected that the project will target pre-existing CARs, where routes and alignments 
are  already  established,  it  may  also  develop  new  roads  from  tracks,  as  may  be 
required  to  improve  access  to  oilseed  producing  areas.  The  cost  of  feasibility  and 
design studies is estimated to cost about USD 1000/km of road surveyed.  
175.  Environmental  and  social  impact  assessments.  Environmental  and  social 
impact assessments will be carried out for all roads that are selected as feasible, in 
accordance with national laws and regulations. The district environment officers will 
lead  the  preparation  of  all  environment  studies  for  all  selected  roads.  The 
environment  impact  assessments  will  be  carried  out  by  independent  consultants 
registered  under  NEMA.  The  consultants  will  be  procured  through  a  competitive 
process by the Component 2 PICT. 
176.  Construction of roads. Road construction will be carried out by competitively 
recruited private contractors. The procurement processes for the contractors will be 
managed  by  the  District  Local  Governments  with  support  and  supervision  by  the 
Component 2 PICT in MoLG. Work packages will be organised in a way that will be 
95 
adequate to attract competition from contractors and provide value for money. It is 
expected that the procurement process for the contractor may take up to 12 months 
to be finalised, hence special attention needs to be made to facilitate this process. 
The  DAO  will  sign  the  contracts  for  CAR  construction.  During  construction,  the 
contractor will prepare progress reports, and organize regular site meetings.  
177.  The employment of workers will follow national construction industry standards, 
paying attention to the work conditions, such as provision of safety clothes, adequate 
resting breaks, adequate clean water supply and ablution facilities.  
178.  Use of local labour during construction. The contractor will be required to 
prioritise recruitment of both skilled and unskilled labour from the local communities 
as much as is practical. The contractor will work together with the road committees 
to identify available skilled and unskilled labour from the villages where the road is 
passing through. Attention will be paid to identify work that can be done by women 
and facilitate their employment in a way convenient for them. This may be through 
half day employment opportunities or provision of catering services for workers.  
179.  The estimated construction cost per kilometre of CAR is USD 20,000. The cost is 
an average cost that includes all drainage ancillary works that may be required for 
each road. 
180.  Construction  supervision.  The  District  and  Sub-County  Local  Government 
engineers  will  be  responsible  for  the  supervision  of  construction  works.  The 
Component 2 PIU engineers will provide quality assurance during the construction 
by making periodic site inspections, attending site meetings and reviewing proposed 
construction methodologies, test results, progress reports and payment certificates. 
The PIU can reject a payment certificate that it considers inadequate. 
181.  As  part  of  monitoring  and  evaluation  activities,  the  construction  supervision 
reporting  will  be  digitalised  to  have  the  construction  supervisor  and  their  clerk  of 
works create and upload progress reports, pictures and any site instructions given 
on a frequent basis to be available for review by the PICT. The digital platform will 
also work as a collaborative platform among the project staff to help each other in 
sharing experiences and solutions in real-time across the project. 
182.  Commissioning and handover. At the completion of construction, each road 
will be commissioned and handed over to the district authorities by the contractors. 
The  road  committee  will  also  sign  the  handover  certificate  to  indicate  that 
participated  in  the  construction  and  are  satisfied  with  the  way  the  contractor 
conducted work. 
183.  Road  maintenance.  The  district  and  sub-county  local  governments  will  be 
responsible  for  the  maintenance  of  all  roads  developed  under  the  project.  The 
tripartite  agreement  will  include  an  undertaking  by  each  district  that  adequate 
resources will be made available for the maintenance of the roads. It is also preferred 
that  that  priority  CARs  selected  are  potential  candidates  for  upgrading  to  district 
roads, so that they can benefit from allocation of funding from the road fund. 
96 
Component 2 Implementation flowchart 
97 
NOSP Component 2: Support to Public Infrastructure Serving Oil-Seed SectorCommunity/FarmersDistrict LGMoLGIFAD Country OfficeNEMAMAAIFNOSP PMUConsultants/ContractorsMultistakeholder PlatformComponent 2 PIURoad CommitteeO & MIdentification and SelectionFeasibility and Design StudiesDetailed Engineering DesignsProcurement of contractorsConstruction worksStartup and General AdministrationProcurement of ConsultantsESIAN1. Prepare ITT documentsN2. Review and Submit for  no objection N3. Issue  no objection L1. Prepare BoQ &  works specificationsN4. Publish tenderN5. Evaluate bidsN6. Recommend award and compile reportN7. Review and Request  no objection YesN8. Issue  no objection S4. Pay contractorH2. Review and provide NOA. Signing implementation tripartite MoUsB. Sketch of priority oilseed production areas and status of road networkC. Submit list of priority roads per sub-county D. Selection of roads for development and improvement E. Community awareness and social mobilization a.Carry out Environmental ScreeningF. Carry out Environmental Screeninga.Carry out Environmental ScreeningG. Organize community road committees a.Carry out Environmental ScreeningI. Feasibility studies of roads a.Carry out Environmental ScreeningJ. Environment and social impact assessments (ESIA) a.Carry out Environmental ScreeningK. Approval of ESIA a.Carry out Environmental ScreeningL. Undertake detailed designa.Carry out Environmental ScreeningS1. Quality assuarance during constructiona.Carry out Environmental ScreeningN. Bidding, bid evaluation and award of contracts a.Carry out Environmental ScreeningO. Contract signing a.Carry out Environmental ScreeningP. Road construction a.Carry out Environmental ScreeningQ. Implementation of ESMPs a.Carry out Environmental ScreeningR. Monitoring of ESMP implementation a.Carry out Environmental ScreeningS. Supervision of road construction and contract managementa.Carry out Environmental ScreeningV. Maintenance of road A. Signing implementation tripartite MoUsA. Signing implementation tripartite MoUsa.Carry out Environmental ScreeningM. Supervision of all studies and Contract managementa.Carry out Environmental ScreeningS2. Support contract managementa.Carry out Environmental ScreeningK1. Comply with NEMA instructions a.Carry out Environmental ScreeningH1. Prepare ToRs, RfPH3. Publish tenderH4. Evaluate bidsH5. Recommend award and compile reportH6. Review and provide NOa.Carry out Environmental ScreeningT. Disbursement of cash advances to districtsa.Carry out Environmental ScreeningH7. Contract signing Select road committeesD1. Assist in selection of priority oilseed production areas and associated roadsLetters of consent for land acquisitiona.Carry out Environmental ScreeningPrepare and submit component 2 progress reportsCompile project report Progress meeting minutes and reportsFeasibility study reportsA1. Draft and facilitate implementation tripartite MoUsU. Commissioning and handover Progress reports and payment certificatesProgress reportsS3. Approve contractor progress reports and payment certificatesEvaluation reportsBidding documentsESMP Monitoring reporta.Carry out Environmental ScreeningApproval of feasibility reportsReceive list of priority roads (4,000km) to be studiedReprioritise for 3000kmEvaluate against selection criteriaS3. Approve contractor progress reports and payment certificatesS3. Approve contractor progress reports and payment certificatesa.Carry out Environmental ScreeningQ. Implementation of ESMPs a.Carry out Environmental ScreeningQ. Implementation of ESMPs a.Carry out Environmental ScreeningV1. Maintenance of road Consultation and assist design consultantSign letters of consent for land acquisitionConsult and assist ESIA consultantMobilise communityOrganise local labourMobilise community 
KEY PROJECT PROCEDURES 
A.  Planning and AWPB Process 
184.  The  logframe  of  NOSP  (see  Annex  1  of  PDR)  will  be  the  key  guide  in  the 
development  of  work  plans  and  budgets.  Planning  and  budgeting  will  be 
integrated  in  the  GoU  processes  and  cycles  and  will  be  based  on  Annual  Work 
Plans  and  Budgets  (AWPBs).  These,  together  with  the  logframe’s  quantified 
results-based indicators and NOSP MIS database, will provide the primary basis 
for monitoring the NOSP progress.  
185.  The  planning  process  will  start  at  hub-level  taking  into  consideration  the 
priorities identified through MSPs. Under the guidance of the PCU and PICT, hub 
plans and budgets will be  consolidated into a  comprehensive  NOSP AWPB that 
will be submitted to the PSC for review and approval and then to IFAD for review 
and the issuing of no objection. The AWPB will clearly indicate which activities 
and budget lines fall under the Budget Framework Papers of MAAIF and MoLG, 
respectively. 
186.  The  PCU  and  PICT  will jointly  provide  overall  guidance  in  the  planning  and 
budgeting  processes.  The  PCU  M&E  Specialist  will  work  in  close  liaison  with 
Financial Controllers in both ministries to ensure the budgeting is adequate and 
conforms to the right categories and components. Subsequent AWPB processes 
will  offer  the  opportunities  to  the  PCU  and  PICT  to  reflect  on  lessons  from  the 
implementation experience of the previous years, and to propose activities and 
expenditures  required  to  achieve  the  intended  programme  outcomes.  The 
Programme will have the possibility of revising the AWPB at any time of the year, 
and any proposed adjustments will require approvals by both the GoU and IFAD. 
B.  M&E, Knowledge Management and Communications 
187.  NOSP  will  develop  a  robust  M&E  system  in  compliance  with  IFAD  and  GoU 
requirements,  to  (i)  collect,  analyse  and  update  information  on  project  results 
and  impact;  (ii)  support  the  PCU  and  the  Steering  Committee  in  planning  and 
making  informed  decisions  on  strategies  and  actions;  (iii)  maintain  and 
strengthen  strategic  partnerships  with  stakeholders;  and  (iv)  create 
opportunities  for  learning  and  sharing  results,  good  practices  and  lessons 
learned. The project M&E will be linked to the management information system 
(MIS) that provides project management team and supply chain (SC) teams with 
timely and reliable data on developments against the logframe indicator targets 
at  individual,  household,  cluster  and  buyer/supplier  level.  The  project  M&E 
processes will integrate IFAD’s RIMS/ Operational Results Management System 
(ORMS)5, the project logical framework, principles of the Donor  Committee for 
Enterprise Development Standard (DCED Standard)6 and the National Agriculture 
Sector  Strategic  Plan  for  Uganda7.  In  the  Project  Coordination  Unit  (PCU),  the 
Monitoring  and  Evaluation  Specialist  will  lead  all  internal  M&E  activities  and 
together  with  the  component  leads  and  M&E  and  data  management  officers, 
design the M&E plan, MIS  and progress  reporting templates. NOSP will submit 
5 Taking IFAD's Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) to the Next Level  
6 The DECD Standard for Measuring Results in Private Sector Development 
7 https://www.agriculture.go.ug/agriculture-sector-strategic-plan-assp/ 
98 
quarterly,  semi-annual  and  annual  progress  reports  to  Government  of  Uganda 
and IFAD as per the requirements.  
188.  NOSP will have a qualified M&E  and KM team  which will consist of an M&E 
and KM Specialist (see TOR in the Project Management section of the PIM) and a 
Data Management Assistant at PCU and an M&E Assistant at each HCU (TORs in 
Appendix 1 and 2 below). The team will ensure that the M&E data is up-to-date, 
verified and analysed to inform project planning and decision making and that 
relevant  information  in  produced  into  knowledge  products  for  sharing  with  a 
wider  audience.  The  M&E  team  will  work  in  close  coordination  with  the  supply 
chain team, engineers, management team and implementing partners to ensure 
the M&E system collects, analyses and reports on all required indicators. Below, 
the key features of planned NOSP M&E system are described. 
Annual Work Plan and Budgets (AWPB)  
189.  The  PCU  will  prepare  the  AWPBs  following  evidence-based  performance 
review during the final quarter of each fiscal year to serve as the basis for project 
planning,  implementation  and  progress  monitoring  for  the  following  year.  Hub 
Coordination Units (HCU) will consolidate the annual plan from the implementing 
partner  organisations  and  submit  the  consolidated  one  to  the  PCU.  Upon 
finalization,  the  PCU  will  share  the  final  version  with  the  Project  Steering 
Committee for approval and then submit to IFAD for ‘no objection’ approval no 
later than 60 days prior to the start of the next fiscal year. The Table below shows 
the key reporting responsibilities and frequencies for NOSP. 
Institution  
Reports 
IFAD 
AWPB (IFAD template) 
Frequency 
Last quarter 
of the year  
Narrative, Physical Progress and Financial Reports 
against AWPB (IFAD templates) 
Semi-annual, 
Annual 
Narrative, Physical Progress and Financial Reports 
against AWPB (Performance Based Budgeting 
System templates provided by MAAIF) 
Quarterly, 
Semi-annual, 
Annual 
Narrative, Physical Progress and Financial Reports 
against AWPB (templates provided by OPM) 
Quarterly and 
Annual 
Agriculture 
Planning 
Department in 
MAAIF 
Office of the 
Prime Minister 
(OPM) 
99 
M&E Plan 
190.  Once the project staff is recruited, the PCU will prepare an M&E Plan that will 
encompass the following: 
i. Preparation of M&E matrix with details on how all indicators will be collected, by who 
and at what frequencies; 
ii. Procedures, tools and templates for data collection, entry and analysis including MIS; 
iii. Details of how the indicators will be measured; 
iv. Flow of communication and reporting along with timelines;  
v. Assessment of the capacity of staff (PCU, Hub and field staff- both M&E and others) 
in undertaking M&E responsibilities;  
vi. Capacity building on M&E data collection and analysis for staff based on the needs 
assessment. 
191. 
In the process of designing the NOSP M&E system, the M&E team will: 
a)  Finalise  the  design  of  project  M&E  processes  that  integrate  IFAD’s  RIMS/ 
Operational Results Management System (ORMS)8, project Logical Framework, 
principles of the Donor Committee for Enterprise Development Standard (DCED 
Standard)9 and the National Agriculture Sector Strategic Plan for Uganda. The 
M&E system will include the use of regularly updated results chains and M&E 
frameworks for each priority cluster to compliment the overall M&E and project 
logframe. The use of results chains for each cluster and commodity will enable 
the identification and tracking of intermediate change indicators and allow the 
cluster  stakeholders  to  have  an  evidence-based  understanding  of  the 
opportunities and challenges in the sector. 
b)  Develop survey tools and formats for tracking of data to monitor and analyse 
the overall performance at household, group and cluster level. 
c)  Design of a Management Information System (MIS) which will be an important 
element  in  improving  the  efficiency  and  reliability  of  the  M&E  of  NOSP.  The 
project will develop a robust online web-based MIS system hosted in the PCU, 
linked to online/offline tablet-based direct data entry in the field. 
d)  Ensure  the  financial  management  system  is  able  to  tag  all  expenditures  by 
commodity/cluster/district  and  the  type  of  activity  to  allow  for  segmented 
analysis  of  the  costs  and  benefits  for  the  different  clusters,  commodities  and 
locations. 
e)  Design and deliver capacity building trainings on M&E system, data collection 
tools  and  formats  and  use  of  tablets  to  PCU  and  Hub  staff.  The  Hub  M&E 
assistant will further train the Mentors to use tablets for data collection.  
Data Collection Tools  
192.  NOSP  will  build  on  IFAD’s  growing  experience  of  mainstreaming  household 
and  group  tracking  as  part  of  the  self-learning  process  for  supported  farmer 
households and producer groups. This will be achieved through the business skills 
training  activities  and  follow-up  which  will  encourage  the  majority  of  project 
supported  households  to  maintain  household  record  books  of  their  farm/non-
8 Taking IFAD's Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) to the Next Level 
9 https://www.enterprise-development.org/wp-content/uploads/DCED_Standard_versionVII_Apr15_bluecover.pdf 
100 
farm enterprises. The experience to date is that the individuals and households 
themselves  place  a  very  high  value  on  the  insights  they  gain  from  their  own 
enterprise records and a large majority are keen to keep their records books up 
to date once they are given the skills and support to do so. A similar process of 
self-assessment and data gathering will be used to track key indicators from the 
HHM activities. All project data will be collected through tablets and linked to the 
MIS. All M&E data will be disaggregated by gender, age and poverty and assessed 
against project’s targets in logframe10 and checklists11. 
193.  Cluster and industry tracking data will be used to monitor and assess the 
overall  performance,  issues  and  challenges  in  the  clusters  supported  by  the 
project as well as the whole sector. The cluster data will be collected every season 
and  more  frequently  as  needed  and  entered  into  MIS,  which  will  provide  a 
detailed overview of the performance and growth patterns in the clusters.  The 
project will follow a system of ‘rolling baselines’ in which baseline data on each 
cluster is collected at the time that interventions begin in the particular supply 
chain  in  each  cluster.  This  will  include  households,  groups  and  trader/agri-
business  surveys  as  well  as  the  use  of  secondary  data  sources.  Data  for  the 
cluster tracking surveys will come from multiple independent sources: 
i.  Household and group data tracking; 
ii.  Buyers and supplier data tracking; 
iii.  Secondary sources 
194.  Household and Group Tracking will be an integral part of the project M&E 
to  ensure  that  household  and  group  level  data  tracking  on  seasonal  basis  is 
embedded into the everyday operation of the project. The data will be VC specific 
and focus on production, post-harvest and marketing, sources of financing and 
loans obtained and household relations. The data collection and tracking will be 
done through business  skills and HHM mentors and overseen by the  Economic 
Mobilization  and  HHM  teams  contracted  to  each  Hub  under  Private  Service 
Provider contracts. All households participating in project-supported groups will 
be given a unique identification number in the MIS so that activities and results 
can be traced back to the specific household. 
195. 
In order to record the data, Farm Business Diaries will be provided to all 
households participating in business skills training to maintain the records of the 
main commodities supported by the project. The Diaries will also have a section 
to report results generated from HHM session. The baseline and seasonal data 
will be entered into the MIS system and will form part of the cluster data. The 
diaries  will  be  pre-printed  with  relevant  indicators  for  both  farm  business  and 
HHM in user-friendly template to guide the farmers along the process. Farmers 
will  be  oriented  and  supported  to  keep  the  records  up-to-date  by  the  mentors 
and peers. Besides informing the project MIS, this will also allow the farmers to 
record  their  starting  position  against  which  to  compare  progress  over  time  so 
they  can  better  understand  the  cost  and  benefits  of  their  investments  in  the 
oilseeds supply chain and have a better knowledge of their margins to negotiate 
with  buyers  and  suppliers.  Further,  the  business  skills  mentors  will  organise 
seasonal review meetings within each producer group to review individual and 
collective results from the season and discuss opportunities to improve for the 
next season. As part of these group review meetings, the mentors will collect key 
information from the farm diaries for each household and enter the data into the 
10 See NOSP Logframe in Annex 1 of the PDR 
11 See Gender and Targeting Checklist in the targeting section of the PIM 
101 
forms  on  their  tablets  using  the  household  specific  ID.  These  MIS  data  will  be 
cross  referenced  with  relevant  sources  including  loan  data  provided  by  the 
financial institutions and utilization capacities of processors for triangulation and 
analysis of results. 
196. 
Likewise,  group  tracking  data  will  be  used  to  assess  the  maturity  of  the 
groups  to  graduate  as  independent  and  self-sustaining.  The  maturity 
assessment  will  be  done  after  two  to  three  years  of  group  formation/support 
and  will  have  a  combination  of  both  self-assessment  checklists  and  external 
assessment tools. Set of criteria for group maturity will be agreed by the project 
upon  participatory  discussions  with  farmers  and  key  stakeholders.  Some  key 
criteria include the following:  
 
linkage 
commercialisation,  
to 
input/output  markets  and 
financial 
services 
for 
  access to quality seeds of improved varieties  
  VLSAs linked to FIs (SACCOs/MFI/Banks) 
  Group saving regularity at 80% 
  Group meeting attendance at 80% 
  Loan repayment at 95% 
  active participation in MSP 
 
 
inclusive and well-functioning group governance  
complete and up-to-date records.  
197.  The  group  maturity  assessment  data  will  be  verified  by  the  Economic 
Mobilizers and HHM Field Supervisors and entered into the MIS system for further 
analysis by M&E team at Hub and PCU.  
198.  Buyer  and  supplier  tracking  surveys  will  be  conducted  seasonally  by 
supply chain teams at the Hubs with support from PSPs and entered into the MIS 
in a similar process used for the individual/household data. The survey results 
will be part of the rolling cluster baselines and annual  cluster tracking and will 
include basic data on volumes, prices, timing, origin and destination of purchases 
and  sales.  Information  sharing  will  be  based  on  the  mutual  understanding  of 
getting  a  better  overview  of  the  growth,  challenges  and  opportunities  in  the 
industry. In addition, buyers and suppliers will be expected to share the data on 
a  quid  pro  quo  basis  in  exchange  for  being  able  to  participate  in  cluster 
development activities, including the MSP and B2B processes. 
199.  For  roads  construction,  NOSP  will  conduct  feasibility  studies  and 
environment and  social impact assessment  for each stretch of the road as per 
the GoU’s guidelines and FAD’s Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment 
Procedures (SECAP)12. Separate reports of road construction committee meetings 
will also be recorded.  
200.  Other  reports  for  the  project  will  include  field  visit  reports  (farmer 
groups/processors/road construction sites etc.), monthly meeting minutes of the 
different  implementation  units,  MSP  meeting  minutes,  specific  reports  and 
information  generated  during  supervision  missions,  and  joint  reviews  by  IFAD 
and the GoU.  
12 IFAD's Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
102 
Data Collection and Entry  
201.  Business  Skills  Mentors  and  HHM  Mentors  will  be  provided  with  tablet 
computers  with  project  MIS  data  entry  forms  and  tools  installed.  They  will  be 
provided with a data allowance and paid a small fee for data collection and entry 
into  the  MIS.  Tablet-based  data  entry  forms  will  be  geo-referenced  and  will 
include data screening and built-in data validation prompts to reduce data entry 
errors at source. For areas with no cellular network, data entry will be done either 
off-line or with a live connection to the internet via mobile networks. Data will 
then be sent automatically from the tablets to the centralized MIS database once 
a  network  connection  is  established.  Data  received  at  the  central  MIS  will 
reviewed and verified before it is uploaded into the main MIS database. In case 
of  errors  and  anomalies,  the  relevant  mentor  will  be  required  to  recheck  and 
resubmit the data. Payments for data collection will be released only when the 
records are cleared and accepted into the central MIS. In addition, the PCU, Hub 
and  field  staff  will  be  encouraged  to  use  social  media  tools  (project  website, 
twitter  etc.)  to  improve  communication  and  information  sharing  within  the 
project and among stakeholders.  
Baseline Surveys, Impact Evaluations, MTR and PCR 
202.  Project  Baseline.  A  baseline  survey  will  be  conducted  before  project 
intervention in project areas with the objective to establish benchmarks for time-
series comparisons between project direct beneficiaries, flow-on beneficiary and 
non-beneficiary  control  population.  Separate  socio-economic  baseline  surveys 
will also be conducted for each stretch of roads. 
203. 
In  addition,  at  each  cluster  level,  NOSP  will  follow  a  system  of  ‘rolling 
baselines’  in  which  baseline  data  on  each  cluster  is  collected  at  the  time  that 
interventions begin in the particular supply chain in each cluster. This will include 
households, groups, cluster and trader/agri-business surveys as well as the use 
of  secondary  data  sources.  While  the  project  baseline  will  be  outsourced  to  a 
consulting  firm,  the  rolling  baselines  will  be  conducted  by  Business  Skills  and 
HHM mentors.  
204.  Mid-Term Review. (MTR) will be carried out towards the end of the project’s 
third  year.  The  MTR  will  cover  physical  and  financial  progress  as  measured 
against AWPB, performance and financial management of implementing partners 
and assessment of the technical assistance, training programmes and delivery of 
project  benefits  to  the  target  groups.  In  addition,  it  is  expected  that  the  MTR 
would look at the effectiveness of HHM to high risk families and assess in detail 
findings  and 
the  socio-economic  status  of  women  and  youth.  The 
recommendations from  MTR will inform the project on decision-making on any 
required adjustments, scaling up and further expansion of project interventions. 
205.  Annual  Outcome  Surveys.  The  project  will  commission  annual  outcome 
surveys  to  track  the  progress  of  project  supported  supply  chains  against  the 
overall  baseline  and  the  rolling  baseline  data.  Survey  data  will  be  mutually 
supplemented  as  appropriate  through  regular  exchange  with  government 
statistics and other relevant sources of information such as the Living Standards 
Measurement Surveys. The outcome surveys will also compare the impact of the 
project on NOSP beneficiaries versus other non-NOSP beneficiaries. Two potential 
control groups for household level outcomes could be: (a) other commercially-
oriented oilseed producers that do not benefit directly from NOSP but may benefit 
indirectly from investments in market infrastructure and processing and storage 
facilities and (b) other oilseed producers who are not commercially oriented and 
who are not direct beneficiaries of the program. These producers may be affected 
103 
negatively by the project if system-wide effects drive down prices for oilseeds. 
Comparison  of  the  treatment  group  with  this  control  group  would  likely 
overestimate the true impact of the program.  
206.  Project  Completion  Report/Impact  Assessment  (PCR).  PCR  will  be 
conducted  during  the  final  year  of  project  implementation.  The  M&E  data 
collected over the project implementation period will be used as part of the PCR 
to assess the changes in the livelihoods of the target groups and for sharing of 
lessons learned and good practices. The project completion process will include 
reflection  workshops  where  stakeholders  have  the  opportunity  to  evaluate  the 
performance  of  the  project,  identify  success  factors  and  areas  of  further 
interventions  and  discuss  the  way  forward  for  sustainability.  Key  outcome 
indicators  for  impact  assessment,  in  addition  to  productivity/profitability  of 
specific  oilseeds,  household  income  and  assets,  will  also  include  resilience  to 
climatic  shocks  and  women’s  empowerment,  particularly  the  impact  of 
HHM/GALS). 
Knowledge Management and Communications 
207.  After  the  NOSP  start-up,  the  project  will,  with  support  from  IFAD  experts, 
develop  an  effective  NOSP  Knowledge  Management  (KM)  Strategy  and  Action 
Plan that is linked to the M&E and MIS systems to ensure knowledge products 
are  generated  and  used  to  improve  project  performance  and  results..  Lessons 
learnt  in  implementation  will  be  actively  shared  between  clusters  and  hubs. 
Quarterly  review  meetings  with  implementing  partners  will  be  organised  by 
project  management  to  discuss  progress  towards  results  in  relation  to  each 
quarterly progress report, the format of which will explicitly include a focus on 
lessons learnt in terms of challenges, good practices, etc. Study tours, exchange 
visits  and  learning  routes  will  be  organised  for  lateral  knowledge  transfer.  An 
effective  downward  and  upward  flow  of  information  about  project  progress  to 
beneficiaries  and  implementing  partners  in  the  field  is  of  utmost  relevance  in 
fostering ownership and participation.  
208.  The KM Strategy will have a strong focus on documenting best practices as 
well  as  positive  and  negative  lessons  from  NOSP  implementation  experience, 
supported  by  reliable  evidence  and  analysis.  The  wider  adoption  of  NOSP’s 
documented  best  practices  will  be  an  important  measure  of  its  success  in 
knowledge management. Key elements of the NOSP approach to be documented 
in  KM  products  and  promoted  for  wider  adoption  by  other  organizations  are 
expected  to  include,  inter  alia:  improved  business  skills  and  financial  literacy; 
multi-stakeholder cluster meetings and associated processes for inclusive cluster 
development;  producer  groups  and  member  mentoring;  market-based  service 
market  development;  social  mentoring  and  household  methodologies;  and 
promotion of private smallholder investment via savings and credit rather than 
grants. 
104 
Appendix 1: TOR for Monitoring and Evaluation Assistant at HCU 
The M&E assistant will be based at the Hub and under the supervision of the PCU M&E and 
KM Specialist, S/he will take responsibility for data and database management, and assist 
the  Business  Skills  and  HHM  mentors  in  data  collection  and  entry  into  MIS.  The  M&E 
Assistant will perform data and reporting support functions and will overall be in charge of 
ensuring the project databases are regularly updated.  
Duties and Responsibilities 
The Hub Monitoring & Evaluation Assistant’s duties and responsibilities include the 
following: 
●  Populate and maintain the project databases and MIS 
●  Support Business Skills Mentors and HHM Mentors in data entry into MIS on 
tablets  
●  Carry out data collection activities 
●  Produce summaries of the data entered to inform management 
●  Produce project maps 
●  Support other Hub staff and implementing partners in ensuring completeness of 
their routine reports 
●  Provide technical backstopping to in preparation of activity-based annual work 
plans and budgets to ensure compliance with the project’s implementation 
approach and objectives 
Specific Qualifications 
The following specific qualifications are required: 
●  Bachelor's degree in Economics, Statistics, Agricultural Economics, Development 
Economics, Business Administration, Social Sciences or a related field 
●  Post graduate Diploma/Training in M&E is an added advantage 
●  At least 2 years’ experience in data collection, data entry and data analysis is a 
must 
●  Post graduate training in Statistics is an added advantage  
●  Training and/ or demonstrated evidence in the use of Geo-spatial technologies 
(GIS) is an added advantage 
●  Demonstrated evidence design of data entry and analysis screens is an added 
advantage  
●  Good reporting and report writing skills  
●  Good knowledge of computer applications (particularly MS Excel, Word, Access 
and Powerpoint, STATA) will be an added advantage 
●  Working knowledge of written and spoken English 
105 
Appendix 2: TOR for Data Management Assistant at PCU 
As a part of NOSP M&E team in PCU and reporting to the M&E and KM Specialist, the Data 
Management  Assistant  will  support  design  and  implementation  of  information  systems 
intended  to  facilitate  the  flow  of  programme-related  data  for  improved  information 
management, reporting and progress tracking purposes. 
The Data Management Assistant’s duties and responsibilities include the following: 
 Data Management: 
● 
●  Assist in developing online and offline survey 
●  Assist in troubleshooting data submission errors and data error issues 
●  Provide support to the project team in analysis data for reports sand knowledge 
products 
●  Assist in performing and documenting procedures for data preparation including 
data cleaning, standardization and analysis 
●  Assist in producing weekly, monthly, annual data reports 
●  Assist in developing and update project’s dashboard 
●  Assist in defining and/or creating data listings, summary table validation, data 
specifications and/or process data transfers in preparation for statistical review 
and/or data management audit 
●  Design maps using GIS 
●  Orienting implementing partners and Hub staff in data collection and entry in MIS 
via tablets  
●  Support in maintenance and repair of tablets 
Specific Qualifications  
●  BA in Information Technology, computer science or a related field 
●  At least 2 years of relevant work experience in data management 
●  Experience with IT, particularly database design and management and web 
application 
●  Excellent  knowledge  of  computer  applications  including  programming,  Microsoft 
Excel and Access 
●  Familiarity with digital data gathering platforms and software 
●  Good communication skills (written and spoken), good writing skills in English. 
106 
Appendix 3: TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR THE BASELINE SURVEY 
1.0 INTRODUCTION 
1.1. Objectives of the Terms of Reference 
The purpose of these Terms of Reference is to enter into a contractual agreement with a 
successful bidder and select a suitable Consultant to undertake the baseline survey for 
the National Oilseeds Project (NOSP).  
Consultants are requested to propose the best and most cost-effective solution to meet 
the requirements, while ensuring a high level of service. The expected procurement 
method will be Quality Cost-Based Selection i.e. QCBS (80 technical/20 financial). The 
evaluation is weighted in favor of quality over price. The Evaluation criteria will include: 
proven experience with implementation of similar assignments, technical and financial 
capacity to execute the assignment. 
2.0  OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF THE ASSIGNMENT   
2.1 Objective of the Assignment 
The main objective of the baseline survey is to establish impact level indicators 
(including RIMS, as per the logical framework) as well as a limited number of basic 
production and market access indicators. The existing social economic characteristics of 
the households in the project targeted areas, and their current income, food security and 
vulnerability status will provide a benchmark for measuring the effects and impacts of 
the project interventions in future.  
The consultants will establish the first round of a panel data-set, to be used for impact 
assessment. 
2.2 Scope of the Assignment 
This study will establish baseline data/information at the individual/household level. The 
proposed specific objectives of the baseline study are: 
1.  To understand the household demographics. 
2.  To establish the households’ asset ownership index and food security in the sample 
area i.e. 
  Financial assets (e.g. incomes, savings, capital, etc.);  
  Agricultural production assets (e.g. land/farm size, machinery and equipment, 
farm structures);  
  Physical assets (housing conditions, household items, transport facilities, etc.); 
  Human assets (i.e. education levels, food security, and sanitation facilities); 
  Food security (length of hunger months, and frequency of meals per day) 
3.  To establish the anthropometry characteristics of the households. This will be through 
finding out the following;  
  Name of the child (0-5yrs) 
  Sex of the child(0-5yrs) 
  Date of birth of the child(0-5yrs) 
  Age in months of the child(0-5yrs) 
  Height(centimeters) for the child(0-5yrs) 
107 
  Weight (kilograms) for the child(0-5yrs) 
4.  Calculate the indices for measuring malnutrition, namely: 
  under weight,  
 
stuntedness, and 
  wasting 
5.  To establish the Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index i.e. by measuring the 
role of women in: 
  decisions about agricultural production;  
  access to,  and decision making power over production resources;  
 
 
 
control over use of income (including credit);  
leadership in the community; and 
time use 
6.  To establish the ability of households to adopt to shocks 
  Resilience questions on ability to adopt to shocks   
 
Include an indicator from biophysical monitoring assessment by CIAT/ICRAF (we 
better identify it at this stage as we can't send out the ToR for RFPs when we 
have not decided) 
7.  To establish the current levels of household crop production, productivity, and 
market access 
  access and use of mechanization 
  area planted  
  volumes harvested per unit area  
  volumes of crop produce  
NOSP’s primary target and beneficiary group are smallholder farmers (women, men and 
youth) engaged in the production of oilseeds. Smallholder farmers include the farmers 
whose farm size is less than one hectare (58% of the total population of smallholder 
farmers) and those whose farm size is more than one hectare but less than five hectares 
(38% of the total population of smallholder farmers) 
2.3 Expected Outputs and Deliverables  
The following outputs are expected from the consultant undertaking the assignment. 
1.  An inception report describing the consultants’ understanding of the TORs, study 
design/ methodology and processes for undertaking the baseline survey. More 
specifically, it should also incorporate draft tools/data capture instruments and the 
proposed sampling framework. 
2.  Brief field report on challenges/difficulties or expected shortcomings related to the 
study and overall data capture exercise. 
3.  Draft report shared with the PCU.  
4.  Draft report incorporating comments from the PCU presented to key stakeholders. 
108 
5.  Final Baseline Report incorporating comments from the stakeholders including the 
PCU.  
6.  A soft copy and five copies of final NOSP Baseline Report;  
7.  A DVD with pictures and some video recordings of the data collection exercise and 
the entire dataset (soft and hard). 
8.  Present a map showing the GIS coordinates of the survey participants. 
109 
3.0 METHODOLOGY AND ACTIVITIES 
3.1 Methodology and Approach 
The methodology and sampling design will be proposed by the consultant in the technical 
proposal and further detailed in the inception report. Primary data collection is required, 
with rigorous statistical frameworks for sampling and analysis. The consultancy team will 
familiarize itself with the project log frame and results framework. Secondary and 
qualitative information can be included if deemed relevant by the consultant. Data must 
be disaggregated by sex and age. 
The purpose of the baseline will be to establish baseline indicators in the project area 
and to establish the first round of a panel dataset. Careful documentation of data 
collection methods and GPS coordinates of each household visited will be required, to 
establish a second panel at mid-term and/or impact assessment stage.  
An expected 500 households will be randomly sampled throughout the 25 project sub-
counties. Pre-existing questionnaire modules from IFAD and others will be used to the 
extent possible, as well as computation of indexes for easy evaluation and 
communication. The team will finalize and agree on the sample design in an inception 
meeting with the Project Coordination team (PCU). 
Anthropometry characteristics will be determined on the children between the ages of 0-
5 years living in the sampled households. 
3.2 Specific Activities  
The consultant(s) should conduct the following activities under each of the following 
phases: 
A.  Inception Phase 
  Review the project literature to familiarize with project goals, objectives, 
strategies, activities and status. 
  Develop sampling design, study methods and tools.  
  Expound on the measurable indicators based in the broad project objectives  
  Hold an inception meeting to agree on the indicators, sampling design, tools, and 
approach, with the project team. 
  Prepare and submit a refined inception report. 
B.  Study phase 
  Hire the services of and train experienced enumerators to collect data from 
primary and secondary sources.  
  Data collection through conducting interviews, administering questionnaires and 
other tools, and holding focus group discussions where applicable. 
C.  Reporting Phase 
  The analysis should be deepened not to provide only descriptive statistics, but 
also analytical statistics. The various indices mentioned (asset ownership & WEIE) 
should be calculated and results interpreted in writing. 
  Prepare a brief report within a week from the end of fieldwork presenting 
challenges in the data collection process, as well as preliminary findings on key 
110 
indicators and key lessons for future. The report will be presented to the project 
PCU. 
  Prepare a comprehensive draft report incorporating the feedback from the PCU. 
The revised draft report should be presented to the PCU and other stakeholders. 
  Prepare and submit the final report based on the comments from the PCU.  
NB: All information, data and datasets compiled as part of this study will be the 
sole property of the Government of Uganda and the consultant will not use it 
for any other private or official use, any publication, or claim any right to it. 
Soft-copies will be handed over to the PCU.  
3.3  Schedule of Deliverables  
The timing and duration for the assignment will be 90 days effective from the date of 
signing of the contract. The timetable for the evaluation, including when different 
deliverables or products – such as inception report, briefs, draft report, final report is 
provided in the table below:  
Time (Days After Signing of 
Contract) 
Deliverable 
1.    Inception Report 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Meeting to discuss, refine and 
approve the tools 
Orientation of Enumerators and 
pre-testing of the tools 
Final refining of data collection 
tools (after pre-test) 
Data collection 
6.   
Brief Field Report immediately 
after field exercise 
7.    Draft Report submission to PMU 
8.   
Presentation of draft report to 
stakeholders 
9.    Final Baseline Report 
4.0 SUPERVISION 
The Consultant will be supervised by the Project Coordinator and shall work closely with 
NOSP M&E team. This will help in ensuring that the consultant maintains the technical 
expectations of the project, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries 
and Ministry of Local Government. The project coordinator will help in linking the 
Consultant to the project Districts and providing any organization information that may 
be required by the consultant.  
5.0 SERVICES TO BE PROVIDED BY THE PROJECT COORDINATION UNIT 
NOSP shall provide introductory letters for the Consultant to the key respondents, as 
well as relevant literature on the project. 
111 
The equipment for measuring anthropometry characteristics of children in the sampled 
households can be obtained on hire.  
REQUIRED SKILLS, QUALIFICATIONS AND COMPETENCES  
The following Table summarizes the key skills, qualifications and levels of experience 
required from the core consultancy team: 
Specialization 
Role 
No
. 
Experience 
Minimum 
Qualificati
on  
1.  Agricultural/ 
Team Leader  Masters 
Level 
Development/ 
Economist/ Rural 
Development 
Specialist/Economi
st 
2.   Social Scientist/ 
Development 
Scientist 
3.  Data Analyst 
Community 
Developmen
t dynamics 
Survey 
design, 
coding of 
questionnair
e, modeling 
and analysis 
> 5 years of experience in 
quantitative survey and qualitative 
research related to increasing incomes 
through development projects; 
baseline research studies, and 
evaluation studies  
Masters 
Level 
> 5 years’ experience in community 
development work, studies/surveys 
and evaluation of projects 
> 5 years demonstrated experience in 
design, research/ information 
compiling, modeling and analysis. 
Statistical 
training at 
Post 
Graduate 
Level. 
Training in 
econometri
cs is an 
added 
advantage. 
4.  GIS Expert 
Digital Data 
Collection 
including 
use of GPS 
Digital data 
collection 
training at 
any level. 
> 3 years demonstrated experience in 
design of electronic data collection 
instruments, assembling and 
transmission of data/information.  
6.0  PAYMENT TERMS 
The total contract price (i.e. fees) of this study will be paid in the following manner: 
  30% of the contract price will be paid after submission of an acceptable inception 
report, and agreed data collection process and tools/instruments. 
  40% of the contract price will be paid after submission of the first draft report to 
the PMU. 
  30% of the contract price will be paid after submission of the final report in the 
required number of copies along with the entire raw data and the soft copy of the 
report. 
112 
C.  Financial Management 
209.  Financial  management  arrangements  of  NOSP  follow  the  Government  of 
Uganda  financial  management  system  with  some  enhancements  proposed  to 
mitigate on identified risks. A Financial Management Assessment (FMA) for NOSP 
has been carried out in accordance with IFAD’s Guidance Note  on Undertaking 
Financial Management Assessment as part of NOSP design. The objective of FMA 
is  to  provide  assurance  that  NOSP  will  be  implemented  within  sound  financial 
management practices (timely and efficient accounting systems), and punctual 
professional  reviews;  both  internally  (internal  audit)  and  externally  (external 
audit).  The assessment was based at the PCU of VODP2 because NOSP will be 
adopting  similar  processes  and  procedures.  The  PCU-based  assessment  was 
combined  with  reviews  at  MoLG,  the  proposed  implementing  agency  for 
Component  2  of  NOSP.  It  also  included  a  discussion  and  review  of  IFMIS  and 
other MoFPED processes and further reviews of district level disbursements and 
financial reporting arrangements.  
210.  The  Government  of  Uganda  (the  Borrower)  will  be  required  to  maintain 
acceptable  financial  management  systems  including  accounting,  financial 
reporting  and  auditing  systems  for  NOSP  some  project  specific  additional 
measures have been incorporated into these to enhance financial management 
of the project. 
211.  Overall, the financial management risk is rated as ‘high’ and ‘substantial’ before 
and after mitigation respectively.  The project faces a major risk in discrepancies 
in  budgeting  due  to  the  strict  timelines  (10  months  of  the  preceding  year), 
omission  of  project  budgets  in  printed  estimates  approved  by  the  Parliament 
especially for district level activities, MoFPED requirements for project financial 
reporting using IFMIS which has not been tested comprehensively on capability 
for project financial reporting, and delays in financial reporting by districts that 
will  handle  some  funds  for  supervision  and  monitoring  for  infrastructure 
development and other agricultural and environmental activities.   
212.  To minimize the risk, it has been agreed that key payments for infrastructure 
works will be budgeted and paid from the parent ministry (MoLG), hence reducing 
funds to be disbursed or required to be budgeted by districts. There will also be 
close collaboration between PCU and planning officers at the ministry and district 
levels  to  ensure  appropriate  budget  is  included  in  the  printed  estimates.  To 
mitigate  on  challenges  of  IFMIS  not  able  to  handle  project  reporting 
appropriately, a simple off-shelf accounting system (pastel) will run concurrently 
with IFMIS for the first 18 months, which will serve as a pilot phase, after which 
a  review  will  be  made.  IFMIS  also  will  be  mapped  accordingly  as  per  the 
developed demo so that the review after testing period will be appropriate.  
Implementing and participating organizations with fiduciary  responsibilities 
213.  Lead  Agencies.  The  co-lead  agencies  for  NOSP  at  national  level  will  be 
MAAIF and MoLG. MAAIF will establish a Project Coordination Unit (PCU), to be 
responsible for managing the implementation of the  Project, with emphasis on 
Component 1. The PCU will be based in Lira Municipality, located centrally in the 
project area, to facilitate close supervision, coordination and technical support of 
the NOSP field activities. The PCU would have a small Liaison Office in MAAIF, 
Kampala. MoLG will establish a small NOSP Project Implementation Coordination 
Team  (PICT)  to  coordinate  the  rural  infrastructure  component  of  the  project 
113 
(Component  2).  The  PCU  in  MAAIF  and  the  PICT  in  MoLG  will  conduct  regular 
joint planning and review sessions to ensure full harmonisation of their respective 
components’  activities  (see  more  on  tasks  of  PCU  and  PICT  in  Project 
Management section of the PIM). The Permanent Secretaries of MAAIF and MoLG 
will  be  the  Accounting  Officers  for  the  NOSP  funds  implemented  under  their 
ministries and are accountable to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. 
214.  Districts.  Participating districts  participate in  some  NOSP  activities  related 
to districts operations that will be paid at districts levels, mainly related to the 
supervision  and  monitoring  of  infrastructure  development  and  community 
development and agricultural activities. All consultants and road contractors will 
directly be paid by the PICT/PCU. The basic role of the participating districts will 
be  to  receive  and  to  account  for  activity-earmarked  advances  in  line  with 
instructions from PCU/PICT. PCU/PICT will provide suitable templates to enable 
the districts to provide acceptable accountabilities of advances received.  
215.  Heifer International is a co-financier to the project. It has a Memorandum 
of  Understanding  with  IFAD  (reference  number  EB  2017/122/INF.3,  dated  17 
September  2017)  with  a  view  to  strengthening  collaborations  and  leveraging 
investments in support of agricultural development and improved food security. 
The  organization  has  previously  implemented  IFAD  funded  projects  in 
neighbouring  countries.  It  has  a  country  office  in  Uganda,  which  manages 
projects  implemented  in  the  country.  Heifer  will  receive  matching  funds  from 
MAAIF as performance-based contract payments with specific deliverables upon 
which the payments are made. Heifer uses ERP accounting system called Aggreso 
that is able to provide financial reports per components and categories as may 
be required by PCU. 
216.  Project Coordination Unit (PCU). The PCU under MAAIF will be the overall 
accounting hub for the project, including consolidation of the combined project 
financial  statements,  while  the  PICT  in  MoLG  will  manage  payments  linked  to 
Component 2. The PCU, as the overall accounting hub for NOSP, will in financial 
management be responsible for: 
a)  Budget  consolidation  ensuring  a  bottom-up  approach  and  timely 
submissions  for  inclusions  in  GoU  overall  approved  budget  estimates  of 
the components under MAAIF;  
b)  Procurement planning, execution and support service;  
c)  Disbursement  of  funds  through  IFMIS  (including  advances  to  other 
implementing centres),  
d)  Management of withdrawal applications from IFAD;  
e)  Financial  reporting  and  consolidation  of  financial  statements  for  audits 
under the two ministries (MAAIF & MoLG); 
f)  Requests for No Objection to IFAD.  
217.  Project  Implementation  Coordination  Team.  PICT  under  MoLG  will  be 
the accounting hub for Component 2, “Support to Market Linkage Infrastructure 
Serving Oilseed Sector”. PICT, as the accounting hub for Component 2, will be 
responsible for: 
a)  Budget  consolidation  for  Component  2  activities  ensuring  a  bottom-up 
approach and timely submissions for inclusions in the GoU (MoLG) overall 
budget estimates;  
b)  Procurement planning, execution and support service;  
c)  Disbursement  of  funds  through  IFMIS  (including  advances  to  other 
implementing centres) under component 2. 
d)  Management  of  withdrawal  applications  from  IFAD  for  Component  2, 
which will be submitted to IFAD through the PCU;  
114 
e)  Regular  financial  reporting,  through  PCU,  of  the  project’s  financial 
progress.  
Disbursement Arrangements and Flow of Funds 
218.  Disbursements  from  IFAD  will  be  made  by  way  of  an  advance  to  the 
Designated  Account  and  subsequent  replenishments  based  on  expenditure 
incurred as supported with Statement of Expenditure (SoE). For efficient project 
management, there will be two designated accounts: one for Component 2 under 
MoLG,  handling  infrastructure-related  activities  and  the  other  for  other 
components  which  will  be  under  the  PCU/MAAIF.    The  modalities  of  the 
designated account for  the  IFAD  resources will be detailed in the Letter to the 
Borrower,  which  would  be  issued  by  IFAD.  The  IFAD  loan  will  be  disbursed  in 
accordance  with  IFAD  Loan  Disbursement  Handbook.  Details  of  the  specific 
names,  titles  and  signature(s)  of  the  persons  authorized  to  operate  these 
accounts  will  be  submitted  by  the  GoU/MoFPED,  and  must  reach  IFAD  before 
withdrawals are initiated. Below, a diagram illustrates the flow of funds from IFAD 
to  various  points  of  expenditure  payments,  followed  by  descriptions  of  the 
individual cash flow items. 
a)  Payments of any Government of Uganda counterpart financing. This relates to VAT and    
other taxes that will be paid under the project. 
b)  OFID funds on infrastructure transferred to OFID bank account (component 2). 
c)   
     c)   Transfer of Component 2 funds by IFAD to NOSP-MoLG designated account managed  
           by the PICT. 
d)  Transfer of Component 2 funds to project operational account in local currency for  
payments at MoLG PICT. 
e)  Transfer of earmarked funds to Districts Single Treasury Accounts for payments of 
supervisions and other oversight functions to be carried out by the districts. Rural 
roads contractors will be paid from NOSP/MoLG operational account and not at the 
districts. 
115 
IFADOFIDHeifer InternationalNOSP -MAIIF Designated Account (US$) -Central BankNOSP -MoLG Operational Account NOSP -MAIIF Operational AccountDistricts Single Treasury  Accounts  Districts Single Treasury  Accounts  Payments for Eligible ExpenditureHeifer Inter'lGoU -CounterpartOFID Bank AccountGoU Counterpart Bank AccountNOSP-MoLGDesignated Account(US$) -Central Bankcaqpafijklmnop 
f)  Payments of eligible expenditure for activities to be carried out by the districts. The 
funds will be send as earmarked advance for specific activities approved by PCU and 
accounted for on quarterly basis.  
g)  Payments of eligible expenditure from NOSP - MoLG operational account related to 
Component 2. This relates to contractors and other rural infrastructure related activities 
under component 2. 
h)  Direct payment to suppliers or partners by IFAD. This will be on exceptional basis and 
for payments of more than USD 100,000.  
i)  Transfer of Component 1, 3 & 4 funds by IFAD to NOSP-MAAIF special account 
managed by MAAIF PCU. 
j)  Payments of eligible expenditure related to other components from PCU/MAAIF 
operational account. 
k)  Transfer of Component 1,3 & 4 financing to NOSP-MAAIF project operational account in 
local currency for payments at MAAIF PCU. 
l)  Transfer of earmarked funds to Districts Single Treasury Accounts for activities to be 
carried out by districts under component 1 and 3. As noted above, these would only be 
for operational activities carried out by districts staff. 
m) Payments of eligible expenditure for activities to be carried out by the districts. The 
funds will be send as earmarked advance for specific activities approved by PCU and 
accounted for on quarterly basis. As noted above, all key payments will be made from 
PCU.  
n)  Transfer of Heifer International co-financing to Heifer Uganda office. 
o)  Payments of eligible expenditure by Heifer International in Uganda 
p)  Transfer of any advances to Heifer International for implementation of activities. 
q)   r)   s)   
219.  At the districts level, the  GoU has implemented the Treasury Single Accounts, 
which was meant to phase out the conventional separate project accounts.  Under 
the NOSP project, the transfers to the districts will not be significant.  The earmarked 
advances for specific activities agreed with PCU will be disbursed through Districts 
Treasury Single Accounts through IFMIS and accounted on quarterly basis, by 15 of 
the month following the quarter end.   
220. 
 At the PCU/PICT level (MAAIF and MoLG), specific project Special Account and 
operational accounts will be used as demonstrated in the figure above. This will be 
linked to IFMIS, and online payments will be made from the Bank of Uganda where 
the bank accounts will be held. 
221.  Withdrawal  Applications  for  Advance  Withdrawal  and  Reimbursements  may 
be submitted once ninety 90 days (quarterly basis) have lapsed from the submission 
of the previous withdrawal application. However, if the requested withdrawal amount 
is  at  least  twenty  per  cent  (20%)  of  the  initial  advanced  amounts,  a  withdrawal 
application may be submitted even if ninety (90) days have not lapsed. This will be 
included in the letter to the borrower (LTB). 
222.  The Designated Accounts limit for NOSP- MAAIF and MoLG will be set at USD 7 
million for both accounts (USD 3.5 NOSP-MAAIF and USD 3.5 for NOSP-MoLG). In 
PY  5  and  6,  the  payments  from  NOSP-MOLG  are  expected  to  rise  significantly  as 
indicated in the cost tables. The DA limit will be adjusted upward to accommodate 
the increased payments. 
116 
t)   
Planning and Budgeting 
223.  NOSP  budget  will,  as  required  by  the  Public  Finance  Act,  be  part  of  the  GoU 
overall printed national budget estimates as part of the parliamentary approvals and 
appropriations.  There are two parent ministries involved under the project: MoLG 
for activities under Component 2 and MAAIF for all other NOSP activities. The annual 
budget for components/activities under each ministry will be included in the printed 
estimates of their parent ministry’s budgets 
224.  The approved budget will be uploaded into the Integrated Financial Management 
System (IFMS). IFMS is the system used by the entire Government of Uganda for 
budgeting  and  financial  management.  The  Financial  Controller  of  the  PCU  will 
coordinate  the  budget  preparation  processes  with  close  coordination  with  project 
coordinator  and  the  lead  person  for  each  component.  At  the  district  levels,  the 
activities to be carried out at the districts will also need to be included in their budget 
for approval by the district’s council. This will be done by project focal person under 
the guidance of the project’s Financial Controller. Payments cannot be made if the 
budget  provisions  have  not  been  made  and  approved  by  the  Parliament  at  the 
Ministry level and the District Council for the district activities.   
225.  The  budget  preparation  activities  start  by  August  of  the  preceding  year  (10 
months before the related financial year) as summarized below. It will be critical for 
the project to ensure the proposed budget for the coming year is well established 
early enough as per the timelines below. 
Activity 
Issuance of 1st budget circular 
 
  Budget consultations  
Timelines 
August 
September 
to 
  Submission  of  budget  framework  papers  and  draft 
budget estimates to Ministry of Finance, Planning and 
Economic Development 
Not  later  than  15 
November  
  Submission  of  Budget  Framework  paper 
to 
By 31 December 
Parliament 
  Presentation  of  Ministerial  Policy  Statements  to 
By March 15 
Parliament 
  Annual budget presented to the Parliament 
By April 1 
  Approval of annual budget 
  Presentation of budget speech 
By May 31 
By June 15 
226.  The GoU planning calendar requires the elaboration of the budget estimates 
each year by August, 10 months before the implementation period which early 
as compared to many other countries. Due to the timing difference, there can be 
significant differences between the AWPB for which IFAD eventually expresses its 
‘no objection’ and the budget that had been appropriated for posting in the IFMIS. 
This  creates  disbursement  challenges  given  that  IFMS  does  not  allow  any 
payments that are not in the approved appropriated budgets. The appropriated 
amounts  in  IFMIS  is  a  block  limit,  from  which  implementing  entities  have  a 
window in June/July, to provide the breakdowns for the AWPB signed–off by the 
117 
Accounting  Officer  of  the  Ministry.    The  Financial  Controller  will  ensure  the 
breakdowns provided for in IFMIS are in line with the AWPB for which IFAD has 
provided no-objection and the spending is in line with this. He/she will seek to 
have  any  unreconciled  totals  provided  for  the  supplementary  budget  that  is 
usually done within 3 months after commencement of financial year.  
227. 
In  some  cases  by  the  time  the  budget  is  appropriated  by  the  Parliament, 
there can be unexplained cuts/reductions in expenditure estimates to fit within 
the  Medium-Term  Expenditure  Framework  (MTEF)  for  the  line  Ministry.  This 
element of uncertainty sometimes results in discrepancies between the AWPB on 
which  IFAD  has  expressed  “No  Objection”  and  that  appropriated  by  the 
Parliament and loaded into the IFMS system. The Financial Controller will closely 
work  with  planning  officers  at  MoLG,  MAAIF  and  MoFPED  to  ensure  that  the 
project is not affected by these regular budget cuts which are usually based on 
estimated and actual revenue collections by the government. The budgeting area 
is  therefore  considered  high  risk  area  that  require  keen  monitoring.  PCU’s 
Financial Controller should ensure there is close collaborations with Planning and 
Budget Officers at MoLG, MAAIF, MoFPED and the participating districts to ensure 
that  part  of  the  NOSP  budget  are  not  omitted  in  the  printed  estimates.  While 
there  are  supplementary  budget  processes  which  ensure  what  may  have  been 
omitted  is  rectified,  this  takes  time,  hence  it  is  critical  to  ensure  that  there  is 
adequate budget for the project at the start of the year. 
Accounting Systems, Policies and Procedure 
228.  228. The Accountant General’s Office of the Government of Uganda indicated 
that  they  have  enhanced  IFMIS  to  have  capabilities  to  carry  out  project 
accounting requirements. There is, however, no IFAD project that is fully using 
IFMIS  for project reporting. PROFIRA, an  IFAD  funded project implemented by 
MoFPED, is under IFMIS but does project financial reporting through a simple off-
the-shelf accounting system, since project financial reporting was not set up in 
IFMIS at the project commencement. The key financial reporting parameter for 
IFAD  projects  is  a  financial  system  that  will  be  able  to  (i)  extract  SoE  for 
withdrawal  applications,  (ii)  report  expenditure  per  category  and  comparing 
budget vs actual for the same for the current year and cumulatively, (iii) report 
expenditure per category and comparing budget vs actual for the current year 
and  cumulatively  and  (iv)  report  of  expenditure  per  financier.  IFMIS  requires 
special coding and mapping to enable it to handle these key financial reporting 
and monitoring requirements and they have to be done at commencement of the 
project. The training on use and installation of the software will be a part of the 
start-up  advance  described  below,  to  ensure  that  all  will  be  set  by  the  time 
project implementation commences. 
229.  To mitigate on risks and also to monitor the use  of  IFMIS for  IFAD project 
financial  reporting,  a  simple  off-the-shelf  accounting  system  (Pastel)  will  be 
installed at PCU and PICT that will run parallel with IFMIS. This will be integrated 
so that PICT at MoLG and PCU at MAAIF will use the same system for automatic 
consolidation  of  project’s  financial  statements.  After  the  first  two  years  of 
operations,  based  on  results  of  monitoring  of  IFMIS  for  project  reporting,  the 
project will consider whether to report using IFMIS alone.  Pastel has been noted 
IFAD-supported  PROFIRA  to  be  adequate  for  these  financial  reporting 
requirements. It is proposed to be the off-the-shelf accounting system for use by 
NOSP. It will be installed at PCU and PICT at the project start-up. Installation and 
training on use of Pastel will be done by the software vendor. 
118 
230.  Disbursement  to  the  districts  will  be  made  as  advances.  Recording  of 
expenditure to the project accounting system will be done by PCU/PICT based on 
expenditure reports submitted by the districts. 
231.  The project expenditure initiation, authorization and payments will be in line 
with Public Finance Act of GoU. The PSs, MAAIF/MoLG (and all ministry officials 
under  their  delegation) play  a  key  role  in  sanctioning  all  withdrawals  from  the 
project special accounts, local accounts and the  GoU  counterpart fund account 
under their components as described above. 
232.  The  Permanent  Secretary/Secretary  to  the  Treasury  at  MoFPED  and  all 
ministry officials under  his delegation play a key role  of approving all financial 
documents  for  onward  submission  to  IFAD  on  financial  and  other  project 
implementation matters (under the Loan Agreement, MoFPED represent the GoU 
as the borrower). 
Financial Reporting 
233.  Financial Controller at the PCU will be responsible for all financial reporting 
for  the  project  and  will  produce  a  consolidated  financial  statement  for  all  the 
components (all activities under MAAIF and MoLG).  The financial reporting will 
comply  with  International  Public-Sector  Accounting  Standards  (IPSAS)  -Cash 
Basis. 
234.  While  in  IFMIS,  Component  2  under  MoLG  and  other  components  under 
MAAIF are considered separate budget entities, at the project reporting level a 
consolidated financial statement will be produced by the PCU. The consolidated 
financial statements for the project will on an annual basis be audited by Office 
of the Auditor General, and audited financial statements submitted to IFAD within 
six months after the period end in accordance with IFAD guidelines. IFAD will, in 
addition  to  the  annual  audited  financial  statements,  require  interim  financial 
reports on a six-monthly interval. For management decision-making and control, 
detailed monthly and quarterly management accounts will be produced.   
Financial Management Organization and Staffing 
235.  As  noted  above,  NOSP  financial  management  arrangements  follow  the 
Government  of  Uganda  financial  management  system.  The  PSs  (MAAIF  and 
MoLG) are the accounting officer for MAAIF and MoLG, respectively that are the 
implementing  entities  for  the  project.  The  project  expenditure  initiation, 
authorization and payments will be in line with Public Finance Act of  GoU. The 
following  staff  positions  have  been  provided  for  to  ensure  (i)  adequate 
coordination  of  payments  for  project  expenditure,  (ii)  appropriate  accounting 
entries and (iii) appropriate financial reporting. 
119 
Implementation 
level 
Project  Staff  Position 
and Numbers 
Remarks 
PCU – MAAIF 
 Finance Controller (1)  
 Project Accountant (1) 
Assistant 
 Project 
Accountant (1) 
 The staffing is based on the structure of 
VODP2,  which  has  similar  types  of 
activities 
implementation 
arrangements.  
and 
 The  staff  will  be  hired  on  two  years 
on 
renewable 
based 
contracts, 
performance.  
 The staff will be hired as part of start-up 
activities. 
PICT – MoLG 
 Project Accountant (1) 
Assistant 
 Project 
Accountant (1) 
Districts 
Designated 
Accountant (1) 
Project 
 The  staff  will  be  hired  on  two  years 
on 
renewable 
based 
contracts, 
performance.  
 The staff will be hired as part of start-up 
activities. 
 This  will  be  a  staff  member  of  the 
district,  designated  to  handle  financial 
reporting and coordinating processing of 
transactions. 
 It will be one of the conditions in the MoU 
with  districts  to  have  a  designated 
accountant for the project. 
 He/she  will  handle  and  report  on 
transfers from both MoLG and MAAIF. 
Internal Controls 
236. 
In  order  to  effectively  safeguard  project  resources,  internal  controls  have 
been instituted at the PCU in the whole framework of financial and administrative 
procedures.  The  identified  controls  include  proper  record  keeping  and  posting; 
authorization  of  accounting,  procurement  and  administrative  documents; 
balancing  and  checking;  physical  security  of  assets;  double  signing  (approval) 
arrangements  and  financial  reporting  and  monitoring.  These  are  prescribed  in 
PFM act and will be further detailed in the Finance and Operation Manual for the 
project.  There  will  be  internal  audit  functions,  as  discussed  below,  to  check 
overall  compliance  to  internal  controls  and  provide  support  towards  improving 
systems, procedures and processes. 
Internal Audit 
237.  There are internal auditors across the ministries, departments and agencies 
that are under the direct supervision of the Internal Auditor General (IAG) at the 
Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development (MoFPED). IAG reports 
to the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury. In addition to its legal 
and  regulatory  platform,  Internal  Audit  has  audit  programmes,  audit 
documentation, reporting and follow up activities, as described in international 
standards. 
238. 
Internal  audits  will  be  conducted  to  provide  assurance  that  the  Project  is 
being implemented in accordance with the PIM, complies with GoU regulations 
and  is  complying  with  Project  financing  covenants.  The  project  will  utilise  the 
internal audit function at MAAIF and MoLG. 
120 
239.  The  internal  auditors  were  noted  to  be  pre-occupied  in  pre-audits  of 
transactions  instead  of  providing  independent  appraisals  of  project  accounting 
systems  and  control  environments.  Pre-audit  jeopardizes  the  independence  of 
internal auditor later when carrying out specific reviews as they will have been 
involved in expenditure approval process through pre-audit. The office of Internal 
Auditor  General  is  shifting  gradually  to  ex-post  audits  and  this  will  be  an 
advantage to the project. The internal Auditors will be required to carry out the 
audit of the project at least once annually. These would be carried out by internal 
auditors at MoLG for Component 2 and MAAIF for other components.  
240. 
IFAD  supervision  and  implementation  support  missions  will  consistently 
demand  and  review  the  rolling  internal  audit  plans,  internal  audit  reports 
produced  and  shared  as  per  internal  audit  plans  and  the  progress  in  the 
implementation of internal audit recommendations.  
External Audit 
241.  External audits will be executed by the Office of the Auditor General (OAG), 
which has been carrying out the external audit of IFAD projects implemented by 
the Government. The Terms of Reference will require IFAD’s No Objection. IFAD 
will  require  specific  audit  opinions  on:  (a)  general  standard  on  the  financial 
statements  and  (b)  the  balances  of  funds  held  in  the  special  account.  IFAD 
handbook on audit will be shared with the auditors to enhance their reviews. 
242.  The  audits  by  OAG  are  carried  out  in  accordance  with  the  International 
Standards  of  Supreme  Audit  Institutions  (ISSAI)  and  relevant  ethical 
requirements.  As  such  they  also  cover  revenues,  expenditures,  assets  and 
liabilities. In addition, they highlight any relevant material issues and systemic 
and control risks. This enables the auditor to express an opinion as to whether 
or  not  the  financial  statements  are  prepared,  in  all  material  respects,  in 
accordance with an identified or applicable financial reporting framework and (or) 
statutory requirements. 
243.  The OAG, in drawing up its audit programmes, incorporates a review of the 
implementation  of 
those 
recommendations have not been followed, this will be stated in the current audit 
report.  The  capacity  of  OAG  has  been  consistently  assessed  by  IFAD  as 
satisfactory in terms of undertaking project audits. The risk assessment here is 
therefore low. 
the  previous  period’s 
recommendations. 
If 
244.  As noted above, a consolidated project financial statement will be produced 
on which the Auditor General will provide his/her opinion including Management 
Letter.  Considering  that  there  are  two  accounting  officers  involved  in 
implementation of the  project (MoLG and MAAIF), the Management Letter and 
issues  raised  will  be  specific  on  who  is  responsible,  which  will  assist  in 
implementation of the OAG recommendations. The audited financial statements 
will be submitted to IFAD within 6 months after financial end as required by IFAD. 
245.  Start-up  advance.  IFAD  encourages  the  use  of  a  start-up  advances  for 
project  start-up activities. An amount of USD  500,000 is proposed and can be 
disbursed  after  entry  into  force  of  the  project.  The  amounts  utilized  will  be 
121 
accounted  for  and  will  form  a  part  of  the  project  costs  (loan).  Any  unutilised 
amounts of the advance will be refunded to IFAD or transferred to the project’s 
operational  account  as  a  part  of  the  project  funds.  The  proposed  start-up 
activities  to  be  funded  by  the  start-up  advance  include  hiring  of  project  staff, 
acquisition of the off-the shelf accounting system, acquisition of office equipment 
required  for  operationalisation  of  the  project  office  and  the  commencement  of 
cluster mapping.  
246.  Retroactive financing. There is no need for retroactive financing noted. 
Performance Audit13 
247.  Performance audit will be carried out for Component 1 activities and all other 
trainings  and  capacity  building  activities  that  will  be  implemented  with  the 
support  of  private  service  providers  under  performance-based  contracts.  The 
audit will follow a risk-based sampling and will seek to respond to the economy, 
efficiency and effectiveness with which the resources are utilized to deliver the 
services  to  the  public.  The  auditor  will  assess  whether  the  programmes 
implemented lead to results, outputs and outcomes in accordance with project 
objectives. The TOR for the performance audit has been developed and further 
IFAD will provide a no objection to the contracting process as is done with other 
consulting contracts.   
248.  NOSP  expenditure  centres.  Project  expenditures  are  to  be  spent  at 
different implementing levels. The following will be the key NOSP spending units 
and/ cost centres: 
Spending Unit 
Remarks 
PCU - MAAIF  
  Payments  of  eligible  expenditure 
related 
to  other 
PICT – MoLG 
Participating 
districts 
Heifer 
International 
Project 
13 TORs provided 
components/activities except Component 2. 
  Payments  of  eligible  expenditure  related  to  Component  2, 
most  of  which  will  relates  to  contractors  and  other  rural 
infrastructure related activities. 
  Most  of  component  2  expenditure  will  be  paid  from  this 
level. 
  Payments of eligible expenditure for activities to be carried 
out  by  the  districts.    Contractors  and  other  significant 
payments for rural roads construction will be paid from the 
MoLG PICT and not districts. The payments at the districts 
are mainly for roads-related supervisions and other related 
minor operational costs.  
  The funds will be advanced from PCU based on the approved 
AWPB. As noted above, funds for significant expenditure will 
be retained at PCU/PICT and paid directly. 
  Payments of eligible expenditure by Heifer International in 
Uganda.  
  This  is  one  of  the  co-financiers  that  will  also  be 
implementing some activities under Component 1. 
122 
249.  Nature  of  project  eligible  expenditures.  NOSP  expenditure  categories 
have  been  allocated  in  accordance  with  the  standard  IFAD  expenditure 
categories. Eligible expenditures include the following expenditure categories:  
(i)  Works 
(ii) Goods, services and inputs 
(iii)  Equipment and materials 
(iv)  Consultancies – TA – International 
(v) Consultancies – TA – National 
(vi)  Trainings and workshops 
(vii)  Grants 
(viii)  Salaries and allowances 
(ix)  Other operating costs 
250.  Detailed cost tables are presented in Annex 3 of this document. Transaction-
based disbursement procedures will be used. 
251.  Eligibility of Expenditure. The eligibility of expenditure should require: 
a)  The expenditure shall meet the reasonable cost of goods, works and services 
required for the Project and covered by the relevant AWPB and procured in 
conformity with the procurement guidelines 
b)  The expenditure shall be incurred during the project implementation period, 
except  that  expenditures  to  meet  the  costs  of  winding  up  the  project  that 
may be incurred after the project completion date and before the closing date 
c)  The expenditure shall be incurred by a project party 
d)  If the agreement allocates the amount of the financing to categories of eligible 
expenditures and specifies the percentages of  such eligible expenditures to 
be financed, the expenditure must relate to a category whose allocation has 
not been depleted, and shall be eligible only up to the percentage applicable 
to such category. The expenditure shall be otherwise eligible in accordance 
with the terms of the financing agreement. 
Financial Management Risk Assessment 
252. 
Inherent  risks:  Country  Issues,  Entity  Risks  and  Project  Design. 
Uganda’s  inherent  risk  is  “High”  as  measured  by  Transparency  International’s 
Corruption  Perceptions  Index  (CPI).  The  2018  Transparency  International 
Corruption  Perception  Index  for  Uganda  rating  was  26  (High  Risk),  which  was 
same as in 2017. The country ranking was 149th out of 180 countries, showing 
an improvement from the 2017 ranking of 151th.   
253.  The last Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment 
report was issued in December 2017. The financial years covered for indicators 
that  required  assessing  over  three  years  were  2013-14  to  2015-16,  2015-16. 
The reports showed the following areas of weaknesses: 
254.  Aggregate  Fiscal  Discipline.  Control  of  contractual  commitments  is  not 
sufficiently  effective,  creating  a  risk  of  generating  further  expenditure  arrears. 
The strong external audit function enhances fiscal discipline. 
123 
255.  Strategic allocation of resources. There is a strong emphasis on the overall 
fiscal framework. The Chart of Accounts caters for a multidimensional analysis of 
expenditure.  However,  the  link  between  the  medium-term  perspective  in 
expenditure budgeting and strategic plans needs to be developed to improve the 
strategic allocation of resources. 
256.  Efficient use of resources for service delivery. The current weaknesses 
in  competitive  bidding  in  the  procurement  system  could  have  adverse 
implications  for  the  efficiency  in  service  delivery.  The  strengths  in  the 
accountability  mechanisms  such  as  the  comprehensiveness  and  production  of 
annual financial statements - make external audits effective as counter checks 
on inefficient use of resources. Publishing of performance targets and outcomes 
also assists the efficient use of resources, though lack of systematic programme 
evaluation  and  data  on  resources  available  at  service  delivery  units  can 
undermine  accountability.  Such  information  would  help  management  decision-
making to support improved service delivery. 
257.  The  PEFA  report  concluded  that  there  have  been  improvements  in  the 
orderliness  and  participation  in  the  budget  process  as  well  as  multi-year  fiscal 
forecasts  and  functional  allocation.  Debt  recording  and  reporting  had  also 
improved as had payroll functions and  elements  of procurement.  It noted that 
the  payroll  and  procurement  function  had  achieved  this  despite  an  ambitious 
decentralization policy.  Internal control and internal audit have also advanced. 
The main area of backsliding is arrears, tax audits and reconciliation of arrears. 
Many of these improvements were attributed to strong management of the PFM 
reform programme as well as the enactment of the new PFM Act (2015). Some 
improvements  have  already  been  made  as  a  result  of  the  Act  and  its  legal 
requirements, whilst others are still being developed. 
258. 
In  March  2016,  the  World  Bank  Group  issued  a  Country  Partnership 
Framework  
(CPF) for the Republic of Uganda for the period 2016 -2021. The overall risks to  
 the CPF were assessed as substantial, with two areas rated as High Risk: 
 
Institutional  capacity  for  the  effective  implementation  of  projections  -  due  to 
either understaffing, underutilization of capacity, incomplete implementation of 
policies and weak oversight and control mechanisms 
  Environment and social - weak government ownership of safeguards. 
259.  The following areas were given “Substantial Risk” ratings: 
  Political and governance – mainly due to concerns relating to governance 
and effective public-sector management  
  Sector  studies  and  policies  –  lack  of  institutionalization  and  weak  links 
between planning budgeting and implementation 
  Fiduciary – primarily in the area of procurement as well as weak financial 
management and internal audit functions. 
Implementation Readiness 
260.  The following FM Actions are proposed to mitigate on project risks at NOSP 
start-up: 
124 
Action 
Responsible 
Party 
/ 
Person 
Target  Date  / 
Covenants 
(i)  
Recruit  qualified  and  experienced  PCU/ 
PICT financial management team. 
MAAIF 
MoLG 
& 
Disbursement 
condition. 
Allocate the tasks and give a formal letter 
with  roles  and  responsibilities  to  the 
District  Accountant  that  will  handling 
and 
project 
coordinating processing of transactions. 
reporting 
financial 
He/she will handle and report on transfer 
from both MoLG and MAAIF. 
coding 
 Comprehensive 
and 
special 
mapping  of  IFMIS  to  enable  it  to  handle 
key  financial  reporting  and  monitoring 
including  (i)  extracting 
requirements, 
SoEs  for  withdrawal  applications,  (ii) 
reporting  expenditure  per  category  and 
comparing budget vs actual for the same 
for the current year and cumulatively, (iii) 
reporting  expenditure  per  category  and 
comparing budget vs actual for the same 
for the current year and cumulatively and 
(iv) reporting of expenditure per financier.  
Training of recruited NOSP staff on IFMIS 
will  be  done  by  Financial  Management 
Division of MoFPED. 
 Acquisition  and  installation  of  an  off-the 
shelf  accounting  system  for  the  PCU  and 
PICT  that  will  run  parallel  with  IFMIS  for 
the first 2 years and monitored thereafter. 
This  will  be  integrated  so  that  PICT  at 
MoLG  and  PCU  at  MAAIF  will  use  same 
system  for  automatic  consolidation  of 
project’s financial statements. Installation 
and  training  on  use  will  be  done  by  the 
software  vendor  as  part  of  start-up 
activities. 
CAO 
Start-up 
advance 
will  be  utilized  for 
this 
Disbursement 
condition 
to 
participating 
districts 
the 
MAAIF,  MoLG 
& MoFPED 
Immediately 
effectiveness. 
after 
be 
To 
finalized 
before  any  project 
expenditure 
is 
incurred  so  as  to 
ensure  all  project 
are 
expenditure 
captured correctly.  
MAAIF 
MoLG 
& 
Immediately 
effectiveness. 
after 
be 
To 
finalized 
before  any  project 
expenditure 
is 
incurred  so  as  to 
ensure  all  project 
are 
expenditure 
captured correctly. 
Ensure  advances  to  districts  will  be  for 
specific,  earmarked  activities  as  opposed 
to general advances. 
PCU – MAAIF 
and 
PICT 
MoLG 
Continuous 
(ii)  
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v)  
(vi) 
 During  loan  negotiations,  IFAD  will  seek 
specific  assurances  from  the  GoU  that 
project  budget  estimates  will  not  be 
arbitrarily  cut  by  the  Ministry  of  Finance, 
Planning and Economic Development. 
IFAD Team 
(vii) 
 The project  will more likely commence in 
the  course  of  a  financial  year,  after  a 
budgeting  cycle.  IFAD  will  require  GoU 
MAAIF,  MoLG 
& MoFPED 
125 
To  be  part  of  Loan 
and 
Negotiations 
implemented 
immediately  upon 
loan effectiveness 
To  be  part  of  Loan 
Negotiations 
and 
implemented 
Action 
commitment  to  include  budget  estimates 
for  that  financial  year  (year  1)  as  a 
supplementary budget to enhance project 
commencement. 
Responsible 
Party 
/ 
Person 
Target  Date  / 
Covenants 
immediately  upon 
loan effectiveness 
(viii) 
 Provision  of  counterpart  finance  for  the 
project  to  cater  for  taxes  and  other 
counterpart contribution 
MAAIF,  MoLG 
& MoFPED 
To  be  part  of  Loan 
Negotiations, 
Financing 
Agreement 
implemented 
immediately  upon 
loan effectiveness 
and 
FM Supervision Plan 
261.  Supervision. NOSP will be directly supervised by IFAD with annual supervision 
and  implementation  support  missions,  followed  initially  by  shorter  follow-up 
missions six months later as may be required. Supervision will not be conducted 
as  a  general  inspection  or  evaluation,  but  rather  as  an  opportunity  to  jointly 
assess  achievements  and  lessons,  and  to  reflect  on  ways  to  improve 
implementation;  and  impact.  From  a  financial  management  perspective,  IFAD 
missions will keenly follow up the fiduciary risk at various levels, including the 
use of the report-based disbursement. 
126 
Terms of Reference for Performance Audit 
1. Objective of Operational Performance Audit: 
Government of Uganda (GoU) needs to conduct detailed Operational audits of the PSP to 
evaluate  performance  of  the  Organizations  in  the  form  of  economy,  efficiency 
and  effectiveness  of  its  operations.  For  this,  the  PMU  would  like  to  appoint  one 
International/local  audit 
(Chartered  Accountants/Certified  Public 
Accountants),  having  experience  to  conduct  performance  audit  in  public  sector.  An 
interested firm can bid for Operational Performance audit of one or more of the listed hubs. 
The government may also refer such audit to the Auditor General of Uganda if it so desires. 
firm 
a) Primary objectives are to assess the availability of operational activities and services 
provided by the hubs and whether these are in line with the vision of corporatization and 
overall value for money. 
b) Operation audit will also evaluate the performance and capacity of the staff of hubs, 
check existing system for services, check Operational Procedure and provide feedback to 
the project coordinator/country manager. 
c) Hiring process of the performance audit firms would be done by the PMU and inter alia 
may be financed from the government funding already available. 
2. Scope of Assignment: 
The  assigned  audit  firm  needs  to  review  overall  Operational  Performance  and  control 
system of the project operations and support activities in light of NOSP (National Oilseeds 
Project) Standards/other applicable Standards to come up with an opinion on the status 
of  economy,  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  operations  primarily  focused  to  examine 
whether  the  6  hubs  are  meeting  the  overall  objective  of  corporatization  while  also 
achieving its purpose: 
  At the right pace 
  With the right cost effectiveness 
  With the right administrative structures 
  With the right inbuilt system of checks and balances: 
o  Administratively, 
o  Financially, 
o  Legally and 
o  Operationally 
 
It is also to be examined that whether the corporatized hubs been better then its 
replacement in achieving its objectives in terms of cost benefit. If yes how much? 
Could  it  have  been  more  productive  in  the  given  resources?  If  not  why?  Who  is 
responsible and how does one correct it within the given resources? 
127 
3. Specific Areas of Examination and Verification: 
Without  undermining  the  generality  of  the  foregoing,  the  performance  and  operational 
audit firms are expected to: 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
Review and assess respective legal framework under which the relevant hubs 
is functioning. 
Identify  any  improvements  in  the  Legal  framework  to  align  the  same  to  the 
vision of the respective organization. 
Review & Assess whether the Policies, SOPs,  Operation manuals, Operational 
Plan  of  the  hub  concerned  is  correctly  made  to  meet  requirements  for  the 
organization’s day-to-day operational activities. 
Determine  whether  the  funds  are  used  for  the  purposes  and  intended 
operational activities. 
Conduct  physical  on-site  verification  of  services  rendered  as  described  in  the 
payment  documents  or  contracts  and  verify  whether  any  payments  made 
before actual receipts of services and beyond contract clause. Evidence of work 
may  include  photographs  of  people  attending  trainings  and  works  by  the 
consultants,  written  acknowledgment 
from  beneficiaries,  participants, 
stakeholders  and  other  third  parties,  supporting  documents  from  venues  for 
workshops, training center etc. 
vi) 
Examine  whether  transaction  prices  or  value  are  unduly  inflated;  whether 
liquidated damages have been charged and recovered as per contract. 
vii) 
Conduct verifications which may be extended to third parties check to confirm 
eligibility of expenditures especially for hired venues for training, workshop and 
business meeting etc. if any. 
4. Compliance 
The assigned audit firm needs to review the compliance on test/sample basis of Support 
Services  i.e.  on  Accounts,  Procurement,  and  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  covering  the 
following areas: 
i) 
ii) 
Review expenditures of the hubs in a particular year with reference to business 
objectives in a timely manner considering KPIs, under which these were claimed 
and whether right category of financing were used. 
Review arrangements for managing the Designated Accounts and determining 
that these are maintained and operated as per agreed arrangements. 
iii) 
Examine whether the hubs maintains all necessary books of accounts in a timely 
manner and to ensure compliance of financial management guidelines. 
128 
iv) 
v) 
vi) 
Examine  the  compliance  of  laws,  rules,  regulations,  notifications,  SROs, 
including those related to public procurement. 
Verify  whether  assets  procured  under  the  hub’s  funding  are  justified  and  are 
appropriately utilized in an efficient manner. 
the 
Verify 
asset 
stock/inventory takeover goods/services, receipt issues, transfers and disposals 
are up to the mark. Compare the physical assets with Assets register. 
templates/Proforma  used 
annual/half-yearly 
for 
vii) Review good storing system, ageing analysis; identify goods with life span and beyond 
life span to determine impairment and recommendation for management decision. 
vii) 
Review document management/filling system including time taken for Official 
correspondence. 
viii) 
Review monitoring and evaluation reports in the areas of physical progress and 
financial progress, and quarterly/annual reports 
5. Conduct period of the Audit 
The performance audit shall be carried out covering the period from the second year of 
the project and bi-annually onward in order to ensure continuous monitoring of the 
management of GoU resources of which will, in turn, generate good value for money.  
The operational audit should focus less on transactions-checks and more on Operations of 
hubs. 
6. Performance Audit Planning 
  Audit is to be planned to cover all the components and sub components of the hubs 
at all the implementations sites including their Head Offices. 
  The auditor would plan the work dimensions as per guidelines provided under the 
components  break  up.  Methodology  of  the  test  should  be  planned  and  resources 
engagement to achieve the planned result with in stipulated time frame. 
  Deliverable would require to be confirmed in the inception report within 30 days 
of engagement along with revised and updated plan, methodology, resources and 
time frame. 
  Operational auditor will conduct audit in accordance with the plan with adequate 
notice  to  the  auditee  for  preparation  of  audit  data  sheet  circulated  on  relevant 
information. 
  On invitation, The audit firm will attend Project Implementation meeting to report 
on the progress of planned audit work, request the Chairman of the Committee on 
any need. The practicalities of these arrangements will be discussed and agreed. 
7. Staffing by of the Audit Firm 
i) 
Given  the  nature  of  this  assignment  in  direct  and  personnel  support  of  hub 
officials,  the  firm  staff  should  all  have  highly developed  human  relations  and 
129 
ii) 
iii) 
communications skills and the firm may include sufficient number of appropriate 
seniors / junior staff for specific tasks as required. 
The  Audit  Firm  shall  provide  a  detailed  schedule  of  proposed  staff  and 
corresponding  duration  of  assignment.  The  staffing  proposal  should  clearly 
indicate the international or national origin of staff inputs. The staff must speak 
the local language of the site visited 
Staffing  changes  may  be  proposed  by  either  party  and  no  change  may  be 
effected  by  the  firm  except  with  the  prior  approval  of  the  client.  In  case  of 
substitutions  proposed  by  the  firm,  the  firm  at  its  own  cost  will  ensure 
reasonable  overlap  between  departing  and  new  staff  as  well  as  smooth 
continuity of work. 
8. Deliverables and Reporting 
a) Operational audit will report to Project Coordinator and Country Manager 
b) The Reporting will be designed in three parts; 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
Preliminary  study  of  the  hubs  operations  by  the  Principal  of  Chartered 
Accountants/Certified Public Accountants Firm and submit an inception 
report with an audit methodology, time frame, audit resources and their 
qualification within 10 days of the award of the contract. 
Submit  draft  report  within  75  days  of  the  award  of  the  contract, 
covering  Audit  report  with  an  auditor’s  opinion,  detailed  report  on 
component wise work undertaken, control environment of the beneficiary 
institutions as studied by the project, fund received, utilized, reasons for 
delayed  utilization  (if  any)  and  deficiencies  noted  and  a  table  form 
report  (sample  format  to  agree  in  the  inception  report)  with 
impacts,  recommendations, 
financial 
significant 
managements  response  and  timeframe  of  the  implementation  of  the 
recommendations. 
(PIC) 
representatives (s) would attend the draft report discussion meeting. 
Implementation 
Committee 
findings, 
Project 
issues, 
Submit  final  report  as  reviewed  with  90  days  of  the  award  of  the 
contract in  
As part of the final deliverable/audit report, the Provincial Government expect to 
receive  a  detailed  performance  giving  a  bird-eye  view  of  the  hubs  especially 
covering: 
Nature Tasks Timeframe 
Cost Outputs Cost/Benefit ratio 
Issues Responsibility Solutions 
Administration 
Operational 
Financial 
Legal 
130 
Each of the area and task may have sub-areas and sub-tasks, if so applicable. 
Each Report shall contain: 
  Executive Summary 
  Summary of audit findings with recommended actions. 
  Detailed assessment of each audit areas which include review of the hubs progress, 
assessment  of  internal  control  system  that  captures  the  audit  issues  and 
recommendations. 
  Categorization of audit findings by risk severity: High, Medium and low. 
  Classification of possible causes of audit findings. 
9. Data & Services to be provided by the Client: 
a) The audit firm shall be given access to all legal documents, correspondences and any 
other  information  associated  with  the  hubs  and  deemed  necessary  by  the  auditor. 
Confirmation should also be obtained of amounts disbursed and outstanding with Donors; 
Governments; etc.  
b) The audit firm shall also be given access to all relevant papers and documents, 
correspondences and any other information deemed necessary during the audit.   
c) The auditor shall also be given such other logistic facilities which will be mutually 
agreed. 
131 
D.  Procurement 
263. During the design process, a draft Procurement Manual for NOSP was produced, to 
guide all procurement processes of the projects. It is presented below, together with the 
draft  TOR  for  the  Procurement  Officer  to  be  recruited  in  the  PCU.  A  longer  and  more 
detailed version of the Procurement Manual is available in the folder “NOSP Background 
Files”. 
132 
NOSP PROCUREMENT MANUAL (DRAFT) 
I.  Assessment of Procurement Systems 
A.  Country Procurement Systems Assessment 
1. 
Procurement  Regulations  applicable  to  NOSP:  All  procurements  with  cost 
estimate  above  the  threshold  for  international  competitive  bidding  (ICB)  will  be 
undertaken according to the World Bank Guidelines. All contracts procured at national level 
following  National  Competitive  Bidding  (NCB)  and  other  lower  procurement  procedures 
such as Restricted Bidding and Shopping (Request for Quotations) will follow the national 
public procurement law (the Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003 and its 
attendant regulations). These procedures have been  reviewed by  IFAD and found to be 
satisfactory,  except  for  the  following  provisions,  which  will  not  be  applicable  under  this 
project: 
a.  Domestic preferences shall not apply under NCB; 
b.  The charging of fees for dealing with bidder complaints at procuring entity level 
shall not be permitted; 
c.  Paragraph 6(1) (b and c) of the fourth schedule of the PPDA Act (restrictions on 
contract amendments) shall not apply with respect to consultancy services. 
2. 
Legal Aspects and Procurement Practices: Public procurement in Uganda is 
regulated  by  the  amended  Procurement  and  Disposal  of  Public  Assets  Act,  2003).  The 
Parliament of Uganda adopted the Act to make governmental procurement more fair and 
transparent by subjecting it to the principals of: 
transparency, accountability and fairness; 
  non-discrimination; 
 
  maximisation of competition and ensuring value for money; 
 
  economy and efficiency; and 
  promotion of ethics.  
confidentiality; 
Clearly,  the  amendment  of  the  Procurement  and  Disposal  of  Public  Assets 
3. 
Act, 2003 has improved the competitive nature of governmental procurement in Uganda 
as follows: 
  Strengthen PPDA by giving it additional powers in regulating public procurement in 
all Government entities. 
  Ensure transparency and accountability by making accounting officers personally 
liable for their actions in the procurement process. 
  Guarantee the confidence of the public in the procurement process by establishing 
 
the PPDA Tribunal.  
Introduce a number of rules, regulations and definitions to cover the different needs 
in the procurement cycle. 
Independence and segregation of roles among the various stakeholders. 
 
  Recognition of procurement planning as crucial to the success of the procurement 
 
function. 
Increased  autonomy  of  the  entities  and  wider  participation  of  all  stakeholders  in 
the decision-making process. 
B.  Project Specific Assessment 
The review of the procurement system in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal 
4. 
Industry  and  Fisheries,  the  lead  implementing  agency,  indicated  that  the  procurement 
capacity is inadequate. Common areas of weakness in procurement arrangements include: 
133 
(a) the need for improvement of procurement practices; (b) weak capacity at all levels; 
(c)  Instructions  to  bidders,  qualification,  evaluation,  award  criteria,  and  contract 
management  are  not  sufficiently  clear;  (d)  the  contract  conditions  can  be  improved  to 
achieve  a  more  equitable  balance  between  employer  and  contractor/supplier.  A  major 
shortcoming  that  leads  to  awarding  contracts  to  nonperforming  contractors/suppliers  is 
not applying a post-qualification process on the nominated contractor/supplier for award. 
The  overall  assessment  is  moderately  unsatisfactory.  The  details  of  the  review  are  as 
follows: 
5. 
Procurement  planning:  The legal framework provides thorough guidance 
on  procurement  planning,  linking  the  planning  process  up  with  the  budgeting  process, 
hence providing an important first step towards actual integration of procurement planning 
in the budgeting process. According to the legal framework, all procurement shall be within 
the approved budget of the PE.  
6. 
Districts Level suffers from a number of weaknesses the most important ones being:  
At  the  same  time,  the  procurement  planning  process  on  the  National  and 
a.  The  PPDA format does  not fully comply with IFAD  Guidelines.  The plan does not 
include  actual  rows.  Moreover,  there  is  no  separate  sheet  for  each  procurement 
category 
b.  Lack of or failure to procure within the approved plan. 
c.  Failure to commence procurements as per the planned timelines leads to delays in 
service delivery and works completed. 
d.  In  one  district,  the  Entity  did  not  provide  indicative  timelines  in  its  procurement 
plan. 
e.  Use of a wrong procurement method to enter into framework contracts. 
f.  Variance  between  the  planned  and  actual  contract  value.  This  is  a  sign  of  poor 
planning leading to high contracting costs and leads to domestic arrears 
g.  Conducting procurements outside the Entity procurement plan. 
7. 
Procedures  for  pre-qualification:  As  provided  by  the  Law,  the  pre-
qualification procedure is allowed based on the nature of procurement. In relation to the 
practice of the procuring entities for pre-qualification spelled out in the law, each procuring 
entity has established its list; however, the quality of the prequalification documents and 
evaluation procedures were not assessed.  
8. 
Preparation of bidding documents: The legal framework is complemented 
with  a  series  of  Standard  Bidding  Documents  (SBDs)  covering  procurement  of  goods, 
works and services. However, the procuring entities lack capacity in preparation of Bidding 
Documents resulting in poor quality evaluation criteria, general and special conditions and 
technical  specifications,  which,  leads  to  poor  quality  procurement  of  goods,  works  and 
services.  In  some  cases,  allegation  exists  that  technical  specifications  are  tailored  for  a 
specific manufacturer which leads to de facto SS. 
9. 
In the procuring entity, compliance with the mandatory steps were existed as follows:  
Management of bidding process from advertisement to bid opening: 
a.  Advertising:  Advertisements  are  placed  in  widely  read  national/  international 
media and websites, depending on the bidding thresholds. The challenge remains 
with limited bidding where the invitations to tender are sent to some bidders out 
the prequalified list without proper justification. 
b.  Communication  with  bidders:  Generally,  bidders  are  provided  with  procuring 
entity address and all details needed for any clarifications within specific period of 
time. 
134 
c.  Receipt and opening of bids: Receipts, provided on purchase of bid documents, 
are included in proposals/bids on delivery and registered in forms provided by the 
entity to show time of delivery. Generally, bid opening is done within an hour after 
the bid closing time. The main gap in the bid receiving procedure is the submitted 
bids are not securely stored  since there is no tender box in any of the assessed 
entities.  
10. 
Bid evaluation and contract award: In many cases, evaluation of bids was 
carried  out  using  criteria  not  disclosed  in  the  bidding  documents  or  eliminating  some 
criteria enrolled in the documents. Using wrong evaluation methodology and irregularities 
of evaluation were noticed in several cases which lead to: 
a.  Reduce competition and failure to attract competitive prices for achievement 
of value for money. 
b.  Award the contracts to incompetent vendors. 
Moreover,  the  evaluation  committees  for  consultancy  services  in  most  cases,  did  not 
include members with a relevant type of skills, knowledge and experience relevant to the 
procurement requirement.  
11. 
Preparation  and  signing  of  contract:  Based  on  the  recommendation  of 
the  evaluation  committee  and  the  approval  of  the  contracts  committee  the  contract  is 
signed  with  the  lowest  evaluated  bidder.  However,  in  some  cases  the  selected  bidders 
failed to provide the performance security in the due time and no corrective action was 
taken. In one case, there were changes in the special conditions of contract in the signed 
contract as compared with those in the solicitation document without Contracts Committee 
approval. 
12. 
Contract  management  during  implementation,  including  dispute 
resolution  methods:  The  information  gathered  from  the  assessed  procuring  entity 
confirmed  that  the  lack  of  proper  contract  management  and  contract  administration  in 
place.  In  several  cases,  there  was  no  evidence  of  formal  appointment  of  a  contract 
manager  contrary  to  Regulation  259  of  the  PPDA  Regulations  2003.  Although  the  Act 
requires the public entity to develop an implementation plan for each contract, frequently 
the Pes failed to comply with this requirement. Moreover, delay in processing the payments 
for vendors was noticed.   
Support  and  control  systems:  The  Public  Procurement  and  Disposal  of 
13. 
Public  Assets  Authority  (PPDA)  in  the  de-centralised  system  is  the  principal  regulatory 
body for public procurement and disposal of public assets in Uganda. It does this through 
setting standards; ensuring application of the rules is fair, transparent, non-discriminatory 
and provides value for money; harmonizing procurement and disposal policy systems and 
practices  in  central  government,  local  governments  and  statutory  bodies;  monitoring 
compliance  of  procuring  and  disposal  entities;  and,  building  procurement  and  disposal 
capacities in Uganda. The amendments to the PPDA law have introduced several changes 
prominent  of  which  is  the  strengthening  and  enhancement  of  the  role  of  PPDA  in  the 
execution of its regulatory mandate. Its Executive Director reports directly to the Board of 
Directors  whom  appointed  by  the  Minister  of  Finance.  However,  PPDA  is  physically  and 
functionally separate from the accounting and reporting functions of MOF. Nevertheless, 
the information available on the procurement website is not comprehensive and cannot be 
used to  calculate a definite figure for the percentage  of contracts monitored. Moreover, 
there is a poor enforcement and follow up on external audit recommendations. 
Record-keeping:  The  Districts  recordkeeping  practices  remain  poor,  the 
14. 
legal frame-work establishes norms for the safekeeping of records and documents related 
to procurement transactions and contract management for a period of seven years from 
135 
the date of a decision to terminate the procurement or disposal action, or the date of the 
contract  completion,  whichever  comes  later.  While  there  is  significant  improvement  in 
record-keeping  at  the  Central  Level,  the  findings  of  the  PPDA  Audit  Report  on  74  Local 
Entities for Procurements and Disposals-March 2018 indicated that the Procurement and 
Disposal Units lacked a central repository for procurement records which was attributed to 
lack of adequate facilitation. Failure to archive procurement and disposal records in a safe 
and  secure  location  might  result  into  loss  of  documents  by  the  Entity  through  theft  or 
misplacement and affects confidentiality of the procurement process. 
15. 
Staffing:  The  available  expertise  at  PE  level  does  not  meet  the  need  for 
specialised procurement knowledge: The overall lack of procurement knowledge remains 
a  major  weakness  to  the  efficiency  of  procurement  operations.  It  should  be  noted  that 
there  is  an  urgent  need  for  additional  procurement  expertise  who  are  possessing  the 
necessary competence levels. Massive upgrading of qualifications through training as well 
as an increase in the supply of specialised graduates will be required to fill this gap. 
II.  NOSP Procurement Arrangements 
A.  General Considerations 
16. 
The responsibility for the implementation of the Project, and therefore for the 
award and administration of contracts under the Project, rests with the Borrower/MAAIF. 
The  IFAD, for its part, is  required to  ensure that  the proceeds  of any  loan or grant are 
used only for the purposes for which the loan or grant was granted. While in practice the 
specific  procurement  rules  and  procedures  to  be  followed  in  the  implementation  of  a 
Project depend on the circumstances of the particular case, seven (7) principles generally 
guide the Fund’s requirements: 1) Ethics, 2) Accountability, 3) Competition, 4) Fairness, 
5) Transparency, 6) Efficiency, Effectiveness & Economy and 7) Value for Money. 
Ethics:  The  guiding  principles  of  ethical  behaviour  are  impartiality, 
17. 
independence and integrity. No person or entity shall use his/her/its authority, position or 
office  for  personal  gain,  which  will  be  defined  as  soliciting,  accepting  or  otherwise 
benefiting  from  anything  of  material  value,  in  any  form,  either  in  person  or  indirectly 
through  close  relatives  or  associates,  as  a  result  of  procurement  financed  by  IFAD. 
Borrower/Recipient officials engaged in procurement activity have a duty to: 
a.  maintain and enhance the reputation of the Borrower/Recipient country by: 
i.  maintaining  the  highest  standards  of  honesty  and  integrity  in  all  professional 
relationships; 
ii.  developing the highest possible standards of professional competence; 
iii.  maximizing  the  use  of  IFAD  funds  and  other  resources  for  which  they  are 
responsible for the purposes for which these funds and resources were provided 
to the Borrower/Recipient country; and 
iv.  complying with both the letter and the spirit of: 
 
 
the financing agreement; 
the laws and regulations of the Borrower/Recipient country; 
  accepted professional ethics; and 
 
contractual obligations; 
b.  declare any personal interest that may affect, or might reasonably be deemed 
by others to affect, impartiality in any matter relevant to their duties (conflict of 
interest).  In  a  situation  of  this  nature,  the  official  concerned  should  not 
136 
participate in any way in the procurement process, to avoid mis-procurement; 
and 
c.  respect the confidentiality of information gained in the course of duty and not 
use such information for personal gain or for the unfair benefit of any bidder, 
supplier or  contractor.  Information given in the course of their duties shall be 
true, fair and not designed to mislead. 
18. 
Accountability:  The  Borrower/Recipient  is  accountable  to  IFAD  for  all 
actions and decisions in relation to Project-funded procurement. This includes, but is not 
limited to: 
a.  Ensuring  that  the  funds  are  used  solely  for  the  purpose  for  which  they  were 
provided; and 
b.  Ensuring that procurement is undertaken in accordance with IFAD Guidelines. 
19. 
Competition: Full, fair and legitimate competition among eligible suppliers 
and contractors is the foundation on which Project-funded procurement activities should 
be  based.  The  most  common  method  of  seeking  competition  is  through  a  competitive 
bidding  process,  and,  in  this  regard,  IFAD  specifies  that  all  goods,  works  and  services 
should  be  obtained  through  an  agreed  procurement  process  involving  at  least  three 
separate  suppliers  or  contractors  whose  business  is  directly  related  to  the  procurement 
being  undertaken.  It  is  recognized  that  it  is  neither  practical  nor  efficient  to  advertise 
internationally  for  low-value  contracts  for  goods,  works  or  services,  and  the  degree  to 
which the principle of competition is required for each procurement activity will be outlined 
in  the  procurement  method  approved  by  IFAD  within  the  procurement  plan. 
Borrowers/Recipients  will  be  expected  to  promote  genuine  competition  at  every 
opportunity and maybe required to provide evidence of: 
a.  fair and genuine competition in the compilation of shortlists and in the solicitation 
of bids; and 
b.  the effectiveness of competition during the bidding process. 
c.  Single  sourcing  and  direct  contracting  do  not  provide  the  elements  of 
competition  required  by  IFAD.  Only  in  exceptional  circumstances  will  these 
approaches be considered and approved in procurement plans agreed with IFAD. 
Fairness: IFAD’s expectation is that Project-funded procurement will be open 
20. 
to as many eligible bidders from  IFAD’s developed and developing Member States as is 
practicable 
in  order  to  meet  the  requirements  of  competition.  IFAD  expects 
Borrowers/Recipients to ensure that all prospective bidders are: 
a.  managed  with  a  consistent  approach  and  application  of  laws,  regulations  and 
requirements in respect of the procurement process; 
b.  offered a level playing field on which to genuinely compete; and 
c.  treated in a fair, impartial and unbiased way, so that principles of impartiality 
and equal opportunity can be demonstrated in all procurement activities. 
21. 
In striving for fairness in its procurement operations, IFAD: 
a.  will  not  tolerate  exclusion  of,  discrimination,  bias  or  prejudice  against,  or 
favouritism  or  inequality  towards  any  potential  supplier  or  contractor,  either 
directly  or  indirectly  through  manipulation  of  any  part  of  the  procurement 
process, including, but not limited to, the preparation of technical specifications, 
evaluation criteria or bidding requirements. Where any such activity is suspected 
137 
or  proven,  IFAD  reserves  the  right  to  take  any  preventative,  corrective  or 
punitive action it considers appropriate; and  
b.  will seek to address, in consultation with the Borrower/Recipient, any impositions 
that may deter or impinge on the attainment of fairness within the procurement 
process. 
22. 
Transparency:  IFAD  expects  the  highest  degree  of  transparency  and 
openness  within  the  procurement  processes  undertaken  under  its  projects.  A  lack  of 
transparency can be perceived as an attempt to withhold information, which in turn may 
make the fairness and integrity of the procurement process suspect. Transparency within 
procurement  relates  to  disclosing  the  public  domain,  information  for  parties  involved, 
interested in or affected by the process, including but not limited to information on: 
a.  the availability of potential and existing procurement opportunities; 
b.  where to access relevant data; 
c.  the processes by which the procurement is being undertaken; 
d.  the mechanisms by which contracts will be awarded; 
e.  contract award data; and 
f.  appeal procedures. 
23. 
Modes of communication/publication of such information will vary depending 
on the nature of the data but will generally be through existing means of public information 
(e.g.  government  websites,  public  notice  boards  or  media)  or  in  the  procurement 
documentation relevant to an individual procurement activity (e.g. bid notices and bidding 
documents). Borrowers/Recipients are required at all times to act openly, predictably and 
in accordance with the information provided. 
and 
IFAD 
Economy: 
Efficiency, 
Effectiveness 
24. 
requires 
Borrowers/Recipients  to  demonstrate  efficiency  and  economy  in  undertaking  Project-
related  procurement,  to  avoid  undue  implementation  delays  and  to  achieve  value  for 
money. Procurement must be well organized, carried out correctly with regard to quantity, 
quality  and  timeliness,  and  at  the  optimum  price,  in  accordance  with  the  appropriate 
guidelines,  principles  and  regulations.  Processes  must  be  proportionate  to  the 
procurement activity, so that the  overall cost  of conducting the procurement process is 
minimized and tailored to the size of the budget for the activity being undertaken, while 
upholding  the  guiding  principles.  Efficiencies  can  be  obtained  through  a  combination  of 
methods.  For  instance,  a  strategic  approach  can  be  taken  to  planning,  combining  and 
conducting procurement activities so as to minimize loss of time and resources. For this 
reason, the design of all IFAD-funded projects must now include a procurement plan. 
25. 
Value for money: Underpinning all of the above is the need to obtain value 
for  money  for  all  Project  procurement  activities  through  the  optimum  combination  of 
several factors, including: 
a.  applying sound, internationally recognized procurement principles; 
b.  ensuring that the goods, works or services procured meet the requirements for 
the task and are not over-specified; 
c.  ensuring that the goods, works or services are contracted on the best possible 
terms, taking into account their expected life cycle; and 
d.  ensuring that the provider/supplier of the goods, works or services is qualified, 
legally entitled and competent to execute the contract. 
138 
Best  value  does  not  necessarily  mean  the  lowest  initial  price  option,  but 
26. 
rather represents the best return on investment, taking into consideration the unique and 
specific circumstances of each procurement activity; the balance of time, cost and quality 
required;  and  the  successful  overall  outcome  of  the  contract  in  meeting  its  original 
objectives. 
27. 
Borrower/recipient officials engaged in procurement activity have a duty to: 
a.  Maintain and enhance the reputation of the borrower/recipient country by: 
  Maintaining  the  highest  standards  of  honesty  and  integrity  in  all 
professional relationships; 
  Developing the highest possible standards of professional competence; 
  Maximizing the use of IFAD funds and other resources for which they are 
responsible  for  the  purposes  for  which  these  funds  and  resources  were 
provided to the borrower/recipient country; and 
  Complying with both the letter and the spirit of: 
  The financing agreement; 
  The laws and regulations of the borrower/recipient country; 
  Accepted professional ethics; and 
  Contractual obligations. 
b.  Declare any personal interest that may affect, or might reasonably be deemed 
by others to affect, impartiality in any matter relevant to their duties (conflict 
of  interest).  In  a  situation  of  this  nature,  the  official  concerned  should  not 
participate in any way in the procurement process, to avoid mis-procurement; 
and 
c.  Respect the confidentiality of information gained in the course of duty and not 
use such information for personal gain or for the unfair benefit of any bidder, 
supplier or contractor. Information given in the course of their duties shall be 
true, fair and not designed to mislead. 
28. 
The Project will contribute to building up the in-house procurement capacity 
of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Ministry of Local Government 
and  participating  Districts,  instilling  best  practices  and  the  required  approach  and 
methodology,  and  monitoring  the  timeliness  and  quality  of  the  process.    IFAD  plans  an 
intensive training programme at start-up to familiarise NOSP staff with IFAD Guidelines.  
The  effectiveness  of  procurement  will  be  assessed  during  supervision  and  alternate 
arrangements put in place if necessary. 
29. 
The  PPDA  standard  bidding  documents  will  be  used  for  undertaking 
procurement  under  this  Project  for  all  transactions  applying  National  methods  (NCB, 
Restricted  Bidding  and  National  Shopping)  and  consistency  with  IFAD  Procurement 
Guidelines should be ensured. Concepts relating to Accountability, Competition, Fairness, 
Transparency,  Efficiency,  Effectiveness  &  Economy  and  Value  for  Money  contained  in 
IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and which are central to  IFAD’s Procurement Philosophy 
are discussed above. 
30. 
The  Procurement  Process  involves  the  purchasing,  acquiring,  hiring  or 
obtaining of goods, works and services by any contractual means and can be defined in 
more detail as procurement of goods, procurement of works and procurement of services. 
The  procurement  cycle  consists  of  General  Procurement  Notice,  Tender  Document 
Preparation,  Pre-Qualification,  Advertisement,  Receipt  of  Tenders,  Public  opening  of 
Tenders, Evaluate of Tenders, Award of Contract, Issue of Work Order or Purchase Order 
and Performance of contract. 
31. 
Each  Annual  Procurement  Plan  will  identify  procedures  which  must  be 
implemented by the Borrower in order to ensure consistency with the IFAD Procurement 
139 
Guidelines.  IFAD may require that all bidding documents and contracts and other records 
for procurement of goods, works and services financed by the Loans/Grants are: 
a.  Available  for  full  inspection  by  the  Fund  of  all  bid  documentation  and  related 
records; 
b.  Maintained for ten years after the project completion date; and  
c.  IFAD may also require that the Project cooperate with agents or representatives 
of the Fund carrying out an audit or investigation into procurement issues. 
32. 
all financing agreements directly supervised by IFAD. NOSP is one such agreement. 
IFAD’s review of and no objection to procurement plans is compulsory under 
33. 
IFAD monitoring and review to ensure that the procurement process is carried 
out  in  conformity  with  IFAD  procurement  Guidelines  and  with  the  agreed  procurement 
plan,  IFAD  will  review  arrangements  for  procurement  of  goods,  works  and  services 
proposed by the borrower/recipient, including: 
a.  Contract packaging;  
b.  Applicable procedures and procurement methods;  
c.  Bidding documentation; 
d.  Composition of bid evaluation committees; 
e.  Bid evaluations and award recommendations; and 
f.  Draft contracts and contract amendments. 
34. 
The extent to which these review procedures will be applied to each project 
or programme will be contained in the letter to the borrower/recipient and the procurement 
plan. For full details on the review processes, refer to IFAD Procurement Handbook. 
35. 
Post-review: All other contracts will be subject to post-review and may be 
subject to procurement audit by the Fund. The Project staff will maintain accurate records 
of all procurement activities and documents related to the Project. The procurement files 
will be maintained for review by IFAD supervision missions and independent audits. The 
Project staff will also consolidate procurement activities into quarterly and annual progress 
reports. 
Mis-procurement:  IFAD will not finance expenditures for goods, works  or 
36. 
consulting  services  that  have  not  been  procured  in  accordance  with  IFAD  Procurement 
Guidelines and the financing agreement. In such cases, IFAD may, in addition, take other 
remedial  action  under  the  financing  agreement,  including  cancellation  of  the  amount  in 
question from the loan and/or grant account by declaring it ineligible. Even if the contract 
was awarded following IFAD’s “no objection” statement, the Fund may still declare mis-
procurement  if  it  concludes  that  this  statement  was  issued  on  the  basis  of  incomplete, 
inaccurate or misleading information furnished by the borrower/recipient, or that the terms 
and conditions of the contract had been modified without IFAD’s approval. 
B.  Procurement Risk Assessment 
Key Findings and Conclusions from the PRM Assessment  
37. 
As  part  of  the  design  process,  a  Project’s  PRM  was  developed.  The  overall 
procurement risk is “Medium” at Central Level and “High” at Districts Level on account of 
inherent weaknesses, particularly those associated with inadequate procurement capacity 
at  Districts  level.  The  assessment  indicated  the  following  risks:  (i)  capacity  constraints 
(the  available  expertise  at  PEs  does  not  meet  the  need  for  specialised  procurement 
knowledge) leading to – failure to comply with National Procurement Regulations and IFAD 
Procurement Guidelines; delays in processing procurement and preparing specifications, 
statement  of  requirements,  and  TORs  by  the  User  Departments;  inadequate  evaluation 
and post-qualification criteria, general and special conditions; evaluation not conducted in 
accordance with the criteria stated in the bidding documents , delays in evaluation, review 
140 
and  approval,  weak  records  keeping  and  filing,  and  weakness  in  ensuring  contract 
management (supervision)/administration (monitoring) during contract implementation to 
completion resulting into cost overruns; (ii) award of contracts to firms with no capacity; 
(iii)  Delays  in  paying  vendors  due  to  delays  in  internal  approving  processes;  (iv)  the 
available  expertise  at  Districts  with  regard  construction  management  not  meet  the 
standard level;  (v) lack of use of Procurement plans as a planning and management tool, 
and (vi) Inadequate working area/rooms and space for record keeping/filing.  
38. 
following: 
Key  mitigation  measures  to  address  procurement  capacity  gaps  are  the 
(a)  Ensure the application of the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). 
(b)  Reduction  of  the  thresholds  during  the  initial  period  until  the  Project  can 
demonstrate confidence in its systems and methods. 
(c)  Recruiting  two  qualified  and  experienced  procurement  officers  at  the  central 
levels to carry out procurement activities. 
(d)  Provide focused training and capacity building of the staff of the PCU and other 
implementing partners. 
(e)  Timely identification of  gaps and hiring of  experts to support the MAAIF and 
MOLG to prepare comprehensive technical requirements/TORs. 
(f) 
Integrate  the  procurement  planning  as  part  of  the  budgeting  process  and 
prepare Procurement Plan for the project using IFAD new template. Continuous 
updating  of  Procurement  Plan  to  reflect  actual  procurement  activities.  Close 
monitoring of procurement plans on a monthly basis and closely monitor and 
exercise  quality  control  on  all  aspects  of  the  procurement  process,  including 
evaluation,  selection,  award,  contract  signing  and  implementation  to 
completion. 
(g)  Recruit  a  proficient  procurement  specialist  (consultant)  knowledgeable  and 
experienced in donors funded procurement to support and also offer hand on 
training to the procurement team in the PCU and other implementing partners. 
(h) 
Improve contract supervision and monitoring, and application of the conditions 
of contract through formation of Contract management and monitoring team, 
led by the Project Coordinator and Focal persons, including the technical and 
the procurement teams, and beneficiaries (if necessary). Close monitoring to 
ensure  adherence  to  stipulates  of  the  sections  in  the  respective  Contract 
Documents and to minimize poor performance of service providers. 
(i)  Hiring  a  Third-Party  Quality  Assurance/Quality  Control  Consultant  to  provide 
independent assurance of the quality of civil works. Conduct training on FIDIC 
contracts and contract management to build contract implementation capacity 
for major works and consultancy contracts. 
(j) 
The MOUs to be signed between MOLG and respective Districts should include 
provision for the role of the MOLG PDU in reviewing and approving all District 
procurements. 
(k)  Provide sufficient working area/rooms and space for record keeping/filing. 
(l)  Regular top management monitoring and follow-up of implementation. 
The residual risks after the implementation of the proposed mitigation measures will 
be reduced to Medium at Districts Level and will remain Medium at the Central Level. 
141 
C.  Institutional Arrangements.  
39. 
The NOSP PCU anchored in the MAAIF will be responsible for overseeing and 
implementing  all  procurement  transactions  under  component  1  and  3  including 
International Competitive Bidding (ICB), National Competitive Bidding (NCB) procurement 
and  selection  of  consultants  as  well  as  National  Shopping  with  extensive  support.  All 
procurement  transactions  implemented  by  NOSP  PCU  will  be  approved  through  MAAIF 
Contracts  Committee.  Activities  under  component  2  “Support  to  Public  Infrastructure 
Serving  Oil-Seed  Sector”  will  be  implemented  under  a  two-tiered  institutional 
arrangement, namely at the national and district levels. At the national level, MOLG PDU 
and Contracts Committee will be the main implementing agency for the activities that will 
cut across districts such as the design of works and carrying out ESIAs. Districts PDUs and 
its Contracts Committees will be the executing agencies for the road construction works.  
The majority of the procurement activities under NOSP will be implemented through the 
application  of  NCB  method;  relatively  few  high-value/specialized  procurement  packages 
will attract ICB. Appropriate thresholds that can maximize the efficiency of procurement 
implementation  but  manage  the  governance  risks  will  be  specified  in  the  Letter  to  the 
Borrower  (LTB).  IFAD  plans  an  intensive  training  program  at  start-up  to  familiarize  the 
Central  Ministries  and  Districts  PDUs  with  IFAD  Guidelines.  The  effectiveness  of 
procurement will be assessed during supervision and alternate arrangements put in place 
if necessary. 
40. 
The Borrower shall establish within six (6) months from the date of entry into 
force of this Agreement a Project Contracts Committee, based in Lira to handle all Project 
procurements  estimated  to  cost  equal  or  less  than  USD  55,000  equivalent  ,  with  fully 
delegated  powers  from  MAAIF,  with  a  composition  acceptable  to  IFAD  and  the  required 
authority to undertake procurement review and selection. The Borrower shall also ensure 
the  continuing  operation  of  the  Project  Contracts  Committee  and  shall  not  alter  its 
composition without first consulting IFAD for the duration of the Project Implementation 
Period. 
With  regard  to  procurement  management,  two  procurement  officers  with 
41. 
required qualifications (TORs included in Appendix 1) and experience will be recruited from 
the market and stationed in MAAIF-PCU/MOLG-PICT. Additional TA will be provided at early 
stage of the project to strengthen procurement capacity, so the institutions can undertake 
implementation, facilitation, and coordination of the Project with reduced risk. 
Works Procurement Arrangements Under Component 2 
Design  of  works:  Design  work  will  be  centrally  done  through  contracted 
42. 
consultants  and  coordinated  by  the  MLOG-PICT.  The  consultants/PICT  will  ensure  the 
participating  districts  are  involved  in  the  contracting  process  for  ownership.  The  design 
consultants will be procured by the PICT. 
43. 
Development of bidding documents: Bidding documents (including technical 
specifications, BOQs, evaluation and post qualification criteria, general items of bid data 
sheet and special conditions) will be prepared by the PICT with support from the MOLG 
PDU based on the National template. The districts will be provided with completed bidding 
documents  for  them  to  insert  administrative  aspects  such  as  physical  address  of  bid 
delivery and other periphery aspects. The districts would, however, have to be involved in 
the  development  of  aspects  such  as  specifications  and  would  have  a  right  to  seek 
clarification or request adjustments if their needs are not taken care of. 
142 
Advertising and Handling of submitted bids: Bid advertisements will be placed 
44. 
in the newspapers by the PICT directing bidders to purchase the bid documents from the 
respective  districts.  Receipt  of  completed  tenders  from  bidders  will  be  handled  by  the 
district PDUs in accordance with PPDA procedures. Bid opening will also be handled by the 
district  PDU  in  attendance  of  bidders  who  choose  to  attend.  As  part  of  a  quality  due 
diligence review, officials from the PICT will attend bid opening and obtain copies of the 
bids to be evaluated. 
Bid evaluation and approval will be a responsibility the district government 
45. 
structures (PDU, and contracts committees). Post qualification analysis will be an integral 
aspect of evaluation to avoid signing of contracts with incompetent contractor. 
Due diligence reviews, approvals and No Objections: Before the contract is 
46. 
awarded,  the  PICT  will  undertake  a  due  diligence  review  and  provide  comments  to  the 
districts  if  they  don’t  concur  with  the  result.  These  comments  should  avoid  taking 
procurement decisions or forcing districts to take bidders other than those recommended 
by  evaluation  committees;  the  PICT  should  provide  the  type  of  comments  used  in  No 
Objections,  leaving  the  district  governments  to  take  decisions  that  have  legal  mandate 
implications. However, it will be explicitly stipulated in the MOU that will be signed between 
MOLG and Districts that No contract will be awarded without the clearance of the PICT. 
Once the evaluation report is cleared, the PICT will request IFAD’s No Objection. On receipt 
of IFAD’s No Objection the Attorney General’s approval will be sought by the districts and, 
after it is received, the contracts are signed off. 
Contract administration: Experience under PRELNOR shows that the quality of road works 
supervision by the districts was less than satisfactory. The PICT will engage supervising 
engineers  to  support  the  districts  in  the  supervision  of  works.  Payment  certificates  will 
require signatures of the district engineer. To support payments, measurement sheets will 
be reconciled to the progress completion certificates. Specific arrangements are presented 
in  Figure  1:  Responsibilities  and  Procedures  Works  Procurement  under  Component  2 
(Works Procurement). 
143 
Use of Prequalification 
47. 
As  proposed  in  the  procurement  method  section,  the  thresholds  for  less-
completive procurement methods (Restricted Bidding and Request for Quotation) will be 
as follows: 
a.  Works estimated below USD 100,000 will be procured through Restricted Bidding 
or National Shopping. 
b.  Goods estimated below USD 35,000 will be procured through Restricted Bidding 
or National Shopping. 
c.  Consulting  and  Non-Consulting  Services  below  USD  10,000  will  be  procured 
through Restricted Bidding or National Shopping. 
This  means  that  if  NOSP  has  a  list  of  prequalified  bidders,  it  would  be  able  to 
shorten/streamline the procurement processes for bulk of its procurement. 
48. 
Pre-qualifications can lead to misuse, if not well managed. It is proposed that 
the  MAAIF-PCU/MOLG-PICT  with  support  from  the  PDUs  will  develop  a  NOSP  specific 
prequalified list of bidders for use under Less-competitive methods. The prequalified list 
should  be  updated  every  two  years  and  will  require  IFAD’s  No  Objection  prior  to  being 
used for limited bidding.  
49. 
In any event, it is important that activities must not be unjustifiably separated 
into smaller activities just to avoid using the specified procurement method defined by a 
financial threshold. If it is determined that any such separation has taken place for this 
purpose,  IFAD  will  withhold  the  no-objection  of  the  plan  until  this  has  been  corrected. 
Conversely, there will be occasions where low-value procurement activities are grouped 
together under one tender for purposes of economies of scale. In such circumstances, the 
total  cumulative  estimated  amount  of  the  tender  should  be  used  to  determine  the 
procurement method. For instance, road works will be packaged in batches (in lots) and 
will  not  be  procured  through  restricted  bidding  although  some  individual  roads  may  be 
within the threshold. The invitation for Limited Bidding or the Request for Quotation  will 
be sent only to those vendors enrolled in the project pre-qualified lists and/or respective 
PDU lists.  
Goods and Services Procurement Arrangements  
50. 
Goods:  Goods  and  supplies  such  as  vehicles  and  computers  that  may  be 
common to the PCU and across governorates will be procured centrally through the PCU 
in  order  to  gain  the  benefits  of  bulk  /  quantity  purchases.  Low  value  supplies  will  be 
procured  at  the  districts  through  their  respective  PDUs  and  Contracts  Committees. 
Therefore, the consolidated procurement plan will indicate which entity is responsible for 
the procurement of each item. 
Services:  Most  of  the  anticipated  services  will  cut  across  Districts.  These 
51. 
services  will  be  procured  centrally  by  the  PCU  through.  Certain  services  such  as  the 
recruitment  of  the  consulting  firms  to  carry  out  roads’  improvements  feasibility  study; 
detailed  design  and  Environment  and  Social  Impact  Assessment  that  are  unique  to  the 
implementing partners and will be procured at the MOLG-PICT. 
52. 
Service  Providers:  The  Project  will  be  managed  by  the  MAAIF-PCU/MOLG-
PICT and implemented by contracted service providers on performance related contracts. 
Service providers will include: (i) preselected public institutions except Districts who will 
have  the  status  of  Project  Parties  and  be  required  to  ensure  that  procurement  actions 
undertaken by them and financed by IFAD or Government be undertaken in compliance 
144 
with  the  stipulated  procedures  of  IFAD  and  Government;  and  (ii)  non-preselected  civil 
society organizations or private sector vendors that will participate in the Project. Service 
providers not pre-selected will be procured on the basis of IFAD procurement guidelines. 
Performance  based  contracts:  For  Contracts,  MOU  and  Framework 
53. 
Agreements between PCU/PICT and the vendors, it is suggested that performance-based 
contracts  in  the  delivery  of  hardware  and  software  goods  and  services  will  be  adopted. 
Such  contracts  will  focus  on  outputs  and  outcomes  of  service  provision,  with  clear 
milestones, with triggers for contract extension linked to achievements. There will be no 
automatic extensions in time or scope. All contracts, MOUs and Framework Agreements 
will  include  the  payment  schedules  against  deliverables,  monitoring  and  quality 
assessment,  and  value-for-money  assessment.  They  will  also  define  the  key 
responsibilities of the partners at national and districts levels, and will be jointly monitored 
and supervised. This is not dissimilar to current government personnel procedures which 
incorporate performance-based assessment.  
54. 
components of NOSP are presented in figures 2&3. 
Details  of  the  Procurement  Responsibilities  and  Procedures  under  different  
145 
figure 2: Responsibilities and Procedures Works Procurement under Component 1&3 
Fig3: Responsibilities and Procedures Works Procurement under Component 2 (Goods, Consulting and Non-
Consulting Services) 
55. 
Public  Private  Producer  Partnerships  and  other  Private  Sector 
Participation  arrangements.  Public  Private  Producer  Partnerships  may  include  the 
following  forms  or  combinations  of  them;  partnerships;  leasing;  concession;  service 
contract;  management  contract.  Activities  that  could  be  financed  by  an  NOSP  as  a 
matching contribution (or an incentive to initiate a 4P) include: 
a.  Pre-investment activities such as: 
  The  elaboration and implementation of a communication and dissemination 
strategy  to  raise  awareness  of  the  programme  and  its  activities  among  all 
actors along the value chain; 
146 
  Technical  assistance  and  training  for  producers  to  form  institutions,  build 
capacity  and  adopt  or  upgrade  their  technologies  to  meet  market 
requirements  (for  example,  in  logistics,  storage,  marketing,  accounting, 
financial  literacy,  machinery,  packaging,  labelling,  traceability,  quality 
control, and food safety and hygiene); 
  Recruitment of independent consultancy firm for undertaking desk and field 
proposal appraisal; 
  Legal services to draft 4P agreements and negotiate and enforce contracts; 
b.  Technical assistance and coaching for aggregators through recruiting a competent 
transaction advisor; 
c.  Obtaining  or  renewing  certification  to  comply  with  the  quality  standards  of  the 
buyer or end market; 
d.  Investments  in  collective,  productive  equipment  such  as  transport,  office,  ICT 
tools/mobile applications, product processing, vehicles; and 
e.  Other long-term investments required by Aggregators to renew their facilities or 
invest in new ones (such as storage/warehouse and mill facilities, etc.). 
56. 
Activities from a to c will be directly implemented by the Project following the 
same  Procurement  arrangements  for  other  activities.  While  activities  d  and  e  will  be 
implemented through special arrangements including Competitive process.  
For  the  selection  of  the  aggregators  under  the  short-term  investments 
57. 
category, open competitive bidding procedures followed by the Project will be applied as 
follows: 
a.  A call for proposals for business plans to interested private-sector companies and 
producers’ organizations.  
b.  The business plans should then be reviewed, assessed and selected following a set 
of pre-established eligibility and selection criteria. 
c.  Development of eligible proposals into full-fledged business plans, Project through 
the recruited advisor will provide technical advice during this stage 
d.  Final selection of business plans based on the selection criteria. 
58. 
For  the  selection  of  the  aggregators  under  the  long-term  investments 
category, open competitive bidding procedures followed by the project will be applied as 
follows:  
a.  Wide  advertisement  is  done  providing  potential  bidders  detailed  information  and 
enough time for preparation of applications. 
b.  Prequalification of potential bidders is done using well designed criteria.  
c.  Bidding  documents  are  well  prepared,  clear  and  non-discriminatory  bidding 
documents. The Project may provide technical advice during this stage. 
d.  Procedures for bid submission are clear and bid opening is public.  
e.  Bid evaluation criteria are transparent, well defined in the bidding documents.  
f.  Negotiation  of  the  final  contract,  if  required,  is  done  only  within  the  parameters 
defined in the bidding document, and after receiving IFAD “no-objection”.  
g.  Selection  of  one  firm/aggregator  for  award  of  contract  is  done  based  on  most 
economically advantageous offer.  
59. 
When preparing to select 4P partners and business plan proposals, it is critical 
to identify an institution with the most appropriate competencies to manage the selection 
process. It is challenging to assess business plans submitted by partners – especially the 
aspects  related to financial viability, community  engagement and compensation  –  since 
they tend to rest on a number of assumptions. It is recommended to recruit a specialized 
service provider to perform this function. 
60. 
Depending on whether the initial mapping exercise leads to the identification 
of multinationals or SMEs, some due diligence is required to assess the selected company’s 
147 
capacity and reliability in case of long-term investments. Similarly, producer organizations 
must be assessed to determine whether they would be reliable business partners for the 
selected private company in a 4P arrangement.  
As provided by the PTA note “How to do Public-Private-Producer Partnerships 
61. 
(4Ps) in Agricultural Value Chains” the eligibility and selection criteria will include but not 
limited to:  
a.  Proven  know-how  and  technical  expertise  related  to  the  selected  product  and 
services (key requirement)  
b.  Willingness to invest both human and financial resources in the 4P  
c.  Formal  buy-in  and  commitment  of  the  small-scale  producers  involved  in  the  4P 
business plan, as evidenced by a formal agreement (e.g. contract)  
d.  The  company’s  production  practices  and  those  of  its  smallholder  suppliers  are 
environmentally friendly and comply with social (labour, gender) standards  
e.  The partner’s strategy is not simply focused on short-term profits but on long-term, 
viable business relationships with producers; it is an integral part of its business 
model rather than a corporate social responsibility initiative  
f.  Producers are willing to engage in stable and continuous commercial relationships 
with business partners, as opposed to opportunistically looking for the best buyer 
in each season  
g.  Private  sector’s  proven  experience  and/or  formal  commitment  to  establishing 
business partnerships with small producers  
h.  In the case of international companies, capacity to partner with local firms. 
A  standard  contract  agreement  will  be  developed  as  part  of  the 
62. 
implementation  manual  for  the  establishment  of  4P.  The  PTA  note  provides  some  key 
elements for typical contract specifications that should be taken into consideration during 
preparation of the standard contract agreement. 
63. 
Good  practices  recommend  allowing  the  Service  Provider  to  have  more 
flexibility in operational, managerial and investment decisions aiming at more innovative 
solutions.  Use  of  output  results  (performance  indicators)  is  a  good  means  of  giving  the 
Service Provider the maximum scope to innovate or otherwise use his skills and experience 
to design efficient solutions without being constrained by past practices. With the above 
factors appropriately addressed, the private sector has greater incentive to reduce costs.  
The Service Provider can procure goods, works and services required by the 
64. 
facility using its own procurement practices (subject to eligibility conditions defined under 
paragraph 64 of Procurement Guidelines and having no conflict of interest as defined in 
paragraph 19.b  of Procurement Guidelines), provided the Service Provider was  selected 
based on open competitive bidding procedures determined acceptable by IFAD. 
D.  Applicable Procurement Rules and Regulations 
Overriding Principles 
As provided in Section 7.05 of the General Conditions, procurement of goods, works and 
services shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the Borrower/Recipient’s 
procurement  regulations,  to  the  extent  such  are  consistent  with  the  IFAD  Procurement 
Guidelines and by observing the following specific principles:  
  Procurement will be carried out in accordance with Financing Agreement and any 
duly agreed amendments thereto;  
  Procurement will be conducted within the Project implementation period, except as 
provided under Article 4.08 (a)(ii) of IFAD General Conditions;  
148 
  The cost of the procurement is not to exceed the availability of duly allocated funds 
as per the Financing Agreement;  
  Procurement  is  to  be  consistent  with  the  duly  approved  annual  work  plan  and 
budget (AWP/B) including a procurement plan (for the first time, the procurement 
plan will cover the first 18 months of the Project implementation period);  
  Procurement is to result in the best value of money and fit for purpose.  
  All goods, works and services procured will be exempt from duties and taxes. 
Specific Rules 
All  procurements  with  cost  estimate  above  the  threshold  for  international  competitive 
bidding  (ICB)  will  be  undertaken  according  to  the  World  Bank  Guidelines.  All  contracts 
procured at national level following National Competitive Bidding (NCB) and other lower 
procurement  procedures  such  as  Restricted  Bidding  and  Shopping  (Request  for 
Quotations) will follow the national public procurement law (the Procurement and Disposal 
of  Public  Assets  Authority  (PPDA)  Act,  2003  and  its  attendant  regulations.  These 
procedures  have  been  reviewed  by  IFAD  and  found  to  be  satisfactory,  except  for  the 
following provisions, which will not be applicable under this project: 
a.  Domestic preferences shall not apply under NCB; 
b.  The  charging  of  fees  for  dealing  with  bidder  complaints  at  procuring  entity  level 
shall not be permitted; 
c.  Paragraph 6(1) (b and c) of the fourth schedule of the PPDA Act (restrictions on 
contract amendments) shall not apply with respect to consultancy services. 
d.  Procedure  for  conducting  merit  point  evaluation  for  Work,  Goods  and  Non-
Consulting Services shall not apply. 
e.  non-monetary bid securities will not be allowed for works and services worth over 
USD 35,000. 
E.  Procurement Planning 
65. 
At the outset of the Project, the MAAIF-PCU and MoLG/PICT, in collaboration 
with other project partners, will establish a consolidated procurement plan covering the 
first 18 months of the Project, followed by 12-month successive plans synchronized with 
the  annual  work  plans  and  budget  during  implementation.  IFAD’s  review  of  and  No 
objection to procurement plan is compulsory.  
For each contract to be financed by IFAD proceeds, the types of procurement 
66. 
methods,  estimated  cost,  prior  review  requirements  and  time-frame  would  be  agreed 
between the Project and IFAD respectively in the Procurement Plan. 
Procurement plan should be divided into goods, works and services and as a minimum, 
the procurement plan must contain the following information: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
A  brief  description  of  each  procurement  activity  to  be  undertaken  during  the 
period or the plan; 
The estimated value of each activity; 
The method of procurement to be adopted for each activity 
The method of review IFAD will undertake for each activity; 
In addition to the minimum information above, it is considered good practice for 
the procurement plan to capture additional information such as: 
  Planned timing of the procurement activities; 
  Procurement by Project component; 
  Dates for IFAD prior review; 
149 
The procurement plan shall be prepared in excel sheets and each procurement category 
(goods/works/consulting  services/non-consulting  services)  in  separate  excel  sheets  as 
follows:  
For Goods, Works and Non-Consulting Services 
-  Project title: 
- 
Financiers: 
-  Period: 
-  Type of procurement: goods/works/services 
-  Code as per AWPB 
-  Component/unit 
-  Procurement tender number 
- 
Item description 
-  Plan vs Actual with two rows: 
  planned  
  actual  
-  Contract type: Lumpsum or exact /BQS for Works 
-  Total amount in USD 
-  Procurement method 
-  Prior or post review 
-  Preparation of tendering process 
  bid document preparation and submission to IFAD 
 
IFAD No objection  
-  Bidding process 
  Publication/invitation/advertisement 
  Closing/opening 
-  Evaluation process 
  Technical and financial evaluation and submission of report to IFAD  
 
IFAD No Objection to award 
-  Contract 
  Award and notification of award 
  Signing of the contract 
  Contract period 
  Contract completion date 
  Comments  
For Consulting Services 
-  Project title: 
- 
Financiers: 
-  Period: 
-  Code AWPB 
150 
-  Component/unit 
-  Procurement tender number 
- 
Item description 
-  Plan vs Actual with two rows: 
  planned  
  actual  
-  Contract type: Lumpsum or time based 
-  Total amount in USD 
-  Selection method 
-  Prior or post review 
-  Preparation of tendering process (terms of reference) 
  Preparation date 
 
IFAD No objection  
-  Bidding process/Request for Expression of Interest  
  Dated of invitation 
  Closing/opening 
-  Shortlist  
  Date proposed for submission of shortlist to IFAD 
  Date of IFAD No Objection 
-  Request for Proposal 
  Date prepared and submitted to IFAD 
  Date of IFAD No Objection 
 
Invitation date 
  Date of opening 
-  Evaluation process: 
  Technical evaluation 
 
IFAD No Objection to technical evaluation report 
  Date of opening financial proposals 
  Date of submission of combined evaluation report 
  Date of IFAD No Objection to the report and award 
-  Contract 
  Award and notification of award 
  Signing of the contract 
  Contract period 
  Contract completion date 
  Comments 
 Procurement Methods and Thresholds 
F. 
67. 
Procurement Methods: The methods which are permitted for the procurement 
of works and goods are: a) international competitive bidding (ICB), b) national competitive 
bidding (NCB) or open tender, c) limited national bidding (LIB) or restricted bidding, d) 
international or national shopping or requests for quotations, e) direct contracting, and f) 
procurement from United Nations agencies. The indicative time for the procedures under 
each method is presented in table1. 
151 
The  methods  which  are  permitted  for  the  procurement  of  non-consulting 
68. 
services are: a) international competitive bidding (ICB), b) national competitive bidding 
(NCB)  or  open  tender,  c)  national  shopping  or  requests  for  quotations,  and  d)  direct 
contracting. 
Table1. Indicative time for procurement procedures (Goods, Works and Non-Consulting Services) 
Procedures 
No
. 
Works with 
Pre-
qualification 
ICB 
Works 
without 
Pre-
qualification 
Procurement Method 
NCB 
Goods and 
Non-
Consulting 
Services 
Works with 
Pre-
qualification 
Works 
without 
Pre-
qualification 
Goods and 
Non-
Consulting 
Services 
Restricted 
Bidding 
Shopping 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Preparation of 
Prequalification 
Document 
Advertise for 
Prequalification 
Evaluation of 
Prequalification 
Preparation of 
Bidding 
Documents 
20 days 
NA 
NA 
15 days 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
42 days 
NA 
20 days 
NA 
NA 
NA 
30 days 
NA 
20 days 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
15 days 
20 days 
20 days 
10 days 
15 days 
15 days 
10 days 
5 days 
Bidding  
42 days 
42 days 
42 days 
30 days 
30 days 
30 days 
21 days 
10 days 
Evaluation 
30 days 
40 days 
30 days 
20 days 
30 days 
20 days 
15 days 
5 days 
Notice of best 
evaluated bidder 
Period during 
which no further 
action may be 
taken 
Providing 
Performance 
Security 
5 days 
10 days 
Within 21 days after signing the contract 
21 days if 
required 
69. 
The selection methods which are permitted for the procurement of consulting 
services are: a) quality and cost-based selection, b) quality-based selection, c) selection 
under  a  fixed  budget,  d)  selection  based  on  consultant’  qualifications,  e)  least  cost 
selection,  f)  single-source  selection,  and  g)  selection  of  individual  consultants.  The 
indicative time for the procedures under each selection method is presented in Table 2. 
152 
Table 2. Indicative time for procurement procedures (Consulting Services) 
No. 
Procedures 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
Preparation of the TORs and REOI 
Advertise for the REOI 
Evaluation of the EOI and Preparation 
of the Shortlist or the Selection in case 
of CQS and Individual Consultant 
Preparation of RFP 
Bidding  
Technical Evaluation 
Notice for Opening Financial Proposals 
Combine Evaluation 
Notice of best evaluated bidder 
Period during which no further action 
may be taken 
Contract Negotiations 
20 
days 
42 
days 
30 
days 
ICB 
QBS 
QCBS 
20 
days 
30 days 
15 working days 
QCBS 
FBS 
LCS 
15 days 
30 days 
Selection Method 
NCB 
QBS 
CQS 
International 
National 
IC 
20 days 
10 days 
10 days 
5 days 
15 days 
15 days 
15 working 
days 
10 days 
10 working 
days 
5 days 
15 days 
42 days 
30 days 
15 days 
30 days 
30 days 
40 days 
30 days 
20 days 
30 days 
20 days 
NA 
NA 
NA 
10 days 
5 days  NA 
5 days 
5 days 
NA 
NA 
5 days 
10 days 
10 days 
5 days 
10 days 
5 days 
For each contract to be financed by IFAD proceeds, the types of procurement 
70. 
methods,  estimated  cost,  prior  review  requirements  and  time-frame  will  be  agreed 
between  the  Project  and  IFAD  respectively  in  the  Procurement  Plan.  IFAD  financed 
procurement  of  works,  goods  and  consultancy  services.  While  eventually  the  specific 
thresholds for procurement financed under the Project will be stipulated in the Letter to 
the Borrower, the recommendations are the following (based on the guidance established 
by the IFAD Procurement Manual): 
Works estimated to cost more than USD 700,000 equivalent will be procured 
71. 
through International Competitive Bidding (ICB) method either through pre-qualification 
or  post-qualification  procedure  using  the  World  Bank’s  applicable  Standard  Bidding 
Documents (SBDs). Works estimated between USD 100,000 and USD 700,000 equivalent 
will  be  procured  through  the  National  Competitive  Bidding  (open  tender).  While  works 
estimated  below  USD  100,000  will  be  procured  through  Restricted  Bidding  or  National 
Shopping  (request  for  quotations).  Direct  contracting  will  have  to  be  identified  and 
approved by IFAD in advance for those cases which justify use of such method. 
72. 
Goods estimated to cost more than USD 200,000 equivalent per contract will 
be procured through the International Competitive Bidding (ICB) method using the World 
Bank’s applicable SBDs. Goods estimated to cost between USD 35,000 and USD 200,000 
equivalent  per  contract  will  be  procured  through  National  Competitive  Bidding  (open 
tender).  Goods  estimated  to  cost  less  than  USD  35,000  equivalent  per  contract  will  be 
procured through Restricted Bidding or Shopping methods (request for quotations). Direct 
contracting  will  have  to  be  identified  and  approved  by  IFAD  in  advance  for  those  cases 
which justify use of such method.  
73. 
Consultancy services. Quality and Cost Based Selection will be the standard 
method  applied  unless  otherwise  approved.  The  following  thresholds  and  processes  will 
apply:  i)  International  Request  for  Proposal  (RFP)–  for  contracts  with  a  value  of  USD 
100,000 equivalent and above; ii) National Request for Proposal (RFP) – for contracts with 
a  value  of  less  than  USD  100,000  equivalent  and  more  than  USD  10,000  equivalent. 
153 
Contracts with a value of USD 10,000 equivalent or bellow, or procurement of individual 
consultancy or Technical Assistance services, will be based on National Shopping (request 
for quotation).  
Non-Consultancy services. The following thresholds and processes will apply: 
74. 
i)  Services  estimated  to  cost  more  than  USD  100,000  equivalent  per  contract  will  be 
procured  through  the  International  Competitive  Bidding  (ICB)  method,  ii)  NCB  (open 
tender)  method  –  for  contracts  with  cost  between  USD  10,000  and  USD  100,000 
equivalent. Contracts with a value of USD 10,000 equivalent or bellow, will be procured 
through  Restricted  Bidding  or  National  Shopping  (request 
from 
predetermined shortlist). 
for  quotation 
However,  these  financial  thresholds  may  be  adjusted  as  appropriate,  with 
75. 
prior  IFAD  approval,  depending  of  the  nature  of  the  assignment.  And  the  method  of 
procurement to be followed will be pre-determined in each approved annual procurement 
plan. 
G.  Definition of the applicable Procurement methods for Goods, 
Works and Non-consulting Services 
76. 
International Competitive Bidding: International competitive bidding 
(ICB)  is  a  procurement  method  suited  to  high-value  requirements  that  would  be  of 
interest  to  the  international  business  community.  The  objective  of  ICB  is  to  provide  all 
eligible prospective bidders located and operating both within the Borrower’s/Recipient’s 
country  and  abroad  with  timely  and  adequate  notification  of  the  Borrower’s/Recipient’s 
requirements and an equal opportunity to bid for the required goods and works. Where 
ICB is the identified method of procurement within an approved procurement plan, World 
Bank  procedures  as  set  forth  in  their  guidelines  will  apply.  The  new  Procurement 
Regulations for Investment Project Financing (IPF) Borrowers of the World Bank available 
at: 
https://policies.worldbank.org/sites/ppf3/PPFDocuments/Forms/DispPage.as
px?docid=4005&ver=current, the competitive bidding is now called “Request for Bids 
(RFB)”. RFB is a competitive method for the solicitation of Bids. It should be used when, 
because  of the nature  of the  Goods,  Works,  or Non-consulting Services to be provided, 
the Borrower is able to specify detailed requirements to which Bidders respond in offering 
Bids.  The  minimum  period  allowed  for  preparation  of  Bids/Proposals  shall  be  forty-two 
(42)  Calendar  Days  for  open  international  competitive  procurement.  The  Standard 
Procurement 
at: 
Request 
http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/299661509568509693/SPD-Request-for-
Bids-GOODS-1-envelope-OCT-2017.docx 
http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/328641509642865653/SPD-Request-for-
Bids-SMALL-WORKS-1-Env-OCT-2017.docx for works. 
Document 
available 
Goods 
Bids 
and 
at: 
for 
for 
for 
is 
77. 
National Competitive Bidding (NCB) is the competitive bidding procedure 
normally used for public procurement in the country of the Borrower/Recipient, and may 
be the most efficient and economical way of procuring goods or works that, by their nature 
or scope, are unlikely to attract foreign competition. NCB may be the preferred method of 
procurement where foreign bidders are not expected to be interested because: 
  Contract values are small; 
  Works are scattered geographically or spread out over time; 
  Works are labour-intensive; or 
  The goods or works are available locally at prices below those on the international 
market. 
154 
NCB procedures may also be used where the advantages of ICB are clearly 
78. 
outweighed  by  the  administrative  or  financial  burden  involved.    Advertising  for 
procurement under NCB may be limited to the national press of the Borrower’s/Recipient’s 
government or, where possible, a free and open-access website. Bidding documents may 
be  in  an  official  language  of  the  country,  and  local  currency  is  generally  used  for  the 
purposes of bidding and payment. The procedures are to provide for adequate competition 
in order to ensure reasonable prices, and the methods used in the evaluation of bids and 
the award of contracts are to be objective and made known to all bidders, and are not to 
be applied arbitrarily. The procedures will also include public opening of bids, publication 
of results of evaluation and of the award of contract, and provisions for bidders to protest. 
In  addition,  bidding  documents  will  provide  clear  instructions  on  how  bids  should  be 
submitted, how prices should be offered, and the place and time for submission of bids. 
Adequate response time for preparation and submission of bids will be provided. If eligible 
foreign firms wish to participate under these circumstances, they are to be allowed to do 
so. 
Limited National Bidding (Restricted Bidding) (LNB) is essentially NCB 
79. 
by  direct  invitation  without  open  advertisement.  It  may  be  an  appropriate  method  of 
procurement where: 
  Contract amounts are small; 
  There is only a limited number of suppliers or contractors; or 
  Other  exceptional  reasons  exist  that  may  justify  departure  from  full  ICB 
procedures. 
80. 
Under  LNB,  borrowers/recipients  should  seek  bids  from  a  list  of  potential 
suppliers or contractors broad enough to ensure competitive prices. This list should include 
all suppliers and contractors when there are only a limited number. In all respects other 
than advertisement and preferences, NCB procedures apply to procurement under LNB, 
including the publication of the contract award. 
81. 
Shopping is a procurement method that entails comparing price quotations 
from several suppliers or contractors (usually at least three) to ensure competitive prices. 
It is an appropriate method for procuring readily available, off-the-shelf goods or standard 
specification  commodities  that  are  small  in  value,  or  simple  civil  works  of  small  value. 
Requests for quotations should indicate the description and quantity of the goods, together 
with  desired  delivery  (or  completion)  time  and  place.  Quotations  may  be  submitted  by 
mail, electronic mail or facsimile. The evaluation of quotations will follow the principles of 
competition. The terms of the accepted offer are to be incorporated in a purchase order 
or brief contract. Under international shopping, the purchaser is to solicit quotations from 
at least three suppliers in two different countries. National shopping may be used where 
the desired goods are ordinarily available from more than one source in the country of the 
Borrower/Recipient at competitive prices. 
Procurement from United Nations agencies. There may be situations in 
82. 
which  procurement  from  specialized  agencies  of  the  United  Nations,  acting  as  suppliers 
and pursuant to their own procedures, may be the most economical and efficient way of 
procuring relatively small quantities of off-the-shelf goods. Use of such agencies as supply 
sources,  together  with  the  Project  component  and  the  type  of  goods  or  works  to  be 
procured  from  such  sources,  are  to  be  expressly  and  specifically  agreed  between  the 
Borrower/Recipient  and  IFAD  before  proceeding  with  the  application  of  this  method  of 
procurement. 
83. 
Direct Contracting (for Goods, Works and non-consulting services) consists 
in procuring goods or works without competition (by single or sole-source selection). Due 
155 
to  its  non-competitive  nature,  DC  may  be  only  permitted  in  the  following  exceptional 
circumstances: 
  An  existing  contract  for  goods  or  works  awarded  in  accordance  with  procedures 
acceptable  to  IFAD,  may  be  extended  for  additional  goods  or  works  of  a  similar 
nature to a maximum of 25 per cent (%) of the original contract value, with the 
prior approval of IFAD, provided that no advantage could be obtained by further 
competition and that the prices on the extended contract are reasonable. Provision 
for  such  an  extension,  if  considered  likely  in  advance,  is  to  be  included  in  the 
original contract; 
  Standardization of vehicles, equipment or spare parts to ensure compatibility with 
existing vehicles, equipment or machinery may justify additional purchases  from 
the  original  supplier.  For  such  purchases  to  be  justified,  the  original  vehicles, 
equipment  or  machinery  should  be  suitable;  the  number  of  new  items  should 
generally be less than the existing number; the price should be reasonable; and 
the  advantages  of  another  make  or  source  of  equipment  are  to  have  been 
considered and rejected on grounds acceptable to IFAD; 
  The required equipment is proprietary and obtainable only from one source; 
  The  contractor  responsible  for  a  process  design  requires  the  purchase  of  critical 
items from a particular supplier as a condition of a performance guarantee; and  
  Purchases from the original supplier may also be justified in exceptional cases and 
emergencies, such as in response to a natural disaster, conflict and post conflict, 
or in countries where there are restrictions to free markets and enterprises. 
84. 
Any  request  for  direct  contracting  from  a  Borrower/Recipient  must  be 
accompanied by a detailed justification, which IFAD will examine carefully to ensure that 
it is satisfied that no other alternative selection methods can be used. 
H.  IFAD Prior Review Thresholds 
85. 
the following will be subject to prior review by IFAD:  
In accordance with paragraph 80 of the IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines, 
  First  five  contracts  for  goods  and  equipment  undertaken  by  each  of  the  MAAIF-
PCU, MOLG-PICT and first three contracts for goods undertaken by each respective 
District and thereafter, award of any contract for goods and equipment estimated 
to cost USD 50,000 equivalent or more; 
  First five contracts  for  works undertaken by  each of the MAAIF-PCU,  MOLG-PICT 
and  first  three  contracts  for  works  undertaken  by  each  respective  District  and 
thereafter,  award  of  any  contract  for  works  estimated  to  cost  USD  100,000 
equivalent or more; 
  First five contracts for consultancy services undertaken by each of the MAAIF-PCU, 
MOLG-PICT, and thereafter, award to a firm of any contract for consultancy services 
estimated to cost USD 50,000 equivalent or more; 
  First five contracts for non-consultancy services undertaken by each of the MAAIF-
PCU, MOLG-PICT and first three contracts for non-consultancy services undertaken 
by each respective District, and thereafter, and thereafter, award to a firm of any 
contract for non-consultancy services estimated to cost USD 25,000 equivalent or 
more; 
  First five contracts for individual consultant undertaken by each of the MAAIF-PCU, 
MOLG-PICT, and thereafter, award to an individual of any contract for consulting 
services estimated to cost USD 5,000 equivalent or more;  
156 
  Award of any contract through direct contracting, single source selection, including 
selection of United Nations’ agencies, irrespective of the amount. Furthermore, for 
consultancy services, all Terms of Reference, Short-listing (if applicable) and draft 
contracts will be subject to IFAD prior review. 
Aforementioned  may  be  modified  from  time  to  time  as  notified  by  the  Fund  to  the 
Borrower. 
86. 
Register  of  Contracts:  Procurement  carried  out  under  the  Project  will  be 
recorded and registered against the Procurement Plan. In addition, all contracts, with or 
without  IFAD  prior  review,  will  be  listed  in  the  Register  of  Contracts  maintained  by  the 
procuring  entity  with  the  dates  of  approval  as  provided  by  IFAD.  When  a  contract  is 
amended, the amendment will be recorded in the Register of Contracts. If a contract is 
cancelled or declared ineligible for financing by IFAD, this information will be written in the 
Register  of  Contracts.  As  this  register  facilitates  the  review  and  approval  of  payment 
requests on contracts, it is to be updated and submitted to the IFAD country programme 
director on a monthly basis. The sample form to be used and instructions are detailed in 
Annex 6 of IFAD’s Loan Disbursement Handbook. It will also be necessary that the PCU 
prepare  annual  statistics  disaggregated  by  type  and  methods  of  procurement,  for  the 
overall procurement transactions carried out for the Project. 
Record Keeping. The IFAD General Conditions for Agricultural 
87. 
Development Financing require that Borrower/recipients retain documents and records 
for review by IFAD at any time within a period of ten (10) years after completion of the 
project. Table 3 illustrates what procurement files, folders or dossiers should contain. 
Table 3. Elements of the procurement filing 
Document 
(i) A copy of the published advertisement or shortlist (if applicable) * 
(ii) A copy of the published pre-qualification and invitation documents and 
any  amendments,  extensions  or  clarifications  that  were  requested  and 
issued* 
(iii) A record of tender opening signed by all present 
(iv)  A  full  copy  of  each  bid  received  and  evaluated,  plus  clarifications 
requested and responses received 
(v) A copy of the evaluation report* 
(vi) Signed minutes of all meetings relating to the procurement, including 
pre-bid and negotiation meetings where these were held 
(vii) A contract award notice* 
(viii)  Any  letter  of  tender  acceptance  to  the  supplier,  contractor  or 
consultant* 
(ix) The signed contract document and contract acceptance* 
(x) Any contract amendments* 
(xi)  All  contractual  correspondence  between  the  procuring  entity  and  a 
supplier, contractor or consultant 
(xii)  Post-contract  documents  relating  to  the  fulfilment  of  contract 
obligations,  in  particular  photocopies  of  bank  guarantees  or  payment 
guarantees 
(xiii)  Signed  minutes  of  any  meetings  related  to  contract  management, 
including contract progress or review meetings 
(xiv) Signed delivery documents evidencing delivery of supplies or signed 
completion certificates in relation to a contract for services or works under 
the contract, including any contract delivery records 
(xv) A copy of all invoices for works, services or supplies, including work 
papers verifying the accuracy of payments claimed and details of the actual 
payment authorized 
(xvi)  A  copy  of  cumulative  payment  worksheets/records  evidencing 
management of all payments made 
Preferred format 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
157 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
(xvii)  A  copy  of  all  submissions  to  and  all  decisions  of  the  appropriate 
approval authority related to the procurement, including the approval of the 
invitation documents, approval of the evaluation report(s), contract award, 
approval of contract documents and contract amendments and any decision 
to suspend or cancel procurement proceedings 
(xviii) A copy of any claims made by the procuring entity  with respect to 
any warranty, non-warranty, short supply, damage and other claims upon 
the provider or upon the procuring entity 
(xix) In the case of IFAD prior review, all submissions and correspondence 
in relation to the seeking of IFAD’s no-objection 
(xx) any other communications relating to  the  procurement in questions, 
including internal entity correspondence 
*Ideally, drafts of these published documents and reports should also be retained for completeness and to provide a 
full picture of how the published document evolved. It is, however, accepted that where issues of space exist this may 
not always be possible in practice. 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
Hard and/or Soft copy 
158 
E.  Environmental, social and climate change management procedures 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
This section presents procedures to ensure that environmental and social management is 
mainstreamed into NOSP activities.   
The Environmental, Social and Climate Change (ESCC) management procedures for NOSP 
subprojects will follow the national guidelines and processes as described in the preceding 
section, as well as IFAD’s safeguard requirements as elaborated in SECAP.  Processes to 
ensure  that  the  environmental  and  social  assessments  conducted  for  NOSP  subprojects 
are aligned with IFAD’s safeguards requirements are also elaborated.  
All  interventions  focusing  on  the  development  of  values  to  be  proposed  by  Multi-
Stakeholder  Platforms  will  have  to  follow  the  procedures  outlined  below,  including 
screening,  preparation  of  ESIAs  or  Project  Briefs  and  other  safeguards  documentation, 
review and approvals, disclosure, setting up grievance mechanisms, monitoring, auditing 
and reporting.  
2.  IMPLEMENTATION AND COORDINATION  
The institutional arrangements for  NOSP implementation have been described  earlier in 
this PIM, and gives an overview of the roles of the PSC, PCU and PICT, as well as the hubs.  
The  MAAIF  PCU  will,  among  others,  also  have  a  Social  Inclusion  Specialist  (SIS)  and  a 
Climate and Environmental Specialist (CES). The MoLG PICT staffing will have a Social and 
Community Development Specialist (SCDS).  
The  PCU  CES  and  SIS  will  have  overall  responsibility  for  both  Components  1  and  2  for 
environmental and social management in NOSP activities, but will focus on Component 1 
activities.  
However, in order to ensure that environmental, social and climate change safeguarding 
is mainstreamed into all Project activities, it has been recommended that: 
  The PICT will be staffed with an Environmental and Social Specialist (ESS) instead 
of  the  Social  and  Community  Development  Specialist.    The  ESS  will  be  directly 
responsible for overseeing both the environmental and social aspects of Component 
2.  The ESS will report to the CES and SIS in the PCU. 
  Each  Hub  will  have  an  Environmental  and  Social  Officer  (HESO)  who  will  work 
closely  District  Environmental  Officer  (DEO)  and/or  District  Natural  Resources 
Management Officer (DNRMO), and will continuously liaise with the NEMA Regional 
Officer.  The HESOs will mainly report to the CES and SIS in the PCU, but will also 
coordinate activities with the ESS.  
159 
Specific  responsibilities  in  line  with  this  institutional  arrangement  in  relation  to  ESIA 
procedures and safeguards requirements are described in the sections.   
3.  POLICIES AND LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT OF 
NOSP ACTIVITIES 
Uganda has a number a strategic frameworks that guide the agricultural sector, namely: 
Vision 2040, the Second National Development Plan (NDPII) 2015/16 – 2019/20 and the 
Agriculture Sector Strategic Plan (ASSP).  Policies and legislation that have implications 
for  NOSP  cover  Agriculture,  Agriculture  Extension,  Food  and  Nutrition,  Environment 
Management,  Conservation  and  Management  of  Wetland  Resources,  Climate  Change, 
Irrigation, Water, Wetlands, Gender and Elimination of Gender Based Violence, HIV/AIDS 
and Occupational Health and Safety. 
A full description of the Policy and Legal framework governing the environmental and social 
aspects of  NOSP activities is contained in Annex 1. 
4.  SCREENING 
The purpose of screening is to provide an initial indication of the nature and complexities 
of  a  project,  after  which  it  can  be  categorised  to  determine  the  level  of  investigation 
necessary to ensure that the  project causes no harm to the environment or the project 
communities,  and  to  ensure  that  the  project  is  acceptable  and  sustainable  in  terms  of 
environmental, social and climate risks and impacts.  
SECAP Screening Categorisation 
According to the SECAP Review Note, NOSP has been categorised as Category B.  In other 
words, NOSP subprojects may have some adverse environmental and/or social impacts on 
human populations or environmentally significant areas, but the impacts are site specific 
and few are irreversible in nature, and can be readily remedied by appropriate preventive 
actions  and/or  mitigation  measures.      These  subprojects  typically  involve  agricultural 
intensification  and/or  expansion  of  cropping  area  in  “non-sensitive  areas”;    natural 
resource  based  value  chain  development;  development  of  an  agro-processing  facility; 
construction  or  operation  causing  minimal  increase  in  traffic  in  rural  roads;  small-scale 
irrigation  projects  (<100  ha);  activities  that  have  minor  adverse  impact  on  physical 
cultural resources; economic and physical displacement affecting fewer than 20 people or 
impacting  less  than  20  per  cent  of  any  one  community’s  or  individual  farmer’s  or 
household’s  assets;  and  subprojects  requiring  a  migrant  workforce  for  construction  or 
seasonal workers for construction, planting and harvesting. 
160 
Activities not supported by IFAD 
There are a number of activities that IFAD will not support or implement, for which SECAP 
(2017) refers to the IFC exclusion list14.  In the context of NOSP, these are: 
  Production or trade in alcoholic beverages; 
  Production or trade in tobacco; 
  Production  or  trade  in  any  product  or  activity  deemed  illegal  under  host  country 
laws  or  regulations  or  international  conventions  and  agreements,  or  subject  to 
international bans, such as pharmaceuticals, pesticides/herbicides, ozone depleting 
substances, PCB's, wildlife or products regulated under CITES. NOSP will have to 
ensure  beneficiary  farmers  use  approved  pesticides  and  herbicides.  An  indirect 
impact of NOSP may result in an  increase in poaching or killing of threatened or 
endangered species that may raid farms, since most of the hubs contain a number 
of national parks and forests. NOSP must therefore ensure that sufficient provision 
is made for the protection and conservation of wildlife, flora and their habitats; 
  Production or activities involving harmful or exploitative forms of forced labour15 
and/or harmful child labour16.  As such forced labour may not be an issue for NOSP 
subprojects,  but  it  should  be  noted  that  IFAD  requires  that  farm  hands/casual 
workers are paid decent living wages, and that labour and working conditions and 
well-being of workers and local communities are fully considered and in line with 
ILO conventions.  In rural societies, children often skip school during the harvest 
period  in  order  to  assist  their  families  on  the  farms.    Children  working  on 
agricultural  projects  are  especially  susceptible  to  harm  from  poor  use  and 
management  of  agrochemicals.  NOSP  supported  subprojects  will  therefore  have 
ensure  that  harvesting  (and  other)  activities  do  not  interfere  with  children’s 
education,  and  that  children  do  not  handle  agrochemicals  and  are  not  otherwise 
exposed to these substances. 
SECAP (2017) also states that IFAD will not support “projects in areas of critical habitats 
or which result in conversion or degradation of such habitats”. Emphasis will be to identify 
alternatives and ensure that any potential degradation or conversion is firstly avoided, and 
if not avoided, appropriately mitigated.   
In  addition,  in  order  to  retain  Category  B  status,  NOSP  will  NOT  support 
subprojects or interventions that have the following implications: 
Subprojects having locational implications which:  
  Would develop wetlands; 
  Cause significant adverse impacts to habitats and/or ecosystems and their services, 
such as conversion of natural forest or wildlands, loss of habitat, erosion or other 
form of land degradation, or fragmentation of habitats; 
  Result in major hydrological changes; 
14 International Finance Corporation Exclusion List: www.ifc.org/exclusionlist  
15 Forced labor means all work or service, not voluntarily performed, that is extracted from an individual under threat of 
force or penalty. 
16 Harmful child labor means the employment of children that is economically exploitive, or is likely to be hazardous to, 
or to interfere with, the child's education, or to be harmful to the child's health, or physical, mental, spiritual, moral, or 
social development. 
161 
  Are located in ecologically sensitive areas, areas of global/national significance for 
biodiversity conservation (eg. protected areas – national parks and forests, world 
heritage  sites),  and/or  biodiversity-rich  areas  and  habitats  depended  on  by 
endangered species; 
  Are  located  in  areas  subjected  to  major  destruction  as  a  result  of  geophysical 
hazards eg. landslides, earthquakes or volcanic eruptions. 
Subprojects having natural resource implications that would: 
  Lead to unsustainable natural resource management practices (fisheries, forestry, 
livestock) and/or result in exceeding carrying capacity; 
  Would result in significant increase in the use of agrochemicals which may lead to 
life-threatening illness and long-term public health and safety concerns; 
  Rely on water-based (groundwater and/or surface water) development where there 
is  reason  to  believe  that  significant  depletion  and/or  reduced  flow  has  occurred 
from the effects of climate change or from overutilization; 
  Pose  a  risk  of  introducing  potentially  invasive  species  or  genetically  modified 
organisms which might alter genetic traits of indigenous species or have an adverse 
effect on local biodiversity. 
Subprojects involving infrastructure development that would: 
  Require the need to rehabilitate or develop large scale irrigation schemes of more 
 
 
 
 
than 100 hectares per scheme;  
Involve significant extraction/diversion/containment of surface water, leaving the 
river  flow  below  20  per  cent  environmental  flow  plus  downstream  user 
requirement; 
Include  drainage  or  permanent  correction  of  natural  waterbodies  (eg.  river 
training); 
Involve the construction/rehabilitation/upgrading of roads that entail a total area 
being cleared above 10 km long.  
Involve the construction of a large or medium-scale industrial plant (eg. oil mills 
exceeding production of more than 10 T/day17). 
Subprojects having social implications that would result in: 
  Any economic displacement or physical resettlement; 
  Significant  social  adverse  impacts  on  disadvantaged,  vulnerable,  indigenous  and 
underserved groups; 
  Conversion  and/or  loss  of  physical  cultural  and  traditional  resources,  including 
graves, indigenous tree/plant species that have traditional value. 
Generic impacts of the various anticipated NOSP activities under Components 1 and 2 are 
summarized in Appendix 2.  
All Component 1 subprojects and interventions will be screened by the CES and SIS, while 
Component 2 subprojects (CARs and off-road runoff harvesting) will be screened by the 
PICT ESS and the relevant HESOs in consultation with DEOs and DNRMOs, and the NEMA 
Regional Officer.  
17 Based on District guidelines of small, medium and large oilseed mills. 
162 
A Screening Checklist is provided in Annex 3. 
5.  INVOLVEMENT OF BENEFICIARIES DURING SUBPROJECT SELECTION 
For Component 1, clusters of stakeholders (producers, buyers/millers, suppliers) will be 
formed according to the commodities and multi-stakeholder platforms (MSP) will be held 
regularly (at least twice per year) at the cluster and hub level.  NOSP will also engage in 
farmers group mentoring to equip farmers with skills and confidence to grow their farm 
enterprise,  manage  climate  risks  and  face  fewer  social  barriers  to  their  development. 
Mobilisation of individuals and households into the clusters and engaging them into NOSP 
activities will be led by a team of market-oriented Economic Mobilizers (EM) in each hub 
with  support  from  the  hub  Supply  Chain  teams.  Social  mentoring  of  households  of  all 
supported producer groups will be undertaken  to address risks and barriers and ensure 
that households are able to maximize their socio-economic progress.  
For Component 2, Community Access Roads will be led by the MoLG and district and sub-
county local governments.  The selection of roads for NOSP support will be done through 
a consultative and participatory process at the district/sub-county and multi-stakeholder 
platform  levels.    The  Districts  will  prepare  a  map  of  the  selected  sub-counties  growing 
oilseeds and compile a list of priority roads for potential NOSP support, assisted by the 
MSPs and oilseed farmers. Further prioritisation of CARs will be done across the districts. 
The PCU will submit a list of the priority roads to the Project Implementation Coordination 
Team (PICT) in the MoLG to begin the feasibility studies. When the roads to be improved 
are identified, the district and sub-county local governments will hold community meetings 
in the villages that the road will pass through to make the citizens aware of the upcoming 
project, make them fully aware of possible negative and positive impacts of the road and 
get  acceptance  of  the  road  applying  the  principals  of  free,  prior  and  informed  consent 
(FPIC).  The  project  will  facilitate  the  establishment  of  area  level  road  management 
committees  to  facilitate  interaction  with  the  communities  during  road  design  and 
construction  activities.  The  road  management  committee  will  assist  in  community 
consultation  process,  monitoring  construction  activities  and  their  impacts,  advising  on 
mitigation measures including participatory implementation of the environment and social 
management plans and organising road maintenance groups. The District and Sub-County 
Local Government engineers will be responsible for the supervision of construction works. 
The PICT engineers, ESS and HESOs will provide quality assurance during the construction 
by making periodic site inspections, attending site meetings and reviewing.  Criteria for 
selection of CARs are presented at the end of Annex 2. 
6.  ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL AND CLIMATE SAFEGUARDS DOCUMENTATION 
The  various  safeguard  documents  required  to  be  prepared  for  NOSP  subprojects  and 
interventions are described below.   
163 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) 
Based on the exclusions listed in the preceding section, all subprojects funded directly by 
NOSP will fall under SECAP Category B, which  would not require ESIAs to be prepared.  
However,  in  terms  of  NEMA  categorisation,  the  NOSP  interventions  will  require  Project 
Briefs, apart from large scale cultivation and irrigation projects that would exceed 20 ha, 
which according to the National Environment Act (2019) (NEA) will require a full ESIA.    
In  the  event  that  the  MSPs  propose  activities  or  interventions  that  may  have  some 
environmental and/or social impacts of concern, they would have to undertake ESIAs in 
accordance with NEMA’s guidelines.   But if they involve activities listed in the exclusion 
list, then those interventions will not be supported through NOSP. 
An ESIA Report must cover, among others: 
  Administrative and institutional arrangements required for environmentally sound 
implementation  of  the  environmental  management,  applicable  national  and 
international environmental legal and policy frameworks and their relevance to the 
project; 
  A detailed description of the proposed project components, as well as all ancillary 
works including location, technologies to be used, materials and their quantities, 
construction period, etc; 
  A  detailed  description  the  biophysical  and  socio-economic  baseline  conditions, 
bearing in mind that these provide the basis for impact analysis and monitoring; 
  A description of  other  ongoing or planned developments in the project area that 
could have cumulative or synergistic effects on the project outcome; 
  Outcomes  of 
stakeholder 
for  addressing  stakeholder  concerns 
recommendations 
implementation; 
Identification and analysis of anticipated adverse impacts and risks, and cumulative 
impacts, as well as beneficial impacts;  
consultations  and  public  participation  and 
in  design  and 
 
  Analysis  of  alternatives,  including  project  sites,  access  options,  technologies, 
construction methodologies, etc, and a ‘no project’ alternative;  
  Preventative, mitigation and enhancement measures; 
  Recommendations for changes to project design; 
  Environmental  and  social  management  plan  (ESMP  –  which  includes  climate  risk 
resilience proposals); 
  Grievance redress procedure; 
  Monitoring and auditing requirements and procedures; 
  Costs  for  environmental  and  social  management  and  monitoring,  and  climate 
resilience measures. 
As  ESIAs  are  done  in  tandem  with  the  feasibility  studies  and  design  development,  it  is 
important that: 
  Stakeholder concerns – particularly those of the communities and project affected 
persons - are  addressed in the ESMPs, and if  they are not,  reasons for doing so 
should be explained; and 
  The project design should be presented to the communities. 
164 
Should any of the interventions proposed under NOSP (irrigation schemes or subprojects 
proposed  through  the  MSP)  require  ESIAs  as  per  NEA  (2019),  these  reports  will  be 
prepared by NEMA registered consultants hired by the proposer. 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 
As mentioned above, all NOSP interventions will fall under SECAP Category B. In regard 
NEMA’s  categorisation  prescriptions,  while  some  interventions  will  require  ESIAs  to  be 
prepared (as discussed above), the majority will require Project Briefs.  In the preparation 
of Project Briefs/ESMPs, guidelines in NEMA’s EIA Regulations (1998) and EIA Guidelines 
(1997), together with SECAP’s ESMP formats, will be closely followed.   It will also be noted 
that ESIA reports must contain ESMPs.   
A Project Brief must contain: 
  The nature of the subproject in accordance with the categories as per Schedule 4 
of the National Environment Act, 2019; 
  A detailed description of the project components, including materials to be used, 
inputs, products and by-products (including waste generation), number of people 
the project will employ, social and economic benefits derived at the local, regional 
and national levels; 
  A baseline which focuses on bio-physical, social and cultural baseline information 
required for the analysis of impacts and also for the purposes of monitoring; 
  An analysis of positive and negative environmental, landscape, social and climate-
related impacts (as specified in the First Schedule of the EIA Regulations, 1998; 
  Mitigation measures for negative impacts; 
  Details  on  the  implementation  of  mitigation  measures,  including  at  what 
stage/when  they  should  be  incorporated,  responsibilities  for  implementing 
mitigation, cost of mitigation; 
  Details on monitoring requirements, including responsibilities for monitoring during 
construction and operation, monitoring indicators, monitoring baseline, frequency 
and means of monitoring, costs of monitoring. 
The ESMPs/Project Briefs will be prepared by consultants hired by the PCU.    
Again,  stakeholder  concerns  must  be  addressed  in  the  ESMPs,  and  the  project  design 
should be presented to the communities. 
While the actual implementation of ESMPs will be done by contractors, the HESOs will be 
responsible for ensuring that these are implemented and will carry out regular monitoring.   
However,  supervision  and  monitoring  of  ESMP  implementation  will  be  done  by  the  CES 
and SIS, and for CARs by the ESS.  
165 
Climate Risk Analysis 
The  purpose  of  climate  risk  screening  is  to  determine  the  exposure  of  the  project  to 
climate-related risks (High, Moderate or Low) based on available information about historic 
climate hazard occurrences, current climate trends and future climate change scenarios, 
as well as to assess the likelihood of the project increasing the vulnerability of the expected 
target  populations  to  climate  hazards.  It  provides  an  opportunity  to  integrate  climate 
issues  into  project  design  and  therefore  increase  project  resilience  and  hence 
sustainability.   NOSP has a medium climate classification.   
Initial results from the Climate Risk Analysis (CRA) carried out for IFAD by the University 
of  Cape  Town18  indicate  that  between  the  present  time  and  the  Mid-Century  Future 
(defined as ~2040-2069), the Central region of Uganda will be most vulnerable to climate 
change  impacts  for  groundnut  and  sesame  cultivation  and  the  Western  Region  for 
groundnuts and soyabean. For the Eastern and Northern Regions, the impacts of climate 
change  will  generally  have  a  positive  impact  on  groundnuts,  sesame,  soyabean  and 
sunflower,  while  soyabean  production  is  also  anticipated  to  improve  in  Central  Region.  
The final CRA report will provide guidance for NOSP oilseed interventions. 
NOSP has made provision for improved climate information services which includes climate 
data  collection,  capacity  building  for  cliimate  change,  and  district  level  climate  risk  and 
vulnerability  assessments.    This  is  aimed  at  improving  smallholder  resilience  to  climate 
risks. 
FPIC Documentation 
Some  NOSP  interventions  (for  example  the  upgrading  or  construction  of  rural  access 
roads,  land  for  demonstration  plots,  or  workshops,  etc)  will  necessitate  the  permanent 
acquisition of land.  The approach to do this will be “to do no harm” and adhere to the 
principle  of  free,  prior  and  informed  consent  –  in  other  words,  NOSP  will  not  support 
subprojects resulting in any physical or economic displacement. Land to be acquired for 
demonstration  plots,  workshops  and  stores/sheds  will  be  located  on  Government  land, 
which  will  be  selected  provided  no  economic  or  physical  displacement  will  take  place. 
Alternatively,  landowners  or  communities  may  wish  to  sell,  rent  or  lease  their  land  for 
NOSP  infrastructure,  which  will  be  done  on  a  “willing  buyer/willing  seller”  or  “willing 
lessor/willing lessee” basis.  In the latter cases, detailed agreements will be drawn up and 
reviewed by the SIS and ESS to ensure that the landowner/community have a fair sale or 
letting arrangement, which is not to their disadvantage.  
For Component 2 subprojects, the MoLG has specified that it will not compensate for land 
take, physical resettlement or economic displacement.  Where a member of the community 
18 IFAD (2019); Climate Risk Assessment for the Agriculture Sector of Uganda; African Climate Development Initiative 
(ACDI), Climate System Analysis Group (CSAG) and the Environmental Policy Research Unit (EPRU); University of 
Cape Town. 
166 
does not wish to give up his/her land, alternative routes or plots will be identified by the 
communities  themselves.    Under  no  circumstances  will  a  person  be  coerced  into 
relinquishing land or assets against his/her will.   It must also be noted that in most of the 
Project hubs, land tenure is customary – in other words it is either by individuals, families 
or by clans.   
Any land take for the purposes of the Project interventions will be based  on negotiated 
agreement with individuals, families or the clans, following the FPIC process and ensuring 
comprehensive  documentation  of  the  consultation  process  and  the  outcomes  of 
consultations. Thus, the need for a RAP is negated.  
The  FPIC  Process  for  NOSP  essentially  comprises:  1)  consultations  leading  to  FPIC,  2) 
formalising the consent agreement, and 3) assessing the implementation of FPIC.   The 
table below summarises the FPIC processes for NOSP.  A detailed FPIC Implementation 
Plan is presented in Annex 4.  
Table 1: NOSP FPIC Implementation Plan 
Description/Activity 
Conduct consultation leading to 
FPIC on the proposed 
project/specific 
component/activities 
Consultations should: 
-  Share  objective  and  scope  of  the 
project  with  the  representatives 
identified by the communities and 
identify  project 
component(s) 
requiring FPIC 
-  Inform 
them  on 
the  actors 
financing  and  implementing  the 
project  and 
respective 
responsibilities  
their 
-  Provide  clear  and  transparent 
information  on  the  benefits  and 
risks of the project 
-  Share the findings of the baseline 
studies  
-  Formalize consent agreement 
Formalize the consent agreement 
the 
if  so 
Formalize 
requested  by 
i) 
consent 
agreement  (written  or  in  other 
form 
the 
community) 
The format for a consent agreement 
would include: 
-  Respective expectations  
-  Proposed 
duration, 
project 
expected results and activities 
-  Participatory  monitoring 
and 
verification plan and procedures  
Responsible 
Timeframe 
PCU  SIS,  PICT  ESS 
through 
an 
independent 
facilitator,  supported 
by  IFAD  as  part  of 
project 
implementation 
support, as required. 
At  the  beginning  of 
Project 
implementation 
phase  and  before 
of 
construction 
CARs/harvesting 
facilities,  and  any 
other  acquisition  of 
land  or  removal  of 
trees/crops for NOSP 
interventions. 
Project 
implementation 
phase. Timing 
agreed upon the 
during consultation 
process and before 
construction of 
CARs/harvesting 
facilities, and any 
other acquisition of 
land or removal of 
PCU SIS, PICT ESS 
through an 
independent 
facilitator, supported 
by IFAD as part of 
project 
implementation 
support, as required. 
167 
Description/Activity 
-  Identification 
of 
grievances 
Responsible 
Timeframe 
trees/crops for NOSP 
interventions. 
procedures and mechanisms  
-  Terms of withdrawal of consent  
ii)  Record  process  through  means 
and  languages  accessible  to  all 
stakeholders and parties involved 
iii)  Annex  the  FPIC  agreement 
and  documented  process  to  the 
PDR 
Assess FPIC implementation 
i)  Assess  FPIC  implementation 
as  part  of  the  M&E  exercise  during 
the project life.  
and  monitor 
ii) 
Identify 
appropriate 
for 
measuring progress towards and/or 
attainment  of  agreed  terms  will  be 
defined and linked with a timeframe 
in the FPIC agreement 
indicators 
PCU, MoLG, IFAD 
implementation 
support and joint 
supervision missions 
Project 
implementation 
phase - throughout 
the project cycle 
Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) 
It  is  likely  that  NOSP  will  stimulate  increased  agricultural  productivity,  and  therefore 
increased use of agrochemicals.  Agrochemicals (mainly fertilizers and pesticides) may be 
necessary to achieve higher yields, but they must be carefully applied as they have various 
adverse environmental and social impacts related to contamination of water bodies and 
soil  and  thereby  threatening  biodiversity,  risks  to  farm  workers  and  community  health 
from exposure to agrochemicals, and releases of GHGs.   In order to properly manage the 
use  of  pesticides,  Integrated  Pest  Management  Plans  (IPMPs)  must  be  prepared.  
Guidelines for the preparation of an IPMP are presented in Annex 5.  
FAO  defines  integrated  pest  management  as:  “the  careful  consideration  of  all  available 
pest  control  techniques  and  subsequent  integration  of  appropriate  measures  that 
discourage  the  development  of  pest  populations  and  keep  pesticides  and  other 
interventions  to  levels  that  are  economically  justified  and  reduce  or  minimize  risks  to 
human health and the environment. IPM emphasizes the growth of a healthy crop with the 
least  possible  disruption  to  agro-ecosystems  and  encourages  natural  pest  control 
mechanisms”. 
The following main steps can be considered as typical for an IPM approach19: 
  Prevention and/or suppression of harmful organisms.  This is often best achieved 
by a combination of the following options: 
o  crop rotation;  
19 http://www.fao.org/agriculture/crops/thematic-sitemap/theme/pests/ipm/more-ipm/en/ 
168 
o 
inter-cropping  use  of  adequate  cultivation  techniques  (e.g.,  seedbed 
sanitation, sowing dates and densities, under-sowing, conservation tillage, 
pruning and direct sowing); 
o  where  appropriate,  use  of  pest 
resistant/tolerant  cultivars  and 
standard/certified seed and planting material; 
o  balanced  soil  fertility  and  water  management,  making  optimum  use  of 
organic matter; 
o  prevent  spreading  of  harmful  organisms  by  field  sanitation  and  hygiene 
measures  (e.g.,  by  removal  of  affected  plants  or  plant  parts,  regular 
cleansing of machinery and equipment); 
o  protection and enhancement of important beneficial organisms, e.g. by the 
utilisation of ecological infrastructures inside and outside production sites. 
  Harmful  organisms  must  be  monitored  with  adequate  methods  and  tools,  where 
available. Such adequate tools should include observations in the field and where 
feasible warning, forecasting and early diagnosis systems (e.g. traps). 
  Based on the results of the monitoring it is decided whether and when to use what 
pest management inputs. Sustainable biological, physical and other non-chemical 
methods must be given priority over chemical methods if they provide satisfactory 
pest control. 
  Pesticides should only be applied as a last resort when there are no adequate non-
chemical alternatives and use of pesticides is economically justified. 
  The pesticides applied shall be as specific as possible for the target and shall have 
the least side effects on human health, non-target organisms and the environment, 
while their use should be kept at minimum levels, e.g. by partial applications. 
  Monitor the success of the applied pest management measures. 
The  IPMP  should  evaluate  the  impact  of  potential  pests  prior  to  programme 
implementation, identify the type of pests and assess the magnitude of impacts likely to 
be caused by those pests.  In assessing the hazards of pesticide use, the toxicity of the 
pesticide and exposure to it are key elements. Therefore, as a minimum, the IPMP should: 
  Screen the types of pesticides for toxicity by ensuring: they are effective against 
the  target  species,  have  negligible  adverse  impacts  on  human  health  and  non-
target  species,  will  not  precipitate  resistance  in  pests,  and  do  not  fall  into  WHO 
class 1A or 1B; 
  Aim to reduce exposure time or degree of exposure. 
  Propose alternative non-pesticide management options (physical, mechanical and 
biochemical), as well as any available less toxic varieties of the pesticides. 
The CES, in collaboration with the NEMA and MAAIF will prepare the IPMP as applicable to 
crops promoted through NOSP.  The IPMPs will then be distributed to all the Hubs, who in 
turn will ensure that all agricultural involving the use of agrochemicals receive, understand 
and  implement  the  IPMP.    The  IPMP  must  also  stipulate  national  requirements  and 
approved and appropriate agrochemicals used in the schemes.  In developing the IPMP, 
reference should be made to SECAP’s Guidance Statement #2 on Agrochemicals, and IFC’s 
EHS Guidelines on Crop Production (revised 2015). 
Standard Operating Procedures 
Depending on the scale and complexity of the some of the interventions and subprojects 
proposed under NOSP, other operating procedures or plans may need to be developed to 
169 
ensure environmental protection, community and occupational health and safety and other 
risks and hazards.  If necessary, these may include: 
  Traffic Management Plan; 
  Waste Management Plan; 
  Health and Safety Management Plan; 
  Pollution Contingency Plan; 
  Erosion Management Plan; 
  Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan; 
  Cultural Heritage Management Plan. 
These plans may be developed by the PCU SIS and CES and the PICT ESS. 
7.  DISCLOSURE OF ESIAS AND PROJECT BRIEFS 
In  developing  ESIAs  and  Project  Briefs,  consultations  must  be  held  with  all  levels:  at 
community, village, district and national levels.  During these consultations, the processes 
for disclosure of the documents should be communicated. IFAD’s SECAP procedures also 
require that sufficient consultations have been carried out with key stakeholders (ie. the 
communities)  in  order  to  satisfy  its  requirements  for  Free  Prior  and  Informed  Consent 
(FPIC).    
Prior  to  approval  of  the  subprojects,  the  ESIAs  or  Project  Briefs  and  NOSP’s  Integrated 
Pest Management Plan (IPMP) will be disclosed nationally, at hub districts and at village 
level at a location accessible to the general public, and in a form and language that the 
communities are able to understand,  so that they may comment on  any aspects/issues 
contained in the reports prior to their approval. MAAIF, MoLG, the Hub Districts and IFAD 
will be responsible for disclosure.   
ESIAs (for cultivation or irrigation schemes >20ha and <100ha), Project Briefs and the 
NOSP IPMP may have to be updated to reflect any received comments and indicate how 
those  comments  have  been  accommodated  into  the  relevant  subproject  design  and 
implementation procedures.  If the comments have not been taken on board, the reason 
for doing so must be provided.    
It is also important that the all designs for the proposed interventions are discussed and 
approved by the target beneficiary groups and project affected persons.    
8.  REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF ESIAS, PROJECT BRIEFS AND IPMP 
ESIAs  and  Project  Briefs  will  be  reviewed  by  the  PCU  CES  and  SIS,  and  the  PICT  ESS 
together with the District Environment Officers of the Hub districts, and then submitted 
for review and approval/clearance as follows: 
  Subprojects requiring ESIAs according to the NEA (2019 to be submitted to NEMA 
for review and approval include: 
170 
o  Cultivation of 20 hectares and more; 
o  Large scale application of agro-chemicals for disease and pest control; 
o 
o  Milling facilities with a capacity of at least 1000 kg per day. 
Irrigation of more than 20 hectares; 
  Subprojects  for  which  Project  Briefs  are  to  be  prepared  and  submitted  to  NEMA 
include: 
o  Construction of new CARs 
o  Temporary access roads >10km 
o 
Irrigation schemes between 5-20ha  to be submitted to NEMA; 
  Subprojects for which Project Briefs are to be prepared and submitted to MAAIF for 
approval include:  
o  Construction of medium to small scale agro-processing facilities; 
  Subprojects for which Project Briefs are to be prepared and submitted to MOLG for 
approval include: 
o  Opening up of community access and feeder roads; 
o  Upgrading of community access and feeder roads to bitumen standards; 
o  Small bridge construction; 
o  Swamp road improvement which involves installation of culverts; 
The NOSP IPMP will be reviewed by IFAD and approved by MAAIF and NEMA.   
9.  GENDER BASED VIOLENCE AND SEXUAL EXPLOITATION AND ABUSE 
GBV/SEA Risk Factors 
There  are  a  myriad  of  risk  factors  associated  with  gender-based  violence  and  sexual 
exploitation  and  abuse,  which  cut  across  multiple  spheres  including  individual, 
relationship, community, institutional and policy levels.  NOSP component interventions, 
depending on their scope, can exacerbate existing risks or can create new ones. Project-
related risk factors may include:  
  Unequitable  sharing  of  income  between  men  and  women  after  sale  of  oilseed 
produce; 
  The influx of labour into the community due to road construction activities;  
  Failure  by  communities  to  relate  with  labourers  who  sometimes  have  different 
culture and language; and  
  Limited land for agriculture  which requires hiring of land especially by the youth 
and women, often based on informal agreements.  
All these can exacerbate already existing inequities between women, men, and youth.  
GBV/SEA Risk Mitigation Measures 
The prevention and mitigation of  GBV/SEA requires interaction and collaboration between 
major  actors  in  the  NOSP  project  sub  components.  These  may  include:  i)  the  farmers 
especially  women  and  their  children,  as  well  as  other  vulnerable  populations,  in 
communities  where  NOSP  will  be  implemented;  ii)  the  communities  including  cultural, 
religious  and  informal  structures  who  may  play  a  protection  role;  iii)  contractors  and 
consultants  who  are  responsible  for  following  contractually  mandated  social  and  labour 
practices  that  prevent  abuse  and  violence;  iv)  Central  and  Local  Government  who  are 
171 
critical  to  ensure  that  SEA  prevention  and  accountability  mechanisms  are  in  place;  v) 
workers including extension officers and road construction workers who will need to abide 
by codes of work ethics or codes of conduct.   
In the NOSP context, SEA/GBV risk level is considered to be of medium, and therefore the 
project will deploy the following strategies: 
  Use the GALS methodology to handle GBV/SEA and other gender and youth related 
inequalities at the household, farmer group and community level; 
  Sensitize communities especially the vulnerable populations on the potential risks 
of an influx of labour associated with a project and made aware  of the laws and 
services that can protect them and provide redress in case of an incident;  
  Require every access road contractor to sensitise their workforce on GBV/SEA and 
sign a code of conduct;   
  Train  farmer  group  councillors  and  road  management  committees  in  conflict 
management. 
NOSP will work with service providers for survivors of SEA/GBV (community development 
office, probation office and police) to offer a minimum basic package of services, ideally 
including  case  management  support,  health  services,  psychosocial  support,  shelter—if 
needed— security and access to legal services. 
10. GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISMS 
Grievance Redress Mechanism for NOSP  
The goal of NOSP’s GRM is to promote a mutually constructive relationship and enhance 
the achievement of project development objectives. The GRM is to ensure that complaints 
are directed and expeditiously addressed by the relevant agencies which are to enhance 
responsiveness and accountability.   
NOSP  will  utilize  existing  formal  or  informal  grievance  mechanisms  to  resolve  disputes 
which may arise. Informal mechanisms include existing committees and or individuals in 
farmers groups responsible for conflict management and road management committees 
to  handle  access  road  construction  related  disputes.  The  formal  grievance  redress 
mechanisms exist at village and sub county levels where the LC1 and LCIII chairpersons 
are involved in dispute resolution for civil cases. For criminal cases, the police are required 
to intervene.  Should disputes not be resolved at these levels, then the matter is taken to 
the magistrate’s and high courts. 
Typical Grievances under NOSP 
Likely common grievances in the project implementation areas will include: 
  Non-payment of work done; 
  Non-payments of infrastructure construction materials; 
172 
  Non-payment for land taken up by the project common infrastructures; 
  Occupation, health and safety; 
  Gender based violence; 
  Sexual exploitation and abuse;  
  Construction safety and nuisances caused by construction; 
  Non-fulfilment of contracts. 
Each project site (eg. road construction site, farmer’s group level) is expected to operate 
its mechanisms of handling feedback and complaints (see Figure 4 below). Feedback or 
complaints shall be encouraged among all workers and community members throughout 
the  project  and  resolved  without  undue  delay.  This  will  also  be  closely  monitored  and 
reported through the different project levels including the hub level and PMU level.  Such 
a  mechanism  will  be  checked  to  ascertain  its  effectiveness,  accessible  and  transparent 
procedures  to  receive  and  resolve  complaints  and  where  need  be  and  for  purposes  of 
delivering this project, it shall then be reviewed and modified accordingly. 
Guiding Principles for NOSP GRM 
The GRM for the NOSP is designed on the following universal principles: 
  Accessibility and social inclusion; 
  Simplicity; 
  Transparency; 
Inclusivity;  
 
  Due process and impartiality; 
  Prompt action; 
  Qualifications (eg communication skills); 
  Grievance uptake points; 
  Analysis and feedback.  
Steps of Grievance Redress in NOSP    
The first step in setting up a GRM will be to appoint a committee to handle grievances.  At 
the farmer’s group level, members will elect three members (male, female, youth) to form 
a Grievance Redress Committee (GRC) as part of the executive committee, or they may 
elect  one  person  as  a  grievance  handling  officer.    In  case  of  access  roads,  the  road 
management committee will also elect 3 members (male, female, youth and LC1) to form 
a  GRC  as  part  of  the  road  management  committee.    At  the  Parish,  Sub  County,  and 
Districts, grievances will be handled through existing LC systems. At the Hub level, every 
district in a given hub will field a sociologist or community development officer to the Hub 
level  grievance  committee  which  will  meet  on  a  regular  basis  to  handle  any  dispute 
referred to them. The HESO will be the chairperson of the GRC.  At the PCU level, MoLG 
and MAAIF will second a staff in charge of NOSP together with the sociologist at PCU level 
to form a grievance handling committee. 
A  verbal  or  a  written  complaint  from  aggrieved  person  will  be  received  by  a  person 
assigned  in  the  project  as  the  Grievance  Officer  (GO)/Counsellor/  Grievance  Redress 
Committee (GRC) and recorded in a grievance log/book. Grievances can be lodged at any 
time. The following steps will be followed; 
173 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Registration of the complaint; 
Verification  to  determine  eligibility  undertaken  by  the  Grievance  Officer 
(GO)/Counsellor/ Grievance Redress Committee (GRC); 
Processing, including hearings and resolutions; 
Implementation and case closing. 
The PCU SIS and PICT ESS will be responsible for overall monitoring of the effectiveness 
of the GRMs for Component 1 and Component 2 subprojects respectively.  
Figure 4  NOSP Grievance Redress for Civil and Criminal Offences 
11. IFAD’S COMPLAINTS PROCEDURE 
In  addition  to  NOSP’s  GRM,  communities  and  individuals  who  believe  that  they  are 
adversely  affected  by  NOSP  activities  may  submit  complaints  to  the  IFAD  Grievance 
Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed 
in order to address project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals 
may submit their complaint to the IFAD’s independent Inspection Panel, which determines 
whether harm occurred, or could occur, because of IFAD non-compliance with its policies 
and  procedures.  Complaints  may  be  submitted  at  any  time  after  concerns  have  been 
brought  directly  to  the  IFAD's  attention,  and  IFAD  Management  has  been  given  an 
opportunity  to  respond.    Complaints  in  may  also  be  lodged  using  the  following  email: 
SECAPcomplaints@ifad.org. 
174 
12. MONITORING 
Performance Monitoring 
Performance monitoring requires that: 
  The various safeguards instruments (ESIAS, Project Briefs, ESMPs, and IPMP) have 
been prepared to the required standard, within the required timelines; 
  The safeguards instruments have been reviewed and approved by the responsible 
entities; 
  Environmental,  social  and  climate  mitigation  measures,  have  been/are  being 
implemented and that mitigation measures are effective. This includes monitoring 
the  implementation  of  the  ESMPs  and  IPMP,  and  also  the  grievance  redress 
mechanism(s); 
  The  community  is  participating  in  all  stages  of  the  environmental  and  social 
management and monitoring processes; 
  PCU, PICT,  and  relevant Hub district officers and village level officers have been 
trained in accordance with the capacity building proposals; 
  Reports are prepared and delivered as required. 
Performance monitoring will be done primarily by the CES, SIS, PICT ESS, and the HESOs, 
and for some parameters with support from the Hub Engineers.   
Examples of typical monitoring parameters and indicators are shown in the table below: 
Table 2 Typical Performance Monitoring Indicators 
Monitoring 
Parameter 
Safeguards  
Screening 
Monitoring 
Activity/Indicators 
Target 
Responsibility 
for Monitoring 
% of proposed 
interventions screened 
100% proposed 
interventions 
screened 
CES, SIS, ESS, 
HESO 
NEMA Approvals 
received 
% of ESIAs, Project 
Briefs  approved 
100% ESIAs, Project 
Briefs approved 
CES, SIS, ESS, 
HESO 
Licences and permits  % of required permits 
obtained 
100% of required 
permits obtained 
CES, SIS, ESS, 
HESO 
Safeguards training 
# of PCU, PICT, Hub 
officers, Hub district 
and village officers 
trained 
All PCU, PICT, PCU, 
PICT, Hub officers, 
Hub district and 
village officers trained 
CES, SIS, SCDC 
175 
Monitoring 
Parameter 
Monitoring 
Activity/Indicators 
Target 
Responsibility 
for Monitoring 
Grievance Redress 
# of subprojects 
having functioning 
grievance redress 
committees 
All subprojects have 
functioning grievance 
redress committees  
SIS, SCDC 
# of grievances 
received 
% of grievances 
resolved 
Reporting 
No. of quarterly 
reports received 
4 quarterly reports 
received 
No. of annual reports 
received 
1 annual report 
received 
CES, ESS 
Intervention Level Monitoring 
Workshops 
# of incidents of oil 
spills per month 
Zero incidents of oil 
spills per month 
CES, HESO  
# of workplace 
accidents and incidents 
per month 
Zero workplace 
accidents and 
incidents per month 
Inoculants laboratory 
and storage 
Quality of wastewater 
discharge 
Crop production 
expansion 
Baseline acreage under 
oilseed cultivation 
Agro-processing  
Quality of wastewater 
discharge 
Effluent from ETPs 
within national 
standards for 
industrial wastewater 
discharge 
CES 
% increase of acreage 
under oilseed 
cultivation 
SIS 
Effluent from ETPs 
within national 
standards for 
industrial wastewater 
discharge 
CES 
Small scale irrigation 
schemes 
# days water not 
available for irrigation 
in a year 
Zero days water is 
not available in a year 
# days abstraction 
rate exceeds permitted 
rate in a year 
Permitted abstraction 
rate for 365 
days/year 
CES, HESO, Hub 
Engineer 
176 
Monitoring 
Parameter 
Monitoring 
Activity/Indicators 
Target 
Responsibility 
for Monitoring 
Stores/sheds  
% of stores/sheds with 
functional  fire fighting 
equipment 
100% stores/sheds 
have functional fire 
fighting equipment 
% of stores/sheds with 
adequate ventilation 
100% of stores/sheds 
have adequate 
ventilation 
CES, HESO 
Community access 
roads 
% of CARs - siltation in 
side drains 
Zero CARs have silted 
side drains 
% of CARs - erosion 
evident in side drains   
Zero CARs have 
eroded side drains  
% of CARs – 
functioning culverts 
100% culverts 
functioning  
HESO, Hub 
Engineer 
% of CARs – 
completely passable 
100% CARs 
completely passable 
Off road runoff 
harvesting 
% of functioning 
harvesting structures 
100% of constructed 
harvesting structures 
functioning 
HESO, Hub 
Engineer 
Results Monitoring 
Results  monitoring  involves  monitoring  compliance  and  effectiveness  of  the  safeguards 
instruments,  and  also  assesses  the  overall  environmental,  socio-economic  and  climate-
related  impacts  of  the  Project’s  interventions  in  relation  to  its  development  objectives.  
Results monitoring will be done on an annual basis by the PCU SIS and CES, the PICT ESS, 
in  collaboration  with  the  DEOs/DNRMOs  and  the  NEMA  Regional  Officer.    Results 
monitoring will be critical in providing feedback and lessons learned for any future phases 
of NOSP.   Typical parameters for results monitoring are shown in Table 3 below.  Social 
and socio-economic indicators should be measured specifically for the hubs in which the 
subproject  interventions  are  taking  place.    However,  environmental  indicators  (such  as 
those relevant to water quality and aquatic ecology) may go beyond hub boundaries. 
177 
Table 3 Typical Results Monitoring Parameters 
Monitoring Parameter 
Monitoring Activity/Indicators 
Water quality in water 
courses 
at 
quality 
Water 
sites 
downstream  of  irrigation  schemes, 
demonstration plots, agro-processing 
facilities 
given 
Agrochemical releases into 
water courses  
Water  quality  at  given  sample  sites 
along drainage network, and point of 
discharge  
Agrochemical concentrations 
in aquatic fauna 
Noticeable number of times dead fish 
observed  in  rivers,  marshlands  and 
lakes  
Soil quality 
Nutrient  depletion  and 
structure 
loss 
in 
Agrochemical contamination 
Economic activity in Project 
area 
Changes  in  agricultural  production 
and marketing 
Socio-economic status 
Changes in poverty levels 
Changes in nutrition status 
Changes  in  employment  levels  for 
women, men and youth 
13. QUARTERLY AND ANNUAL REVIEWS 
Quarterly and annual reviews will be undertaken by the PCU CES and SIS, and the PICT 
ESS and M&E Officer.   These reviews are necessary to: 
  Ensure that subprojects are complying with the processes established in the ESMF; 
  Ensure  that  subprojects  are  compliant  with  the  conditions  and  requirements 
 
stipulated in ESIAs, ESMPs and IPMP;  
Identify challenges and opportunities in order to learn lessons and thereby improve 
Project performance; and  
  Be able to determine the cumulative impacts of the Project to establish attainment 
of the Project Development Objectives.  
The reviews will produce Quarterly and Annual Review Reports.   
Each  year,  workshops  will  be  held  where  environmental,  climate  change  and  social 
performance of the Project will be reviewed and discussed, and recommendations made 
178 
for improved Project performance.  These workshops  will be  attended  by the CES, SIS, 
ESS, HESOs, DEOs, DNRMOs and NEMA Regional Officers. 
The Quarterly and Annual Review reports will be presented to PSC in order to ensure that 
the  Project  activities  are  achieving  its  objectives.    IFAD  will  participate  in  these 
presentations.   
14. REPORTING 
Hub Coordinators will submit monthly reports on environmental, social and climate-related 
issues  to  the  PCU  for  Component  1  subprojects  and  to  PICT  for  CARs  and  off-road 
harvesting interventions. 
The PCU Project Manager and PICT Project Coordinator will submit quarterly and annual 
environmental, social and climate performance reports to the PSC and IFAD.  
15. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL AND AUDITING 
The  purpose  of  auditing  is  to  establish  the  level  of  compliance  with  national  policy 
objectives  and  regulatory  requirements  and  whether  NEMA’s  conditions  of  approval 
attached  to  the  ESIAs  and  Project  Briefs  are  being  implemented  satisfactorily.    For 
Component  1  and  Component  2  subprojects,  respectively,  the  PCU  and  PICT  will  be 
responsible for ensuring that environmental and social audits are carried out once every 
two years.  The audits will be carried out by independent consultants. 
Audit reports will be sent to the PSC and IFAD, as well as to NEMA and the Hub districts.   
16. SUMMARY OF PROCESSES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
Table 4 below summarises the procedures and responsibilities described in this ESMF. 
Table 4 ESMF Procedures and Responsibilities 
ESMF Procedures 
Screening 
Activity 
Eligibility 
Responsibility 
CES and SIS; PICT SDS and 
HESOs 
ESIA/Project Brief  
Preparation of ESIA or Project 
Brief, both containing ESMPs  
Consultant  
Disclosure of ESIA or Project 
Brief 
Review of ESIA or Project 
Brief 
MAAIF, MoLG, Hubs and IFAD 
CES, SIS, PICT ESS 
179 
ESMF Procedures 
Climate Risk 
Analysis 
FPIC 
Activity 
Review and approval of ESIA 
or Project Brief 
Implementation of ESMP 
Supervision and monitoring 
of the ESMP developed for 
ESIA or Project Brief  
Responsibility 
NEMA, IFAD, MAAIF, MoLG  
HESO, contractors, 
community 
CES and SIS; PICT ESS 
Climate risk monitoring 
CES 
Documentation of process 
Independent facilitator 
Supervision and monitoring 
of FPIC process 
SIS, ESS 
IPMP 
Preparation of IPMP 
CES 
Review and approval of IPMP 
IFAD, NEMA, MAAIF 
Supervision and monitoring 
of implementation of IPMP 
CES, Hub District Agricultural 
Officers 
Other Plans/SOPs 
Preparation of management 
plans / SOPs 
Consultant or Technical 
Assistants, supervised by 
CES, SIS, ESS 
Implementation of SOPs 
Hub Engineers 
Grievance Redress 
Mechanism 
Grievance receipt, 
verification, investigation, 
resolution, communication 
with complainant and referral 
to higher levels if necessary 
Village or Group Grievance 
Committees 
Performance 
monitoring  
Monitoring of effectiveness of 
GRM 
SIS, ESS 
Safeguards instruments 
CES, SIS, ESS, HESOs 
Intervention level activities 
Results Monitoring 
Project level environmental 
and social indicators 
CES,SIS,  HESO, Hub 
Engineer 
CES, SIS, ESS, in 
collaboration with 
DEOs/DNRMOs and NEMA 
Regional Officers 
CES, SIS, ESS, PICT M&E 
Officer 
Submission of quarterly 
review reports to PSC and 
IFAD 
Submission of annual review 
reports to PSC and IFAD 
CES, SIS, ESS, PICT M&E 
Officer 
Monthly environmental, social 
and climate resilience reports 
to PCU, PICT 
Quarterly and annual 
environmental, social and 
climate resilience 
performance reports to the 
PSC and IFAD 
Hub Coordinators 
PCU Project Manager and PICT 
Project Coordinator 
Reviews 
Reporting 
Environmental and 
Social Audits 
Audits of subprojects once 
every 2 years 
Carried out by independent 
consultants; overall 
responsibility CES, SIS, ESS 
180 
A.  CAPACITY BUILDING 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
In  view  of  increasing  environmental  and  social  concerns  in  the  country  and  the  overall 
NEMA ‘s under staffing at both local and at the district levels it has become very difficult 
to effectively manage environmental mitigation measures.   The successful implementation 
and monitoring of the environmental and social management framework, environmental 
and  social  management  plans  (ESMPs)  will  require  that  target  groups  and  stakeholders 
who play a role in the implementation of the ESMF be provided with appropriate training 
and awareness. This is necessary because the implementation of the activities will require 
inputs, expertise and resources which will be adequately taken care  of if the concerned 
parties are well trained. These groups are described below.  
2.  EXISTING CAPACITY 
MAIIF and MoLG 
Currently the capacity within MAAIF and MoLG is inadequate to implement environmental 
and  social  requirements  necessary  to  manage  the  potential  environmental  and  social 
risks  and  impacts  resulting  from  the  proposed  agricultural  activities  for  NOSP.  MAAIF 
does not have a unit dedicated to overseeing environmental issues in the sector yet the 
nature  of  its  activities  interact  directly  with  the  environment,  and  heavily  relies  on 
consultants, which is both costly and unsustainable. 
At the district level, there is only one District Environmental Officer at the district who is 
required to oversee all environmental activities in all sectors in the district. This has led to 
backlogs  and  the  inability  to  handle  the  issues  in  a  timely  manner.  This  situation  is 
compounded  by  a  lack  of  funding,  equipment,  transport  and  qualified  staff.  The  newly 
created districts are not currently staffed with District Environment Offices, exacerbating 
the difficulties in operationalizing environment management.  
It is further noted that, with time, organizations such as MAAIF/MoLG NOSP will need to 
move  away  from  the  use  of  external  systems  for  ensuring  environmental  and  social 
safeguards  in  its  development  of  projects  and  to  enhance  its  own  reliance  on  its  own 
institutional systems for environmental and social safeguards management. The following 
are some of the suggested strategies for safeguards enhancement in MAAIF/NOSP and its 
establishments. 
The identification of capacity building requirements has been based  on discussions held 
with  implementing  agencies  on  the  existing  district  level  capacities  to  manage 
environmental  and  social impacts  and  risks  and  to  implement  national laws  and  SECAP 
requirements.  At the Project level and at the Hubs, as well as in the Districts, capacity to 
practically implement or monitor environmental, social and climate related management 
was limited.   
181 
In order that the ESMF process and requirements are properly followed, it will be necessary 
to build capacity at all levels at the PCU, PICT, Hub and District level. 
In  order  to  ensure  that  safeguards  requirements  are  wholly  integrated  into  the  NOSP 
project activities, the PCU will include a Climate and Environment Specialist (CES) and a 
Social  Inclusion  Specialist,  while  the  PICT  will  have  a  Social  Community  Development 
Specialist.  Each hub will have an Environmental and Social Officer (HESO).    
In  order  for  environmental  and  social  teams  to  be  effective  under  NOSP  it  is  proposed 
that: 
 
  Funds be provided for specialized trainings for the environmental and social staff 
within  NOSP,  in  areas  such  as  climate  change,  GIS,  early  warning  systems  and 
technologies, environmental planning, sustainable waste management options and 
technologies.  
Introductory  safeguards  trainings  to  NOSP  staff  and  such  trainings  should  be 
responsive to environmental challenges in work places in the organization; and 
  Set up an Environmental and Social Management Information System (ESMIS) for 
NOSP,  which  will  be  the  responsibility  of  the  CES  and  SIS  at  the  PCU.    These 
Specialists  will  be  tasked  to  give  back-up  skills  on  mainstreaming  environment, 
climate change and social aspects into the Project activities.  
Capacity Building for Collaborating Institutions 
The collaborating institutions under the project will include, such as  NARO and ZARDIs, 
private  sector  players  and  participating  farmers  groups.  Each  of  these  categories  will 
require responsive capacity enhancement in environmental and social management based 
largely their levels involvement in NOSP project activities. In addition, NOSP may request 
national  and  international  university  departments  undertaking  research  in  agricultural 
development, or NGOs, to provide support in capacity building or providing mentoring.  
3.  TRAINING NEEDS 
The  proposed  NOSP  activities  will  be  numerous  and  challenging.  Successful 
implementation  of  the  project  activities  will  require  dynamic  and  multi-disciplinary 
professionals. Therefore, regular short and tailor-made training courses and seminars will 
be required to reinforce the capacity and skills of the stakeholders and farmers during the 
entire project period. The following is an outline of the capacity building and training needs 
for environmental and social management for NOSP. 
Training Topics 
Training  will  be  delivered  according  to  the  level  at  which  implementation  of  specific 
activities and actions is required. 
182 
  Requirements of the national environmental, social and climate policies, legislation 
and administrative frameworks; 
  Requirements of IFAD’s SECAP and ERNM, Climate, Land and Disclosure Policies; 
  ESMF  processes,  procedures  and  institutional  arrangements  to  develop  and 
implement ESMPs and other IFAD and NEMA requirements; 
  Screening of subprojects as prescribed in the ESMF; 
  Environmental, social and climate impacts, IPMP, PCR assessment; 
  Preparation, implementation and monitoring of ESMPs and IPMPs; 
  Reporting and monitoring implementation of ESIAs, ESMPs, PMPs; 
  HIV/AIDS and GBV/SEA sensitisation; 
  Grievance redress; 
  Environmental and social best practices – including proper application of chemical 
inputs,  pest  management,  water  saving  agronomic  practices,  soil  fertility 
management, and labour saving techniques; 
  Participatory mapping; 
  Water harvesting techniques; 
  Conservation agriculture techniques. 
Target Audience 
The target audiences for training are intended to be: 
  National Steering and Technical Committees; 
  MAAIF/NOSP Environmental and Social teams at Project and Hub level; 
  Farmers development committees within the lower hub level;  
  Agricultural training institutions. 
Training Approach  
Training  will  in  the  first  instance  be  provided  to  the  NOSP  PCU,  Hub  staff  and  farmers 
groups. In addition, the NOSP’s CES, SIS and ESS will undergo training of trainers, so that 
they  can  roll  out  training  to  the  HESOs  and  other  Hub  staff,  and  lower  level  team  and 
sector  experts  with  regard  to  ESMF  process,  requirements  and  approvals,  including 
preparation of safeguard documents and their implementation.    
The  NOSP  Environmental  and  Social  Team  will  roll  out  training  to  the  target  audience, 
focusing  on  the  on-the-ground  implementation  of  ESC  mitigation  and  management 
measures,  with  special  attention  on  water  management  and  agrochemical  application, 
handling, storage and disposal.   Independent consultants will be hired to carry out specific 
training, 
relevant 
in  reviewing 
institutions/authorities/agencies  will  be 
ESIA/EMSPs,  advising  on  the  preparation  and  implementation  of  the  IPMP,  climate  risk 
assessment, PCR assessment). 
from 
invited  to  participate  (eg. 
resource 
persons 
NEMA, 
other 
IFAD 
and 
183 
Table 5  Proposed Environmental, Social and Climate Training for NOSP 
Training Topics 
Target Audience 
Training 
Methods 
National 
environmental, 
social and climate 
policies, 
legislation and 
administrative 
frameworks 
requirements 
NOSP Steering Committee 
and Technical Committee 
PCU CES, SIS 
PICT ESS 
HESO 
Hub level Engineers 
District Level technical staff 
 Sub county technical staff  
Farmers groups and 
associations 
Training 
workshops at 
National district 
and Hub  
Roll-out training 
for hub level, 
district, sub 
county and 
farmers groups 
and associations 
 Means of 
verifications * 
66 high level 
decision makers, 
managers, 
coordinators 
trained 
IFAD’s SECAP and 
NEMA , Climate, 
Land and 
Disclosure Policies 
PCU CES, SIS 
PICT ESS 
HESO 
District Level technical staff 
 Sub county technical staff  
Training 
workshops at 
National district 
and Hub Level 
Roll-out training 
for sub county 
and farmers 
associations/ 
groups 
PCU CES, SIS 
PICT ESS 
HESO 
District Level technical staff 
 Sub county technical staff  
ESMF processes, 
procedures and 
institutional 
arrangements to 
develop and  
implement 
required 
safeguards 
documents 
Training 
workshops at 
National district 
and Hub Level 
Federal and 
Regional levels 
Roll-out training 
for sub county 
and farmers 
associations/ 
groups 
Screening and 
rating as 
prescribed in the 
ESMF 
PCU CES, SIS 
PICT ESS 
HESO 
District Level technical staff 
Training 
workshops at 
National district 
and Hub Level 
184 
66 members of 
District Agricultural 
Office Team are 
trained. 
66 District 
Environment Units 
members are 
trained.  
66 Extension 
workers in project 
impact areas 
trained. 
120  sub county 
level/farmers 
association   
66 members of 
District Agricultural 
Office Team are 
trained. 
66 District 
Environment Units 
members are 
trained.  
66 Extension 
workers in project 
impact areas 
trained. 
120 Sub county 
level  
66 members of 
District Agricultural 
Office Team are 
trained. 
Training Topics 
Target Audience 
 Sub county technical staff  
Environmental, 
social and climate 
impacts, IPMP,  
PCR assessment  
approaches and 
requirements 
PCU CES, SIS 
PICT ESS 
HESO 
District Level technical staff 
 Sub county technical staff  
Preparation, 
implementation 
and monitoring of 
ESMPs,  IPMPs  
PCU CES, SIS 
PICT ESS 
HESO 
District Level technical staff 
 Sub county technical staff  
Training 
Methods 
Federal and 
Regional levels 
Roll-out training 
for sub county 
and farmers 
associations/ 
groups 
Training 
workshops at 
National district 
and Hub Level 
Federal and 
Regional levels 
Roll-out training 
for sub county 
and farmers 
associations/ 
groups 
Training 
workshops at 
National district 
and Hub Level 
Federal and 
Regional levels 
Roll-out training 
for sub county 
and farmers 
associations/ 
groups 
 Means of 
verifications * 
66 District 
Environment Units 
members are 
trained.  
66 Extension 
workers in project 
impact areas 
trained. 
120 Sub county 
level 
66 members of 
District Agricultural  
Office Team are 
trained. 
66 District 
Environment Units 
members are 
trained.  
66 Extension 
workers in project 
impact areas 
trained. 
120 Sub county 
level 
Office Team are 
trained. 
66 District 
Environment Units 
members are 
trained.  
66 Extension 
workers in project 
impact areas 
trained. 
120 Sub county 
level 
Reporting and 
monitoring the 
implementation of 
ESMPs, PMPs 
PCU CES, SIS 
PICT ESS 
HESO 
District Level technical staff 
 Sub county technical staff  
Training 
workshops at 
National district 
and Hub Level 
Federal and 
Regional levels 
Training 
workshops at 
National district 
and Hub Level 
Federal and 
Regional levels 
185 
Training Topics 
Target Audience 
Training 
Methods 
 Means of 
verifications * 
Environmental 
and social best 
practices – 
including proper 
application of 
chemical inputs, 
pest 
management, 
water saving 
agronomic 
practices, soil 
fertility 
management, 
labour saving 
techniques 
Participatory 
mapping 
PCU CES, SIS 
PICT ESS 
HESO 
District Level technical staff 
 Sub county technical staff  
Roll-out training 
for sub county 
and farmers 
associations/ 
groups 
Training 
workshops at 
National district 
and Hub Level 
Federal and 
Regional levels 
Roll-out training 
for sub county 
and farmers 
associations/ 
groups 
Roll-out training 
for sub county and 
farmers 
associations/ 
groups 
Training 
workshops at 
National district 
and Hub Level 
Federal and 
Regional levels 
Roll-out training 
for sub county and 
farmers 
associations/ 
groups 
PCU CES, SIS 
PICT ESS 
HESO 
District Level technical staff 
 Sub county technical staff  
Practical training 
sessions 
66 members of 
District Agricultural 
Office Team are 
trained. 
66 District 
Environment Units 
members are 
trained.  
66 Extension 
workers in project 
impact areas 
trained. 
120  sub county 
level/farmers 
association   
66 members of 
District Agricultural 
Office Team are 
trained. 
66 District 
Environment Units 
members are 
trained.  
66 Extension 
workers in project 
impact areas 
trained. 
Conservation 
agriculture 
techniques 
PCU CES, SIS 
PICT ESS 
HESO 
District Level technical staff 
Sub county technical staff  
Practical training 
sessions 
186 
Training Topics 
Target Audience 
Training 
Methods 
 Means of 
verifications * 
120  sub county 
level/farmers 
association   
* Based on 66 Hub districts covered by NOSP 
187 
B.    ESMF IMPLEMENTATION BUDGET 
The cost estimate for the implementation of activities proposed in this ESMF is USD 11,605,000, 
as  presented  in  Table  6  below.    This  cost  includes  costs  already  budgeted  for  in  the  PDR  for 
Producer  Group  Mentoring,  Public  Infrastructure  Serving  the  Oilseed  Sector,  Knowledge 
Management and Monitoring & Evaluation, and Project Coordination and Management.  In this 
table,  the  costs  for  community  sensitisation  and  ESMP  implementation  have  been  adjusted 
upwards  given  the  importance  of  these  two  activities.  Finally,  the  budget  provides  for  annual 
ESC reviews be undertaken by the PCU, PICT and Hub environmental and social teams.  
Also shown in Table 6 below is the budget allocated in the PDR for the Gender Action Learning 
System (GALS).  Although presented as a separate budget line, GALS will address many of the 
anticipated or potential social risks and interventions posed by NOSP. 
Table 6 ESMF Implementation Budget 
Budget Item 
Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5 
Year 
6 
Year 7 
TOTAL 
(USD) 
ENVIRONMENT/CLIMATE AND SOCIAL STAFF SALARIES 
Hub E&S Officer1 
90,000  90,000 
108,00
0 
108,00
0 
108,00
0 
108,0
00 
108,00
0 
720,000 
PICT ESS 
24,000  24,000  24,000  24,000  24,000 
PCU CES and SIS 
60,000  60,000  60,000  60,000  60,000 
24,00
0 
60,00
0 
24,000 
168,000 
60,000 
420,000 
SUB TOTAL Environmental, Climate and Social Staff 
ENVIRONMENTAL, CLIMATE AND SOCIAL ACTIVITIES UNDER OTHER PROJECT 
ACTIVITIES 
Capacity Building and 
Training  
350,00
0 
300,00
0 
350,00
0 
340,00
0 
300,00
0 
300,0
00 
Climate Information 
Services, Materials 
and Training 
Hub Climate Risk and 
Vulnerability 
Assessment 
17600
0 
15100
0 
36000  36000 
44000
0 
44000
0 
24000
0 
1,308,00
0 
1,940,00
0 
399,000 
1,120,00
0 
Social Impact 
Assessments 
14000
0 
14000
0 
90000  40000  40000 
450,000 
188 
1,575,00
0 
1,450,00
0 
1,497,00
0 
Budget Item 
Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5 
Year 
6 
Year 7 
TOTAL 
(USD) 
Soil health 
assessments 
32000
0 
30300
0 
32300
0 
30300
0 
32300
0 
3000 
Nutrition Awareness 
Raising 
35000
0 
35000
0 
35000
0 
35000
0 
50000 
ESIA and ESMP 
preparation 
Environmental 
Awareness Raising 
Annual ESC Review 
Workshops (Hubs, 
PICT, PCU) 
600,00
0 
897,00
0 
6,000 
6,000 
6,000 
6,000 
6,000  6,000 
36,000 
10,000  10,000  10,000  10,000 
10,00
0 
10,000 
60,000 
SUB TOTAL Costs Included Environmental, Climate and Social Activities Under Other 
Project Activities 
8,527,00
0 
OTHER COSTS FOR ENHANCING ENVIRONMENTAL, CLIMATE RELATED AND SOCIAL 
RISK AND IMPACT MANAGEMENT 
Community 
Sensitisation 
150,00
0 
200,00
0 
240,00
0 
240,00
0 
150,00
0 
150,0
00 
150,00
0 
1,280,00
0 
ESMP 
Implementation 
Annual Independent 
Audits (NEMA 
requirement) 
TOTAL ESTIMATED 
BUDGET: 
ENVIRONMENTAL, 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
AND SOCIAL 
MANAGEMENT 
95,000  95,000 
60,00
0 
60,000 
310,000 
60,000 
  60,000 
  60,000 
180,000 
SUBTOTAL Other Risk and Impact Management Costs 
1,770,00
0 
2,106,
000 
2,674,
000 
2,794,
000 
1,612,
000 
1,226,
000 
721,0
00 
472,00
0 
11,605,0
00 
GRAND TOTAL - ENVIRONMENTAL, CLIMATE CHANGE AND SOCIAL 
MANAGEMENT 
11,605,
000 
GENDER ACTION 
LEARNING 
SYSTEMS 
613,00
0 
3,016,
000 
2,880,
000 
100,00
0 
7,000 
6,616,00
0 
189 
Annex 1: 
Institutional, Policy and Legal Framework for Environmental Management 
1.0 
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT 
Environmental decision making about the NOSP activities are based on numerous policy and 
legislative documents. These documents inform decisions on project level environmental 
authorisations issued by the National Environmental Management Authority as well as 
comments from key stakeholders who include local and district authorities. Moreover, it is 
significant to note that they also inform strategic decision making by government agencies and 
development partners.  
Therefore, to ensure streamlining of environmental authorisations it is imperative for the 
proposed NOSP project developments activity to align with the principles and objectives of key 
national, international and local development policies and legislation. 
Component activities will be achieved through comprehensive support and engagement across 
MAAIF, NOSP/PCU, MoLG and through engagement with ministries also involved in the 
agricultural and trade value chain. MAAIF and MoLG will coordinate with NEMA on ensuring 
that environmental and social issues are addressed effectively throughout the lifecycle of the 
Project.  
MAAIF/NOSP and MoLG will be the main implementing unit of this project at national level, 
working in liaison with local governments in the respective districts.  
a) 
Overall Project Coordination Unit (PCU) for NOSP project  
Oversight role and the implementation of mitigation measures and general 
b) 
compliance of the project with any permits, licenses and Approval Conditions and related 
regulations and standards on environment.  
c) 
activities by stakeholders  
Report on matters of resolving complaints and grievances regarding the NOSP 
1.1 
Key Ministries and Agencies 
The institutional role for the ESMF are specifically spelled out in the various mandates and 
environmental management in Uganda is undertaken under a decentralized mechanism. 
Table A4-1 Key Ministries and Agencies and their Mandates and Roles 
Ministries and Departments - Mandates and Roles  
The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal and Fisheries 
MAAIF is responsible for policy formulation, planning, setting standards on irrigation, 
aquaculture and water for livestock. The Crop Protection Directorate of MAAIF is in charge of 
190 
all matters related to plant health, including issuance of import and export phytosanitary 
certificates for live plant material and horticultural crops, as well as for plant pest prevention 
or eradication programmes. The department is also responsible for enforcing regulations on 
registration and the use of pesticides and other agrochemicals. 
Safeguards Capacity –The MAAIF does not have Environmental and Social management 
specialists. Given the fact that agricultural activities contribute cumulatively to environmental 
degradation in Uganda, there should be residential in-house capacity in NOSP for 
environmental management. NOSP will therefore recruit in-house Environmental and Social 
Development Specialists to handle safeguard issues, to ensure effective compliance on 
implementation, and carry out monitoring and reporting on environmental and social issues 
including land acquisition. 
The Ministry of Water and Environment (MWE) 
The management framework for water resources in Uganda is spelt out in the Water Act, 
Cap152 and the National Water Policy (1997). The Minister for Water and Environment has the 
overall responsibility for management of water resources. A Water Policy Committee (WPC) 
assists the Minister in the management while DWD provides professional and technical 
services. The National Environment Act, Cap 153 requires a developer to obtain a permit from 
DWD before the developer can undertake any construction on water resources and that an 
ESIA be carried out before the DWD can issue a permit to carry out regulated activities on the 
riverbank and wetlands. In this regard, the Developer will have to obtain water permit before 
starting any development. 
Climate Change Unit, MoWE 
Uganda’s National Adaptation Programmes of Action (NAPA) was developed under the 
leadership of the Department of Meteorology as the UNFCCC National Climate Change Focal 
Point. 
As one of the NAPAs, “PROJECT 7: Vectors, Pests and Disease Control Project” aims at 
understanding the linkages of these outbreaks to climate change for more cost-effective 
management with special emphasis on vulnerable communities and gender dimensions (GoU, 
2007).  
Therefore, the Climate Change Unit will have to implement the NAPA on pests and diseases 
and inform NOSP on its findings 
Water Resources Management Directorate (WRMD) 
The directorate that awards surface water permits and construction permits to Developers. 
Additionally, WRMD provides technical advice to the Developer in the early stages of the EIA 
and initial project development phase. 
Ministry of Local Government (MOLG) 
The Ministry is mandated to carry out a number of responsibilities in the Local Government Act 
as follows: to inspect, monitor, and where necessary offer technical advice/assistance, support 
supervision and training to all Local Governments; to coordinate and advise Local 
Governments for purposes of harmonization and advocacy; to act a Liaison/Linkage Ministry 
with respect to other Central Government Ministries and Departments, Parastatals, Private 
Sector, Regional and International Organizations; and to research, analyse, develop and 
formulate national policies on all taxes, fees, levies, rates for Local Governments. 
Ministry. Gender, Labour and Social Development   The Ministry is enjoined to operationalize 
Chapter 4 of the Constitution (Articles 31-42), which focus on affirmative action and promotion 
of fundamental human rights of the people of Uganda. The Department of Occupational Safety 
191 
and Health in the Ministry is responsible for inspection of workplace environment to safeguard 
occupational safety, rights of workers and gender equity.  This agency shall be fundamental in 
monitoring the conditions of workers and whether the proponent is adhering to health, safety 
and gender aspects during construction and operation of the project infrastructure. 
National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) 
NEMA was formed under the Environment Act 1995 is the principal agency in Uganda for the 
management of the environment. It role is to coordinate, monitor and supervise all activities in 
the field of the environment. NEMA is under the Ministry of Water and Environment, and has a 
cross-sectoral mandate and is to review and approve EIS submitted to it. NEMA has issued 
guidelines on EIAs (NEMA 1997), and the Environmental Impact Assessment Regulations 
(1998) was approved by the Ugandan Parliament. The actual implementation of the EIA 
process remains a function of the relevant line ministries and departments, the private sector, 
NGOs, the developers, recipient communities and the public. 
NEMA retains its mandatory role of coordination, supervision and monitoring environmental 
issues. As for the implementation of the EIA process.  
Safeguards Capacity –In general, NEMA is understaffed and constrained mainly due to the 
limited operational funds and monitoring agricultural activities of smallholder farmers will be a 
challenge. However, NEMA can monitor the components of NOSP through its Department of 
Environment Monitoring and Compliance as well as through District Environment Officers.   
Agricultural Chemicals Control Board (ACB)  
This is a government agency responsible for controlling the use of agricultural chemicals in 
Uganda mainly for phyto-sanitary plant/crop protection purposes. This body regulates: (i) 
herbicides; (ii) pesticides; (iii) fungicides; (iv) fertilizers; (v) insecticides; (vi) plant growth 
regulators; (vii) seed treatment chemicals; (viii) bio pesticides; (ix) chemicals for wood 
industry (petroleum and wood treatment); and (x) vector control-the Board also handles 
chemicals for the control of epidemic pests and diseases. The Agricultural Chemicals Board also 
gives permits to suitable and approved importers of agrochemicals. The Board also maintains a 
statistical database of these chemicals. 
Capacity– ACB has a low laboratory staff capacity with only two fully qualified staff and no 
laboratory equipment for assessing pesticides chemicals. In addition, the ACB is unable to 
regularly sit to assess the chemicals imported in the country and make decisions; and there 
are no regular field inspections and surveillance due to a limited budget. NOSP  will set aside 
resources for laboratory and technical capacity enhancement for the key stakeholders and a 
plan to harmonize activities and share resources where capacity is higher. 
Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development (MLH&UD) 
Office of Chief Government Valuer 
Valuation of properties and or compensation is the responsibility of the Chief Government 
Valuer who also approves District Compensation Rates. A copy of these rates is available at 
every District. The application of the valuation exercise on ground will be done in the presence 
of at least two local council leaders with the participation of the affected persons. Values 
assigned to assets must be based on the market rates approved by the respective districts. 
Where this is not possible, the Chief Government Valuer (CGV) will be engaged to do this. 
National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) 
As per its mandate, will be responsible for advisory services to farmers.  
192 
Capacity – NAADS has a limited number of extension workers. However, District agricultural 
staff (DAOs, DPOs) together with other extension workers at Sub-county level will work 
together with NAADS to implement the project 
Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) 
The UNBS is mandated to develop and promote standardization; quality assurance; laboratory 
testing; and metrology to enhance the competitiveness of local industry and to strengthen 
Uganda's economy and promote quality, safety and fair trade. UNBS also ensures quality 
imports through implementation of the Import Inspection and Clearance Regulations 2002 by 
carrying out inspection of imports. 
UNBS will work hand in hand with MAAIF/NOSP to address issues of pesticides quality. 
Ministry of Internal Affairs- Government Analytical Laboratory   The Government Analytical 
Laboratory is a Department under the Ministry of Internal Affairs and has been in existence 
since 1930’s. It is mandated to safeguard lives of people and environment as well as 
enhancing market competitiveness of products through provisions of forensic and general 
scientific services. 
Directorate of Environmental Affairs (DEA) 
The DEA is responsible for environmental policy, regulation, coordination, inspection, 
supervision and monitoring of the environment and natural resources as well as the restoration 
of degraded ecosystems and mitigating and adapting to climate change. DEA comprised the 
four departments of Environmental Support Services (DESS), Forestry Sector Support 
Department (FSSD), Wetlands Management (WMD) and the Department of Meteorology 
(DOM). DEA works in collaboration with NEMA and NFA. 
District Environment Officer  (DEO)  
The functions of the district environment officer include the following:  
• 
environment;  
advise the district Environment committee on all matters relating to the 
• 
• 
• 
liaise with the authority on all matters relating to the environment;  
to make such reports to the authority as may be prescribed;  
promote environmental awareness through public educational campaigns;  
• 
provided for in the National Environment Act Cap 153;  
assist local environment committees in the performance of their functions as 
• 
resources in the district.  
gather and manage information on the environment and the utilisation of natural 
District Environmental Committees  
The functions of the District Environment Committees include:   
• 
policies and bye laws to the District Council;  
Act as a forum for community members to discuss and recommend environmental 
• 
on environmental management issues in the district.  
Advise the District Technical Planning Committee, the District Council and NEMA 
• 
activities;  
Mobilize members of the public to initiate and participate in environmental 
193 
• 
Environment Action Plans;  
Develop, in consultation with the District Technical Planning Committee, District 
• 
Committee for review and endorsement;  
Receive draft District Development Plans from the District Technical Planning 
• 
environment and natural resources;  
Co-ordinate the activities of the District Council relating to the management of the 
• 
projects; and  
Ensure that environmental concerns are integrated into all district plans and 
• 
Coordinate with NEMA on all issues relating to environment management. 
Environmental Local Committees 
The Environment Committees are appointed by the Local Government System on the advice of 
the District Environment Committee. The functions of Local Environment Committees include:   
• 
Prepare Local Environment Work Plans;  
• 
the degraded environment and improve the natural environment, and  
Mobilize people, through self-help projects to conserve the environment, restore 
• 
significant impact on the environment. 
Monitor and report on any event or activity, which has or is likely to have a 
1.2 
Institutional Analysis 
An analysis of the applicable administrative and legal framework for this ESMF shows that 
there are adequate legal and regulatory instruments for environmental management in 
Uganda.  There is considerable experience in carrying out and reviewing ESIA and 
environmental audit processes. The main challenge, however, lies in monitoring and 
enforcement due to inadequate capacity with regard to skills, knowledge, manpower and 
equipment. 
Therefore, enhancing the knowledge of project staff, especially those charged with the 
responsibility to implement safeguards instruments will be critical.   Staff from the NOSP, 
MAAIF, MOLG, NEMA, Local Government Authorities (LGAs), and other MDAs and CBO/NGOs 
will also need to be strengthened through training, capacity and awareness building on 
environmental management including legal requirements and ESIA methodology.  Chapter 10 
of this ESMF elaborates on the capacity building requirements. 
2.0 
NATIONAL POLICY, LAWS AND REGULATIONS RELEVANT TO NOSP 
2.1 
Environment Policy and Strategic Frameworks 
Table 2 below summarises the policy and strategic frameworks applicable to NOSP. 
194 
Table A4-2 Policy Frameworks Applicable to NOSP 
Policies and Strategic Documents 
Proposed NOSP Component Activity  
Key Provisions/Requirements 
Relevance to the 
Vision 2040  The vision is centred on harnessing opportunities, improving competitiveness and 
strengthening the fundamentals for transformation of Uganda as a nation. 
Uganda’s Vision is to have “A transformed Ugandan society from a peasant to a modern and 
prosperous Country within 30 years”, from 2010. This involves changing from a predominantly 
low income to a competitive upper middle-income country within 30 years. Uganda has 
abundant land and natural resources that provide numerous opportunities, which can foster 
faster socio-economic transformation. The proposed NOSP component activity is an 
opportunity to achieve Vision 2040 Agriculture and land use. 
Second National Development Plan (NDPII) 2015/16 – 2019/20  The National Development 
Plan (NDP) 2016-2020 plan vision is to achieve a transformed Ugandan society from a peasant 
to a modern and prosperous country within 30 years.  
The development of NOSP component activity will be key in improving agriculture 
related economy. 
This is further emphasized in the NDP III (2020/2021/2024/2025) 
Agriculture sector strategic plan (ASSP)   
The development of the agriculture sector is expected to contribute to national 
wealth creation and increased employment along the agricultural value chains in a sustainable 
manner. ASSP recognizes the need to increase access to water for agricultural production as 
one of its key priority interventions to ensure attainment of GoU aspiration of attaining food 
security at household levels. This is based on existence of significant potential in Uganda to 
harness available water for increased agricultural production and productivity. The Plan notes 
that, for now, only 40% of its irrigable area and 1/3 of the 66 km of total renewable water 
resources in Uganda is utilized. 
chains in sustainable way as one of the NOSP component activity  
Increase of oil agriculture productivity and   value 
National Agricultural Policy (NAP), 2013   
The vision of the NAP is “a Competitive, Profitable and Sustainable Agricultural 
Sector” and the mission being “to transform subsistence farming to sustainable commercial 
agriculture.” The overall objective of the agriculture policy is to achieve food and nutrition 
security and improve household incomes through coordinated interventions that focus on 
enhancing sustainable agricultural productivity and value addition; providing employment 
opportunities and promoting domestic and international trade. It is evident that, the NAP 
aspirations will be achieved through interventions planned under the planned NOSP especially 
aspects of increased household incomes and nutrition. This is relevant in terms of increasing 
the oil seed acreage and through value addition chain and income  
Agriculture Extension Policy,2016 
The overall development and growth of the sector as stated in the policy is 
anchored on three strategic thrusts: a) increasing production and productivity with a focus on 
selected strategic enterprises for each of the ten ecological zones in Uganda; b) strengthening 
capacity in technical areas of agriculture such as seeds, agrochemicals (including fertilizer), 
water for production, mechanization, etc.; and c) strengthening the capacity of government 
and non- governmental institutions in the sector to efficiently deliver productivity enhancing 
and regulatory services necessary for the sector’s growth. Agricultural extension is one of the 
services that will play a central role in realizing this transformation. This will address the 
195 
extension needs along the entire value chain (as opposed to the previous focus on mainly 
primary production) and synergistic integration with other agricultural support services for 
optimum return on investment. 
The policy reinforces the fact of advising the farmers to improve on the agriculture production 
of which NOSP famers will be helped through this policy drive.  
Food and Nutrition Policy 2003 
Uganda’s national obligation and commitment are to address issues of food 
security and nutrition and to promote development. Food security promotes good nutrition and 
good nutrition is key to good health and the socio-economic wellbeing of a population.  Food 
security and nutrition are mutually reinforcing; social and economic factors have overriding 
influences on either one or both of them.  The economic productivity of a population depends 
on its nutrition and health status 
nutritional status of the people of Uganda through multi-sectoral and coordinated interventions 
that focus on food security, improved nutrition and increased incomes and hence NOSP 
activities. 
The overall objective of the policy is to promote the 
The National Environment Management Policy, 1994 
Provides for sustainable economic and social development through a number of strategies that 
include Environmental and Social Impact Assessment. 
Through this ESIA, the project planning is ensuring that all the environmental and social 
impacts anticipated from the proposed project are assessed and duly mitigated during the 
development of NOSP component activity to safeguard the integrity of the environmental and 
social components of the project area 
The National Policy on Conservation and Management of Wetland Resources, 1995 
This policy aims at curbing loss of wetland resources and ensuring that benefits from wetlands 
are equitably distributed to all people of Uganda. In general, the policy calls for; sustainable 
use, sound environmental management of wetlands, equitable distribution of benefits and 
application of ESIA procedures on activities to be carried out in wetlands. Conversely, wetland 
related issues have been adequately incorporated into the National Environmental Act, Cap. 
153. 
seeds are grown 
This policy will be applicable for the wetland sections near the areas where oil 
Climate Change Policy 2015 
The Climate Change Policy aims at ensuring a harmonized and coordinated 
approach towards a climate resilient and low-carbon development path for sustainable 
development in Uganda, as well as ensuring that all stakeholders address climate change 
impacts and their causes through appropriate measures, while promoting sustainable 
development and a green economy.  The policy provides guidance and directions in addressing 
the problem of climate change while enabling the country to adapt and mitigate the effects of 
climate change. It focuses on providing direction for the key sectors being affected by the 
impacts of climate change; facilitating adaptation and strengthening coordinated efforts 
amongst sectors towards building an overarching national development process that is more 
resilient. The policy also provides a framework for ensuring coordinated action, with adequate 
attention paid to capacity development and climate financing mechanisms. The policy’s key 
pillars are adaptation, mitigation, and research and observation, with adaptation emphasized 
as a primary priority and mitigation as secondary. Uganda has a National Adaptation 
Programmes of Action (NAPAs) to ensure that climate change issues are addressed. 
196 
NOSP will take into account the climate change strategies being addressed by the 
policy and ensure adaptability and adoption of resilience mechanism in addressing the impacts 
from climate change. 
A National Irrigation Strategic Plan for Uganda (2010-2035)  
The Overall Objective of irrigation development in Uganda, in line with the NDP is 
therefore: “Poverty Alleviation and Economic Growth as a result of the sustainable realization 
of the country’s irrigation potential mitigating the effects of climate change and contributing to 
the transformation of Uganda society from a peasant to a modern and prosperous country”. 
Under the Plan, irrigation will present the following benefits:   
it will reduce the risk of climate shock (drought and flood) and allows adaptation 
a) 
against climate change and hence not only renders risk averse farmers willing to invest in 
seasonal inputs and longer term productivity and sustainability measures, it also reduces the 
perceived risks of farming system diversification;  
b) 
alleviation potential; and 
subject to certain caveats, publicly funded irrigation has significant poverty 
Appropriate irrigation development planning, by facilitating intensified production, 
c) 
can reduce the unit costs of input, extension and post-harvest services.  
change aspects the farmers are to adopt to use of irrigation than relying on rain fed as it is not 
sustainable. Irrigation increases productivity and can increase quality of crops;   
With climate 
The National Water Policy, 1999 
The objective of the policy is to provide guidance on development of the water resources of 
Uganda in an integrated and sustainable manner, so as to secure and maintain  water y of 
adequate quantity and quality for all social needs, with full participation of all stakeholders and 
mindful of the needs of future generations. 
Through this ESIA, project planning should ensure that water sources within and near the 
project area are protected. 
The National Wetlands Policy, 1995 
In line with the National Vision which is “A transformed Ugandan society from a peasant to a 
modern and prosperous country within 30 years”, the policy vision for the wildlife sector is 
“Sustainably managed and developed wildlife resources and healthy ecosystems in a developed 
Uganda”. 
with the goals of this Policy. These are relevant to the oil seed project objectives 
The activities pertaining to NOSP component activity will be carried out in line 
The National Gender Policy, 1997 
The aim of the Policy is to guide and direct at all levels, the planning, resource allocation and 
implementation of development programmes with a gender perspective. The National Gender 
Policy forms a legal framework and mandate for every stakeholder to address the gender 
imbalances within their respective sectors. Its overall goal is to mainstream gender concerns in 
the national development process in order to improve the social, legal/civic, political, economic 
and cultural conditions of the people in Uganda in particular, the women. 
NOSP component activities will be done in consideration of the National Gender Policy 
guidelines. 
The proposed 
197 
The National Policy on Elimination of Gender Based Violence, 2016 
The policy provides a framework for the implementation of comprehensive GBV 
prevention measures and provision of multi-sectoral support services for survivors.   
Under these provisions, the contractor will be required to prepare a Labour policy 
including: a sexual harassment policy, which includes a non-judgmental, non-discriminatory 
method of reporting and mitigating incidences of sexual discrimination issues and a zero 
tolerance policy for sexual harassment at construction sites and hence NOSP component 
activity  
National Policy on HIV/AIDS, 2007 
Formulated in 2007, the policy focuses on the workplace and acknowledges that it is the 
workplace where the working population spends most of its active lifetime.  
The National Policy on HIV/AIDS covers all workers and prospective workers, all employers and 
prospective employers from the public and private sectors both formal and informal. The policy 
spells out the key principles underlying its implementation namely: non-discrimination; 
confidentiality; HIV testing; greater involvement of people living with HIV/AIDS; promotion of 
prevention; treatment, care and support; and gender concerns in the work place. The goal is 
to provide a framework for prevention of further spread of HIV and mitigation of the socio-
economic impact of HIV/AIDS within places of work in Uganda.  All the workers employed 
during the construction of NOSP component activities should be treated in a fair manner 
regardless of their health status in line with the goals of this policy. 
Occupational Health and Safety Policy,2006 
The policy seeks to: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
Provide and maintain a healthy working environment; 
Institutionalise OHS in the project programs/activities; and 
Contribute towards safeguarding the physical environment. 
The OHS Policy Statement is guided by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda (1995) and 
other global, national and sectoral regulations and policies. The policy statement also takes 
into consideration, the Tourism Policy and the Land Sector Strategic Plan, all of which aim to 
This 
improve the quality of life for all Ugandans in their living and working environment. 
policy promotes the safeguarding of workers’ health and safety in the work place as pertains to 
the proposed NOSP component activity. 
The National Trade Policy, 2006  
The National Trade Policy (2006) is aimed at poverty reduction, promoting 
employment, economic growth and promotion and diversification of exports, particularly 
nontraditional exports. The guiding principles of the Policy that have a linkage with the 
pesticides management are highlighted in the need to mitigate any adverse effects of practices 
by the country’s trading partners. The concerns are dealt with by invoking and implementing 
trade defense measures as and when appropriate, and taking into account multilateral 
disciplines in the area. The policy also notes that the country ought to be mindful of the 
negative social and economic effects that might come with growth in trade, and ensure that 
mitigating measures and policies are put in place.   Access to markets are amongst 
improvements sought to be addressed in NOSP and is consistent with this policy. 
198 
The National Wealth Creation (OWC) 
The GoU acknowledge that agriculture has, for a long time, been a core sector of the economy 
providing the basis for growth in other sectors and significantly contributing to GDP and 
employment. Under Operation Wealth Creation (OWC), it is the objective of GoU that national 
policies, interventions and programmes aim at transforming agriculture from subsistence to 
commercial agriculture with a target of raising household incomes to a minimum UGX20 million 
per household per year. NOSP will at the grassroots be implemented in close alignment with 
the OWC especially when it comes to working with farmers. 
The NOSP farmers engaged in oil seeds is to  ensure that they are transformed from 
subsistence to commercial agriculture. 
The National Culture Policy, 2006 
The National Culture Policy, 2006 complements, promotes, and strengthens the overall 
development goals of the country. Its specific objectives include amongst others, the need to 
promote and strengthen Uganda’s diverse cultural identities and to conserve, protect, and 
promote Uganda’s tangible and intangible cultural heritage. 
This ESMF outlines Chance Finds Procedures to ensure protection and conservation of any PCRs 
that will be encountered during project implementation.  
Uganda Resettlement/Land Acquisition Policy Framework (2002) With regard to compensation 
and resettlement issues, the main pieces of legislation are the Constitution of Republic of 
Uganda/and the Land Act both of which require that: 
Compensation should be aimed at minimizing social disruption and assist those who have lost 
assets because of proposed project to maintain their livelihoods. In accordance with Ugandan 
laws and standards, a disturbance allowance is to be provided to assist the Project affected 
individual or family to cover costs of moving and locating to a new holding.   Since the 
proposed NOSP component activity in the unlikely event of some minimum compensation, are 
to arise.  
Hence, the resettlement framework and IFAD involuntary policy to be complied with.  
The Uganda Forestry Policy, 2001 
Policy Statements 3 and 4 provides for the social and environmental impact assessments 
especially concerning developing management plans and legal agreements. Policy Statement 7 
provides for Uganda's forest biodiversity to be conserved and managed in support of local and 
national socio-economic development and international obligations. Policy Statement 8 
provides that the government will promote the rehabilitation and conservation of forests that 
protect the soil and water in the country's key watersheds and river systems. The area for the 
proposed for NOSP component activity has some trees within the and therefore, some 
vegetation is likely to be cleared during construction. 
2.2 
National Laws 
Key national laws relevant to NOSP are presented in the table below.  
199 
Table A4-3 Acts of Parliament Applicable to NOSP 
Acts 
Key Provisions  
Relevance to NOSP Component Activity 
The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995  The 1995 Uganda Constitution is the 
supreme law and has provisions for environmental protection and natural resource 
conservation such as Article XIII regarding: “the protection of important natural resources on 
behalf of the people of Uganda” and Article XXVII regarding: “the need for sustainable 
management of land, air and water resources. 
The Constitution requires the Government of Uganda to promote sustainable development and 
public awareness of the need to manage, promote and protect the rational use of natural 
resources in a balanced and sustainable manner for the present and future generations. 
Articles 39 and 17(f) provide for the right to a clean and healthy environment, and the duty to 
maintain such an environment. 
The constitution is relevant to the development of the NOSP project components activities as it 
has articles enshrined which give the state the mandate to promote and implement agriculture 
policies that will ensure that people’s basic needs and those of environmental preservation are 
met. The integrity of the general environment of these project areas during the NOSP 
component activities  needs to be protected in line with the provisions of the Constitution of 
the Republic of Uganda, 1995. 
The National Environment Act, No 5 of 2019   
The National Environment Act, Cap 153 contains provisions for environmental 
management and protection including the need to carry out Environmental Impact Assessment 
(ESIA) studies in connection with some categories of projects that are likely to have significant 
impacts on the environment as contained in its Third Schedule.  The project as described in 
Section 2 of the Act falls in the category of projects, which require Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessment (ESIA). It is therefore on the above basis that the NOSP component 
activity of the ESMF/ESIA   is  prepared. 
The Agricultural Chemicals (Control) Act, No. 1 of 2006  
This Act was enacted to control and regulate the manufacture, storage, 
distribution and trade in, use, importation and exportation of agricultural chemical and other 
related matters. Under this Act, the requirement of packaging, labeling or advertisement of 
agricultural chemicals is relevant in pesticides management to prevent illegal activities related 
to mislabeling and mis-packaging. In addition, section 13(2) provides for the period in which 
the seized agricultural chemicals can be detained and the power to dispose them off. The 
person in whose possession the chemicals were got has to consent in writing for these 
chemicals to be destroyed by the Government  
effective and efficient mechanism for disposal of the seized/expired chemicals. Similarly, a Pest 
Management Plan has been developed to among others guide the use of pesticides in NOSP. 
It is therefore important to put in place an 
Control of manufacture, etc. of agricultural chemicals Act (Cap 29)  
The Act provides for safe manufacture, packaging, store, display, distribution 
agricultural chemicals. It also has provisions governing the Importation and export of 
agricultural chemicals. The Act in its Section provides for the establishment, constitution and 
operation of Agricultural Chemicals Board which has the responsibility to advise government on 
matters pertaining to agricultural chemicals. 
This is relevant as NOSP  farmers are engaged in spraying of pests and  hence handling and 
storage  
The Agricultural Seeds and Plants Act (Cap 28)  
200 
This Act provides for the promotion, regulation and control of plant breeding and 
variety release, multiplication, conditioning marketing, importing and quality assurance of 
seeds and other planting materials. It establishes the National Seed Authority and a Variety 
Release Committee. The Act also establishes the National Seed Certification Service which is 
responsible for the design, establishment and enforcement of certification standards, methods 
and procedures, registration and licensing of all seed producers, auctioneers and dealers, 
advising the Authority on seed standards and providing the Authority with technical 
information on any technical aspects affecting seed quality. The Act imposes stringent 
requirements for variety testing.  
ensure that standards are adhered too.  
NOSP will encourage use of seed that are certified and 
The Plant Protection Act (Cap 31)  
The Act provides for the prevention of the introduction and spread of disease 
destructive to plants.  
Section 4(i) states “Every occupier or, in the absence of the occupier, every owner of land shall 
take all measures as he or she may be required to take by virtue of any rules made under 
section 3 and, in addition, such other measures as are reasonably necessary for the 
eradication, reduction or prevention of the spread of any pest or disease which an inspector 
may by notice in writing order him or her to take, including the destruction of plants. 
These services governed under this Act are targeted for support in NOSP activity 
component as well.  
External Trade Act (Cap 88) 
This Act restricts certain imports (section 3) and empowers the Minister to 
prohibit the importation or exportation of any goods (section 8). This Act provides Uganda the 
opportunity to restrict or prohibit the importation of highly hazardous pesticides, especially as 
the provisions of the Customs Management Act can only be amended through the East African 
Community.  This is relevant in relation to pesticides which are used  by oil  seed  farmers 
Uganda National Bureau of Standards Act, (Cap 327)  
The relevant provision of this Act prohibits any person to import, distribute, sell, 
manufacture or have in possession for sale or distribution any commodity for which a 
compulsory standard specification has been declared unless such commodity conforms to the 
compulsory standard or unless the commodity bears a distinctive mark (section 21(1). This Act 
could be read together with the National Environment Act on chemical standards in developing 
standards for pesticides use in the country. In conformity with standards of oil seeds have to 
comply with the chemical standards  
The Water Act, (Cap 152) The Act provides for the use, protection and management of water 
resources and supply in Uganda. One of the objectives of the Water Act Cap 152 is to control 
pollution and promote safe water storage, treatment, discharge and disposal of waste, which 
may pollute water or otherwise harm the environment and human health. 
In conformity with this law, pollution from the activities related to oil seed farming or disposal 
of overburden, litter or waste should be avoided. 
The Occupational Safety and Health Act, 2006 
This Act consolidates, harmonizes and updates the law relating to occupational safety and 
repeals the Factories Act of 1964. It makes provisions for the health, safety, welfare and 
201 
appropriate training of persons employed in workplaces. Under Section 13 (b), it requires 
every employer to provide and maintain safe working conditions, imposing a duty on 
employers to take measures to protect workers and the public from risks and dangers of their 
undertaking. It also requires employers to ensure the working environment is kept free from 
pollution by employing technical measures applied to new plants or processes and employing 
supplementary organizational measures (Section 13). Section 40(2) states that a person shall, 
not less than one month before he or she begins to occupy any premises as a workplace, serve 
on the Commissioner, a notice with the particulars prescribed in Schedule 3. The Act 
emphasizes work place managers to compel all workers comply and use the PPE in order to 
fulfil the provisions of this Act. Project planning for the proposed NOSP component activity 
development shall ensure that the necessary safety measures to ensure the health and safety 
of local community members within the project areas component specific sites are put in place. 
PCU   or the contractor will need to apply for Registration of a Workplace permit in accordance 
with the Act. 
Local  Government  Act, Cap 243 
The Act provides for the decentralised governance and devolution of central government 
functions, powers and services to local governments that have their own political and 
administrative set-ups. Under Section 9, local governments shall be the highest political 
authority within their area of jurisdiction and shall have legislative and executive powers to be 
exercised in accordance with the Constitution and this Act. 
The local governments are responsible for the protection of the environment at the district 
level; this therefore implies that local governments shall be consulted on projects located 
within their jurisdiction and on matters that affect the environment.  
The NOSP hubs proposed NOSP component activity is proposed to construct community access 
road, has the responsibility of ensuring that the environment in the district is protected. The 
District Environment Officer (DEO) on behalf of NEMA will spearhead environmental issues to 
be complied with the relevant procedure and are fully involved in all the construction process 
of NOSP component activity especially monitoring. 
Physical Planning   Act, Cap 281 
country a planning area. 
The Physical Planning Act, 2010 declared the entire 
Section 37 of the Act requires an EIA permit for developments before they are implemented, 
stating: “Where a development application related to matters that require an environmental 
impact assessment, the approving authority may grant preliminary approval subject to the 
applicant obtaining an EIA certificate in accordance with the National Environment Act”.  The 
proposed NOSP component activity is subject to this law and therefore has regulatory control 
to ensure that this project conforms to local physical planning requirements and approvals. 
The Investment Code, Cap 92 
that the operations of his or her business enterprise do not cause injury to the ecology or 
Potential impacts associated with NOSP component 
environment (Section 18 2 (d)). 
activity, specifically those that have the potential of compromising the functioning of natural 
ecological or environmental systems, should be mitigated. 
Requires an investor to take necessary steps to ensure 
The Land Act, Cap 227 
land. Land is to be used in compliance with relevant national laws such as those listed in 
Section 43 including the Water Act and National Environment Act. Section 44 reiterates the 
The Land Act provides for tenure, ownership and management of 
202 
constitutional mandate for government or a local government to protect environmentally 
sensitive areas for the common good of the people in Uganda.  This law will guide any land 
issues relating to the proposed NOSP component activity and any related grievances. 
Land Amendment Act (2010) 
enhance the security of occupancy of lawful and bonafide occupants on registered land in 
accordance with Article 237 of the Constitution, and for related matters. 
This is an Act to amend the Land Act (1998) in order to 
According to the Land Amendment Act (2010), a lawful or bona fide occupant shall not be 
evicted from registered land except upon an order of eviction issued by a court and only for 
non-payment of the annual nominal ground rent.   MAAIF/NOSP will be responsible of carrying 
out any likely compensations if they arise in line with the provisions of this Act.   
This Act makes provision for the procedures and 
The Land Acquisition Act, 1965 
methods of compulsory acquisition of land for public purposes whether for temporary or 
permanent use. The Minister responsible for land may authorize any person to enter the land, 
survey the land, dig or bore the subsoil or any other thing necessary for ascertaining whether 
the land is suitable for a public purpose. The Government or developer is to compensate any 
person who suffers damage as a result. The Act requires that adequate, fair and prompt 
compensation be paid before taking possession of land and property.  
NOSP component activity are unlikely to have major issues of land acquisition.  
The proposed 
The National Forestry and Tree planting Act, 2003  This Act provides for the conservation, 
sustainable management and development of forests for the benefit of the people of Uganda. 
This law will provide some guidance when it comes to clearing of tree resources and the 
mitigations that will be put in place such as tree planting. 
component activity should be implemented in a way that natural trees are preserved and new 
one planted within the project sites.   
The proposed NOSP 
The Historical and Monuments Act, 1967, (Amended 1977) 
the preservation and protection of historical monuments and objects of archaeological, 
paleontological, ethnographical and traditional interests and for other matters connected 
therewith. Section 1 of this Act describes these terms used above. Section 8 of this Act 
specifies actions that are prohibited. Section 11 stipulates that any discoveries of the objects 
made that are considered to be of importance according to this Act shall be reported to the 
conservator of antiquities or district commissioner or the curator of the museum within 
fourteen days. Any person who contravenes any of the conditions issued under this Act 
commits an offence and this attracts a fine as stipulated in Section 19 of this Act.
This is an Act to provide for 
During the NOSP component activity, there is a need to liaise with the elders to 
ensure any cultural, archeological and spiritual resources are protected.  
Project planning should ensure that all reasonable measures are taken to protect any objects 
encountered that may be of archaeological, paleontological, ethnographical, historical or 
traditional interest and that, all work ceases at the proposed project area, should such objects 
be encountered - the findings of which need to be reported to the Department of Monuments 
and Museums within 14 days. 
Employment Act, 2006 repeals Employment Act, Cap 
Employment Act No 6, 2006 
219 enacted in 2000. This Act is the principal legislation that seeks to harmonise relationships 
between employees and employers, protect workers’ interests and welfare and safeguard their 
occupational health and safety 
ensuring the workers are adequately protected against accidents, diseases and injuries and 
that welfare issues are properly handled.  
MAAIF/NOSP should have adhered to the Act by 
The Workers Compensation Act, 2000  The Act provides for compensation of workers for 
injuries suffered and scheduled diseases incurred in the course of their employment. The Act 
203 
further spells out degrees of compensation depending on the levels of incapacitation, 
calculation of respective earnings, medical examination and treatment of workers, agreement 
as to compensation by the worker, power of Court to submit question of law, determination of 
claims and decisions of the court concerning the treatment of medical reports as well as 
procedures relating to claims. 
Section 22 (1) elaborates the duty of the employer towards contractors or subcontractors. 
Where a person awards a contract or subcontract to an employer for the execution of any 
piece of work, that person shall be liable to pay to any worker employed in the execution of 
the contract or subcontract by the employer any compensation under this Act as if that person 
had directly employed that person. 
Considering that all workers are prone to accidents, 
injury and diseases while at work, the contractor must adhere to the provisions of this Act. 
Labour Unions Act, 2006  This is an Act to regulate the establishment, registration and 
management of labour unions. Section 3 makes provision for employees’ rights to organise 
themselves in any labour union. 
Section 4 stipulates that an employer shall not interfere with, restrain or coerce an employee 
in the exercise of his or her rights guaranteed under this Act. He shall not interfere with the 
formation of a labour union or with the administration of a registered organisation. 
proposed development of NOSP component activity will be implemented in line with this Act. 
Workers will have a right to organize themselves into unions or join worker’s unions.  
The 
This Act refers to a child as a person under the age of 
The Children’s Act, 1997 (CAP 59) 
18 years with the right to stay with their parents or guardians; right to education and 
guidance; right to immunization; right to adequate diet, clothing, shelter and medical 
attention. It is also the parent/guardian’s responsibility to protect the child from discrimination, 
violence, abuse and neglect; and it is unlawful to subject a child to social or customary 
practices that are harmful to a child’s health. 
This Act also states that no child shall be employed or engaged in any activity that may be 
harmful to his/her health, education or mental, physical or moral development.
There is an observed tendency for agricultural projects to employ and over work 
children. The proponent and farmers will be required to comply with the Children’s Act. 
The Penal Code Act states that any person who intends to insult the 
The Penal Code  
modesty of any woman or girl, utters any word, makes any sound or gesture or exhibits any 
object, intending that such word or sound shall be heard, or that such gesture or object shall 
be seen by such woman or girl, or intrudes upon the privacy of such woman or girl, commits a 
misdemeanour and is liable to imprisonment for one year. 
NOSP component activity  is likely to employ some women and is expected to have more than 
25% employees therefore the developer is expected to heed to the requirements of the Act. 
The construction process of 
2.3 
National Environment Guidelines and Regulations 
Guidelines and regulations guiding environmental management are summarised in Table A4-4 
below. 
Table A4-4 Environmental Guidelines and Regulations 
204 
Legislation  Key Provisions  
Relevance to NOSP Component Activity 
The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Guidelines (1997)  It is the responsibility of any 
developer intending to set up a project for which an ESIA is required to carry out the ESIA and 
bear all the costs associated with its conduct. 
and the process as prescribed. 
The ESIA shall comply with the guidelines 
The National Environmental Impact Assessment Regulations, 1998 
The Regulations 
have been gazetted in terms of Section 108 of Part V of the National Environmental Statute of 
1995. The Regulations deal with (among other things) preparation and review process of the 
environmental impact statement; conditions for approval of a project; post assessment of 
environmental audit including self-auditing and mitigation measures and provides schedules 
for the following; 
Issues to be considered in making environmental impact assessment; Certificate of approval of 
Environmental Impact Assessment; and Fees. 
The Environmental Impact Assessment Regulations, 1998 provide for implementation of the 
NEA. These regulations require that all projects listed in the third schedule of the NEA be 
subjected to an impact assessment before implementation. Major construction works 
infrastructure is identified as a category iii listed activity requiring a full ESIA. The ESIA 
process goes through three major stages: screening, the ESIA study, and decision-making.
The ESIA for NOSP component activity  shall comply with ESIA Regulations 
throughout its assessment and submission process. 
National Environment (Noise Standards and Control) Regulations, 2003 
unwanted and annoying sound that is intrinsically objectionable to human beings or which can 
have or is likely to have an adverse effect on human health or environment. The purpose of 
these regulations is to ensure the maintenance of a healthy environment for all people in 
Uganda, the tranquillity of their surrounding and their physiological wellbeing by regulating 
noise levels, and generally, to evaluate the standard of living of the people.  
Noise is any 
Subject to these regulations, no person shall, for an activity specified under regulation 6, emit 
noise in excess of the permissible noise levels provided under the first schedule of the 
Regulations, unless permitted by a license issued under these regulations. Part III Section 8 
(1) requires machinery operators, to use the best practicable means to ensure that the 
emission of noise does not exceed the permissible levels presented under the first schedule of 
the regulations. The regulations require that persons to be exposed to occupational noise 
exceeding 85 dBA for 8 hours should be provided with requisite ear protection. 
NOSP project activity(community road access)  will be associated with some noise generating 
activities hence the regulations have to be adhered to. 
The  
The National Environment (Management of Ozone Depleting Substances and Products) 
Regulations, 2001 
The objectives of these Regulations are to— 
Regulate the production, trade and use of controlled substances and products; 
Provide a system of data collection that will facilitate compliance with relevant reporting 
requirements under the Protocol; 
Promote the use of ozone friendly substances, products, equipment and technology; and 
Ensure the elimination of substances and products that deplete the ozone layer. 
Section 4 of this Regulation states that, “No person shall import or export a controlled 
substance or product listed in the First and Second Schedules, without a license issued by the 
Executive Director.” Section 5 further states that, “A person intending to import or export a 
205 
controlled substance or product shall apply to the Executive Director for a license in the 
application set out in Form A and B respectively in the Third Schedule.” 
Controlled substances according to the Second Schedule of this Regulation include 
Hydrobromofluorocarbons (HBFCs), and Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). 
of NOSP component activity should be carried out with respect to the guidelines in this 
Regulation. 
The development 
The National Environment (Waste Management) Regulations, 1999 
knowledge that during the construction phase many waste materials consisting of both solid 
and liquids will be generated. The regulations under section 53(2) and 107 of the act will apply 
with respect to this project.  
It is common 
These Regulations require that: 
Waste generation is minimised by adoption of Cleaner Production methods; 
Wastes are disposed of in such a way that they do not contaminate water, soil, and air or 
impact public health. This is in relation to on-site storage, haulage and final disposal; and 
Waste haulage and disposal should be undertaken by licensed entities. 
management practices should ensure that wastes generated during the construction of NOSP 
component activity  are handled in accordance with the requirements of these regulations, 
from generation to disposal. 
Waste 
The National Environment (Minimum Standards for Management of Soil Quality) Regulations, 
These Regulations emphasis the need to: maintain and restore the minimum soil 
2001 
quality standards as well as enhance the inherent productivity of the soil in the long term; 
maintain minimum standards for the management of the soil for specified agricultural 
practices; follow the criteria and procedures for the measurement and determination of soil 
The design of 
and apply the prescribed measures and guidelines for soil management. 
NOSP component activity should ensure that the quality of the soils within the proposed 
project area is not compromised, and if it is, that it is restored to as close to its original state 
as possible. 
These regulations provide for the management of wetlands, riverbanks and 
The National Environment (Wetlands, River Banks and Lake Shores Management) Regulations, 
2000 
lakeshores. Regulation 17 (1) states that every landowner, occupier or user who is adjacent or 
contiguous with a wetland shall have a duty to prevent the degradation or destruction of the 
wetland and shall maintain the ecological and other functions of the wetland. 
Section 12 (1) of the regulations provides that ‘subject to the provisions of these regulations, a 
person shall not carry out any activity in a wetland without a permit issued by the Executive 
Director (of NEMA). 
is required to secure a Wetlands, River Banks and Lake Shores Management Permit from NEMA 
and Directorate of Water Development (DWD  
For the intended project to comply with this Regulation, the farmers 
(Waste Discharge) Regulations, No. 32 of 1998; 
These Regulations regulate 
Water 
the discharge of effluent or wastewater on land or into the aquatic environment. NEMA sets 
standards for the discharge of such substances in consultation with the lead agency. A person 
who wishes to discharge such substances in the prohibited environment must obtain a permit 
from the Directorate of Water Resources Management (DWRM). MAAIF/NOSP or farmers must 
obtain a permit from the Directorate of Water Resources Management (DWRM) for the 
discharge of effluent or wastewater. 
The Audit Regulations 
National Environment  (Audit) Regulations, No. 12 of 2006 
operationalise Section 3 (3) c of the National Environment Act, Cap 153 in which it is a 
requirement for ongoing activities, which are likely to have environmental impacts to be 
206 
subjected to an environmental audit in accordance with Section 22 of the Act. The Regulation 
also operationalises the Environmental Impact Assessment Regulation, in which it is a 
requirement to follow up projects that carried out an EIA with an Audit at least three years 
after the commencement of the project. 
components activities project commences in line with these regulations and in line with the EIA 
Certificate of Approval conditions. 
Audits shall be carried out once the NOSP 
Employment (Sexual Harassment) Regulations, 2012 (S.I. 2012 No. 15) 
prescribe that those who contravene the sexual harassment related provisions commit an 
offence and are liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding six currency points or 
imprisonment not exceeding three months or both. 
The Regulations 
The proposed NOSP component activity construction process will employ both 
men and women. Where there are causes of sexual harassment and provisions of the 
regulations are contravened with, punishment will be in line with the regulations 
Section 16 (1) of these Regulations require that no person shall conduct an EIA or 
National Environment (Conduct and Certification of Environmental Practitioners) Regulations, 
2003 
carry out any activity relating to the conduct of an environmental impact study or 
environmental audit as provided for under the Act, unless that person has been duly certified 
and registered in accordance with these Regulations. The Regulations set out the procedures of 
the application for certification and the code of practice and professional ethics. The 
practitioners have to pay prescribed fees (Fourth Schedule) before they can be fully registered.
This is a relevant provision meant to professionalize the ESIA practice in the 
country so that the findings of an ESIA study are authoritatively used in decision-making. ESIA 
process has been undertaken through duly registered practitioners in keeping with the 
Regulations 
2.4 
Permitting and Licencing Requirements 
There are a number of permits and licences that will be required for the implementation of 
various NOSP activities.  These are presented in Table A4-5 below.  
Table A4-5 Permits and Licences Required for NOSP Activities 
Item No.  
Permit  
Issuing Agency  
User  
Responsibility  
1 
commencement of the ESIA study  
Environmental approval ESIA certificate  
• 
MAAIF/NOSP 
NEMA 
Approval 
2 
Water abstraction permit  Water Resources  
Management  
Directorate, (WRMD)   
Abstraction of water for construction and workforce domestic use. 
Abstraction for industrial use. 
• 
MAAIF/NOSP 
• 
MSP subproject proponents such as millers or other agro-processors 
207 
Discharge licence for effluents and waste water  
3 
discharge of effluents without compromising the existing environmental conditions and 
pollution of wetlands and soils  
MAAIF/NOSP/Contractor 
NEMA  
Authorises 
• 
• 
MSP subproject proponents such as millers or other agro-processors 
Certification of the Construction Engineers  
4 
professional Practicing Engineers (UIPPE)  
be undertaken by duly qualified engineers with liability in case of any problem in the works 
Uganda Institute of 
To enable NOSP component construction to 
• 
Contractor  
5 
Certification  of Registration  
Gender, Labour and Social Development,  
of Work Place  
Ministry of 
Occupational Safety and Health Department  
Regulates work places  
•
Contractor  
Agro chemical storage, use and disposal  
6 
dealers and farmers who store agrochemicals in bulk 
MAAIF 
• 
Required for 
Dealers/Farmers 
• 
7 
sites 
• 
MAAIF/NOSP 
Other permits/certificates  eg. for excavation of borrow pits,  restoration 
NEMA 
• 
 Permits for materials sites issued after ESIA undertaken for those 
NOSP/Contractor/ 
MSP subproject proponent  
3.0 
INTERNATIONAL CONVENTIONS AND TREATIES 
Uganda is party to a number of international conventions and treaties. These are summarised 
below: 
Table A4-6  International Conventions and Treaties 
Treaty, Convention or Agreement  
Component Activity 
Subject/Key Requirement Relevance to the NOSP 
African Convention on the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources 
ratified the African Convention on the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (1968), 
signed the Protocol Agreement on the Conservation of Common Natural Resources (1982). The 
Contracting States to this convention are also required to ensure that conservation and 
management of natural resources are treated as an integral part of national and/or regional 
development plans. In addition, during the formulation of all development plans, full 
consideration is required to be given to ecological, as well as to economic and social factors
Uganda has 
Project planning should ensure that conservation of nature and natural resources 
is key during the implementation of the NOSP component activity. 
Convention on Biological Diversity (Rio Declaration), 1992 
biological diversity, promote the sustainable use of its components and the fair and equitable 
sharing of the benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic resources, including by 
appropriate access to genetic resources and by appropriate transfer of relevant technologies, 
Its objectives are to conserve 
208 
taking into account all rights over those resources and to technologies, and by appropriate 
funding (Article 1). 
Project planning should ensure that biodiversity of the proposed 
project area is protected when implementing the NOSP component activity project. 
Basel Convention,2006  The Basel Convention on the Control of Trans-Boundary Movements 
of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal was concluded in Basel, Switzerland, on March 22, 
1989, and entered into force in May 1992. Now ratified by 149 countries including 32 of the 53 
African countries, the focus of this convention is to control the movement of hazardous wastes, 
ensure their environmentally sound management and disposal, and prevent illegal waste 
trafficking (UNEP, 2006). Therefore, any efforts to export obsolete pesticides in NOSP for 
disposal have to be in line with the Basel Convention. 
The Rotterdam Convention aims to promote shared 
Rotterdam Convention, 1999 
responsibility and cooperative efforts among Parties in the international trade of certain 
hazardous chemicals in order to protect human health and the environment from potential 
harm and to contribute to their environmentally sound use. Governments began to address the 
problem of toxic pesticides and other hazardous chemicals in the 1980s by establishing a 
voluntary Prior Informed Consent procedure (PIC). PIC required exporters trading in a list of 
hazardous substances to obtain the prior informed consent of importers before proceeding with 
the trade.  NOSP will observe these provisions when importing agro-chemicals and sound use 
by the oil seed farmers. 
The FAO International Code of Conduct on the Distribution and Use of Pesticides (2002)  
It establishes voluntary standards for public and private institutions involved in 
the distribution and use of pesticides. The Code sets out a vision of shared responsibility 
between the public and private sectors, especially the pesticide industry and government, to 
ensure that pesticides are used responsibly, delivering benefits through adequate pest 
management without significant adverse effects on human health or the environment. 
ensure that NOSP activities do not have significantly adverse effects on farmers and the 
environment, and that an integrated pest management plan is prepared and implemented. 
To 
FAO Guidelines on Good Practice for Ground Application of Pesticides, 2001  FAO produced a 
new, revised and expanded series of pesticide application equipment related guidelines to 
cover the application of pesticides using any ground-based field crop sprayers, including 
operator carried and tree and bush crop sprayers.  Application of pesticides are adhered to by 
NOSP/MAAIF and the farmers. 
The Safety and Health in Agriculture Convention (ILO 184) 
This was adopted by the conference of the International Labour Organization 
(ILO) addresses the protection of workers in the agricultural sector. More people work in 
agriculture than in any other sector, more workers are injured in agriculture than in any other 
sector, and pesticides are a major cause of injury and death. In addition, more children work 
in agriculture than in any other sector and they are differently and particularly vulnerable to 
the toxic effects of chemicals such as pesticides. A specific section of the convention deals with 
the sound management of chemicals and advises governments to adopt good management 
practices for chemicals, to inform users adequately about the chemicals they use and to ensure 
that adequate mechanisms are in place to safely dispose of empty containers and waste 
chemicals.  These are taken into account to ensure protection of workers and safety and 
management of chemicals. 
Strategic Approach to International Chemicals Management (SAICM)  
209 
Uganda UNEP/UNDP Partnership initiative for the implementation of SAICM is 
intended to assist the Government, through the National Environmental Management Authority 
(NEMA), to take up the strategic priorities of SAICM Quick Start Program (SQSP), namely: 
develop and strength national chemicals management institutions, plans, programs and 
activities to implement the Strategic Approach, building upon work conducted to implement 
international chemicals-related initiatives; and undertake analysis, interagency coordination, 
and public participation activities directed at enabling the implementation of Strategic 
Approach by integrating the sound management of chemicals in national development 
priorities and strategies.  NOSP to ensure that integration of sound management of chemicals 
in the project cycle as a priority and strategy. 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), 1992 
The ultimate objective of this Convention and any related legal instruments that 
the Conference of the Parties may adopt is to achieve, in accordance with the relevant 
provisions of the Convention, stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere 
at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system
The NOSP activities are to adhere to the convention to ensure that green gases do 
not interfere with climate system  
Convention on 
The Ramsar Convention on Wetlands of International Importance 
Wetlands of International Importance especially as Waterfowl Habitats. The Convention’s 
mission is “the conservation and wise use of all wetlands through local and national actions 
and international cooperation, as a contribution towards achieving sustainable development 
throughout the world”. The convention was ratified by Uganda at a time when the country’s 
first Ramsar site at Lake George was designated. Uganda now has 12 Ramsar sites 
(http://ramsar.wetlands.org). The Ramsar Convention has produced guidelines on impact 
assessment for proposed projects in Ramsar sites. These guidelines are based on the 
Convention on Biological Diversity’s (CBD) guidelines for biodiversity-inclusive impact 
assessment, with additional Ramsar-specific annotations (Ramsar Convention Secretariat, 
2010b). 
for the proposed NOSP component activity are followed and vital wetlands are protected. 
NOSP will ensure that the Ramsar Convention guidelines on impact assessment 
Bamako Convention, 1991 
into Africa and the Control of Transboundary Movement and Management of Hazardous Wastes 
within Africa. It requires party states to use legal, administrative and other measures to 
prevent the import of hazardous waste into Africa from non-contracting parties. Import of 
hazardous waste from non-contracting parties is an illegal and criminal act (Art 4.1) 
This Convention was aimed at the Ban of the Import 
Each Party is required to ensure that persons managing hazardous wastes take all actions 
necessary to prevent pollution arising from the management of such wastes and to minimise 
Implementation 
the impacts of such waste in the event of pollution occurring (Art 4.3). 
of the subprojects will be carried out in accordance with the guidelines of this Convention, 
particularly handling and transportation of hazardous wastes. 
Montreal Protocol, 1987  The Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer. 
Requires parties to: Comply with the Ozone Depleting Substances (ODS) freeze and phase-
out; and Ban ODS trade with non-Parties to the Protocol. 
the operation of the projects, release of emissions that have the potential of depleting the 
ozone layer. 
NOSP will ensure that during 
ILO Core Conventions 
These include the following standards for labour: 
210 
• 
(No. 87); 
Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise Convention, 1948 
• 
Right to Organise and Collective Bargaining Convention, 1949 (No. 98); 
• 
1957 (No. 105); 
Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29), Abolition of Forced Labour Convention, 
• 
Convention, 1999 (No. 182); 
Minimum Age Convention, 1973 (No. 138), Worst Forms of Child Labour 
• 
• 
Equal Remuneration Convention, 1951 (No. 100); 
Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention, 1958 (No. 111). 
The ILO Basic Terms and Conditions of Employment refer to: 
• 
• 
Hours of Work (No. 1) 
Minimum Wage (No. 26, 131) and  
Occupational Safety and Health (No. 155). 
• 
closely aligned with the ILO Core Conventions.  NOSP will therefore ensure that all national 
and ILO requirements are followed during implementation of subprojects.   
Ugandan labour laws are 
211 
Annex 3: 
Screening Checklist and Process 
The purpose of screening is to provide an initial indication of the nature and complexities of a 
project, after which it can be categorised to determine the level of investigation necessary to 
ensure that the project causes no harm to the environment or the project communities, and to 
ensure that the project is acceptable and sustainable in terms of environmental, social and 
climate risks and impacts.  
Screening Categorisation 
According to the SECAP Review Note, NOSP has been categorised as Category B.  In other 
words, NOSP subprojects may have some adverse environmental and/or social impacts on 
human populations or environmentally significant areas, but the impacts are site specific and 
few are irreversible in nature, and can be readily remedied by appropriate preventive actions 
and/or mitigation measures.   These subprojects typically involve agricultural intensification 
and/or expansion of cropping area in “non-sensitive areas”;  natural resource based value 
chain development; development of an agro-processing facility; construction or operation 
causing minimal increase in traffic in rural roads; small-scale irrigation projects (<100 ha); 
activities that have minor adverse impact on physical cultural resources; economic and 
physical displacement affecting fewer than 20 people or impacting less than 20 per cent of any 
one community’s or individual farmer’s or household’s assets; and subprojects requiring a 
migrant workforce for construction or seasonal workers for construction, planting and 
harvesting. 
Screening Checklist 
In order to ensure that NOSP projects remain within SECAP’s Category B classification, each 
NOSP subproject will be screened using the following checklist.  
NOSP SUBPROJECT SCREENING CHECKLIST 
SCREENING CHECKLIST  YES 
NO 
PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES 
Will the project: 
Produce or trade in alcoholic beverages 
Produce or trade in tobacco 
Production or trade in any product or activity deemed illegal under host country laws or 
regulations or international conventions and agreements, or subject to international bans, such 
212 
as pharmaceuticals, pesticides/herbicides, ozone depleting substances, PCB's, wildlife or 
products regulated under CITES.  
Production or activities involving harmful or exploitative forms of forced labour  and/or harmful 
child labour .   
GEOGRAPHICAL OR LOCATIONAL CRITERIA 
Will the subproject: 
Develop wetlands; 
Cause significant adverse impacts to habitats and/or ecosystems and their services, such as 
conversion of natural forest or wildlands, loss of habitat, erosion or other form of land 
degradation;  
Be located in critical habitats or which result in conversion or degradation of such habitats 
Cause fragmentation of habitats; 
Result in major hydrological changes;   
Be located in ecologically sensitive areas, areas of global/national significance for biodiversity 
conservation (eg. protected areas – national parks and forests, world heritage sites), and/or 
biodiversity-rich areas and habitats depended on by endangered species; 
Be located in areas subjected to major destruction as a result of geophysical hazards eg. 
landslides, earthquakes or volcanic eruptions.; 
NATURAL RESOURCES CRITERIA 
Will the subproject: 
Lead to unsustainable natural resource management practices (fisheries, forestry, livestock) 
and/or result in exceeding carrying capacity; 
Result in significant increase in the use of agrochemicals which may lead to life-threatening 
illness and long-term public health and safety concerns; 
Rely on water-based (groundwater and/or surface water) development where there is reason 
to believe that significant depletion and/or reduced flow has occurred from the effects of 
climate change or from overutilization; 
Pose a risk of introducing potentially invasive species or genetically modified organisms which 
might alter genetic traits of indigenous species or have an adverse effect on local biodiversity.
INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT CRITERIA 
Will the subproject: 
Require the need to rehabilitate or develop large scale irrigation schemes of more than 100 
hectares per scheme;  
213 
Involve significant extraction/diversion/containment of surface water, leaving the river flow 
below 20 per cent environmental flow plus downstream user requirement; 
Include drainage or permanent correction of natural waterbodies (eg. river training); 
Involve the construction/rehabilitation/upgrading of roads that entail a total area being cleared 
above 10 km long.  
Involves the construction of a major bridge or river crossing 
Involve the construction of a large or medium-scale industrial plant (eg. oil mills exceeding 
production of more than 10 T/day ). 
SOCIAL CRITERIA 
Will the subproject: 
Result in any economic displacement or physical resettlement;   
Cause significant social adverse impacts on disadvantaged, vulnerable, indigenous and 
underserved groups; 
Result in the conversion and/or loss of physical cultural and traditional resources, including 
graves, indigenous tree/plant species that have traditional value. 
Should the answer to any of the above be YES, then the subproject will not qualify for 
consideration under NOSP.  
All Component 1 subprojects and interventions will be screened by the PCU Climate and 
Environmental Specialist (CES) and Social Inclusion Specialist (SIS), while Component 2 
subprojects (CARs and off-road runoff harvesting) will be screened by the PICT Environmental 
and Social Specialist (ESS) and the relevant Hub Environmental & Social Officers (ESOs) in 
consultation with the District Environmental Officers (DEOs) and District Natural Resource 
Management Officers (DNRMOs), together with the NEMA Regional Officer.  
IDENTIFICATION, SELECTION AND PRIORITISATION OF COMMUNITY ACCESS ROADS  
The following are proposed criteria for the identification, selection and prioritisation of 
community access roads: 
Identification and selection of the Community Access Roads (CARs)  is done 
1. 
through a consultative and participatory process at county level, involving the target 
communities, LC1 representatives and PICT Engineer, ESS and HESO. 
214 
2. 
the District council for approval. 
Prioritisation and Ranking is done through the Subcounty council and submitted to 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Selection of CARs will be in areas with high concentration of poverty. 
The roads must have community (especially farmers) and political support. 
The area must have high agricultural production level. 
6. 
health facilities etc. 
There should be connectivity to other major roads, social facilities like schools, 
There should be no major social and environmental problems that require 
7. 
mitigation by the project. i.e. avoid eco sensitive protected areas such as wetlands or forests, 
and major bridges (as per screening checklist) 
8. 
etc. 
Other supportive economic activities may be considered like tourism attraction, 
9. 
CARs in last 10 years. 
There should be no earlier interventions or similar programs for the prioritised 
10. 
more than 10 kms. 
The number of Kilometres for any section should not be less than 5km and not 
11. 
be classified as community access roads. This will ensure that the roads are climate resilient.  
The selected CARs should be designed to District Road III standard, but will still 
215 
Annex 4: 
FPIC Implementation Plan for NOSP  
BACKGROUND 
Consultation with the public and stakeholders is considered an important as it provides 
valuable input to develop acceptable and sustainable project design and implementation plans. 
Most importantly, it allows the concerned communities opportunities to voice their aspirations, 
concerns and preferences regarding the intended development project, including their stance 
to give or withhold their consent to the proposed initiative, entirely or partly. This operational 
principle of empowering local communities to give or withhold their consent to proposed 
investment and development programmes that might affect their land access and use rights, 
territories, natural resources and livelihoods, etc, is ensured through seeking Free, Prior and 
Informed Consent (FPIC) of concerned communities prior to planning a development 
intervention. Consultations with the concerned communities in good faith are believed to 
constitute soliciting FPIC, which ensures that they participate in decision-making processes 
concerning the development project, in line with IFAD Policies.  
There are many advantages to seeking FPIC: 
• 
FPIC improves the relevance and quality of investments; 
• 
enhanced; 
Community ownership of the investment and its results and sustainability are 
• 
organizations is strengthened; 
Partnership between local communities, government institutions and financing 
• 
development minimizes or prevents conflicts with other resource users; and, 
The recognition and support of local communities' aspirations for their own 
FPIC minimizes reputational, operational and fiduciary risks for the government, 
• 
company or donor carrying out activities that may affect the land, resources and rights, and 
livelihood of the local communities. 
An FPIC Implementation Plan is presented here to guide on the consultations leading to FPIC 
component 1 and 2 of NOSP project.   
GUIDANCE AND LEGAL FRAMEWORKS FOR FPIC 
IFAD is among the first international financial institutions to adopt FPIC as an operational 
principle in its policy documents, including its policies on Improving Access to Land and Tenure 
Security (2008); Engagement with Indigenous Peoples (2009), Environment and Natural 
Resource Management (2011), and Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures 
216 
(2014). IFAD-funded projects are people-centred, and, for IFAD, FPIC is not only a safeguard 
principle, rather a proactive approach to identify development pathways with local 
communities and build ownership on project initiatives .   
In Uganda people's right to full consultation, participation and expression of views with respect 
to policies and projects affecting their community are clearly stipulated in the 1995 Ugandan 
Constitution. These are further amplified by; Local Government Act, National Agricultural 
Extension Policy, National Irrigation Policy, 2018, National Gender Policy, Cooperative Act, 
National Agricultural Policy and the Public-Private Partnership Policy. The Local Government 
planning and budgeting processes require participation of citizens. The implementation of 
government programmes also require that these programmes are implemented and owned by 
communities as ultimate beneficiaries.   
PRELIMINARY CONSULTATIONS 
During the NOSP EMSP mission in September 2019, consultations were held with 
1. 
local government agencies and communities regarding development interventions intended 
under NOSP. The community consultations were held at selected farmers groups, millers, and 
local government leadership, access road contractors and road management committee in Lira 
hub, Gulu hub and Mid-western hub (Hoima).  A range of issues were discussed during 
community consultations, the main topics covered being: 
• 
community consultations involved, who benefits and who does not ; 
Road selection process: when by whom, whether consulted, types and level of 
• 
by IFAD, IFAD’s respect of peoples’ rights, what happens if they deny consent etc.; 
Community's awareness of rights: to give consent or deny projects being financed 
Communities’ perceptions: the benefits and risks of the proposed community 
• 
access roads, construction of stores, rain feed oilseed production, agricultural research and 
what they might involve; 
Physical/economic displacement of communities due to project interventions: 
• 
awareness about likely consequences, people to be affected, consent on relocation and 
compensation terms, cultural and/or historical heritage sites and social service facilities that 
may be affected etc.; and, 
• 
affected, how, whether fair/reasonable, at what stage will it be done. 
Resettlement and compensation plans:  under what circumstances, who will be 
• 
management (protection, conservation and harmonization etc); 
Environmental management: formal or customary laws governing environmental 
• 
requiring/related to observance of FPIC; 
FPIC observance: Legal and/or customary regulations and  processes 
• 
procedures/processes;  
Grievance redress: legal provisions, what and how, mechanisms and 
• 
existing institutional arrangements and practices (experience, challenges, capacity gaps, etc). 
ESMF monitoring procedures: current status with handling ESMF monitoring, 
217 
The key findings from these preliminary consultations were as follows: 
Selection of access roads: Local Governments already have a set criteria and procedure for 
selecting access roads. The identification and selection of the roads is done through a 
consultative and participatory process right from the village level to district level. The Parish 
Development Committees identifies the roads through parish meetings and submits priority 
roads to sub counties for ranking and incorporation into sub county plans and budgets and 
these are later submitted to districts for approval.  The set criteria include;  
• 
• 
• 
CARs ought to be in areas with high concentration of poverty. 
Must have community (especially farmers) and political support. 
Such communities must have high agricultural production levels. 
• 
&health facilities  
There should be connectivity to other major roads, social facilities like schools 
• 
mitigation by the project. I.e. avoid eco sensitive protected areas and other major bottlenecks. 
There should be no major social and environmental problems that require 
• 
mining etc. 
Other supportive economic activities should be considered like tourism attraction, 
• 
CARs in last 10 years. 
There should be no earlier interventions or similar programs for the prioritised 
• 
more than 15 kms. 
The number of Kilometres for any section should not be less than 5km and not 
• 
The selected CARs should be within the minimum budget and Cost. 
Community’s awareness of rights: Communities are aware of their rights to consent or deny 
project. Ordinarily majority of the communities accept government project and are willing to 
participate and benefit from the projects. The mission learnt that in a few cases where 
communities have not consented construction of access roads, such roads have not been 
constructed as an alternative option is often selected.  
Communities’ perceptions: Communities anticipate NOSP to be of great benefit to the 
communities. It is expected to enable farmers raise acreage of oil seed cultivates, raise 
production and marketing of oilseeds leading to increased household incomes and better 
welfare indicators. The project is expected to increase participation of men, youth and women 
in production of oilseeds and farmers expect to acquire better GAPs, negotiation skills and 
value addition so as to enhance incomes. The project will enhance farmer’s connectivity with 
other actors like input suppliers and millers which will enhance quality seed and quality 
produce as well as value addition. Thea access road construction will enhance connectivity to 
markets and other social services. The risks identified by farmers were mainly fears related to 
instability in prices, GBV, and poor environmental management 
Displacement and resettlement: These are unlikely to happen because under NOSP component 
2 there will be very minimal land take needs especially with respect to re-alignment and 
routing of roads which will be restricted to existing alignments with minor deviations where 
218 
necessary. Again consultations with communities show high level of willingness and acceptance 
among community members for construction of access roads.  
Environmental Management: There are NEMA policies, regulations and standards for managing 
disposal of pesticides and disposal of oil residues from oilseed processing. However, the 
challenge is enforcement of these standards among agro-chemical shops, farmers and millers. 
The access road designs often describe the nature of road off run harvesting pits and 
construction of access roads in an environmentally friendly manner. With good contract 
management, road contractors often follow these guidelines before certificate of completion is 
issued.  
Grievance redress: In some farmers groups there are counsellors to handles members family 
and group related conflicts if they arise. Groups have bye-laws to this effect. And at family 
level clans often through clan meetings and structures handle family conflicts. If such conflicts 
are not settled then they are referred to Local councils or formal courts of law. For access 
roads, the road management committees are set in place to handle any grievances related to 
road construction among other responsibilities. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban 
Development has developed guidelines on the formation, composition, responsibilities and 
operations of user committees. These guidelines are utilised by Local Governments and 
partners. For instance the road management committees are responsible for;   
i. 
Officials 
Mobilizing local residents for meetings in collaboration with the Government 
ii. 
construction of the roads 
Reporting any grievances to the Community Development Officer during 
iii. 
and safety problems or risks on the respective roads during and after construction  
Reporting to the Parish Chief/ Town Agent/ Sub County or Town Clerk any health 
iv. 
environmental issues arising out of the construction of the roads for follow up 
Reporting to the Parish Chief/ Town Agent/ Sub County or Town Clerk any 
v. 
the project implementation 
Liaising with local leaders to ensure security of the construction materials during 
vi. 
collaboration with the local leaders 
Mobilizing local residents to clean the road during and after construction in 
FPIC IMPLEMENTATION PLAN 
Given that NOSP has no displacement and resettlement issues, the FPIC process 
requires consultations and formalising consent as explained below;  
1. 
Consultations leading to FPIC 
Use community mapping and participatory enquiry techniques to allow assessment of 
ownership, occupation and use of land and resources as well as the social dynamics (eg. 
movements and relationships among the different social groups) and right holders. The 
consultation processes, meetings, field visits, mappings and discussions will help to;  
219 
• 
• 
Confirm that communities are in need of the project interventions; 
Share the objective and scope of the access road with communities directly; 
• 
expected of them; 
Clearly inform the communities and their representatives the different roles 
• 
• 
Provide clear and transparent information on the benefits and risks of the project; 
Share the findings of the baseline studies; 
Engage selected community members or communities' representatives in the 
• 
resources and social mapping activities, in order to assess ownership, occupation and use of 
land territories and resources as well as the social dynamics (relationships among the different 
social groups); 
• 
Ensure inclusive participation - men, women, young people, the elderly, 
representatives of different communities present on the same land and territory, and 
neighbouring villages - and provide for multiple maps by the different communities; 
• 
Share the maps with all stakeholders and actors; and, 
It is important that: 
Where there are doubts on consent, or where concerns are raised during 
• 
consultations, these doubts and concerns are documented, and the communities are requested 
to propose means/solutions to overcome concerns; 
• 
raised by the communities; 
Feedback is provided to the road contractors and project staff on concerns/doubts 
• 
accommodated in the scheme design. 
Feedback is provided to the communities on how their concerns have been 
The usual practice for IFAD-funded projects is to use independent, qualified  facilitators 
supporting the FPIC process. The selection of suitable facilitators for the FPIC process is critical 
to the success of the process. In the selection process, consideration should be given to the 
cultural context the facilitator will work in, to language skills, ethnicity, gender, experience in 
consultation and participatory processes, age (eg. elders prefer to speak to older facilitators), 
technical knowledge of the proposed project and knowledge of IFAD policies and FPIC 
requirements.  If the right people to facilitate these exercises are selected, they can play a role 
as facilitators and at the same time build the capacities of project staff, as well as of 
communities.  Communities’ representatives who participate in the mapping processes should 
be identified by the communities as their representatives in the FPIC process. 
2. 
Formalise the Consent Agreement 
Once project activities and project sites requiring FPCI agreement are identified, this will be 
formalised in a written form in local languages within the 6 hubs, as well as English.  The 
effective time the consent agreement would be formalised will be agreed upon during the 
consultation process and needs to be formalised before any investment is made. The consent 
220 
agreement will be the outcome of the collective decision-making process by the local 
communities. The process will be adequately documented.  
The consent agreement will be prepared by parish development committees/ sub counties/ 
districts and shared with hub coordinators. The format for a consent agreement would, among 
others, include: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Project activities on which consent is provided 
Respective expectations 
Proposed project duration, expected results and activities 
Participatory monitoring and verification plan and procedures 
Identification of grievances procedures and mechanisms 
Terms of withdrawal of consent 
• 
and parties involved. 
Record of process through means and languages accessible to all stakeholders 
The FPIC Agreement and record of process will be made available through means and 
languages that are accessible to all stakeholders and parties involved.  The FPIC 
Implementation Plan will be confirmed and/or revised at the beginning of project 
implementation phase (during start-up workshop, beginning of consultations leading to FPCI, 
beginning of participatory mapping exercise). 
3. 
Assess FPIC Implementation 
In order to assess FPIC implementation, the appropriate indicators for measuring progress 
towards and/or attainment of agreed terms will be defined and linked with a timeframe in the 
FPIC agreement. Subsequent workshops and stakeholders reviews of the FPIC plan may also 
amend the various indicators to be established in the FPIC agreement. Joint supervision 
missions assessing project progress will also assess implementation of FPIC agreements on 
regular basis.  Whenever possible, supervision and evaluation missions would include experts 
of relevance. 
Table XX…:  Summarised NOSP FPIC Implementation Plan  
Description/Activity 
Responsible  Timeframe 
Conduct consultation leading to FPIC on the proposed project/specific 
1. 
component/activities 
project implementation support, as required. 
phase and before construction of CARs/harvesting facilities, and any other acquisition of land 
or removal of trees/crops for NOSP interventions. 
PCU through an independent facilitator, supported by IFAD as part of 
At the beginning of Project implementation 
Consultations should: 
- 
communities and identify project component(s) requiring FPIC 
Share objective and scope of the project with the representatives identified by the 
221 
- 
respective responsibilities  
Inform them on the actors financing and implementing the project and their 
- 
- 
- 
Provide clear and transparent information on the benefits and risks of the project 
Share the findings of the baseline studies  
Formalize consent agreement 
Formalize the consent agreement. PCU through an independent facilitator, 
2. 
supported by IFAD as part of project implementation support, as required.  Project 
implementation phase. Timing agreed upon the during consultation process and before 
construction of CARs/harvesting facilities, and any other acquisition of land or removal of 
trees/crops for NOSP interventions. 
i) Formalize the consent agreement (written or in other form if so requested by the 
community) 
The format for a consent agreement would include: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Respective expectations  
Proposed project duration, expected results and activities 
Participatory monitoring and verification plan and procedures  
Identification of grievances procedures and mechanisms  
Terms of withdrawal of consent  
ii) Record process through means and languages accessible to all stakeholders and parties 
involved 
iii) Annex the FPIC agreement and documented process to the PDR 
3. 
supervision missions 
Assess FPIC implementation. PCU, IFAD implementation support and joint 
Project implementation phase - throughout the project cycle: 
i) Assess FPIC implementation as part of the M&E exercise during the project life.  
ii) Identify and monitor appropriate indicators for measuring progress towards and/or 
attainment of agreed terms will be defined and linked with a timeframe in the FPIC agreement 
Loan Agreement: FPIC requirements will be included in the Loan Agreement as a condition to 
disbursement for Project implementation.  
Disclosure:  IFAD’s  Policy on the Disclosure of Documents enables project design documents 
to be disclosed prior to the Executive Board session at which the project is to be considered.  
Thus, this FPIC Implementation Plan will be disclosed together with the Project Design Report 
(PDR), Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), and other documents to be 
submitted to the Executive Board (and Evaluation Committee). 
222 
Documenting the FPIC Process: FPIC process will be documented through minutes of 
consultations, mapping documents prepared by the communities, videos where feasible, and 
FPIC agreements/formalisation documents.   
223 
Uganda
National Oilseeds Project
Project Design Report
Annex 9: Integrated Risk Framework (IRF)
Document Date:
10/02/2020
Project No.
2000002260
Report No.
5155-UG
Loan ID
2000003281
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
1/4
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
1. Political and governance
Medium
Low
2. Macroeconomic
Medium
Low
3. Sector strategies and policies
Low
Low
4. Technical aspects of project or
program
Low
Low
Since the end of the conflict in Northern Uganda some 15
years ago, the country as a whole and the NOSP target
area in particular have enjoyed political stability that has
supported the successful implementation of development
programmes of the NOSP type. At the same time the
improvements in overall policy environment, with a
stronger private sector emphasis, have enhanced
economic development opportunities in the NOSP area
and increased chances of improved future equality and
social stability.
Since 1990, Uganda has pursued a policy of a fully
liberalised economy and market environment with the
private sector taking the driving seat to achieve economic
growth and social development. This has facilitated the
country’s development which has been characterised by a
high growth rate and a significant decline in poverty.
Growth increased from 6.3 percent in the 1990s to an
annual average of seven percent in the 2000s, giving
Uganda one of the highest sustained growth rates in Sub-
Saharan Africa (SSA) over this period. Substantial oil
reserves were discovered in the Lake Albert Rift Basin in
2006 and commercial oil production is expected to start in
the early 2020s. At the same time the future challenge will
be to use oil revenue and other public funds to reduce
poverty and rural-urban inequalities and ensure
sustainable and inclusive growth for a rapidly increasing
population.
Within the agricultural sector, the oilseeds industry ranks
high on the government agenda due to its poverty
reduction potential. In the highest potential areas for
oilseeds production in the north and north-eastern
Uganda, where 20 years of conflict led to a crippling effect
on agriculture, it is a strategic crop for the Government
towards the post-conflict economic reconstruction and the
transformation of subsistence agriculture to market-
oriented farming. In addition to the importance of domestic
oilseeds production to the local vegetable oil industry, the
by-products from oilseed processing are important to the
development of the animal feed industries and the whole
livestock sector, which increases chances for strong
continued policy support to NOSP implementation.
There is a relatively low likelihood that technical design
issues will adversely impact the achievement of the
project objectives. Learning from the two phases of VODP
implementation, the NOSP approach is based on
increased market orientation and focus on profitable
operations and sustainable institutional arrangements at
all levels, including the use of private service providers in
both operational components. The roads component
design is based on successful methods used in the same
area, again based on the utilisation of private contractors
where possible.
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
2/4
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
5. Institutional capacity for
implementation and sustainability
Medium
Low
6. Financial management
High
Medium
Low implementation capacity in some government
structures has in various cases led to low disbursements
and weak implementation performance in development
projects in Uganda. The market and private sector focus
in NOSP implementation approaches mitigate this threat.
The widespread use of experts and service providers
contracted from the private sector aims to ensure that
performance-oriented implementation will materialise in
NOSP operations.
The project faces risks in discrepancies in budgeting due
to the strict timelines (10 months of the prior year),
omission of project budgets in printed estimates approved
by parliament especially for district-level activities,
MoFPED requirements for project financial reporting using
IFMS which has not been tested comprehensively on
capability for project financial reporting, as well as delays
in financial reporting by districts who will handle some
funds for supervision and monitoring for infrastructure
development and other agricultural and environment-
related activities.
To minimize these risks it has been agreed that key
payments for infrastructure works will be budgeted and
paid from the parent ministry (MoLG), hence reducing
funds to be disbursed or required to be budgeted by
districts. It is also critical to have close collaboration
between PMU and planning officers at the ministries and
district levels to ensure that appropriate budgets are
included in the printed estimates. To mitigate on
challenges of IFMS not being able to handle project
reporting appropriately, a simple off-shelf accounting
system (Pastel) will run concurrently with IFMS for the first
18 months which will serve as a pilot phase, after which a
review will be made.
In addition to the usual attendance by PMU staff for
monitoring of the execution of training and capacity
building activities which will be handled by private service
providers, a performance audit will be carried out and will
follow a risk-based sampling. It will seek to respond to the
economy, efficiency and effectiveness with which the
activities are carried out in accordance with project
objectives.
Risk categories
Risk
Probability
3/4
Risk
Impact
Mitigations/comments
The overall procurement risk is rated “Medium” at central
level and “High” at district level. The assessment indicated
the following risks particularly at the district level: capacity
constraints leading to failure to comply with applicable
rules and contract awarding principles; delays in
processing procurement and in evaluations, reviews and
approvals; weak records keeping and filing as well as
overall weaknesses in contract management and follow-
up. To reduce procurement risks, the PDR includes a draft
for a comprehensive Procurement Manual for NOSP. With
regard to the management and execution of procurement
activities under NOSP, an experienced Procurement and
Contracts Manager will be recruited in the PCU
immediately after NOSP start-up. He/she will be in overall
charge of the implementation of the procurement activities
under the project. Furthermore, a Procurement Specialist
will be recruited at NOSP effectiveness to the PICT in
MoLG, to support and oversee the procurement activities
related to the construction and rehabilitation of rural roads
(see detailed TOR for both procurement posts in the PIM).
Furthermore, IFAD-supported international TA will be
provided at early stages of the project to NOSP to
strengthen procurement capacity and to assist in the
planning and implementation of the procurement
operations. IFAD will also support the planning and
implementation of an intensive training programme at the
project start-up to familiarise the Central Ministries and
District PDUs with NOSP/IFAD Guidelines on
procurement and contract management.
The likelihood of adverse impact or reaction by
stakeholders in the oilseeds sector towards NOSP
implementation is ranked low. Comprehensive
consultation process with the stakeholders during the
design process, covering both the smallholder producers
and agro-businesses, demonstrated great interest by all
parties to develop the value chain to the mutual benefit of
all stakeholder groups.
Increased commercialisation of cash crop production, as
in the case of oilseeds, may have adverse social and
environmental impacts. This is recognized in the design of
NOSP (for details, see the comprehensive SECAP in
Annex 5). The use of the GALS is aimed to promote
gender participation and empowerment in the target areas
and the promotion of environmentally friendly technologies
and climate smart agricultural practices will ensure that the
social and environmental aspects are addressed on a
continuous basis. Additionally, the MSPs will serve as a
conduit for any emerging issues to be addressed during
the course of implementation. ESMPs will be developed
for rural roads development.
7. Procurement
High
Medium
8. Stakeholders
Low
Low
9. Environment and social
Medium
Low
Overall
Medium
Low
Uganda is heading for national elections in 2021, therefore
the commencement of implementation in 2020 will be
crucial to NOSP.
4/4
Uganda
National Oilseeds Project
Project Design Report
Annex 10: Exit Strategy
Document Date:
10/02/2020
Project No.
2000002260
Report No.
5155-UG
Loan ID
2000003281
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
NOSP PDR 
ANNEX 10 
EXIT STRATEGY 
ANNEX 10: NOSP EXIT STRATEGY 
Sustainability of the NOSP benefits and results can be approached at three different levels: the 
smallholder, the farmer group/cooperative and the value chain. The NOSP exit strategy and its 
success  is  closely  linked  to  results  achieved  at  all  these  three  sustainability  levels.  With  this 
sustainability focus, the exit strategy is in-built in the NOSP activities and in the manner they 
are to be implemented. The Table below presents the approach to NOSP exit strategy from the 
point of view of the key activities in the two operational components of the project. 
Component/Activity 
Component 1: Support to 
Oilseed Value Chain 
Development 
Supply  Chain  Brokering 
Investment Facilitation 
and 
Producer Group Mentoring 
Financial Services 
Technical Support Services 
Sustainability and Exit Strategy 
The core of the value chain and cluster development approach is 
a  rolling  process  of  action-oriented  brokering,  dialogue  and 
investment  facilitation  among  the  key  actors  in  each  cluster/hub 
to  catalyse  investments  and  remove  bottlenecks  to  increase 
trading  and  profits,  and  to  make  the  most  of  practical 
opportunities  for  growth.  To  achieve  this,  NOSP  will  organise 
multi-stakeholder  platforms  (MSP)  for  oil  seed  supply  chains  at 
two levels: cluster and hub. MSPs will be held regularly (at least 
twice per year) at the cluster and hub level, initially facilitated by 
the NOSP team but later jointly by the producers and businesses 
themselves. Therefore, after NOSP closes, the independent MSPs 
continue to operate and provide a sustainable solution to this part 
of the oilseed market development. 
The objective is that all producer groups in NOSP clusters should 
graduate  to  being  fully  independent,  financially  robust  and  self-
managing  within  four  years  of  project  engagement.  Further,  a 
majority of group members and their households would have the 
skills  and  confidence  to  grow  their  farm  enterprise,  manage 
climate risks and face fewer social barriers to their development. 
Therefore,  well  before  NOSP  exits,  both  members  and  groups 
would  have  reached  a  development  level  which  ensures  that  the 
benefits  gained  from  NOSP  support  would  continue  as  the 
projects closes. 
The  promotion  financial  services  under  NOSP  is  based  on 
institutional  development  approach  with 
fully  sustainable 
solutions.  The  support  operations  VSLAs,  SACCOs  and  formal 
financial  institutions  relies  on  linking  the  smallholders  and  other 
participants  in  the  oilseed  value  chains  to  these  institutions  and 
assisting  the  FIs  to  develop  appropriate  services  in  the  oilseeds 
sector.  These  services  would  be  institutionalized  in  the  FIs  and 
rolled  out  to  value  chain  participants,  which  aims  to  ensure  that 
these services would continue after NOSP closes.  
All  NOSP  activities  in  the  promotion  of  support  services  to 
smallholders  in  the  oilseed  clusters  are  based  on  a  sustainable 
private  sector-based  approach  with  a  clear  plan  to  continue  to 
function  after  the  project  support  expires.  Given  the  widespread 
lack  of  appropriate  technical  advice  and  follow-up  available  to 
many smallholders, the programme will launch a Farm Production 
Advisors  (FPA)  promotion  scheme.  After  initial  training  and 
support  by  NOSP,  the  FPAs  would  continue  to  provide  technical 
services to farmers against fees, without further project support. 
NOSP  will  also  include  an  Auxiliary  Farm  Services  Promotion 
Scheme  to  stimulate  investment  from  commercial  auxiliary  farm 
service  providers.  To 
transformation  and 
mechanisation  process,  the  scheme  will  offer  partial  investment 
incentives  to  absorb  some  of  the  risk  for  the  early  adopters  and 
then  gradually  reduce  these  incentives  in  subsequent  years  to 
return to market-based financing. After initial NOSP support, the 
mechanisation  service  providers  would  continue  to  operate  fully 
catalyse 
this 
Component 2: Support to 
Market Linkage Infrastructure 
Serving Oilseed Sector 
Enhancement of Community 
Access Roads Serving Oilseed 
Clusters  
commercially  in  the  NOSP  clusters.  Similarly,  Quality  Declared 
Seed  Production  Scheme  would  stimulate  local  seed  businesses 
that, after initial NOSP support, would operate fully commercially 
well  before  the  project  closes.  The  project  would  also  develop  a 
network of NSCS-accredited private seed inspectors and labs and 
in  this  manner  introduce  a  sustainable,  private  sector-based 
inspection function to the oilseeds sector.    
The  exit  strategy  for  the  community  access  roads  construction 
and  rehabilitation  concerns  mainly  the  maintenance  of  these 
roads. The NOSP approach follows the GoU policy and procedures 
in  this  respect.  At  the  completion  of  construction,  each  road  will 
be  commissioned  and  handed  over  to  the  district  authorities  by 
the  contractors.  The  road  committee  will  also  sign  the  handover 
certificate  to  indicate  that  they  participated  in  the  construction 
and  are  satisfied  with  the  way  the  contractor  conducted  work. 
Thereafter  the  road  maintenance  will  be  the  responsibility  of  the 
relevant  district  authorities,  with  the  support  of  the  local 
communities.  
Uganda
National Oilseeds Project
Project Design Report
Annex 11: Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
Document Date:
10/02/2020
Project No.
2000002260
Report No.
5155-UG
Loan ID
2000003281
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Mainstreaming themes – Eligibility criteria checklist
1/1
 Gender transformational
 Youth sensitive
 Nutrition sensitive
 Climate finance  
 National gender policies, strategies
 National youth policies, strategies
 National nutrition policies, strategies
Situation
analysis
and actors
 Gender roles and
exclusion/discrimination
 Key livelihood problems and
youth group
opportunities, by gender
 Use (pro-WEAI) assessment for
M&E baseline
and actors
and actors
 Main youth groups
 Key nutrition problems and
 Challenges and opportunities by
underlying causes, by group
 Nutritionally vulnerable
beneficiaries, by group
Theory of
change
 Gender policy objectives
(empowerment, voice, workload)
 Pathways to youth socioeconomic
 Nutrition pathways
empowerment
 Causal linkage between problems,
 Gender transformative pathways
 Youth employment included in
outcomes and impacts
 Policy engagement on GEWE
project objectives/activities
Logframe
indicators
Human
and
financial
resources
 Outreach disaggregated by gender
 Outreach disaggregated by age
 Outreach disaggregated by gender
 Women are > 40% of outreach
beneficiaries
Pro-WEAI indicator
Further details to be confirmed
 Staff with gender TORs
 Staff with youth TORs
 Staff or partner with nutrition TORs
 Funds for gender activities
 Funds for youth activities
 Funds for nutrition activities
 Funds for Pro-WEAI surveys in M&E
budget
IFAD Adaptation
Finance
IFAD Mitigation
Finance
$16,209,000
$0
Total IFAD Climate-
focused Finance
$16,209,000
ECG
Remarks
Gender
Nutrition
Youth
 No social inclusion themes
Uganda
National Oilseeds Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Nosp Efa Review Compliance Note 21102019 For Qag
Document Date:
10/02/2020
Project No.
2000002260
Report No.
5155-UG
Loan ID
2000003281
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Compliance Note 
EFA Review – Responses from PDT 
Country:  
Uganda 
Project: 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Date: 
15th October 2019 
Reviewer – EFA Reporting Template 
Response 
EFA reviewers' response 
Additional narrative explaining the WOP existing and WP 
new 
the  support  and 
together  with 
investments that will be provided by the NOSP added. 
technologies 
Additional  clarification  on  the  role  of  the  investments  in 
rural market linkage infrastructure and how their impacts 
are  inherent  in  the  assumptions  on  input  supply,  market 
access and price improvements added 
I. 
General Overview 
In  terms  of  the  project’s  intervention  logic  and  the  identified 
benefits, the results chain between project’s inputs, outputs and 
outcomes  appears  to  have  some  missing  links.  Specifically,  it  is 
expected  that  smallholder  farmers  will  start  new  cropping 
activities  (oilseeds)  and  increase  yields  significantly.  While  farm 
advisory  services,  mechanization  packages,  supply  brokering 
activities  and  the  seed  quality  certification  may  contribute  to 
this,  it  is  not  clear  how  they  will  reach  the  proposed  target 
number  of  beneficiaries.  Furthermore,  benefits  have  not  been 
quantified for other significant project investments such as rural 
roads  (which  amounts to more than 50  million  USD,  more than 
30%  of  total  investment).  Overall,  there  appears  to  be  a  wide 
implemented  under  the 
range  number  of  activities  to  be 
project1,  but  yet  their  contribution  to  increasing  yields  is  not 
reflected  adequately  in  the  EFA  analysis.  In  addition,  limited 
quantitative  empirical  evidence  has  been  presented  on  the 
increases  of  oilseed  yields  and  farmers’  gross  margins  under 
VODP and VODP2. 
Paragraph 7 and table 5 have been included in the 
EFA Annex.  
Table  5  includes  a  summary  of  project  support 
investments  and  how  WOP  and  WP  scenario  will 
change. This summary is provided on the basis that 
all farm models have the similar problems and will 
be  benefiting  from  the  same  interventions  (the 
only distinction is made for sunflower farms, which 
will not  use fertilisers and soybean farms that will 
be using inoculants. 
From  the  summary  table  the  following  can  be 
concluded: 
-  Farmers  will  expand  cropping  area  with  oilseed 
crops,  better  inputs  will  be  used  (fertiliser,  seeds, 
machinery)  and  greater  access  to  marketing 
services  and  market  linkage  infrastructure  (rural 
roads?). 
- The main mechanisms through which the project 
is expected to trigger farmer changes are: support 
1 
Compliance Note 
EFA Review – Responses from PDT 
Reviewer – EFA Reporting Template 
Response 
The limited role of VODP2 in the formal definition of input 
parameters described due to that project’s late start with 
oilseed crops. 
EFA reviewers' response 
to  the  development  of  input  suppliers  (auxiliary 
farm  services,  seed  quality  certification)  and  farm 
production  advisors,  investment  in  rural  roads, 
producer mentoring, investment facilitation (?). 
Footnote  number  6  of  EFA  acknowledges  the  fact 
that  no  information  of  gross  margins  or  HH  farm 
models  is  available  from  VODP2  and  that  the 
models  used  are  based  on  technical  discussions 
with  VODP2  Hub  coordinators  and  private  service 
providers (PSP). 
Major Issues 
-  Essential  elements,  such  as  the  production  and  enterprise 
model assumptions should be further justified and/or revised 
for the financial and the economic profitability analysis of the 
project. 
Additional explanation as to the sources and consultations 
undertaken  to  determine  the  key  production  and  farm 
model assumptions added. 
Footnote  5  and  6  include  this  information,  it  is 
claimed  that  the 
‘budgets 
suggested  are  consistent  with  the  project  design 
team’s experiences elsewhere’ 
labour  and  crop 
-  WOP scenarios should be further justified. 
Additional notes added. 
Noted, response to specific comments below 
-  There  should  be  coherency  and  alignment  between  the 
project  logframe  and  key  EFA  assumptions.  In  doing  so  the 
choice  of  logframe  indicators  should  better  capture  the 
relevant  EFA  assumptions,  otherwise  monitoring  of  project 
results could be jeopardized, during implementation. 
Logframe mid-term adoption target revised.  
Mid-term  indicator  targets  were  revised  for  EFA 
related  indicators  2,  3,  5,  and  6,  which  report  the 
number of HH that will receive services supported 
by  the  project,  increase  assets,  sales  of  oilseed 
crops and income. 
Indicator number 2 is defined in terms of persons 
instead  of  households.  It  is  definition  should  be 
revised to HH, to match EFA assumptions. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  choice  of 
logframe 
indicators  focuses  on  measuring  numbers  of 
people  with  increased  income,  sales,  etc.  rather 
than  the  actual  increases  in  income,  sales  of  HH 
2 
Compliance Note 
EFA Review – Responses from PDT 
Reviewer – EFA Reporting Template 
Response 
-  The accounting of project costs should be clearly laid out and 
revised  to  separate  costs  already  included  in  the  enterprise 
models. 
Project  costs  and  the  relations  with  financial  and 
economic model reviewed. Further clarification added. 
EFA reviewers' response 
participating  in  the  project.  This  could  limit  the 
effectiveness  of 
in 
logframe 
quantifying project achievements.  
indicator 
the 
Paragraph 51 of the EFA includes this clarification:  
“None  of  the  costs  that  are  defined  in  the  cost 
tables  are  elements 
farm  models. 
Mechanisation  for  instance  is  included  through 
rental  costs  not  ownership.  In  this  way  double 
counting is avoided”. 
the 
in 
-   Beneficiary phasing should be revised to ensure consistency 
with project implementation assumptions. 
Phasing assumptions reviewed. Phasing in the EFA directly 
aligns to the implementation assumptions and the project 
investments. 
Based on beneficiary phasing presented in table 17 
and  investment  costs  presented  in  Table  F  from 
the EFA, project’s phasing was derived below:  
Project Year 
Beneficiary 
Phasing 
Project 
investment 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
- 
37.50% 
66.25% 
93.75% 
100.00% 
100.00% 
100.00% 
5.74% 
18.28% 
31.23% 
57.81% 
83.09% 
96.70% 
100.00% 
-  The  PDT  should  consider  strengthening  the  sensitivity 
analysis  by  performing  additional  calculations  to  better 
understand risks and project profitability.  
Existing  risk  matrix  and  sensitivity  analysis  reviewed. 
Given  the  other  changes  incorporated  (e.g.  rephasing  of 
road construction) the sensitivity is considered sufficiently 
robust to define the feasible boundary conditions. Further 
sensitivity  analysis  is  expected  via  climate  adaptation 
analysis. 
Paragraph  55  and  table  22  contain  the  sensitivity 
analysis.  The  impacts  of  slower  participation  rates 
were presented. Yet, it is not clear how lower total 
project  adoption  rates  (set  at  75%  for  the  base 
case) will impact the project’s benefits and EIRR. 
3 
Compliance Note 
EFA Review – Responses from PDT 
Reviewer – EFA Reporting Template 
Response 
EFA reviewers' response 
Minor Issues 
-  Further  information  on  the  cost  of  family  labor  should  be 
provided and its value adjusted if relevant. 
Treatment  of  family  labour  follows  Gittinger,  J.P  (1982), 
Economic  Analysis  of  Agricultural  Projects,  Second 
Edition,  EDI  World  Bank  whereby  family  labour  is  not 
entered  as  a  cost;  instead  the  “wages”  for  the  family 
become  a  part  of  the  net  benefit  –  a  residual  of  the 
calculation.  Thus,  as  NOSP  increases  the  net  benefit,  it 
also in effect increases the family's income or "wages" for 
its  labour.  A  note  describing  the  approach  and  the 
derivation  of  the  farm  family’s  labour  availability  is 
included. 
IFAD’s EFA approach requires family labour to be 
included as an operating cost in farm models. The 
cost  of  family  labour  should  be  proxied  by  the 
opportunity  cost  of  time  (i.e.,  wage  that  can  be 
earned outside the farm). In the absence of a good 
proxy  for  the  price,  unskilled  rural  wages  can  be 
used.  
-  Further information should be presented in the EFA Annex of 
financial 
the  PDR  such  as  self-consumption  and  the 
sustainability analysis of household beneficiaries. 
Estimates  made  of  HH  consumption  were  based  on  field 
interviews  and  discussions 
reasonable 
estimates. Valuation was made at market pricing.  
to  derive 
indicators  used 
The 
common, namely:  
in  this  financial  appraisal  are 
Farm  Family  Benefits  After  Financing  presents 
• 
the net income after financing 
• 
Returns to Family-Day of Labour 
Ratio  of  Returns  to  Family-Day  of  Labour  to  the 
• 
unskilled  daily  wage  rate  –  which  gives  insights  into  the 
incentive  for  labour  to  stay  /  return  to  agricultural 
production. 
These  indicators  combined  present  the  degree  to  which 
the WP scenario is a sustainable proposition. 
The  discount  rate  for  financial  analysis  is  taken  as  the 
Commercial  Banks  Weighted  Average  Deposit  Rate  (7-12 
months) Source: Bank of Uganda. This is included in Table 
A  footnote  but  will  be  made  more  prominent  in  the 
4 
-  It  is  recommended  to  further  justify  and/or  revise  the 
discount rates used in the analysis.  
Noted,  each  farm  model  contains  the  information 
mentioned.  The  analysis  suggests  that  households 
financing  to  cover  the 
will  have  access  to 
incremental  costs  of  switching  to  new  oilseed 
crops and that after financing farm family benefits 
will be positive. Footnote2 in table 16 further adds 
indicate  very 
financing.  Models 
that:  “After 
positive IRR and the need  for further  examination 
and refinement.” 
Financial discount rate justification is found in page 
1 of the EFA (footnote 1 of Table A) 
Compliance Note 
EFA Review – Responses from PDT 
Reviewer – EFA Reporting Template 
Response 
EFA reviewers' response 
Economic  discount  rate  justification  is  found  on 
page 22, footnote 13. 
section on Financial Analysis. 
The  discount  rate  for  the  economic  analysis 
is  the 
estimate of the social discount rate (SDR) or rate of time 
preference. For the purposes of this analysis this is taken 
as  10%.  As  noted  in  Table  E  this  is  assumed  to:  i)  reflect 
the  public  nature  of  the  investment;  ii)  account  for 
scarcity  of  resources;  and  iii)  ensure  good  use  of  public 
funds.  The  rate  of  10%  is  also  consistent  with  current 
recent IFAD appraisals in Uganda. 
Matching the SDR to the return on long term Government 
Bonds  was  considered  but  found  to  be  inappropriate  as 
the current return on 10 year bonds in ~15%. Discounting 
the  stream  of  future  benefits  at  such  a  rate 
is 
inappropriate.  The  conventional 
IFAD  approach  was 
therefore adopted. 
II. 
Detailed Observations 
Financial analysis/production models: 
  WOP: The EFA Excel sheets present information on the WOP 
scenarios. The farm models assume that there is a transition 
from growing traditional crops (beans/cassava/sweet potato) 
to  growing  mainly  oilseed  crops.  The  presentation  of  the 
WOP  for  crop  models  in  the  EFA  Annex  of  the  PDR  is 
confusing  -  tables  for  oilseed  crops  are  presented  for  WOP 
and WP yields are presented at the crop level (assuming the 
cultivation  of  1  acre)  and  they  are  presented  again  in  the 
context of farm models.  
The  appendix  tables  to  Annex  4  present  the  details  of 
physical and financial aspects of the oilseed gross margin 
models (production models). 
Noted.  Cropping  patterns  WOP  and  WP  are  now 
presented separately from yields per acre and full 
disaggregation is presented in the appendix 
Once these production models are combined as is shown 
in  main  text  tables  1  to  4,  where  the  cropping  patterns 
WP/WOP are indicated, farm models are generated.  Four 
illustrative farm models are derived. These are presented 
in  physical  and  financial  terms  along  with  the  assumed 
cropping pattern changes in the Appendix 3. 
Paragraph  17  in  Annex  4  describes  the  process  outlined 
above. 
However  the  farm  models  do  not  present  the  amount  of  acres 
grown, thus rendering the analysis confusing. It is recommended 
See comments above. 
Noted.  Cropping  patterns  WOP  and  WP  are  now 
5 
Compliance Note 
EFA Review – Responses from PDT 
Reviewer – EFA Reporting Template 
Response 
that  the  farm  models  present  information  on  the  number  of 
hectares grown for each crop in the WOP and WP scenarios. 
Main  table  Tables  1  to  4  present  cropping  patterns  per 
farm model both WOP and WP. 
EFA reviewers' response 
presented  separately from yields per acre and full 
disaggregation is presented in the appendix 
The  basis  of  all  area  models  is  the  acre  to  be  consistent 
with practice in Uganda. 
The farm models also suggest that sunflower is not grown in the 
WOP  scenario;  yet  yield  for  this  crop  is  presented  under  the 
WOP and WP scenarios.  
Farm  models  in  the  Excel  files  also  assume  that  maize  yields 
increase  (as  farmers  shift  to  improved  varieties),  yet  it  is  not 
mentioned in the EFA Annex of the PDR. 
Finally, it seems that that farmers are undertaking new activities 
or significantly scaling up operations, for which they have limited 
experience.  Since  we  are  assuming  that  the  project  would  be 
scaling-up  or  replicating  VODP2  interventions,  it  would  be 
informative  to  present  evidence  from  VODP2  on  the  farm 
characteristics of the targeted beneficiaries.  
further  clarify  the  cropping  configurations  and 
for  each 
To 
transitions, 
illustrative HH type have been added to Appendix 3. 
level  cropping  patterns 
farm 
Clarification note added to the text. 
Noted.  Footnote  7 
clarification. 
in  page  10 
includes  this 
Explanatory note added to the text. 
Paragraph  16  mentions  that  ‘The  assumed  yields 
and  returns  for  maize,  beans,  cassava,  sweet 
potato  and  sorghum  are  included  in  the  project 
file.  Where  feasible  with  project  yields  of  these 
increases  due  to 
domestic  crops  also  reflect 
changing 
improve 
cultural 
seed/fertilizer availability’ 
practices 
and 
Note added as to the origin of the assumptions employed 
and the role of VODP2 in the process. VODP2 experiences 
have been incorporated to the extent possible. 
Noted,  footnotes  5  and  6  of  page  10  contain  this 
explanation 
  Recommendation:  Provide  further  clarification  on 
WOP  scenarios  and  adjust  WP  scenarios,  as 
required. 
See response above. 
  Family labor:  a distinction is made between family labor and 
hired  labor,  as  input.  Furthermore,  it  is  implicitly  assumed 
that the price of family and hired labor is the same.  
Section  on  treatment  of  farm  family  labour  re-written  – 
see above. 
see response above 
6 
Compliance Note 
EFA Review – Responses from PDT 
Reviewer – EFA Reporting Template 
Response 
EFA reviewers' response 
  Recommendation  consider  the  need  to  value 
family labor cost differently from hired labor. 
See response above. 
see response above 
  Self-consumption: 
information  on  the 
it  appears  that 
amount  self-consumption  of  crops  is  presented  in  the  EFA 
Excel  files  under  the 
label  "on-farm  use".  Except  for 
sunflower,  all  crops  appear  to  be  consumed  by  the  HHs  in 
varying  amounts. 
informative  to  make  a 
reference  in  the  EFA  Annex  on  how  self-consumption  is 
calculated.  
It  would  be 
Note  included  in  the  text  that  these  were  based  local 
estimates available to the design team. 
Noted, paragraph 6 of the EFA mentions this. 
  Recommendation  provide  further  information  on 
self-consumption  assumptions  in  the  EFA  Annex  to 
the PDR. 
See responses above 
  Profitability Indicators (NPV; IRR and B/C ratio):   
   NPV,  IRR  and  incremental  net  margins  per  farm  model 
are  presented  as  profitability  indicators  in  the  EFA 
Annex  of  the  PDR.  A  question  arises  as  to  whether  the 
calculated  increase  in  net  margins  for  some  activities 
increase  of  more  than  2-fold  for  sunflower-
(e.g. 
farm,  soya-bean 
groundnut 
sesame  farm) 
is  corroborated  by 
empirical evidence from previous projects (e.g. VODP & 
VODP2). 
farm,  sesame-soybean 
is  realistic  and 
is  conducted  on  the  financial 
Additional  analysis 
capacity  of  HHs  and  sources  of  finance  to  cover  the 
incremental production cost in the Excel files; however, 
little information is provided in the EFA Annex.   
Note on the source of the yield assumptions added to the 
text – see above.  
While quantitative empirical evidence for the target crop 
yields  was  not  available  from  VODP2  best  efforts  were 
made  to  discuss  with  farmers,  PSP  team  leaders  and 
VODP2 hub coordinators. The PDT were guided by expert 
opinion from Jon Mc Lea (NOSP Consultant Agronomist  – 
whose  local  experience  includes:  running  randomised 
trials  for  private  sector  commercial  farmers;  as  well  as, 
commercial  farming)  and  researchers  from  Makarere 
University. 
Financing reviewed and available in the text. 
Noted,  footnote2  in  table  16  further  adds  that: 
“After financing. Models indicate  very positive IRR 
and  the  need 
further  examination  and 
refinement.” 
for 
noted,  paragraph  3  mentions  the  inclusion  of 
financing in the models and results of farm family 
benefits  after  financing  are  presented.  Appendix 
presents financial flows resulting from financing for 
each farm. 
7 
Compliance Note 
EFA Review – Responses from PDT 
Reviewer – EFA Reporting Template 
Response 
EFA reviewers' response 
  Recommendation: 
household’s  capacity 
production costs in the EFA Annex of the PDR.  
finance 
Include 
to 
information 
on 
incremental 
See responses above 
See responses above 
  Observations about livestock/enterprise models: 
Yield changes. Several of the expected changes in yield 
amount  to  more  than  50%  increase  (for  example: 
soybean is 175% and sesame is 67%). This seems overly 
optimistic  given  that  all  crops  are  grown  in  rainfed 
farms.  The  empirical  evidence  for  the  suggested 
increases  in  yields  and  productivity  should  thus  be 
explicitly cited.  
All yield assumptions have been reviewed and reduced in 
line with the QAG recommendations. 
Noted.  
A  comparison  of  yields  extracted  from  crop  table 
parameters suggest the following: 
Sesame  yield  increases  have  been  adjusted  from 
97% to 67%. 
Soybean  yield  increases  have  been  adjusted  from 
175% to 170%. 
Groundnuts  yield  increases  have  been  adjusted 
from 47% to 45%. 
Land  cultivation  expansion.  Most  farm  models  assume 
that land cultivated will double from the WOP scenario. 
Again,  this  appears  to  be  a  very  optimistic  assumption 
and  should  be  supported  by  empirical  evidence  from 
other programs.  
Labor  inputs.  The  accounting  of  labor  inputs  for  crop 
models  seems  somewhat  odd.  The  total  number  of 
man/woman  days  per  growing  season  seems  much 
lower  than  other  crop  production  models,  observed 
elsewhere. Kindly also specify if the machinery services 
have embedded the labor cost as well as operating costs 
(e.g. fuel cost). 
  Recommendation:  Provide  additional  information 
All  area  increase  assumptions  have  been  reviewed  and 
reduced in line with the QAG recommendations. The PDT 
is unaware of empirical evidence.  
Noted. WP farm cultivation area has been reduced 
from 4 to 3.8 acre and from 3 to 2.85 acres for the 
different models. 
As with the yields the labour inputs were specified by PSP 
staff  and  hub  coordinators.  Further,  they  are  consistent 
with PDT experiences elsewhere.  
Machinery costs are for total cost i.e. hire of machine, fuel 
and labour. This can be added in the explanatory notes.  
is  noted  and  found 
The  clarification 
in  the 
footnotes 5 and 6, it is claimed that the labour and 
crop  ‘budgets  suggested  are  consistent  with  the 
project design team’s experiences elsewhere’ 
See above. 
8 
Compliance Note 
EFA Review – Responses from PDT 
Reviewer – EFA Reporting Template 
to support assumptions and revise as required. 
Economic analysis/aggregation and profitability indicators 
  Logframe:  
Logframe  indicators  are  presented  in  Annex  1  of  the 
PDR.  When  project  results'  indicators  are  compared 
with EFA assumptions, some  inconsistencies have been 
found as follows:  
i) 
Project development objective indicator 5, (number 
of  HHs  reporting  increased  sales  of  oilseeds  crops) 
has  a  target  of  45,000  by  mid-term.  The  EFA 
assumes  59,625  HHs  by  year  3  (which  is  even 
before  mid-term).  A  similar  inconsistency  is  noted 
for indicator 6 (number of HHs reporting increase in 
income).  [nota  bene:  the  end  target  is  aligned 
between the EFA and the logframe]. 
ii) 
The  definition  of  the  HHs  reporting  an  increase  in 
production should be revisited such that it refers to 
the HHs that are receiving value chain services.  
Overall, we noted that the choice of logframe indicators captures 
too  few  relevant  EFA  assumptions,  which  could  seriously 
jeopardize  the  monitoring  of  project  results.  It  is  strongly 
recommended to be more  specific on the amounts of increases 
in sales, income or production. 
Response 
EFA reviewers' response 
Log  frame  mid-term  values  has  been  aligned  to  the 
expected  expenditure  performance  as  of  mid-way 
through PY 4. Log frame has been updated. 
noted 
Text  added 
indicating  the  range  of  support  and 
investments  provided  to  the  participating  households 
making it clear that value chain development services are 
targeted to the households. 
noted 
Logframe  reviewed  in  light  of  comments  and  existing 
guidelines. 
While  indicators  may  be  aligned  with  corporate 
reporting,  we  deem  that  they  are  not  the  most 
ideal for measuring project level results.  
logframe 
focus  on 
indicators 
The  choice  of 
measuring  numbers  of  people  with 
increased 
income, sales, etc. rather than the actual increases 
in income, sales of HH participating in the project. 
This could potentially be a constraint in quantifying 
project achievements. 
9 
Compliance Note 
EFA Review – Responses from PDT 
Reviewer – EFA Reporting Template 
Response 
EFA reviewers' response 
  Recommendation:  Ensure coherence between the 
logframe  targets,  the  choice  of  indicators  and  the 
EFA assumptions. 
See above 
  Aggregation HH focus and phasing: based on the EFA Annex 
of the PDR, it seems that, in principle, aggregation of project 
cost  and  benefits  has  been  carried  out,  taking  into  account 
HHs  conducting  the  different  economic  activities.  However, 
the Excel files, which were present, do not appear to present 
this calculation.. 
  Furthermore,  economic  benefits  are  presented  as  an 
aggregate  number  and  the  contribution  of  each  farm  type 
and beneficiaries to the overall benefit is not presented 
Additional  section  added 
describing the aggregation methodology and results. 
in  the  Economic  Analysis 
Further  a  new  appendix,  Appendix  4  Farm  Model 
Aggregations,  has  been  included.  This  appendix  sets  out 
the  distributions  of  farm  numbers  and  areas  together 
with  the  resulting  aggregations  in  physical  and  financial 
terms for each farm type as well as the overall project. 
See above. 
Further,  addition  text  and  text  table  Incremental  Benefit 
Aggregation - Farm Type to Project added. 
Noted.  Paragraph  37  and  38  contain  information 
on  aggregation  and  table  17  contains  household 
participation assumptions per farm type. Appendix 
4 contains further information on aggregation and 
phasing for each of the farms.  
Noted.  Paragraph  37  and  38  contain  information 
on  aggregation  and  table  17  contains  household 
participation assumptions per farm type. Appendix 
4 contains further information on aggregation and 
phasing for each of the farms.  
Overall,  there  seems  to  be  a  mismatch  between  HH  phasing, 
and  project  costs  by  year  when  compared  with  the  COSTAB 
assumptions,  particularly  for  years  2,  3,  and  4  of  the  project. 
The  accumulated  percentage  of  beneficiaries  adopting  the 
project 
is  37%,  66%  and  93%  of  the  total,  whereas  the 
accumulated  project  disbursements  are  18%,  30%  and  40%  of 
the total for years 2, 3, and 4 respectively.  
Project  investments  and  adoption  rates  reviewed.  Road 
construction expenditure revised aligning it more with the 
implementation of the other components. 
Based on beneficiary phasing presented in table 17 
and  investment  costs  presented  in  Table  F  from 
the EFA, project’s phasing was derived below:  
Project Year 
Beneficiary 
Phasing 
Project 
investment 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
- 
37.50% 
66.25% 
93.75% 
100.00% 
100.00% 
100.00% 
5.74% 
18.28% 
31.23% 
57.81% 
83.09% 
96.70% 
100.00% 
10 
Compliance Note 
EFA Review – Responses from PDT 
Reviewer – EFA Reporting Template 
Response 
EFA reviewers' response 
 
Recommendation:  Revise  the  project  aggregation 
matrix 
COSTAB 
assumptions. 
consistency  with 
ensure 
to 
  Discount rates:  EFA Annex of the PDR refers to the use of a 
financial  discount  rate  of  12%  (re.  Table  A),  based  on  a 
weighted  average  interest  rate  of  term  deposits.  The  Excel 
file  does  not  provide  the  information  on  the  calculation. 
Paragraph  41  of  the  EFA  Annex  refers  to  the  choice  of  the 
economic discount rate of 10%, and footnote 9 indicates that 
this is assumed on the basis of current IFAD practices, but no 
further  information  is  provided.    IFAD  recommends  that  an 
average of long-term public bond rates and long-term deposit 
rates  constitute  a  basis  to  calculate  the  passive  rate  of 
interest  of  the  national  economy.  Please  provide  further 
justification and or revise accordingly 
 
Recommendation: Provide further justification for the 
financial  and  social  discount  rate  and/or  revise 
accordingly  
  Conversion factors and shadow prices: EFA Annex of the PDR 
provides an analysis on the calculations of conversion factors 
and shadow prices, which are also included in the Excel file. It 
will  be  important  to  explain  whether  input  subsidies  are 
lack  thereof 
currently 
additional adjustments. 
in  place  to  justify  the  need  or 
See response above. 
See response above. 
See response above. 
See response above. 
See response above. 
See response above. 
The  factors  used  are  the  best  estimate  available  of  the 
regimes in place.  
Noted 
 
Recommendation:  Provide  further 
conversion factors. 
justification  on 
See response above. 
  Double counting of cost: The Excel file contains project costs 
from the COSTAB. This said, it is not clear whether all project 
costs, already included in the production and the enterprise 
models,  were  subtracted  from  overall  project  costs.  Costs 
related  to  purchase  of  machinery  and  equipment  and 
inputs  provided  by  the  project  should  be 
agricultural 
Additional  text  added  to  the  effect  that  farm  models 
assume that the operations based on their own resources. 
None of the equipment or inputs costs that are defined in 
in  the  farm  models. 
the  cost  tables  are  elements 
Mechanisation  for  instance  is  included  through  rental 
costs  not  ownership.  In  this  way  double  counting  is 
Noted, see response above. 
11 
Compliance Note 
EFA Review – Responses from PDT 
Reviewer – EFA Reporting Template 
Response 
EFA reviewers' response 
subtracted to avoid double counting.   
avoided. 
 
Recommendation:  Provide  further  justification  of  the 
disaggregation  and  accounting  of  project  costs  and 
correct any double counting.  
See responses above. 
  Sensitivity Analysis (SA): Results from the sensitivity analysis 
are  provided  in  paragraphs  43,  44  and  Table  18  of  the  EFA 
Annex of the PDR.  Additional analysis should be undertaken 
to  provide  a  more  comprehensive  understanding  of  project 
risks.  The  analysis  of  reduction  in  project  benefits  does  not 
currently  allow  for  a  comprehensive  understanding  of  how 
different  factors  (number  of  adopters,  yields…)  would  affect 
the project’s profitability.  
Incremental benefits are presented at an aggregate level, which 
limits the understanding of how each farm type and beneficiary 
group  contributes  to  the  project’s  incremental  benefits.  The 
impact  of  different  project  adoption  rates  (i.e.  number  of  HHs 
that benefit from the project) should be explored to complement 
the existing sensitivity results. As farms are rainfed, it would be 
informative  to  analyse  how  variability  in  yields  will  affect  the 
project’s return.  
See response above. 
Noted, see response above. 
Existing  risk  matrix  and  sensitivity  analysis  reviewed. 
Given  the  other  changes  incorporated  (such  as,  road 
construction  cost  rephasing)  the  existing  sensitivity  is 
considered  sufficiently  robust  to  define  the  feasible 
is 
boundary  conditions.  Further  sensitivity  analysis 
expected via climate adaptation analysis. 
See above – Additional text and specific appendix on this 
issue added. 
Noted, see response above. 
 
Recommendation:  Undertake  additional  sensitivity 
analysis to better understand project risks. 
See responses above 
Noted, see response above. 
12 
Uganda
National Oilseeds Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Annex 1. Nosp Log Frame Final 24102019 Clean
Document Date:
10/02/2020
Project No.
2000002260
Report No.
5155-UG
Loan ID
2000003281
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Annex 1  
NOSP Logical 
Framework 
Results Hierarchy 
Outreach 
Project Goal: Inclusive 
rural transformation 
through sustainable 
development of the 
oilseeds sector. 
Development Objective: 
To commercialise key 
oilseeds value chains 
Indicators/a 
Base 
line 
Mid-
term 
target 
End 
target 
Means of Verification 
Assumptions 
108930
01 
1. Estimated corresponding total number of 
households  
Household members – 
Number of people 
217,860  350 000 
tbd 
Households 
67,540  108 500 
tbd 
Women-headed HHs/b 
2. Number of people receiving services promoted 
or supported by the project 
Total no. of persons 
receiving services 
Female (60%) 
74,700  120 000 
1750000 
44,820 
72 000 
0 
0 
Male 
0 
29,880 
 48 000 
Youth (18-35 years) 
(40%) 
3. Number of HHs with increased household 
assets* 
Total no. of HHs 
56,020 
29,880 
tbd 
0 
48 000 
tbd 
17,370 
No. of female headed 
HHs 
4. Women reporting improved quality of their  
diets 
Females – Percentage% 
5. Number of HHs reporting increased sales of 
oilseed crops* 
Total no of households 
56,020 
tbd 
20 
0 
50 
90 000 
90 
000/c 
27 900 
Source 
Project 
reports, 
Outcome 
surveys 
Frequency  Who 
Annual 
PCU/PICT  Continued social, 
political and 
economic stability 
in the country and 
region. 
Manageable climatic 
events. 
Macro-economy 
continues to 
improve. 
IFAD 
Impact 
Study 
Before and 
after project 
implementati
on 
IFAD/PMU  Economic policies 
continue to support 
oilseeds sector and 
associated value 
chains for 
smallholder 
farmers.  
Quarterly 
PMU 
Outcome 
Surveys, 
IFAD 
Implementation 
builds on limited 
local government 
1 Average HH size of 5 in Uganda 
and improve the 
livelihoods and 
resilience of the 
smallholders engaged in 
oilseed production and 
marketing. 
OUTCOME A. Increased 
production, productivity 
and profitability in 
oilseeds sector 
Output A. 1 Multi-
stakeholder platforms 
(MSP) formed and 
oilseed production 
clusters established 
6. Number of HHs reporting increase in income* 
Households 
56,020 
tbd 
90 000 
Impact 
Study 
Annual 
PMU 
7. Households reporting an increase in 
production 
Percentage of HHs 
0 
40 
8. Households reporting adoption of 
environmentally sustainable, climate resilient 
technologies and practices 
Percentage of HHs  
50 
Outcome 
Surveys 
Annual 
PMU 
75 
80 
9. MSPs and Clusters established and brokering 
deals between stakeholders 
Total No of MSPs 
MSPs Hub level – 
numbers 
MSPs Cluster level - 
numbers 
No. of clusters 
405 
5 
0 
0 
200 
400 
0 
0 
406 
6 
400 
200 
Quarterly 
PMU/HCU 
HCU 
Reports, 
PCU 
reports 
capacity through 
private sector led 
support services to 
smallholder oilseeds 
farmers.  
Local and 
international 
demand for oilseeds 
continues to grow. 
No adverse climatic 
events destabilize 
the oilseeds sector. 
The project 
beneficiaries utilize 
the knowledge and 
skills given during 
the trainings. 
Project resources at 
village level can 
strengthen group 
capacity. 
Smallholder farmers 
are influenced by 
the clustering of 
production, thereby 
allowing them to 
have parity with 
off-takers. 
Suitable agricultural 
related income-
Output A 2. Production 
Groups trained in 
market-orientation and 
business skills 
Output A 3. Social 
mentoring provided to 
production groups and 
high-risk households 
Output A 4. Financial 
Services enhanced in 
supported clusters 
10. Number of persons trained in income-
generating activities or business management* 
Total 
Female 
Youth 
74,400  120,000 
72 000 
44,820 
48 000 
29,880 
0 
0 
0 
11. Clusters facilitated in GALS* 
Number of clusters 
0 
200 
200 
12. Number of high-risk HHs receive HH 
mentoring* 
Number of high-risk 
HHs 
Female-headed HHs 
Youth-headed HHs 
13. Percentage of VSLAs credit-linked with FIs* 
12 000 
8 000 
20 000 
0 
0 
0 
12 000 
8 000 
20 000 
% of VLSAs 
0 
30  
40  
tbd 
% of women farmers in 
VSLAs assessing 
credit/financial services 
% of VLSAs with 
majority women 
members 
%. of youth farmers in 
VSLAs assessing credit/ 
financial services 
14. Number of formal FIs supported to launch 
innovative oilseeds products* 
30  
85  
0 
0 
60  
 60 
85  
40  
Business 
Skills 
Mentor 
reports, 
HCU and 
PCU 
reports 
Mentorin
g 
Reports 
from 
Mentors, 
HCU 
reports, 
PCU 
reports 
HCU and 
PCU 
reports 
Quarterly 
PMU/HCU  Off-takers are 
generating 
activities. 
interested in trading 
with clustered 
smallholder oilseeds 
producers. 
Producers and 
private sector can 
negotiate 
satisfactory 
arrangements. 
Quarterly 
PMU/HCU  Social mentoring 
can resolve priority 
issues/constraints. 
Quarterly 
PMU/HCU 
The GoU facilitates 
access to the 
Agriculture Credit 
Facility to benefit 
smallholder oilseeds 
producers. 
0 
0 
4 
2 
No. of formal FIs 
supported 
No. of formal FIs with 
innovative oilseeds 
products 
15. Number of persons in rural areas trained in 
financial literacy and/or use of financial products 
and services* 
Female 
Youth 
44,820 
29,880 
72 000 
48 000 
0 
0 
2 
4 
16. Number of Farm Production Advisors (FPA)  
mobilised and trained* 
Total no. of FPA 
Women FPAs 
100 
60 
0 
0 
200 
120 
Youth FPAs 
0 
40 
80 
0 
0 
0 
100 
60  
40  
17. Number of Auxiliary Farm Service Providers 
(AFSP) trained and operational* 
Total no. of AFSP 
Women AFSP 
Youth AFSP 
18. Local seed businesses (LSB) supplying 
Quality Declared Seeds established and 
operational* 
Total no. of LSB 
LSB run/led by women 
LSB run/led by youth 
19. Households reporting improved physical 
access to markets 
Percentage of 
households  
20. Oilseeds producers reporting reduced 
transport costs 
Percentage of oilseeds 
producers 
100 
 60 
40  
0 
0 
0 
20 
20 
0 
0 
200 
120  
80  
200 
120  
80  
75 
75 
Output A 5. Market-
based technical services 
for smallholders 
enhanced 
OUTCOME B. Transport 
Infrastructure Serving 
Oilseeds Sector 
Improved 
Quarterly 
HCU 
HCU and 
PCU 
reports 
Smallholders willing 
to, through 
commercialization, 
pay for the private 
sector led support 
services. 
Annual 
PMU 
Project 
reports, 
Outcome
/HH 
surveys, 
Market 
Surveys 
Local government 
has the resources 
to support to 
maintain upgraded 
or new CARs.  
CARs complement 
other NOSP 
Output B.1 Community 
access roads 
constructed or 
rehabilitated to all- 
weather standard 
% of youth oilseeds 
producers  
21. Number of kilometres of roads constructed, 
rehabilitated or upgraded  
No. of kms 
20  
0 
0 
0 
40  
2,500  
Quarterly 
PMU 
Project 
Engineer
s’ 
reports, 
PMU 
report 
activities. 
Local government 
has the resources 
to support road 
design, construction 
and 
maintenance. 
  These are in alignment with PRO-WEAI indicators 
(a) All indicators disaggregated by gender, age, poverty and location 
(b) 31% HHs are female headed (UBOS 2016) 
(c) The adoption rate for the NOSP Component 1 intervention is projected at 75% (75% of total 120,000 targeted HHs = 90,000), See more in 
EFA in Annex 4. Mid-term taken as mid-way PY4 based on the cumulative expenditure of the supply chain, producer mentoring, financial services 
and farm production advisors sub-components.  
Uganda
National Oilseeds Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Ifad Procurement Risk Matrix Maaif Mo Lg
Document Date:
10/02/2020
Project No.
2000002260
Report No.
5155-UG
Loan ID
2000003281
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Division
Country
Project
Date
IFAD Procurement Risk Matrix
ESA
Uganda
National Oil Seed Project
INHERENT RISK RATING
Description of Risk Feature
COUNTRY RISK ASSESSMENT
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Country procurement law, regulations and manual exist
Existence of Standard Bidding Documents for Goods, Works and 
Services
#
A
1
a
b
c
Procurement Monitoring
d
Procurement Methods
e
2
a
Public access to procurement information
Accountability and Transparency
Procurement Complaints Management
2.19
Rating
2.30
2.20
3
3
1
1
3
2.40
3
b
Country Corruption Perception Index score 
1
NET  RISK RATING
2.56
Assessment Basis
Remarks 
Recommendation /Mitigation
Rating
3 they all exist, 2 only two exist, 1 only 
one exist or none
3 all exist, 2 only for NCB & ICB, none for 
Shopping, 1 none exists
Records for contracts are maintained in the 
procurement web-based
database, including data on what has been 
procured, the value of
procurement and who has been awarded 
contracts. However, these are
not comprehensive so no percentages can be 
calculated.
Less than 60% of the contract value are
procured using competitive methods
At least four of the key procurement 
information elements are complete
and reliable for government units 
representing most procurement
operations and are made available to the 
public in a timely manner
Use PEFA Framework, see worksheet for 
details
Use PEFA Framework, see worksheet for 
details
Use PEFA Framework, see worksheet for 
details
Use PEFA Framework, see worksheet for 
details
The procurement complaint system meets 
criterion (1), and three of the
other criteria
The website of each IFAD financed 
Project/Programme will include all 
procurement realted information.  
During the preparation of the Procurement 
plan, low-value procurement activities will 
be grouped together under one tender for 
purposes of economies of scale
Uganda ranks 149 out of 180 countries in the 
2018 Corruption Perception Index according 
to Transparency International which 
indicates that integrity and ethical values still 
require strengthening. 
All procuring entities as well as bidders and 
service providers, that is: suppliers, 
contractors, and consultants shall observe 
the highest
standard of ethics during the procurement 
and execution of contracts financed under 
the IFAD funded Projects in accordance with 
paragraph 84 of the Procurement 
Guidelines. The Revised IFAD Policy on 
Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its 
Activities and Operations shall apply to all 
projects, in addition to the relevant Articles 
of the Kenya Public Procurement Act and 
other national legislation which refers to 
corrupt practices.
The score is published on 
Transparency.org. 0 to 29 = 1, 30 to 60 = 
2, 61 to 100 = 3
2.60
2.60
3
3
2
2
3
2.60
3
2
c
2-tiered system to handle complaints
d
Existence of a debarment system
e
B
1
a
b
c
d
e
Existence of an independent and competent local authority 
responsible for investigating corruption allegations
PROJECT INSTITUTIONAL RISK ASSESSMENT
Capability in Public Procurement
2.23
2.40
Existence of a Procurement Unit with at least 2 staff members 
(Design stage, reference is to govt agency)
Existence of a Procurement Officer (Implementation)
Staff member(s) have at least 7 years experience in donor-
funded public procurement
What is the general quality of documents produced by the 
procurement office?
Do procurement staff have immediate access to the legal and 
regulatory framework documents?
Are the procurement and financial management functions 
separated?
3
2
2
3
2
3
2
3
Complaints on procurement processes are 
the responsibility of the Accounting Officer 
at the first level. A small fee is charged for 
lodging a procurement or disposal complaint 
with the Accounting Officer. The second level 
of complaint is the PPDA, where no 
additional fee is charged. The next level of 
complaint
is the PPDA Appeals Tribunal. The final level 
of complaint is with the courts of law. 
The system in place; however, the Company 
registry is not yet very strong and debarring 
a bidder does not necessarily translate into 
actual punitive results as non-complying 
bidders then register other companies and 
still participate in public bidding/ or own a 
chain of other companies.
The Inspectorate of Government is an 
independent institution charged with the 
responsibility of eliminating corruption, 
abuse of authority and of public office. The 
powers as enshrined in the Constitution and 
IG Act include to; investigate or cause 
investigation, arrest or cause arrest, 
prosecute or  cause prosecution, make 
orders and give directions during 
investigations; access and search – enter and 
inspect premises or property or search a 
person or bank account or safe deposit box 
PDU staff have limited experience in using 
Donors Procurement Regulations and 
Procedures and have a heavy workload.
3 as stated, 2 only a single level system, 
1 no system
3 full existence, 2 existence of 
complaints body that is the authority, 1 
does not exist
3 existence of independent Anti-
Corruption agency, 2 existence of an 
office within a government 
ministry/agency that carries out 
some/all of these functions, 1 does not 
exist
3 as stated, 2 one staff member, 1 does 
not exist (at Design stage)
3 as stated, 2 someone else doing 
Procurement, 1 procurement function 
not consistently handled by anyone
3 as stated, 2 for less than 7 years 
and/or  experience in public 
procurement but not donor-funded, 1 
for less than 3 years experience 
3 for very good bidding documents, 
evaluation reports and contracts, 2 for 
mediocre documents, 1 for documents 
with bad quality
Generally, the quality of the bidding 
documents and evaluation reports are 
acceptable; however, further improvements 
are needed as described in the PDR and PIM
The Government of Uganad will ensure 
IFAD’s debarment list are respected in 
awarding contracts under the IFAD finances; 
and
assist IFAD investigations pertaining to the 
funded activities.
Recruiting two qualified and experienced 
procurement officers at the central levels to 
carry out procurement activities.  Recruit a 
proficient procurement specialist 
(consultant) knowledgeable and experienced 
in donors funded procurement to support 
and also offer hand on training to the 
procurement team in the CPMU and other 
implementing partners.
Provide focused training and hand-holding 
for capacity building of existing staff of the 
PMU, MOLG PDU and Districts
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
3 for total separation, 2 for some 
separation, 1 for procurement being 
done by FM staff
Both units are reporting to the same 
undersecrtary
The institutional arrangements for the 
project will ensure total separation for the 
two functions 
3
2
3
2.63
2.80
3
3
2
3
3
2
i
a
b
c
d
ii
a
b
c
iii
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
Public Procurement Processes
Procurement Methods
2.05
1.75
Procurement methods for Goods consistent with IFAD 
Guidelines
Procurement methods for Works consistent with IFAD 
Guidelines
Procurement methods for Services  consistent with IFAD 
Guidelines
Easy access to bidding documents by foreign firms
Procurement Planning
Are procurement plans prepared ahead of time and consistent 
with annual work plans/budgets?
Do procurement people participate in the annual work planning 
processes?
Are Procurement Plans done using an effective format with 
planned and actual rows across 3 different categories
Procurement Processes
Minimum number of quotations established by law
Minimum number of days for advertised procurement under 
competitive bidding processes
Is there enough time provided for bidders to ask questions and 
receive answers in the bidding process?
Are clarifications provided to all bidders?
Are bids received prior to the deadline securely stored?
Are procurement securities securely stored?
Are public bid openings conducted for advertised procurements, 
and within an hour of receipt of bids?
2
2
2
1
2.33
3
2
2
2
3
2
3
3
1
2
3
3 as stated, 2 for national or 
international, 1 for none
Only NCB and other less competitive 
methods were applied
3 as stated, 2 for national or 
international, 1 for none
Only NCB and other less competitive 
methods were applied
Develop the PIM for the project with clear 
procurement procedures, responsibilities, 
and process timelines
Develop the PIM for the project with clear 
procurement procedures, responsibilities, 
and process timelines
3 for large-value method for firms, small 
value method for firms and method for 
individual consultants; 2 for two of the 
above; 1 for only one or less
3 bidding documents are free and could 
be issued/sent electronically; 2 foreign 
bidders have to wire funds to Project to 
buy bidding docs; 1 bidding docs not 
practically available to foreign bidders
Only large-value method for firms and small 
value method for firms were existing
Develop the PIM for the project with clear 
procurement procedures, responsibilities, 
and process timelines
The foreign bidders have no option to get 
the documents electronically
All ICB bidding documents will be available 
over the project website for free downloads
3 prepared ahead and consistent, 2 one 
of either, 1 none
3 if required by regulation  and 
practised, 2 if required by regulation, 1 if 
none of above
As practice only
The PPDA format does not fully comply with 
IFAD Guidelines.The plan does not include 
actual rows. Moreover, there is no seprate 
sheet for each porcurement category
The PIM should clearly stipulate the 
participation of the procurement staff in the 
preparation of the AWPB
As part of the mission activities, the 18 
monts PP will be developed using the IFAD 
template that will be followed later.
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
3 for three or more; 2 for two, 1 if it 
does not state or less than two
3 for minimum of 30 days; 2 for 
minimum of 20 days; 1 for less than 20 
days or not stated
3 if bidders have a minimum of 3 days 
for the RFQ method, 7 days for 
competitive methods to ask questions, 2 
if less than ... but more than two, 1 if 
two days or less
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
3 for both, 2 for bid openings being 
conducted more than an hour after 
receipt, 1 for bid openings not being 
conducted
According to the National Regulations 
twenty working days for the open domestic 
bidding method and twelve working days for 
the restricted domestic bidding method
It will be clearly stated in the PIM that 
minimum period for open bidding will be 
thirty days and 21 days for the restricted 
bidding
Tender Box was there but it is not utilized. 
the bids received were stored in the 
procurement room without any security 
No standard procedure was established, in 
some cases securities stored at a box in the 
room of Senior Procurement Officer without 
an updated register to present the received 
securities
All Project PEs should establish and utilize a 
secure Tender Box for all project 
procurements
The standrd procedure was clearly 
highlighted in the procurement section of 
the PIM
2.46
2.75
3
3
3
2
2.67
3
2
3
2
2
3
3
1
2
3
h
i
j
k
l
m
n
iv
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
Are minutes of bid openings taken, and sent to bidders who 
submitted bids?
Are evaluations conducted by a suitably qualified ad-hoc 
evaluation committee?
In evaluation, is responsiveness based on criteria requirements 
in the bidding documents?
Are evaluations completed within the bid validity period?
Are conditions precedent to contract effectiveness clearly 
stipulated in the contract? (i.e., advance payment security, 
performance security, insurance, etc)
Does the agency maintain a complete record of the process? 
This would include copies of all public advertisements, pre-
qualification documents (if used, the pre-qualification 
evaluation report documenting any decisions not to pre-qualify 
certain potential bidders), the bidding documents and any 
addenda, a record of any pre-bid meetings, the bid opening 
minutes, the final bid evaluation report (including a detailed 
record of the reasons used to accept or reject each bid), appeals 
against procedures or award recommendations, a signed copy 
of the final contract and any performance and advance payment 
securities issued, etc.
2
1
2
2
3
3 for both, 2 for minutes being taken 
but not being sent, 1 for none
3 for both, 2 for qualified but not ad-
hoc, 1 for ad-hoc or none
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
The minutes were developed using one of 
the PPA format and they allow bidders who 
attend the meeting to copy the minutes.
While the PDU established an ad-hock 
evaluation committee for each transaction, 
the members were not suitably qualified for 
some transactions espicially Consultancy 
In some cases, the evaluation committee 
eliminated the application of some criteria, 
or use different criteria
In some cases, the evaluation was delayed 
and further extension were requested from 
the bidders
IFAD through its close follow up will ensure 
proper procedures to be followed
The formation of the evaluation committee 
should be based on the nature of the 
procurement. 
It is clearly highlighted in the procurement 
section of the PIM
The indicative time table for the 
procurement procedures that was 
incorporated in the PIM will be closely 
monitored by IFAD
2
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
In many cases. the procurement files miss 
some important documents. Moreover, 
Inadequate working space for record 
keeping/filing was allocated.
Are all contracts awarded advertised publicly?
2
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
Contract Administration and Management
Existence of authority levels in the contract management 
process
Existence of approval thresholds for contract amendments
1.91
2
1
3 for existence, 2 for some practice, 1 
for none
3 for existence, 2 for some practice, 1 
for none
For each contract the PMU assigned contract 
manager
The procedure will be well illustrated in the 
procurement section of the PIM
Is there an effective contract monitoring system/framework in 
place?
2
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
Only contract monitoring form was found 
but in many cases,  there is no progress 
report 
Is there a process to monitor delivery of goods to verify quantity 
and quality?
Is there a framework for approval of deliverables and payment 
process for consulting services contract?
Is there a process for resolution of final payment and contract 
closure?
Are contract disputes handled in accordance with a formal 
complaints/arbitration system?
2
2
1
3
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
No standard procedure was established
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
Framework was not established
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
as above
as above
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
2
1
2
2
3
2
3
2.18
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
Ensure that complete documentation of 
procurement processes is kept on 
procurement files at the PMU, including all 
related documents and the records for 
transactions implemented by other partners. 
Provide sufficient working area/rooms and 
space for record keeping/filing. 
During the preparation of the Procurement 
plan, low-value procurement activities will 
be grouped together under one tender for 
purposes of economies of scale
Improve contract supervision and 
monitoring, and application of the conditions 
of contract through Formation of Contract 
management and monitoring team, led by 
the project Coordinator and Focal persons, 
including the technical and the procurement 
teams, and beneficiaries (if necessary); Close 
monitoring to ensure adherence to 
stipulates of the sections in the respective 
Contract Documents and to minimize poor 
performance of service providers.
The procedure was well illustrated in the 
procurement section of the PIM
The procedure was well illustrated in the 
procurement section of the PIM
h
i
j
k
3
2
1
Are works contracts supervised by independent engineers or a 
named project manager?
3
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
Are contracts completed on schedule and within the approved/ 
contracted contract price?
2
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
In some cases delay was noticed
Improve contract supervision and 
monitoring, and application of the conditions 
of contract through Formation of Contract 
management and monitoring team, led by 
the project Coordinator and Focal persons, 
including the technical and the procurement 
teams, and beneficiaries (if necessary); Close 
monitoring to ensure adherence to 
stipulates of the sections in the respective 
Contract Documents and to minimize poor 
performance of service providers.
Does the organization have contract registers that register all 
contracts (with names, prices and dates), per procurement 
category?
Are adequate contract administration records maintained? 
(These would include contractual notices issued by the supplier, 
contractor, purchaser or employer; a detailed record of all 
changes or variation orders issued affecting the scope, qualities, 
timing or price of the contract; records of invoices and 
payments, progress reports, certificates of inspection, 
acceptance and completion; records of claim and dispute and 
their outcomes; etc.)
1
2
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
Only list of on-going procurements were 
found
IFAD will ensure development and 
maintaining of the Contracts Register
3 for all, 2 for some, 1 for none
Some documents are missing as presented in 
the working paper
Ensure that complete documentation of 
procurement processes is kept on 
procurement files at the PMU, including all 
related documents and the records for 
transactions implemented by other partners
3
2
2
2
Risk Rating System
L : Low Risk
M : Medium Risk
H : High Risk
PEFA Framework
2011 Framework: Procurement assessed under P1-19
2011 Framework: Procurement assessed under P1-24
2011 Framework
Transparency, Comprehensiveness and 
Competition in the legal and regulatory 
framework
Use of competitive procurement 
methods
Public access to complete, reliable and 
timely procurement inforrmation
Existence of an independent 
administrative procurement complaints 
system
2016 Framework
Procurement Monitoring
Procurement Methods
Public access to procurement information
Procurement Complaints Management 
Procedure
1 Open www.pefa.org 
2 Scroll down and search by country
3 Choose whole country, not regions within a country
4 Choose latest report. Download entire report
5 Examine Pillar PI-19 or PI-24 (depending on Framework used) to see assessment
6 Summary information from section of report should be in Remarks of the Matrix
7 Score as follows:
PEFA
A
B
C
D
IFAD Matrix
3
3
2
1
Uganda
National Oilseeds Project
Project Design Report
Annex: Nosp Qag Compliance Note 25 Oct 2019
Document Date:
10/02/2020
Project No.
2000002260
Report No.
5155-UG
Loan ID
2000003281
East and Southern Africa Division 
Programme Management Department
Compliance Note 
Post- QAG 
Country:  
Uganda 
Project: 
National Oilseeds Project (NOSP) 
Date: 
25 October 2019 
QAG Comments 
Logical Framework 
1.  Some of the specific suggestions on the logframe provided in preparation for the 
DRM  meeting  and  agreed  upon  by  the  PDT  do  not  appear  to  have  been 
integrated  in  the  revised  version  of  the  PDR.  This  refers  to  the  suggestions  to 
replace  some  of  the  proposed  indicators  by  IFAD  Core  Indicators  (namely,  CI 
2.1.2;  1.1.5;  and  1.1.7).  Output  2.1  also  remained  unchanged,  while  baseline 
values still appear as blank, rather than set as TBC.  
SECAP 
2.  QAG consulted with the OPR/SECAP team to ascertain whether the issues raised 
in the SECAP compliance note prepared at DRM stage have been adequately 
addressed. OPR confirmed that all recommendations have duly been taken into 
consideration. No specific reference is made to the IFAD SH/SEA Zero Tolerance 
policy but mitigation measures are included, and no further amendments are 
recommended at this stage. Lastly, as a minor comment, OPR noted that some 
cross-reference to the SECAP seems to be missing from the PIM (i.e. Annex 1 for 
description of the policy and legal framework governing the environmental and 
social aspects of NOSP activities and Annex 3 for screening checklist). 
President’s Report 
Clarify the amount of co-financing from Heifer International (US$ 6.22 million in 
the PR, US$ 6.15 million in the PDR and in the PR tables); 
In the financing summary, correct the amount of co-financing provided by the 
Kuehne Foundation (US$ 13,000); 
In para 31 on exit strategy, it is suggested to mention that some private sector-
based partnerships are already ongoing in Uganda; and 
In para 33 on climate risk classification, the final sentence on the basic climate 
risk analysis is left open.  
 
 
 
 
PDT Response 
Changes  have  been  reflected  and  consistency  assured  in  the  logframe  indicators.  
Baseline values, where TBC, are also included. 
Annex 5 includes a footnote making reference to the IFAD SH/SEA policy, with a link to 
the policy. 
The  Annexes  to  the  SECAP  were  a  separate  document  uploaded  on  to  ORMS  (due  to 
size).  These annexes have now been also included as part of the PIM. 
Changes/corrections  proposed  for  the  PR  have  been  made  in  the  draft  uploaded  in 
ORMS. 
1 
